BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JOSE  ROJAS, 
A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2018060096 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission) 
on  November  5-9  and  13-15,  2018,  in  Los  Angeles,  California.  The  Commission  convened 
for  this  matter  was  comprised  of  the  following  members:  Teresa  Brown,  teacher  credentialed 
in  history,  with  the  Torrance  Unified  School  District;  Carolyn  Monroe,  principal  and  teacher 
credentialed  in  history  (retired),  from  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District  or 
LAUSD);  and  Deena  R.  Ghaly,  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  who  presided. 

Kelly  Kim  and  Cherrie  Moe,  LAUSD  Assistants  General  Counsel,  represented 

Complainant  LAUSD  Assistant  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  Jose  R.  Cantu. 

Richard  Schwab  and  Rosty  Gore,  Attorneys,  Trygstad,  Schwab,  and  Trygstad, 

represented  Jose  Rojas  (respondent),  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent,  certificated  employee  of  LAUSD. 

On  May  9,  2018,  complainant  served  respondent  with  a  letter  notifying  him  of 

the  Board’s  intention  to  dismiss  him  and  place  him  on  immediate  unpaid  suspension. 

3. 

On  May  31,  2018,  respondent  served  the  District  with  his  Request  for  Hearing 

and  Notice  of  Defense.

4. 

5. 

On  June  14,  2018,  complainant  served  respondent  with  an  Accusation. 

On  August  3,  2018,  complainant  served  respondent  with  an  Amended 

Accusation.  Thereafter,  this  matter  ensued. 

Background  Information 

6. 

Respondent  completed  his  undergraduate  education  at  California  State 

Polytechnic  University,  Pomona,  where  he  majored  in  Social  Science  and  History.  He 
obtained  his  teaching  credential,  a  dual  professional  clear  credential  in  Social  Science  and 
History,  and  certification  as  Bilingual  Cross-Cultural  Language  in  Academic  Development 
(BCLAD)  compliant,  from  California  State  University,  Los  Angeles. 

7. 

Respondent  began  teaching  in  1999.  He  worked  at  several  high  schools  within 

LAUSD,  teaching  regular  and  advanced  placement  (A.P.)  courses.  In  2009,  respondent 
joined  the  Los  Angeles  Center  of  Enriched  Studies  (LACES)  where  he  taught  History,  A.P. 
U.S.  History,  A.P.  Geography,  and  Spanish. 

8. 

During  the  period  from  April  2015  through  May  2016,  respondent  engaged  in 

a  pattern  of  communications  and  interactions  with,  and  gift-giving  to,  three  students  at 
LACES,  Mel  R.  ,  Hi 
communications  to  the attention  of  administrators.  LACES  administration  suspended 
respondent  and  undertook  an  investigation. 

C.!  In  May  2016,  these  students  brought  some  of  the 

T.,  and  . 

Student 

|  R. 

9, 

a.  During  the  2014-15  academic  year, Mig R.  MED  was  in  11th  grade  and  a 

student  in  one  of  respondent’s  A.P.  U.S.  History  classes. 
frequently  joking  and  chatting  in  class. 

recalled  respondent  as 

b.  Toward  the  end  of  the  year, Me  told  respondent  that  she  would  be 

working  at  a  children’s  camp  over  the  summer.  Respondent  asked Me  questions  about  the 
camp,  expressing  interest  in  potentially  sending  his  young  son  there.  During  her  deposition, 

described  these  initial  exchanges  as  follows: 

So  we  had  a  few  e-mail  exchanges  regarding  the  camp.  And  at 
that  point  I  thought  it  was  reasonably  appropriate  for  me  to  be 
sending  my  teacher  information  about  that.  But  that  kind  of 

  

'  To  protect  their  privacy,  students  are  identified  by  their  first  name  and  last  initial.

  

devolved  into  something  more  complicated  and  less  appropriate. 
(Exh.  51,  p.  18.7) 

c.  Respondent’s  first  e-mail  to Me  read:  “Give  the  link  to  the  camp.  Want  to 

see  if  any  dates  are  available  for  next  Friday.  Btw,  sad  how  you’re  going  to  say  goodbye 
today.”  (Exh.  29,  p.  530.) 
After Me  responded  that  she  would  see  him  in  class  after  finals, 
respondent  wrote,  “Cool.  Imma  miss  you.  Funny.  Stop  by  tomorrow  morning  if  you  want  to 
meet  [respondent’s  son].”  (bid.) 

d.  After  school  ended,  respondent  continued  to  e-mail Mi.  In  a  message 

would  be  there  then.  He  subsequently  e-mailed  her  with  his  cell 

dated  June  6,  2015,  respondent  wrote  that  he  was  going  to  a  children’s  party  near  the  camp 
and  asked  whether 
phone  number,  “if  [phone  communication]  is  easier  to  stay  in  touch.”  (Exh.  29.) 
continued  to  communicate  with  respondent  solely  through  e-mail.  Regarding  her  choice  to 
use  email, Me  stated  in  her  deposition:  “So  I  didn’t  think  that  texting  was  a  rational  choice 
at  the  time.  And I  continued  to  e-mail  my  teacher,  because  I’d  never  texted  a  teacher 
before.”  (Exh.  51,  p.  25.) 

e.  Respondent  requested  that Me  communicate  with  him  by  phone  a  second 

time:  “Text  me  or  call  me  so  I  can  tell  you  about  my  visit  to  camp.”  (Exh.  29.)  On  June  8, 
2015,  Me  began  communicating  with  respondent  via  text. MI  explained  the  change  in 
mode  of  communication  and  why  she  chose  to  text  respondent,  rather  than  calling: 

Q:  ve  first  [text]  message  on  here,  it  states,  “Hi  Mr.  Rojas. 
It’s 
.’  So  I’m  assuming  you  initiated  this  text  message;  is 
that  correct? 

A: 

I  did.  As  he  asked  me  to. 

Q:  Okay.  Was  there  any  other  reason  why  you  initiated  this 
text  message? 

A:  No.  My  teacher  had  asked  me  to  text  him,  and  it  felt  like  I 
couldn’t  avoid  it.... 

(fl...  (9 

Q:  [T]here  are  e-mails  from  Mr.  Rojas  where  he,  essentially, 
gives  you  the  option  of  either  texting  him  or  calling  him.  Was 
there  any  reason  why  you  chose  to  text  and  not  to  call? 

  

*  References  to  page  numbers  in  cites  to  deposition  transcripts  are  to  the  transcripts’ 
internal  pagination.  All  other  page  numbers  are  to  the  Bates  stamp  numbers  within  each  of 
the  parties’  exhibit  books.

A:  Texting  is  less  connected  than  calling.  I  didn’t  want  to  have 
a  phone  conversation  with  him.  Texting  felt  more  distant,  and 
that’s  why  I  had  preferred  texting. 

(fl...  (9 

Q:  Why  did  you  want  the  distance? 

A:  [had  no  interest  in  having  a  phone  call  with  him.  That 
didn’t  seem  like  the  type  of  relationship  we  had,  and  it  didn’t 
seem  necessary. 

(Exh.  51,  p.  30.) 

f. 

In  the  texts  they  exchanged,  respondent  continued  to  discuss  the  summer 

camp  and  introduced  other  subjects  such  as  his  whereabouts,  that  he  became  bored  while 
attending  a  school  meeting,  and  that  a  teacher  who  had  been  investigated  for  inappropriate 
contact  with  students  had  returned  to  the  school.  In  reference  to  the  returning  teacher, 
respondent  asked Me  to  keep  the  information  he  had  shared  confidential. 

g.  Between  June  8  -  28,  2015,  respondent  sent  texts  to Mig. 

 
V

 W
V
V
V

 
V
V
V

asking  whether  she  knew  any  good  restaurants  for  lunch  around  school; 
inviting  her  to  text  him  1f  she  was  ever  bored; 
twice  offering  her  a  ticket  to  a  professional  baseball  game; 
asking  whether  she  can  leave  the  summer  camp  grounds  after  she  completes  her  work 
there; 
asking  her  to  call  him  by  his  first  name; 
asking  whether  she  would  have  lunch  with  him;  and 
asking  whether  there  was  anything  new  or  exciting. 

h. Me  declined  respondent’s  offer  of  a  baseball  ticket  both  times  he  asked. 

Asked  about  the  repeated  offer,  _ 
ageressive.”  “It’s  not  respecting  that  I  said  no.”  (Exh.  51,  p.  40.) 

stated  that  she  found  it  “unnecessary”  and  “slightly 

  

  

1.  After  the  summer  break, Me  returned  to  LACES  for  her  senior  year  1n  the 
fall  of  2015.  In  February  2016,  respondent  gave Me  promotional  clothes  he  had  received  in 
connection  with  his  work  as  advisor  to  a  running  club  at  LACES.  Respondent  also  asked 

Me  to  keep  the  gifts  a  secret. 

j. 

In  April  2016, Mg  met  Ha  T.  and 

C.  at  “calculus  camp,”  an 
intensive  study  session  for  students  preparing  to  take  the  A.P.  calculus  exam.  There,  she 
learned  for  the  first  time  that  they  too  had  been  receiving  messages,  invitations  and  gifts  from 
agreed  to  report  him  to  the 
respondent.  Seeing  his  actions  as  part  of  a  pervasive  pattern, 
school  administration. Me  also  drafted  a  statement,  which  she  submitted  to  LACES’ 
principal.

mm 

k.  During  her  deposition, 
or  whether  she  would  add  anything  to  it. 
had  with  respondent  made  her  feel  and  what 

was  asked  whether  the  statement  was  complete 
teplied  she  would  add  how  the  encounters  she 
difficult  choices  they  forced  her  to  make: 

I  think  I  would  add  that  the  texting  felt  particularly 
uncomfortable  because  he  was  my  teacher,  and  because  it’s 
teally  difficult  to  say  no  to  somebody  who  has  power.  And  he 
had  power  over  me.  He  could  have  made  my  high  school 
experience  really  uncomfortable.  Whether  that  meant  pestering 
me  more  than  necessary,  whether  that  meant  talking  to  other 
teachers.  Whatever.  He  could  have  made  things  an  issue  if  ’d 
made  him  unhappy. 

And  ---  and  it  was a  lot  easier  to,  kind  of,  silence  any  discomfort 
and  instead  just  please  him  to  the  extent  I  was  - 
Rather  than,  kind  of,  stand  up  for  myself.  And  I  think  by  the 
time  I  wrote  this  statement,  I  was  just  tired  of  it  all. 

-  could. 

- 

(Exh.  51,  p.  70.) 

Student jm  T. 

10 

a.  During  the  2014-15  school  year, E | T. 

student  in  one  of  respondent’s  A.P.  U.S.  History  classes. 
a  great  deal  in  class.  She  felt  some  of  his  jokes  demeaned  and  objectified  women. 

1)  was  in  11th  grade  anda 
also  recalls  respondent  joking 

b.  As  a  junior, 

also  participated  in  a  student  club,  the  Student  Affairs 
Council.  During  her  senior  year, 
joined  the  Cuba  Club.  Respondent  served  as  the 
teacher  advisor  for  both  clubs.  Students  in  the  Student  Affairs  Council  attend  an  annual 
dinner  where  speakers  discuss  political  and  scientific  developments.  The  Cuba  Club  was  an 
informal  gathering  of  students  who  planned  to  go  to  Cuba.  At  the  time,  respondent  was 
scheduled  to  be  the  faculty  chaperone  on  the  trip. 

c.  Respondent  asked 

for  her  cell  phone  number,  ostensibly  to  deliver 
her  and  the  other  members  of  the  Student  Affairs 
messages  regarding  the  annual  dinner  to 
Council. : 
attended  the  annual  dinner  with  three  other  students  and  a  former  LACES 
teacher  and  administrator,  Joseph  Zell,  serving  as  chaperone.  As  qi  entered  the  hotel 
where  the  dinner  was  being  held,  respondent  texted  her  several  messages  including  asking 
whether  she  missed  him  and  whether  she  wished  he  was  with  her. 

stated  that  they  made  her  feel  uncomfortable.  Further  explaining  her  reaction, 

d.  During  her  deposition,  qa  described  the  text  messages  as  “creepy”  and 
stated: 

Just  because  it  was  not  in  the  class  setting,  it  was  - 
personal.  It  felt  like  it  was  —it  just  -  wasn’t  in  class.  It  didn’t  - 
- 
especially  because  he  didn’t  personally  talk  to  me  in  class  in  any

felt 

- 

way  that  made  me  uncomfortable,  so  then  this  new  platform  or 
communication  that  was  like  personal,  it  —  to  some  extent  where 
it’s  like  no  one  else  could  see  it,  it  just  felt  different,  it  felt 
weird. 

(Exh.  49,  pp.  135-136.) 

e.  The  following  year, 

|  participated  in  the  Cuba  Club  meetings.  There, 
students  discussed  how  best  to  prepare  for  the  trip  and  how  to  fundraise  for  it.  Among  the 
ideas  was  visiting  a  local  Cuban  bakery,  Porto’s,  or  purchasing  pastries  from  there  to  sell  at 
school. 
Teceiving  a  text  message  from  her  friend  and  classmate.  Ti  N.  The  message  stated  that 
complied  and,  when  she  arrived, 
tespondent  wanted 
respondent  gave 
a  box  of  pastries  from  Porto’s  Bakery.  He  told  her  that  the  pastries 
were  solely  for  her  and  insisted  she  take  them. 

|  expressed  her  fondness  for  Porto’s  Bakery.  Subsequently, i: 

to  come  to  his  classroom. 

tecalled 

f.  EF 

N.  testified  at  the  hearing.  Her  recollection  was  that  she  met Ha  in 

the  school  hallway  and  there,  told  her  about  the  pastries  and  that  she  believed  respondent 
intended  them  for  a alone.  c  |  N.  did  not  recall  texting 
|  or  summoning  her  to 
tespondent’s  classroom. 

Student 

7! 

Cc 

11. 

a.  During the  2014-15  academic year,  Uc. (UB) was in the  11th 

grade  and  a  student in  respondent’s  A.P.  U.S.  History  class.  During  the  2015-16  academic 
year,  m7  was  in  12th  grade  and a  student in  respondent’s  A.P.  Human  Geography  class. 
That  same  year,  iz  served  as  the  Cuba  Club’s  treasurer,  a  role  that  included  managing 
the  club’s  fundraising  efforts. 

b.  In  July  2015,  7  tesponded  to  a  group  message  where  the 

participants,  including  respondent,  were  discussing  the  Cuba  trip.  She  asked  a  question 
about  visas.  Respondent  answered  with  a  message  only  to  her  and,  over  the  period  of  the 
next  week,  sent  emails  addressed  only  to  her  as  follows: 

> 

This  is  better.  Not  a  group  mail  . 
trip  [to  Cuba].  Been  hitting  the  gym  to  lose  weight. 
>  Remember,  bet  imam  get  more  numbers  than  you  LOL. 
>  Weare  going  to  celebrate  your  birthday.  Big  time  LOL. 
>  Enjoy  your  summer.  Just  keep  reading  on  cuba.  Have  you 

.  Im  so  excited  about  this 

. 

done  anything  interesting  so  far? 
all  I  need  is  someone  who  is  willing  to  stay  up.  Lets  text 
better. 
(Exh.  23,  pp.  519-523.) 

> 

gave  respondent  her  cell  phone  number.  In  early  August  2015, 
tespondent  commenced  texting  her.  He  referred  to  himself  as  “Jose,  your  cuba  adventure

c. 

partner,  haha.”  (Exh.  38,  p.  578.)  7  and  respondent  continued  to  correspond  about  the 
Cuba  trip.  He  stated  that  he  wanted  a  small  group  attending.  Subsequently,  respondent 
changed  the  subject,  asking 
come  up  with  something  good  for  you.”  (Exh.  38.  p.  579.)  Respondent  ended  the  exchange 
by  texting,  “Text  me  tomorrow.  Imma  go  to  bed.”  (Exh.  38,  p.  579.)  7  did  not  text 
tespondent  the  next  day. 

the  date  of  her  birthday  and  stating,  “Got  one  year  to 

Zz! 

d. 

f 

admired  respondent  as  a  teacher  and  was  not  immediately  disturbed 

Zz 

was  also  committed  to  making  the  Cuba  trip  and  its 

by  his  communications  to  her.  Returning  to  school in  August  2015,  she  championed 
respondent  and  defended  him  when  parents  attacked  the  content  of  his  curriculum  during 
back-to-school  night. 
fundraising  a  success.  During  her  deposition,  m7  noted  that,  for  the  first  time,  she 
perceived  a  certain  strangeness  in  respondent’s  behavior  the  day  of  the  back-to-school  night 
event.  The  Cuba  Club  members  had  decided  to  sell  churros  during  back-to-school  night.  As 
none  of  the  students  had  an  accessible  car,  respondent  agreed  he  would  drive 
to  the 
   
grocery  store  to  pick  them  up,  though  he  did  not  have  written  permission  from 
*s 
parents.  When  the  time  came  to  go,  respondent  directed  her  to  meet  him  a  few  blocks  away 
from  campus  so  that  they  would  not  be  seen  driving  off  together,  stating  that  he  did  not  want 
Zz 
to  start  rumors. 
school-related  errand. 

thought  this  was  odd  because  they  were  simply  undertaking  a 

e.  In  October  2015,  respondent  went  to  a  training  in  Germany  in  preparation 

for  his  role  as  a  chaperone  for  the  Cuba  trip.  When  he  returned,  he  and 
following  exchange  via  text: 

had  the 

Respondent:  How  was  it? 

a. 

Was  what? 

Respondent:  Me  out.  And  the  candy  sale. 

Mr.  Schwartz  was  mad!!  Austin  and  Henry  were 
ieee him  off!  But  the  candy is  good.  I  got  a  new  batch  to  sell. 
Can  we  sell  popcorn  in  your  class? 

Only  because  it  is  you.  You  know  I  don’t  like  the 

Turn  up! If it  is  too  smelly  we  can  try  kettle  corn. 

Respondent: 
smell.  But  I  got  you. 

: 
Thanks  Rojas. 

Respondent: 
Don’t  worry.  Im  just  going  to  want  to  hang  out 
with  you  in  cuba  though.  It  be  fun.  Maybe  let  you  sit  next  to 
me  in  the  plane.  Haha.

  

a. 

Ayyyye  fshoo!  How  was  Germany? 

Respondent: 
Good.  Trying  to  find  you  something  but  nothing 
I  thought  you  would  have  liked.  Didn’t  hook  up  with  anyone  :(. 

Aha  well  you  got  your  wife!  But  well  talk  more 

about  your  trip  tomorrow. 

Im  not  Married.  Why  do  you  think  Im  not 

Respondent: 
interested  in  a  chaperone.  Its  only  going  to  be  you  and  me  in 
cuba.  The  others  are  boring.  Not  going  to  want  to  be 
adventurous,  stay  out  late.  Im  better  not  have  to  babysit  you  .. 
though.  You'll  be  18!! 

. 

f.  During  her  deposition,  :  |  described  respondent’s  comments  about 

“hooking  up”  and  not  being  married  as  an  indication  that  he  was  “feel[ing|  too  comfortable 
with  me  as  a  student.”  (Exh.  53,  p.  52.)  His  remarks  about  the  other  students  on  the  trip, 
wanting 

to  be  only  with  her,  and  his  reference  to  her  turning  18  years  of  age  confirmed 
"s  sense  that  the  trajectory  of  the  conversation  “wasn’t  going  in  the  right  direction.” 

(Ibid.)  Regarding  his  remark  about  her  age, : 
should  ever  say  that  to  a  teenage  girl. 
time.”  (Exh.  53,  p.  56.) 

stated:  “I  don’t  think  any  older  man 
It  always  comes  off  creepy,  like  150  percent  of  the 

g.  One  month  later,  via  text  and  email,  respondent  offered 

7  a  ticket  toa 

  

professional  hockey  game. 
respondent’s  email;  however,  at  school,  when  respondent  asked  whether  she  had  received  his 
message,  :  |  attempted  to  confront  respondent  about  what  she  saw  as  his  progressively 
invasive  and  inappropriate  communications.  As  though  sensing  what  she  was  about  to  say, 
respondent  brushed  off  her  request  to  speak  to  him  confidentially. 

did  not  respond  to  either  the  text  message  or 

h.  Respondent  did  not  directly  communicate  with 

mz  again  until  May 

2016.  By  then,  respondent  had  been 
the  students’  report.  In  a  text  to 
out  of  the  classroom  for  some  bs.  Will  be  going  to  a  meeting  and  most  probably  told  not  to 
contact  parents  nor  students.  But  cuba  trip  is  still  on. 
guys  the  day  after  the  last  day  of  school.”  (Exh.  38,  pp.  581-582.) 

placed  on  administrative  leave  pending  investigation  of 
dated  May  11,  2016,  respondent  wrote,  “I  got  pulled 

If  this  drags  on,  I  will  contact  you 

LACES  Administration  Actions 

12. 

Harold  Boger,  Jr.  was  LACES’  principal  from  2011  through  2017.  His 

responsibilities  as  principal  included  supervising  employees  and  ensuring  safety  on  campus. 
In  May  2016,  after Mi. 
actions  to  Dr.  Boger,  he  suspended  respondent  and  commenced  an  investigation. 

reported  respondent’s  communications  and 

    

,  and 

  

13. 

Dr.  Boger  recalls  directing  respondent  not  to  speak  to  anyone  connected  to  the 

school  before  respondent  was  escorted  off  campus  but  he  did  not  put  the  directive  to 
respondent  in  writing.  He  also  retrieved  respondent’s  keys  to  his  classroom  and  a  District- 
issued  laptop  computer.  Dr.  Boger  arranged  for  District  personnel  to  perform  a  forensic  scan 
on  the  computer. 

14. 

Dr.  Boger  also  inquired  into  whether  respondent  had  offered  presents  to  any 

other  students  and  determined  there  was  one  other, 
to  a  sporting  event. 

E.,  who  had  been  offered  a  ticket 

15. 

During  the  hearing,  Dr.  Boger  noted  that  respondent  was  known  as  a  very 
good  and  effective  teacher.  His  style  was  unorthodox  and  “edgy”  but  Dr.  Boger  did  not 
believe  that  his  manner  in  the  classroom  was  anything  more  than  a  teaching  tool.  He  saw  an 
important  distinction  between  making  edgy,  “even  racy”  remarks  to  the  class  in  general  and 
making  them  in  a  one-on-one  communication  with  a  student.  Dr.  Boger  deemed  the  latter 
inappropriate  and  a  violation  of  the  District’s  conduct  and  ethics  standards.  Asked  about  the 
significance  of  such  conduct,  Dr.  Boger  noted  that  crossing  the  line  into  inappropriate 
behavior  breaches  a  teacher’s  inherent  duty  of  trust  and  responsibility  to  maintain  moral 
authority. 

16. 

Kevin  Chaney,  a  digital  forensic  investigator  for  LAUSD,  performed  the 

forensic  scan  on  respondent’s  computer.  There,  he  found  “thumb”  files  with  pictures  of 
scantily  clad  women  on  them.  Thumb  files  are  images  stored  by  the  computer  after  an 
uploaded  image  has  been  deleted.  Thumb  files  are  not  accessible  in  the  course  of  ordinary 
computer  use.  Mr.  Chaney  could  not  determine  how  long  the  pictures  had  been  there,  their 
original  source,  or  whether  the  images  could  have  survived  an  electronic  “scrub”  performed 
when  the  computer  was  re-assigned  to  respondent  from  another  teacher.  As  such,  he  could 
not  definitively  determine  whether  respondent  had  stored  or  accessed  the  images. 

District  Expert  Testimony 

17. 

a.  Dr.  Vincent  Carbino  is  a  former  police  officer  and  holds  educational 

credentials  in  administration  and  pupil  and  welfare  services.  He  is  the  principal  of 
independent  and  online  studies  for  LAUSD. 

b.  Dr.  Carbino  is  familiar  with  the  concept  of  “grooming”  —  seemingly 

innocuous  behavior  by  predators  intended  to  wear  down  the  defenses  of  potential  victims. 
During  his  testimony,  Dr.  Carbino  noted  that,  in  a  school  setting,  grooming  generally 
involves  behavior  outside  the  traditional  role  of  educator.  Teachers  who  are  groomers  act 
more  like  friends  or  siblings  than  adults  in  positions  of  trust  and  responsibility.  Their  sense 
of  purpose  is  also  distinguishable  from  those  of  non-groomer  teachers.  While  educators’ 
roles  and  objectives  are  normally  about  the  needs  of  their  students,  groomers  are  focused  on 
their  own  needs,  whether  sexual  or  social.

c.  According  to  Dr.  Carbino,  a  secondary  purpose  to  groomers’  conduct  is  to 

“sort”  the  students.  With  each  step  toward  a  more  personal  relationship,  the  groomer 
determines  whether  the  student  is  susceptible  to  more  frankly  exploitive  conduct. 

d.  Dr.  Carbino  reviewed  the  students’  deposition  transcripts  and  recordings, 

the  records  from  the  District’s  investigation,  and  U.S.  Department  of  Education  publications. 
Applying  his  experience  and  knowledge,  Dr.  Carbino  concluded  that  respondent  had  engaged 
in  grooming:  the  classroom  jokes  and  provocative  remarks  were  intended  to  flush  out  the 
most  susceptible  students,  the  emails  and  texts  were  intended  to  break  down  barriers,  and  the 
gift-giving  and  offering  were  intended  to  ingratiate  himself.  Asking  each  of  the  students  to 
keep  secrets  is  also  indicative  of  grooming.  According  to  Dr.  Carbino,  this  type  of 
communication  helps  a  groomer  determine  who  can  be  counted  on  to  remain  silent  even  as 
more  exploitive  behavior  takes 
as  those  respondent  posed  to  i  to  have  lunch  or  his  comment  to 
anticipated  it  would  “just  be  you  and  me  in  Cuba  —  others  are  boring”  are  attempts  to  isolate 
his  victims,  also  typical  of  grooming. 

place.  Finally,  under  Dr.  Carbino’s  analysis,  invitations  such 

that  he 

18. 

a.  The  District’s  second  expert,  Detective  Daniel  Scott,  has  been  a  law 

enforcement  officer  for  over  33  years,  including  working  with  a  special  victims’  unit  and 
child  abuse  cases.  He  has  also  served  on  the  Los  Angeles  County  Blue  Ribbon  Commission 
on  Child  Abuse  and  the  Federal  Commission  on  Child  Abuse  and  Child  Homicide. 

b.  During  his  testimony,  Detective  Scott  stated  that  grooming  is  very 

frequently  a  part  of  sexual  abuse  but  is  not,  in  itself,  a  crime.  Grooming  is  behavior  intended 
to  lower  the  inhibitions  of  the  victim,  to  find  out  how  far  a  perpetrator  can  go,  and  to  increase 
access  with  the  victim. 

c.  Detective  Scott  reviewed  the  District’s  investigation  report  and  some  of  the 

communications  between  respondent  and  the  three  students  at  issue.  Based  on  his  review, 
Detective  Scott  came  to  the  conclusion  that  respondent  was  engaging  in  “subtle”  grooming. 
His  conclusion  was  primarily  based  on  the  number  of  instances  respondent  tried  to  be  alone 
with  one  or  the  other  of  the  three  students,  the  “targeted”  gift-giving,  and  the  fact  that 
tespondent’s  communications  often  occurred  outside  the  normal  confines  of  the  school 
routine. 

Respondent’s  Evidence 

19. 

a.  During  his  testimony,  respondent  denied  that  he  had  intended  to  lunch  with 

Ma  alone,  stating  he  intended  to  bring  his  wife  and  child.  Respondent  denied  offering  or 
insisting 

take  the  box  of  Porto’s  pastries  and  keep  them  all.  He  also  denied  driving 

alone  with 

b.  Regarding  the  email  and  text  messages,  respondent  did  not  deny  that  he 
wrote  them;  but  denied  any  improper  motive,  explaining  each  one  as  either  misconstrued, 
intended  to  be  a  joke,  or  made  with  an  intentional  educational  purpose  in  mind. 

10

c.  Respondent  addressed  some  of  the  individual  messages  he  sent.  Regarding 

his  communications  with Mi.  respondent  explained  them  as  follows: 

> 

> 

from  teacher/student  to  parent/camp  counselor; 
for  restaurant  suggestions  stemmed  from  his  unfamiliarity  with  the 

Asking Ma  to  call  respondent  by  his  first  name  was  to  reflect  their  evolving 
telationship 
Asking 
neighborhood  where  LACES  is  located  because  he  rarely  had  time  to  eat  off-campus 
and  so  was  unfamiliar  with  the  area. 
Writing  about  his  fellow  teacher  was  just  something  respondent  “blurted  out”  and 
immediately  regretted,  so  he  asked 

to  keep  it  confidential. 

d.  Respondent  explained  his  communications  with qa  as  follows: 

Obtaining  Hs  number  was  at  the  recommendation  of  the  World  Affairs  Council’s 

former  advisor,  Joseph  Zell,  and  was  to  facilitate  his  work  as  its  current  advisor. 
The  main  purpose  of  respondent’s  call  to  Hl  on  the  night  of  the  cultural  event  the 
students  in  the  club  attended  was  to  confirm  that  they  had  all  arrived  and  were  able  to 
find  Mr.  Zell.  Respondent’s  questions  about  whether  Hl  wished  respondent  was 
chaperoning  the  event  and  whether  she  missed  him  were  jokes. 

e.  Respondent  explained  his  communications  with  m7  as  follows: 

to  practice  her  Spanish. 

Referring  to  himself  as  “Jose,  your  cuba  adventure  partner”  was  respondent’s  way  to 
teignite  the  students’  enthusiasm  for  the  trip  and  the  result  of  his  concern  that  students 
would  forget  about  the  trip  during  the  summer  break. 
Writing  “This  is  better.  Not  a  group  email.”  was  respondent’s  effort  to  avoid 
tepeating  himself  and  different  members  of  the  original  group  email  had  different 
levels  of  interest  in  the  trip.  Additionally,  ni  was  the  most  enthusiastic  about  the 
trip  and  had a  leadership  position  in  it. 
Writing  “Imma  gonna  get  more  numbers  than  you”  was  respondent’s  effort  to 
encourage 
Referencing 
her  own  excitement  about  celebrating  it  in  such  an  exotic  location.  His  comment 
about  needing  her  to  be  willing  to  stay  up  was  to  reassure  her  that  she  can  count  on 
him  keeping  the  close  cohesion  of  the  students  in  class. 
Comments  about  wanting  a  small  group,  not  wanting  many  boys  to  come,  and  not 
wanting  another  chaperone  referenced  his  concern  about  avoiding  trouble  and 
possible  transgression  of  the  many  rules  and  restrictions  the  group  would  have  to 
tespect  while  in  a  foreign  country,  particularly  one  as  restrictive  and  isolated  as  Cuba. 
Comments  about  wanting  to  “hang  out”  with  7  during  the  trip  and  “it  is  only 
going  to  be  you  and  me  in  cuba”  and  “others  are  boring”  was  intended  to  “renew”  her 
interest  in  it. 
“Maybe  let  you  sit  next  to  me  on  the  plane”  and  “Im  not  married”  were  jokes. 

’s  18th  birthday  in  various  communications  was  in  response  to 

ll

f.  Respondent  addressed  the  gifts  in  his  testimony:  The  Porto’s  pastries  were 

intended  to  be  for  all  the  members  of  the  Cuba  Club;  ie 
appropriated  them  without  his 
permission.  The  offers  of  sporting  tickets  were  intended  to  thank Me  for  her  assistance 
with  his  questions  about  summer  camp  and  to  reward 
assistance  with  planning  the  trip  to  Cuba,  respectively. 

7  for  her  enthusiasm  and 

g.  Respondent  described  his  suspension  and  the  resulting  disciplinary  action 

as  a  “wake  up  call”  causing  him  to  reevaluate  his  values  and  priorities  as  an  educator. 
Respondent  was  a  popular  teacher,  with  a  reputation  for  being  fun  and  funny.  After 
consulting  with  a  spiritual  advisor  and  a  psychologist,  respondent  came  to  understand  he 
enjoyed  his  students’  attention  and  adulation  and  made  choices  intended  to  increase  his 
popularity,  not  necessarily  to  be  the  best  teacher  possible. 

h.  Respondent  stated  he  felt  great  remorse  for  his  actions,  particularly  the 

three  students  at  the  forefront  of  LACES  investigation  and  disciplinary  action.  He  did  not 
intend  to  “hurt  their  feelings”  and  now  realizes  how  his  actions  could  be  misconstrued  and 
caused  them  embarrassment  and  discomfort. 

i.  Respondent  denied  storing  or  accessing  pornographic  images  on  his 

District-issued  computer,  and  denied  that  Principal  Boger  had  directed  him  to  refrain  from 
contacting  students  when  the  LACES  administration  suspended  respondent. 

20.  |  Two  educators  who  worked  with  respondent  at  LACES  testified  on  his  behalf: 

a.  Jeffrey  Horton  was  a  fellow  teacher  with  respondent  at  LACES  from  2010 
and  2016.  He  described  respondent  as  a  generous  colleague,  supportive  of  students,  and  an 
effective  teacher,  particularly  prolific  at  “softening  the  blow”  of  difficult  material  with  his 
engaging  personality.  Mr.  Horton  became  aware  of  the  charges  against  respondent  in  the 
course  of  preparing  for  the  hearing  but  did  not  know  that  respondent  was  sending  the  texts  in 
question  when  they  worked  together. 

b.  Joseph  Zell  was  an  assistant  principal  at  LACES  between  2001  and  2010, 

overlapping  with  respondent’s  tenure  there  by  one  year.  Mr.  Zell  confirmed  that  he  did 
recommend  that  respondent  choose  one  student  with  whom  to  communicate  while  the  group 
was  at  the  off-campus  dinner.  Mr.  Zell  also  commented  on  respondent’s  teaching,  noting 
that  respondent  was  known  for  using  humor  in  his  teaching,  and  that  such  an  approach  could 
be  particularly  effective  with  high-performing  students  who  enjoy  sophisticated  interaction 
with  their  teachers.  He  also  stated  that  it  was  not  inappropriate  to  discuss  personal  matters, 
including  issues  around  dating  and  related  subjects,  with  students.  Some  eight  years  after 
retirement,  Mr.  Zell  remains  in  touch  with  certain  students  through  social  media  and  email 
and  does  not  believe  that  is  unusual  or  inappropriate. 

21. 

Respondent  submitted  multiple  letters  of  support  from  students  and  former 
students,  email  communications  between  himself  and  students,  letters  of  recognitions  and 
awards. 

12

Analysis 

22. 

a.  Inthe  course  of  its  deliberations,  the  Commission  considered  the  two  main 

    

to  a  nearby 

areas  where  the  underlying  facts  were  in  dispute  —  whether  respondent  had  gifted  to Ha  a 
grocery  store.  Regarding  the 
box  of  pastries  and  whether  he  had  driven 
pastries,  Efitestified  that  her  friend, 
a  text  message  summoning 
her  to  respondent’s  classroom  on  the  day  in  question  and  that  it  was  respondent  who  first  told 
in  the  hallway  between  classrooms 
her  the  box  was  for  her. 
and  telling  her  about  respondent’s  intentions.  Respondent  testified  that  the  box  had  not  been 
for 

alone  and  that  she  had  appropriated  it.  Given  the  inconsistencies  in Ha  and 
*s  testimony  about  what  was  communicated  to Ha  and  by  whom,  the  Commission 

     
concluded  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  respondent  had  gifted  the  box 
of  pastries  to Ha. 

|  N.  recalled  meeting 

N.,  had  sent 

    

b.  Regarding  whether  respondent  had  driven 

in  his  vehicle,  the 
was  straightforward  and 

    

Commission  members  credited  her  version  of  events. 
detailed  in  her  explanations  and  she  evinced  no  bias  against,  or  interest  in,  harming 
respondent.  Additionally,  the  experience  stands  in  sharp  relief  in  her  memory  as  it  began  her 
reassessment  of  respondent’s  motives  and  intentions.  There  is  no  other  explanation  for  how 
respondent  was  able  to  purchase  the  goods  she  sold  at  school  that  evening  and  there  is  no 
dispute  that  she  was  present  there  as  both  she  and  respondent  recall  her  coming  to 
respondent’s  defense  when  visiting  parents  challenged  his  curriculum.  Accordingly,  the 
Commission  concluded  that  respondent  had  driven 
parent’s  or  guardian’s  written  permission. 

in  his  private  vehicle  without  a 

mm 

23. 

a.  Regarding  whether  respondent’s  emailed  and  texted  messages  was,  as 

respondent  testified,  either  essentially  innocent  friendly  gestures  or  instances  of  his 
unorthodox  teaching  methods,  the  Commission  found  respondent  not  credible.  Respondent’s 
messages  are,  on  their  face,  suggestive,  possibly  sexual,  and  far  past  the  line  of  any  kind  of 
informal  banter  appropriate  for  a  student-teacher  relationship.  Respondent’s  explanations  at 
the  hearing  simply  did  not  ring  true  or  logical  in  the  face  of  the  plain  meaning  of  his 
messages. 

b.  The  Commission  did  not  credit  the  District  position  that  respondent’s 

actions  constituted  grooming  — 1.e.,  that  he  engaged  in  deliberate  acts  intended  to  lower  the 
inhibitions  of  vulnerable  students  so  that  they  would  be  open  to  more  direct  exploitive 
behavior.  The  Commission  determined  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that 
respondent’s  actions  were  part  of  a  bigger  enterprise  to  engage  the  students  in  planned,  future 
behavior. 

24. 

|The  Commission  determined  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that 

respondent  had  stored  or  accessed  pornography  on  his  District-issued  computer. 

13

  

  

  

  

25. 

The  Commission  determined  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that 

respondent  had  failed  to  obey  a  direction  from  Principal  Boger  to  refrain  from 
communicating  with  students  after  LACES  administration  suspended  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  and  Burden  of  Proof 

1. 

The  Commission  has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  sections  44943  and  44944.  (Factual  Findings  1-5.°) 

2. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter  because  it  is  seeking  to 

dismiss  respondent  from  employment  as  a  certificated  employee.  The  standard  of  proof  is 
preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 
(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

Grounds  for  Discipline 

3. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  sets  out  the  grounds  for  which  a  permanent 

employee  may  be  dismissed  by  a  school  district.  The  grounds  alleged  in  this  case  are: 
immoral  conduct  (subd.  (a)(1));  evident  unfitness  for  service  (subd.  (a)(5));  and  persistent 
violation  of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  school  laws  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the 
employing  school  district  (subd.  (a)(7)).  In  addition,  the  District  alleged  the  section  44939 
prohibition  against  “willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause, 
as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district”  as  further 
grounds  for  dismissing  respondent. 

4. 
been  defined  as: 

a.  Immoral  conduct  under  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  and  44939  has 

Conduct  which  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and 
contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to 
sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude 
(correctness),  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 
dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct 
showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 
members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude 
toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 

(San  Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 
Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466.) 

  

>  Further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

14

b.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment  with  the  District 
under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  for  immoral  conduct,  based  on  Factual  Findings  9- 
11.)  Respondent’s  actions  considered  in  total  demonstrate  a  pattern  of  disturbingly  intimate 
and  invasive  conduct,  an  abuse  of  his  power  over,  and  access  to,  students,  and  near-total 
indifference  to  the  students’  needs  and  feelings  and  his  responsibilities  toward  them  as  their 
teacher. 

5. 

a.  Evident  unfitness  to  teach  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  means 

eee 

clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of 

temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.’  Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness 
for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of 
notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.” 
(San  Diego  Unified  School  Dists,  supra,  194  Cal.App.4"  at1462,  quoting  Woodlands  Joint 
Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th 
1429,  1444.) 

b. 

In  this  case,  respondent’s  misconduct  as  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  9-11, 
was  pervasive  and  evinced  an  immaturity  and  lack  of  discipline  and  professionalism  that  1s 
consistent  with  a  character  defect  and  unlikely  to  improve  with  training  or  coaching. 

6. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229,  the 

California  Supreme  Court  explained  that  ‘immoral  conduct’  and  ‘evident  unfitness  to  teach’ 
as  used  in  the  Education  Code  must  be  analyzed  in  the  context  of  whether  the  underlying 
conduct  is  hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  school  community  and  whether  there  is  sufficient 
nexus  between  the  conduct  and  teaching.  To  that  end,  the  Morrison  court  set  out  seven 
factors  to  consider.  They  are: 

> 

 
V
V
V
V
V
V

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow 
teachers  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated; 
The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct; 
The  type  of  the  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved; 
The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct; 
The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct; 
The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and 
The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling 
effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 

7. 

Applying  the  Morrison  factors,  the  Commission  finds  as  follows: 

a.  Likelihood  of  adversely  affecting  students. Mg. Hm.  and  .  |  all 

described  experiencing  discomfort  and  concern.  Ma  testified  persuasively  about  the  clear 
power  advantage  respondent,  as  her  teacher,  had  over  her  and  how  she  struggled  to  strike  the 
right  tone  in  coping  with  his  intrusions  without  offending  or  angering  him. 

15

b.  Proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Respondent’s  conduct  was 

recent,  having  occurred  between  2015  and  2016. 

c.  Type  of  teaching  certification.  Respondent’s  has  appropriate  credentials  for 

his  position  with  LACES. 

d.  Extenuating  or  Ageravating  Circumstances.  None  were  established. 

e.  Praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 

conduct.  Respondent’s  explanation  of  courting  popularity  over  effective  teaching  provides 
some  insight  into  his  motives.  Allowing  his  desire  to  be  well-liked  to  overwhelm  his 
professional  judgment  as  an  educator  underscores  that  his  failings  are  directly  related  to 
teaching. 

f.  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  Respondent’s 

conduct  occurred  over  an  extended  period  of  time  and  frequently.  Under  these 
circumstances,  that  is  at  least  some  indication  that  it  is  likely  to  recur. 

g.  The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the 

constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  The  conduct  in  question  1s 
respondent’s  private,  one-on-one  communications,  not  his  presentations  in  class.  As  such, 
they  should  not  inhibit  or  chill  teachers’  speech  in  the  classroom. 

8. 

Considering  the  Morrison  factors  as  a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  respondent’s 

conduct  is  directly  related  to  his  teaching.  Indeed,  all  of  it  is  about  and  around  students  and 
could  not  have  occurred  without  the  access  and  authority  respondent  had  as  a  teacher. 

Persistent  Violation  of,  or  Refusal  to,  Obey  Rules  and  Regulations 

9. 

a.  Under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  a  teacher  may  be  terminated  for 

persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him. 

b.  Applicable  rules  and  regulations  implicated  in  this  matter  are: 

>»  LAUSD  Employee  Code  of  Ethics  —  Section  A(1)  provides  that  employees  are  to  set 
the  example,  “striving  to  demonstrate  excellence,  integrity,  and  responsibility  in  our 
work.”  Section  A(2)  provides  that  employees  are  to  create  an  environment  of  trust. 
“We  will  not  tolerate  discriminatory  or  harassing  behavior  of  students.” 

>  LAUSD  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  —  Discourages  extra-curricular  contact  with 

students,  having  private  meetings,  driving  with  students  without  parents’  or 
guardians’  written  permission,  and  communicating  with  students  for  purposes  not 
school-related. 

16

>»  LAUSD  Unified  School  District  Policy  Bulletin  No.  999.10  —  Provides  that  teachers, 
among  others,  must  use  data  systems  and  computers  in  a  responsible  and  education- 
oriented  way.  Inappropriate  use  includes  accessing  or  transmitting  pornography. 
>  Board  Resolution  Reaffirming  Commitment  to  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  — 

requires  treating  all  equally  and  with  respect. 

c.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  position  in  that  he  persistently 

violated  the  aforementioned  rules,  harassing  female  students,  privately  messaging  them 
repeatedly  for  matters  that  were  entirely  unrelated  to  school  and  generally  disrespecting  his 
students  by  consistently  breaching  the  normal  professional  boundaries  between  student  and 
teacher. 

d.  Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  based  on  the  allegation  that  he 

violated  the  District’s  computer  policy  as  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish 
respondent  stored  or  accessed  pornography  on  his  District-issued  computer.  (See  Factual 
Finding  16.) 

e.  Cause  does  not  exist  to  dismiss  respondent  based  on  the  allegation  that  he 

disobeyed  Principal  Boger’s  directive  not  to  contact  students  after  respondent  was  suspended 
in  May  2016.  There  was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  Principal  Boger  had  relayed 
the  directive  to  respondent.  (See  Factual  Finding  13.) 

Willful  Refusal  to  Perform  Regular  Assignments 

10. 

‘The  District  alleges  that  respondent  not  only  violated  applicable  rules,  but  did 

so  ina  willful  manner,  as  though  to  thwart  their  inherent  authority.  Nothing  in  the  records 
supports  the  contention  that  respondent  acted  with  volition  to  circumvent  specific  rules  or 
directives.  If  anything,  respondent  seemed  to  have  been  entirely  unaware  that  he  operated  as 
a  professional  under  rules  and  directives  that  were  intended  to  limit  his  actions  and  choices. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  Commission  concluded  that  cause  did  not  exist  to  dismiss 
respondent  on  the  ground  of  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  in  violation  of 
section  44939. 

Disposition 

11. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach...  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.” 
(California  Teachers  Assoc’n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344.)  Thus, 
even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still  has  broad 
discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted.  (Fontana  Unified 
School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

12. 

‘Taking  all  the  evidence  and  the  applicable  law  into  consideration,  the 

Commission  has  determined  that  respondent  should  be  dismissed  from  his  position  with  the 
District.  The  misconduct  established  1s  serious,  injurious,  against  normal  educational 

17

objectives,  and  evinces  a  degree  of  immaturity  and  lack  of  self-awareness  inconsistent  with 
the  professional  responsibilities  of  a  teacher.  Under  these  circumstances,  respondent’s 
dismissal  is  the  only  appropriate  outcome.  (Factual  Findings  9-25.) 

ORDER 

Respondent  Jose  Rojas  is  hereby  dismissed  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District. 

DATED: 

February  21,  2019 

DATED:  _  February  21,  2019 

DATED:  |  February  21,  2019 

ron  DocuSigned  by: 

: 

Tiuncsa  Brow 

nae  OS  F297A4FBCOACD.... 

  

TERESA  BROWN 
Commission  Member 

oon  DocuSigned  by: 
f 

t :  Carolyn  Meurer 

it 
Nunes  TEBATAQD24A5426... 

  

CAROLYN  MONROE 
Commission  Member 

7  DocuSigned  by: 

: 

Deena  R.  Ghaly 

‘eee  5D13AC50FBADAT7... 

  

DEENA  R.  GHALY 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

18

