BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FAIRFIELD-SUISUN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SOLANO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

JASON  AGAN, 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2019040423 

DECISION 

A  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  convened  to  hear  this 

matter  on  July  22-26  and  July  30—August  1,  2019,  in  Fairfield,  California.  Commission 

members  are  Nancy  Vielhauer,  Carmen  Wright,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Holly  M. 

Baldwin,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  who  served  as  Chair. 

Attorneys  Matthew  P.  Juhl-Darlington  and  Nicole  Phillips  represented 

complainant  Kris  Corey,  Superintendent,  Fairfield-Suisun  Unified  School  District. 

Attorney  Christopher  O.  Hammer  represented  respondent  Jason  Agan,  who  was 

present  throughout  the  hearing. 

The  record  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  August  1,  2019.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Summary  of  the  Case 

1. 

The  Fairfield-Suisun  Unified  School  District  (District)  seeks  to  dismiss 

respondent  Jason  Agan  from  employment.  Cause  for  dismissal  is  based  on  alleged 

immoral  conduct  (including  but  not  limited  to  egregious  misconduct);  evident 

unfitness  for  service;  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of 

the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public 

schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  the  governing  board  of  the  District. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  mathematics  and  leadership  teacher  at  Rodriguez  High 

School.  During  the  2017-2018  and  2018-2019  school  years,  respondent  engaged  in 

conduct  including:  massaging  and  rubbing  female  students  on  the  neck  and  shoulders 

during  class;  grabbing  a  student's  hand  and  placing  it  on  her  leg  to  measure  the 

length  of  her  shorts;  grabbing  and  removing a  cell  phone  from  the  back  pants  pocket 

of  a  female  student  while  she  was  sitting  down;  making  a  variety  of  comments  about 

clothing  worn  by  female  students;  making  suggestive  comments  to  students;  and 

wearing  a  t-shirt  to  class  that  spelled  out  “pimp.”  Respondent's  conduct  made  many 

students  uncomfortable  and  had  a  negative  effect  on  their  educational  environment. 

Multiple  female  students  were  emotionally  distraught  and  described  themselves  as 

“victims.”  Respondent  was  warned  by  administrators,  without  changing  his  conduct. 

3. 

The  District's  allegations  against  respondent  were  established  by  the 

consistent,  credible,  and  persuasive  testimony  of  multiple  students,  and  the  consistent 

and  credible  testimony  of  District  administrators  and  staff.  Respondent  admitted  some 

of  the  allegations,  but  denied  others,  or  engaged  in  semantic  arguments  to  explain  or 

justify  his  own  actions,  suggesting  a  lack  of  candor.  Respondent's  explanations  and

versions  of  events  also  changed  over  time,  undermining  his  credibility.  Overall, 

respondent's  testimony  evidenced  an  attempt  to  downplay  and  minimize  his  actions, 

and  a  failure  to  fully  acknowledge  his  inappropriate  behavior. 

4. 

As  set  forth  below,  the  conduct  alleged  and  proven  at  hearing  establishes 

cause  for  respondent's  dismissal.  The  evidence  presented  at  hearing  was  voluminous. 

The  pertinent  evidence  is  discussed  below. 

Background  and  Procedural  History 

5. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  He 

holds  a  single  subject  mathematics  teaching  credential.  Respondent  has  been  a 

mathematics  teacher  at  Rodriguez  High  School  for  17  years,  since  2001,  his  entire 

teaching  career. 

6. 

Respondent  received  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  mathematics  in  2001  from 

California  State  University,  Sacramento.  He  was  hired  by  the  District  on  an  emergency 

credential,  and  received  his  teaching  credential  in  2004.  Respondent  later  received  a 

master’s  degree  in  curriculum  and  instruction  from  Chapman  University. 

7. 

Respondent's  most  recent  performance  evaluation,  in  December  2015, 

rated  him  as  meeting  or  exceeding  standards.  He  has  not  received  any  prior  formal 

discipline  or  letters  of  warning  or  reprimand. 

8. 

In  the  2017-2018  school  year,  respondent  taught  two  sections  of  Math 

2-3  and  one  section  of  Advanced  Placement  (AP)  Calculus.  In  the  2018-2019  school 

year,  he  taught  one  section  of  Math  2-3  and  one  section  of  AP  Calculus.  Math  2-3  is  an 

accelerated  class  that  condenses  two  years  of  math  curriculum  into  one  instructional

year;  students  in  this  class  were  typically  sophomores.  Students  in  AP  Calculus  were 

mostly  juniors  and  seniors.  Respondent  was  the  only  AP  Calculus  teacher  at  Rodriguez. 

9, 

Respondent  also  was  the  leadership  teacher  and  the  student  activities 

director  at  Rodriguez  for  the  last  seven  years.  He  taught  the  leadership  class  during 

"zero  period,”  starting  at  7:00  a.m.  Many  students  were  in  leadership  for  multiple  years. 

10. 

Respondent's  classroom  had  rows  of  rectangular  tables  and  chairs,  with 

multiple  students  sitting  at  each  table.  The  classroom  adjoined  the  multipurpose  room. 

11. 

On  October  5,  2018,  respondent  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave, 

pending  the  District's  investigation  of  allegations  regarding  his  conduct. 

12. 

At  the  December  6,  2018  meeting  of  the  District's  Board  of  Education,  the 

Board  approved  a  Statement  of  Charges  and  Recommendation  for  Dismissal  and  for 

Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension.  On  December  27,  2018,  respondent  was  served  with 

the  Statement  of  Charges  and  a  notice  of  Ske//y  hearing.  The  Ske//y  hearing  was 

conducted  on  January  8,  2019.  The  Ske//y  officer  upheld  the  District's  recommendation. 

13. 

 OnApril  23,  2019,  Kris  Corey,  Superintendent  of  the  District,  served 

respondent  with  an  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  and  Recommendation  for 

Dismissal  and  for  Immediate  Unpaid  Suspension.  Respondent  timely  requested  a 

hearing,  and  this  hearing  before  the  Commission  followed. 

Applicable  Statutes,  Board  Policies,  and  Regulations 

14. 

Board  Policy  (B.P.)  4119.21,  4219.21,  4319.21,  “Professional  Standards,” 

sets  forth  expectations  for  the  District's  employees.

The  Governing  Board  expects  district  employees  to 

maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  behave 

professionally,  follow  district  policies  and  regulations,  abide 

by  state  and  federal  laws,  and  exercise  good  judgment 

when  interacting  with  students  and  other  members  of  the 

school  community.  Employees  shall  engage  in  conduct  that 

enhances  the  integrity  of  the  district,  advances  the  goals  of 

the  district's  educational  programs,  and  contributes  to  a 

positive  school  climate. 

The  professional  standards  policy  also  enumerates  various  types  of  inappropriate 

conduct,  including  engaging  in  harassing  or  discriminatory  behavior  towards  students. 

15. 

Board  Policy  5137,  “Positive  School  Climate,”  provides  that: 

The  Governing  Board  desires  to  enhance  student  learning 

by  providing  an  orderly,  caring,  and  nurturing  educational 

and  social  environment  in  which  all  students  can  feel  safe 

and  take  pride  in  their  school  and  their  achievements.  The 

school  environment  should  be  characterized  by  positive 

interpersonal  relationships  among  students  and  between 

students  and  staff. 

The  positive  school  climate  policy  also  states  that:  “All  staff  are  expected  to  serve  as 

role  models  for  students  by  demonstrating  positive,  professional  appearance, 

attitudes,  and  respect  toward  each  student  and  other  staff  members.” 

16. 

State  law  and  the  policy  of  the  governing  board  of  the  District  prohibit 

sexual  harassment.  (Ed.  Code,  88  200,  201,  212.5,  220;  B.P.  5145.7.)  The  Education  Code

defines  sexual  harassment  as  including  “verbal,  visual,  or  physical  conduct  of  a  sexual 

nature,  made  by  someone  from  or  in  the  work  or  educational  setting,”  where 

“[s]Jubmission  to  the  conduct  is  explicitly  or  implicitly  made  a  term  or  condition  of  an 

individual’s  ...  academic  status,  or  progress,”  or  where  the  “conduct  has  the  purpose 

or  effect  of  having  a  negative  impact  upon  the  individual's  work  or  academic 

performance,  or  of  creating  an  intimidating,  hostile,  or  offensive  work  or  educational 

environment.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  212.5.)  The  District's  governing  board  has  adopted  policies 

consistent  with  state  law.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  District  to  provide  a  safe  school 

environment  that  is  free  from  harassment  and  discrimination.  (B.P.  5145.7.) 

Administrative  Regulation  5145.7  implements  the  Board  Policy  regarding  sexual 

harassment,  and  defines  prohibited  sexual  harassment  of  students  in  the  same  terms 

as  Education  Code  section  212.5.  The  regulation  also  lists  illustrative  examples  of 

conduct  that  is  prohibited  in  the  District  and  that  may  constitute  sexual  harassment, 

including:  unwelcome  leering,  sexual  flirtations,  or  propositions;  unwelcome  sexual 

slurs,  epithets,  threats,  verbal  abuse,  derogatory  comments,  or  sexually  degrading 

descriptions;  graphic  verbal  comments  about  an  individual's  body  or  overly  personal 

conversation;  sexual  jokes;  massaging,  grabbing,  fondling,  stroking,  or  brushing  the 

body;  and  touching  an  individual’s  body  or  clothes  in  a  sexual  way. 

17. 

District  employees  must  complete  an  annual  online  training  for 

mandated  reporters,  on  topics  such  as  child  abuse,  sex  abuse,  and  sex  trafficking. 

Respondent  completed  the  mandated  reporter  training  on  September  4,  2018.  District 

employees  also  must  complete  annual  online  training  on  sexual  harassment 

prevention  at  the  beginning  of  each  school  year.  There  is  no  evidence  that  respondent 

did  not  complete  the  required  sexual  harassment  prevention  training.

Respondent's  Actions  During  2017-2018  and  2018-2019  School  Years 

18. 

J.W.,'  M.M.,  L.M.,  F.R.,  Z.A.,  R.R.,  J.S.,  F.R.’s  father,  Kara  Kotarsky,  Allison 

Klein,  Gary  Hiner,  and  Mike  Minahen  provided  candid  and  credible  testimony.  There  is 

no  evidence  that  the  student  witnesses  harbored  underlying  ill  will  toward  respondent 

or  had  a  motive  that  could  be  perceived  to  bias  their  statements  or  testimony. 

2017-2018  SCHOOL  YEAR 

J.W. 

19. 

‘In  February  2018,  J.W.,  a  female  sophomore  in  respondent's  Math  2-3 

class,  complained  to  school  administrators  about  respondent's  behavior.  J.W.  was 

sitting  down,  taking  a  test,  when  respondent  came  up  behind  her  and  grabbed  her  cell 

phone  out  of  her  back  pants  pocket,  without  notice.  She  felt  the  phone  sliding  out  of 

her  back  pocket,  and  did  not  know  who  had  grabbed  it  or  why.  Respondent  leaned 

over  her,  put  the  phone  on  the  table,  and  said  it  looked  like  the  phone  was  going  to 

fall  out  of  her  pocket.  J.W.  described  herself  as  feeling  “shocked,”  “disgusted,”  and 

“powerless,”  noting  that  respondent  could  have  walked  to  the  front  of  the  table  to  get 

her  attention  and  told  her  to  remove  the  phone  herself. 

(a) 

Respondent  admitted  at  hearing  that  he  grabbed  the  cell  phone  out  of 

J.W.'s  back  pocket.  He  concedes  this  was  invasive,  and  regrets  he  made  her 

uncomfortable.  He  says  his  intent  was  to  keep  the  phone  from  falling  out  of  her 

pocket  and  breaking. 

  

'The  names  of  students  are  confidential  to  protect  their  privacy.

20. 

J.W.  also  told  administrators  about  a  comment  that  resoondent  made 

during  class  in  late  January  or  early  February  2018,  that  boys  should  go  to  track  meets 

“because  there  are  a  bunch  of  pretty  girls  running  around  in  short  shorts.”  J.W.  felt 

very  uncomfortable  hearing  this,  especially  because  she  was  on  the  track  team  and 

was  required  to  wear  shorts  as  part  of  her  uniform.  Track  conditioning  had  just  started, 

and  the  comment  made  her  think  twice  about  putting  on  her  uniform.  J.W.  observed 

that  the  comment  provoked  shocked  looks  and  uneasy  laughs  from  other  students. 

(a) 

Respondent  denied  at  hearing  that  he  made  this  specific  comment,  but 

admitted  telling  students  that  he  used  to  run  track  as  a  student  and  he  liked 

participating  in  a  co-educational  sport  and  socializing  with  girls.  He  says  J.W.  must 

have  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted  his  remarks. 

21. 

Lastly,  J.W.  told  administrators  about  respondent  massaging  girls’ 

shoulders  in  class.  Respondent  did  this  to  J.W.,  either  grabbing  one  of  her  shoulders 

from  the  side  and  massaging  it,  or  grabbing  both  of  her  shoulders  from  behind.  She 

felt  very  uncomfortable  and  powerless  when  it  happened,  but  felt  she  could  not  speak 

up  and  say  no,  because  respondent  was  in  charge  of  the  class  and  her  grades.  J.W.  also 

observed  respondent  massaging  other  girls’  shoulders,  and  saw  that  they  tensed  up  or 

made  a  face.  She  felt  uncomfortable  seeing  this,  and  felt  bad  for  those  girls. 

22. 

J.W.  spoke  with  assistant  principal  Gary  Hiner  in  February  2018,  and 

submitted  a  written  statement.  J.W.  and  her  mother  requested  that  she  remain 

anonymous,  due  to  concern  about  potential  negative  repercussions  from  respondent 

or  other  students.  Because  J.W.  declined  to  provide  names  of  other  student  witnesses, 

Hiner  did  not  interview  other  students  at  that  time.

23. 

Hiner  spoke  with  respondent  after  receiving  J.W.'s  complaint.  Because 

J.W.  had  requested  anonymity,  Hiner  kept  the  conversation  general.  He  did,  however, 

tell  respondent  that  students  were  uncomfortable  with  his  touching  them  in  class. 

Respondent  said  his  classroom  was  very  crowded,  and  he  was  touching  students  on 

the  shoulders  to  move  them  forward  in  their  chairs  when  he  moved  between  tables. 

Hiner  told  respondent  to  “be  careful”  when  touching  students. 

F.R. 

24. 

__F.R.  was  a  female  sophomore  in  respondent's  Math  2-3  class.  She  saw 

respondent  massage  or  rub  the  shoulders  of  female  students  in  class  during  the 

2017-2018  school  year,  which  made  her  uncomfortable  to  watch. 

25. 

In  late  January  or  early  February  2018,  respondent  made  a  comment  to 

F.R.  about  her  t-shirt,  which  read  “I’m  just  here  for  the  savasana.”  (Savasana  is  a  yoga 

pose  in  which  the  practitioner  lies  down  on  her  back.)  As  F.R.  was  leaving  class  with 

other  students,  respondent  nodded  to  her  shirt  and  made  a  comment  suggesting  that 

F.R.  should  be  lying  down.*  After  F.R.  said  “what?”  in  confusion,  respondent  repeated 

the  comment  to  which  F.R.  said  “no,”  frowned,  and  walked  away.  F.R.  acknowledged 

that  her  t-shirt  was  meant  to  be  satirical,  but  she  was  taken  aback  by  respondent's 

comment—tt  felt  to  her  like  an  abuse  of  authority  for  a  teacher  to  suggest  she  lie 

down.  As  she  put  it, 

“I  think  he  was  joking  but  don’t  think  it  was  an  OK  joke  to  make.” 

  

2  E.R.  said  that  respondent  said  “lie  down”  to  her.  Respondent  said  he  phrased  it 

as  a  question,  “how  come  you  never  laid  down?”  or  “why  aren't  you  lying  down?”  The 

difference  between  these  phrasings  is  immaterial—even  If  respondent  framed  it  as  a 

question,  the  comment  suggests  that  F.R.  should  be  lying  down  on  her  back.

26. 

—-F.R.  told  her  parents  about  the  incident,  and  her  father  contacted 

assistant  principal  Allison  Klein  by  email  in  late  February,  saying  that  he  did  not  want 

to  overreact,  but  he  felt  that  respondent's  comment  to  his  daughter  was  inappropriate. 

27. 

Klein  met  with  F.R.,  and  subsequently  asked  respondent  about  the 

incident.  Respondent  provided  his  recollection  of  the  conversation  and  the  explanation 

that  his  comment  was  a  joke.  He  thinks  F.R.  misinterpreted  his  remark. 

28. 

OnMarch  5,  2018,  Klein  sent  an  email  to  respondent,  stating:  “Please  be 

cautious  in  the  future  of  what  you  say  to  students,  even in  jest,  as  things  can  be  taken 

out  of  context  or  make  others  feel  uncomfortable.  I  never  want  you  or  any  students  to 

be  in  a  situation  that  is  uncomfortable  or  cause  for  concern.” 

29. 

OnMarch  14,  2018,  respondent  wore  a  t-shirt  to  school  on  Pi  Day  (a  day 

referencing  the  first  three  digits  of  pi,  3.14).  The  shirt  was  printed  with  the  Greek  letter 

for  “pi”  (tt),  followed  by  the  letters  “m”  and  “p,”  thus  spelling  out  “pimp.”  F.R.  and  other 

students  noticed  the  shirt  and  asked  respondent  if  it  spelled  pimp,  to  which  he  said, 

“oh,  I  didn't  think  you  guys  would  realize  it.”  F.R.  felt  it  was  “kind  of  explicit”  for  a 

teacher  to  wear  such  a  shirt  to  school,  and  that  it  was  inappropriate  for  a  teacher  to 

make  a  joke  about  pimps  or  to  insinuate  that  he  had  the  qualities  of  a  pimp.  F.R.'s 

father  emailed  Klein  to  tell  her  about  the  “pimp”  shirt,  which  he  found  inappropriate 

for  a  public  school  teacher  to  wear  to  class. 

(a) 

Respondent  admitted  at  hearing  that  he  wore  the  “pimp”  shirt,  but  says  it 

was  not  intended  to  refer  to  actual  pimping  or  prostitution.  He  was  intending  it  as  a 

silly  play  on  words,  and  wore  the  shirt  “to  make  math  cool.”  It  did  not  cross  his  mind 

that  wearing  the  shirt  to  school  was  inappropriate.  Respondent  recognizes  that  the 

10

literal  meaning  of  the  shirt's  text  is  offensive,  and  has  come  to  realize  that  it  could  be 

misunderstood. 

30. 

Klein  was  concerned  by  another  issue  having  arisen  with  respondent's 

behavior  in  such  a  short  period  of  time,  and  she  agreed  that  the  “pimp”  shirt  was  not 

appropriate  for  respondent  to  wear  to  school.  Klein  asked  respondent  about  the  shirt 

he  wore  on  Pi  Day,  and  he  sent  her  a  picture  of  the  image  on  the  shirt. 

31. 

On  March  22,  2018,  Klein  sent  an  email  to  respondent,  and  copied  the 

school  principal,  Clarence  Isadore.  Klein's  email  to  respondent  stated: 

Thank  you  for  sharing  with  me  what  was  printed  on  the 

shirt  for  Pi  Day.  We  previously  had  a  conversation  regarding 

a  comment  you  made  to  a  student  telling  her  to  lie  down. 

You  stated  you were  joking  because  of  the  yoga  term  on 

her  shirt.  This  is  another  concern  that  has  been  brought  to 

admin  attention  regarding  student  safety  in  your  care.  In 

my  opinion  this  shirt  is  not  appropriate  for  an  educational 

professional  to  wear  during  work  hours  or  around  students. 

We  want  to  always  ensure  we  promote  student  safety  and 

well-being,  and  make  sure  we  are  messaging  clearly  to 

students  what  is  acceptable  behavior,  rather  than  modeling 

or  advertising  inappropriate  or  unsafe  behaviors. 

I  caution  you  against  making  further  inappropriate  jokes  to 

students  because  I  know  you  want  all  students  to  feel 

comfortable  in  your  class,  and  1  do  not  want  anything  you 

11

do  to  be  misconstrued  or  perceived  as  damaging  or 

inappropriate  interactions  with  students. 

The  classroom  and  school  setting  in  my  opinion  are  not 

[the]  appropriate  time/place  for  sharing  chairs  with 

students,*  physically  touching  students,  inappropriate 

innuendo, or  jokes  in  poor  taste. 

I  share  this  email  out  of  concern  for  student  safety,  and 

concern  for  you  as  a  professional  and  wanting  to  ensure 

you  are  taking  precautions  to  ensure  student  comfort  and 

safety  in  your  class.  1am  happy  to  meet  with  you  to  discuss 

further  if  you'd  like. 

Respondent  did  not  follow  up  with  Klein  to  discuss  her  email  message. 

32. 

The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that  respondent  wore  a 

t-shirt  to  school  in  April  2018  that  depicted  a  cartoon  character  smoking  marijuana. 

This  allegation  was  not  established  by  the  evidence  at  hearing.  The  t-shirt  worn  by 

respondent  showed  Mickey  Mouse  wearing  swim  trunks,  sneakers,  and  sunglasses,  and 

making  “peace”  signs  with  his  fingers,  while  standing  in  front  of  green  palm  trees. 

2018-2019  SCHOOL  YEAR 

33. 

Despite  being  cautioned  by  administrators  about  touching  students, 

respondent  continued  to  do  so  during  the  2018-2019  school  year.  Respondent 

  

>  No  evidence  was  introduced  at  hearing  regarding  sharing  chairs  with  students. 

12

massaged  or  rubbed  the  shoulders  of  multiple  female  students‘  in  class  in  Fall  2018, 

including  L.M.  (a  sophomore  in  Math  2-3)  and  J.W.  (a  junior  in  AP  Calculus  that  year). 

Respondent's  continued  touching  of  students  came  to  light  after  R.R.,  a  female 

sophomore  in  respondent’s  Math  2-3  class,  made  a  report  to  school  administrators 

that  respondent  had  massaged  her  neck. 

R.R. 

34. 

On  October  1,  2018,  respondent  came  up  behind  R.R.  in  class,  put  a  hand 

on  her  neck  underneath  her  long  hair,  and  massaged  her  neck.  R.R.  was  caught  by 

surprise,  felt  uncomfortable  and  violated,  and  did  not  know  what  to  do.  At  hearing,  she 

described  her  reaction  by  saying  “I  was  frozen.” 

(a) 

Respondent  denied  at  hearing  that  he  put  his  hand  on  R.R.’s  neck  under 

her  hair  and  massaging  her  neck,  which  he  concedes  would  be  inappropriate.  He  did 

say,  however,  that  “it’s  possible”  that  he  put  his  hand  on  the  base  of  R.R.’s  neck  where 

it  meets  the  shoulder  and  gave  it  a  couple  of  squeezes  or  shakes  “like  I  do.” 

35. 

After  this  event,  R.R.  spoke  to  other  students,  including  those  in 

leadership,  to  see  whether  it  was  an  isolated  incident  or  had  also  happened  to  others. 

She  heard  that  respondent  put  his  arms  around  girls  in  leadership  class  or  massaged 

them.  A  friend  told  R.R.  she  should  go  talk  to  her  school  counselor. 

  

“  There  was  some  evidence  that  respondent  also  occasionally  touched  and 

rubbed  the  shoulders  of  male  students,  but  most  witnesses  only  observed  this 

happening  with  female  students,  and  felt  respondent  focused  his  attention  on  girls. 

13

36. 

On  October  3,  2018,  R.R.  spoke  to  school  counselor  Kara  Kotarsky,  told 

her  about  respondent  massaging  her  neck,  and  asked  to  transfer  out  of  respondent's 

class.  R.R.  seemed  uncomfortable  and  scared  by  what  had  happened.  Kotarsky  did  not 

think  R.R.  was  overreacting.  Kotarsky  had  R.R.  write  a  statement  and  reported  the 

incident  to  Hiner.  That  same  day,  Hiner  called  R.R.  into  the  front  office.  R.R.  happened 

to  see  respondent  in  the  office  area  while  she  waited  to  speak  with  Hiner.  R.R.  had 

already  gone  to  respondent's  class  that  day,  but  felt  so  uncomfortable  that  she  told 

Hiner  she  was  thinking  of  skipping  the  class  in  the  future.  Hiner  found  that  this 

indicated  a  serious  concern,  because  it  was  unusual  for  a  high-performing  student 

such  as  R.R.  to  tell  an  assistant  principal  she  planned  to  skip  class. 

37. 

On  October  4,  2018,  R.R.  attended  class,  but  respondent  noticed  that  the 

computerized  attendance  sheet  listed  R.R.  as  having  dropped  the  class.  Later  in  the 

class  period,  respondent  pulled  R.R.  aside  and  asked  her  why  she  was  transferring  out 

of  class.  R.R.  felt  caught  off  guard  and  intimidated  by  respondent  making  this  inquiry, 

and  was  scared.  She  told  respondent  that  she  was  switching  classes  because  she  was 

struggling  to  keep  up  in  his  class;  she  did  not  want  to  tell  him  that  the  real  reason  was 

due  to  the  touching.  R.R.  thought  respondent  must  know  she  had  complained  about 

him,  since  she  had  seen  respondent  in  the  front  office  when  she  was  there  the  day 

before,  waiting  to  speak  to  Hiner. 

(a) 

Respondent  admitted  at  hearing  that  he  had  pulled  R.R.  aside  to  ask  why 

she  was  transferring  out  of  his  class,  but  denied  that  it  was  a  “confrontation,”  which  he 

interprets  as  involving  aggression.  He  did  not  see  R.R.  when  they  were  both  in  the 

front  office  the  day  before. 

38. 

|  Toward  the  end  of  the  day  on  October  5,  2018,  the  school  psychologist 

called  Hiner  to  her  office,  because  R.R.  was  having  a  panic  attack.  When  Hiner  arrived, 

14

R.R.  was  visibly  upset,  had  been  crying,  and  was  having  a  hard  time  breathing.  Hiner 

talked  with  R.R.  after  she  had  calmed  down.  R.R.  had  heard  students  talking,  with 

students’  opinions  split  as  to  whether  one  should  come  forward  with  concerns  about 

respondent.  R.R.  thought  that  the  students  knew  she  was  the  one  who  had  complained 

about  respondent. 

Other  Students 

39. 

In  addition  to  massaging  or  rubbing  students’  shoulders,  respondent  had 

an  overall  tendency  to  touch  students  in  class  and  encroach  on  their  personal  space. 

(a) 

J.S.  demonstrated  how  respondent  would  get  uncomfortably  close  to 

students  when  looking  at  their  work  or  answering  questions,  which  she  found  to  be 

“invasive.”  Respondent  stood  close  behind  the  student's  chair,  grasped  the  student's 

left  shoulder  with  his  left  hand,  leaned  over  the  table,  and  put  his  right  hand  on  the 

table  next  to  the  student.  Respondent  admitted  at  hearing  that  he  touched  and  leaned 

over  students  in  this  manner. 

Respondent  also  once  put  his  hand  on  J.S.’s  head,  which  she  described  by 

saying  that  “he  grasped  my  head  firmly.”  This  made  her  uncomfortable,  as  she  does 

not  like  it  when  anyone  touches  her  head  or  her  hair. 

(6) 

F.R.  had  experienced  similar  behavior  in  respondent's  class  the  previous 

year.  Respondent  would  get  uncomfortably  close  with  a  hand  on  her  shoulder  to  look 

at  her  paper,  so  that  she  could  feel  the  warmth  of  his  body.  In  her  words,  “if  you 

moved  an  elbow  you’d  bump  him.” 

15

(c) 

L.M.  was  stretching  in  class  one  day,  with  her  arms  behind  her.  After  she 

commented,  “I  can't  feel  a  stretch,”  resoondent  came  up  behind  L.M.,  and  grabbed  and 

pulled  on  her  arms.  This  made  L.M.  feel  uncomfortable  and  unsafe. 

40. 

Respondent  grabbed  the  hand  or  wrist  of  M.M.,  moved  her  hand  to  the 

side  of  her  leg,  and  extended  her  fingers  to  conduct  a  “fingertip  length  test”  on  a  day 

when  she  was  wearing  shorts.  (The  District’s  dress  code  provides  that  students’  shorts 

or  skirts  should  be  at  least  fingertip  length.)  This  happened  in  front  of  other  students, 

and  it  made  M.M.  and  other  students  who  witnessed  it  feel  uncomfortable. 

(a) 

At  hearing,  respondent  did  not  specifically  remember  grabbing  M.M.’s 

hand  to  conduct  a  fingertip-length  test  of  her  shorts,  but  he  had  no  reason  to  believe 

she  was  not  telling  the  truth  about  It,  and  said  “I'm  sure  I've  done  it  before.” 

41. 

The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  also  alleged  that  respondent 

“swiped”  his  hand  up  the  leg  of  one  or  more  female  students  while  conducting  a 

fingertip  length  test.  This  allegation  was  not  established  by  the  evidence  at  hearing. 

42. 

Respondent  made  comments  to  female  students  about  their  clothing 

that  made  them  feel  uncomfortable. 

(a) 

|  On  the  first  day  of  school,  respondent's  class  was  returning  to  their  room 

after  getting  books,  and  respondent  called  out  to  LM.  from  behind,  calling  her  “short 

shorts”  and  making  the  comment  that  “those  shorts  are  kind  of  short.”  Respondent  did 

not  formally  “dress  code”  L.M.  or  send  her  to  the  office  to  obtain  different  clothing. 

(i) 

Respondent  admitted  at  hearing  that  he  pointed  at  L.M.  and  said 

“hey,  short  shorts”  to  indicate  that  her  shorts  were  too  short,  but  denied  calling  her 

“short  shorts”  as  a  nickname. 

16

(6) 

|  M.P.  wore a  tank  top  to  school  one  day,  which  was  partially  visible  under 

a  large  jacket.  Respondent  asked  her,  “What  are  you  going  to  do  when  it  gets  hot?” 

She  responded  that  she  would  fluff  her  jacket  so  air  could  circulate.  M.P.  was  made 

uncomfortable  by  respondent's  comment  about  her  tank  top,  and  was  subsequently 

very  cognizant  of  what  she  wore  to  his  class.  J.W.  similarly  reported  that  she  paid  close 

attention  to  what  she  wore  to  respondent's  class,  to  avoid  being  “on  his  radar.” 

IMPACT  ON  STUDENTS 

43. 

Most  of  the  student  witnesses  who  testified  did  so  with  manifest  emotion 

as  they  recounted  the  effect  of  respondent's  conduct  on  their  school  environment. 

44. 

JW.  did  not  feel  safe  in  respondent's  AP  Calculus  class  in  Fall  2018. 

Respondent  again  massaged  J.W.’s  shoulders  (Factual  Finding  33),  as  he  had  the  year 

before  in  Math  2-3  (Factual  Finding  21).  J.W.  felt  even  more  trapped  and  powerless 

when  respondent  touched  her  during  the  AP  Calculus  class  than  she  had  felt  the  year 

before,  because  she  had  complained  to  school  administrators  but  respondent  was 

continuing  the  same  conduct.  J.W.  tried  to  sit  with  a  group  of  friends,  or  sit  with  a 

bookshelf  behind  her,  or  sit  in  the  back  corners  of  the  room  so  that  respondent  could 

not  walk  up  behind  her.  She  tried  to  stay  quiet  and  not  talk  in  class,  having  noticed 

that  respondent  more  frequently  massaged  the  girls  he  talked  to.  She  felt  miserable  in 

respondent's  class,  but  remained  in 

it  because  respondent  was  the  only  AP  Calculus 

teacher  at  Rodriguez. 

45. 

 F.R.  was  not  comfortable  with  respondent  as  a  teacher  after  the  incidents 

she  experienced  in  Spring  2018  (Factual  Findings  24-25  &  29),  and  his  class  was 

stressful  because  she  felt  “on  guard”  and  “on  edge.”  She  received  an  “A”  in  Math  2-3 

class  as  a  sophomore,  and  the  next  advanced  math  class  ordinarily  taken  in  sequence 

17

would  be  AP  Calculus.  Instead,  F.R.  chose  to  take  Honors  Pre-Calculus  her  junior  year, 

not  AP  Calculus,  because  she  did  not  want  to  take  another  class  from  respondent.  It 

was  a  hard  decision,  because  F.R.  likes  to  take  challenging  classes  and  wants  to  get 

into  a  good  college,  but  she  made  the  choice  for  her  emotional  well-being. 

Respondent  is  the  gatekeeper  who  signs  students’  enrollment  forms  for  advanced 

math  classes.  When  F.R.  brought  him  her  Honors  Pre-Calculus  enrollment  form, 

respondent  expressed  disappointment  that  she  was  not  taking  his  calculus  class,  and 

called  her  “lazy,”  which  made  her  feel  sad  and  insulted.  When  asked  if  respondent 

could  have  been  trying  to  motivate  her  by  that  remark,  F.R.  said,  “I  know  he  wanted  me 

to  take  it  [AP  Calculus],  but  it’s  a  lousy  way  to  motivate,  by  putting  someone  down.” 

46. 

When  respondent  massaged  L.M.’s  shoulders  (Factual  Finding  33),  she 

felt  unsafe,  shocked,  and  confused,  and  was  not  sure  what  to  do.  Seeing  respondent 

do  this  to  other  girls  also  made  her  feel  unsafe  and  worried  for  her  friends,  saying 

“That's  a  predator  move,  to  touch  without  consent.”  L.M.  wanted  to  participate  in 

leadership  for  the  2019-2020  school  year,  but  visiting  respondent's  former  classroom 

at  the  end  of  the  year  in  2019  to  get  the  sign-up  form  made  her  uncomfortable, 

“brought  too  much  back,”  and  discouraged  her  from  participating  in  leadership 

because  she  did  not  want  to  be  in  that  room.  (After  respondent  was  put  on  leave,  the 

Math  2-3  class  was  moved  to  a  different  room,  so  L.M.  had  not  returned  to 

respondent's  former  classroom  before.)  L.M.  attended  counseling  and  saw  a 

psychiatrist  after  her  experiences  in  respondent's  class,  receiving  medication  for 

posttraumatic  stress  disorder,  depression,  and  anxiety. 

47. 

RR.  did  not  feel  safe  or  comfortable  in  respondent's  class,  saying  “the 

vibe  was  Just  off.”  R.R.  sought  to  transfer  out  of  respondent's  class  and  experienced  a 

panic  attack  after  reporting  respondent's  conduct  and  then  being  asked  about  her 

18

class  transfer.  (Factual  Findings  34-38.)  It  still  makes  R.R.  uncomfortable  to  think  about 

respondent  putting  his  hands  on  her  neck  in  class. 

48. 

Multiple  students  (J.W.,  L.M.,  F.R.,  J.S.)  stated  that  they  would  not  have 

felt  comfortable  going  to  see  respondent  for  extra  help  with  math  outside  of  class, 

because  they  did  not  want  to  be  alone  with  him,  due  to  his  touching  of  students. 

Similarly,  multiple  students  J.W.,  M.M.,  J.S.)  said  they  tried  not  to  speak  up  or  ask 

questions  in  class,  to  avoid  drawing  respondent's  attention. 

49. 

Students  who  observed  respondent  massaging  other  students  during 

class  were  negatively  affected  by  these  observations,  even  if  they  were  not  massaged 

themselves.  For  example,  M.M.  was  not  massaged  by  respondent,  but  she  felt 

uncomfortable  watching  him  massaging  the  shoulders  of  other  girls  and  seeing  that 

they  would  cringe  when  it  happened.  Similarly,  Z.A.,  a  male  student,  felt  uncomfortable 

watching  respondent  massaging  the  shoulders  of  female  students. 

INVESTIGATION  BY  THE  DISTRICT  IN  FALL  2018 

50. 

After  receiving  R.R.’s  statement  on  October  3,  2018,  assistant  principal 

Hiner  began  an  investigation  of  respondent's  conduct.  He  separately  interviewed  and 

obtained  statements  from  two  other  students  that  were  identified  by  R.R.  Hiner  spoke 

to  principal  Isadore  on  October  4,  2018.  Subsequently,  Kristen  Witt,  the  Director  of 

Secondary  Education,  and  Dr.  Robert  Martinez,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human 

Resources,  were  contacted.  Hiner  continued  to  interview  students  and  obtained 

additional  written  statements  from  them  in  October  2018. 

51. 

On  October  5,  2018,  Dr.  Martinez  placed  respondent  on  paid 

administrative  leave  pending  the  District's  investigation,  and  advised  him  not  to 

19

discuss  the  matter  with  others.  Dr.  Martinez  sent  respondent  a  confirming  letter  on 

October  9,  directing  him  not  to  visit  any  District  campus  while  on  leave. 

52. 

On  October  12,  2018,  Mike  Minahen,  who  was  the  District's  Director  of 

Human  Resources,  initiated  an  investigation  into  respondent's  conduct,  in  consultation 

with  Isadore,  site  administrators,  and  District  counsel.  Minahen  conducted  individual 

interviews  with  students,  with  their  parents  present.  He  also  interviewed  respondent, 

with  counsel  for  respondent  and  the  District  present.  Minahen  met  with  the  Board  in 

closed  session  to  approve  moving  forward,  and  worked  with  Dr.  Martinez  and  the 

Superintendent  to  develop  the  Statement  of  Charges,  which  the  Board  approved  in 

December  2018. 

53. 

 Athis  Ske//yhearing  in  January  2019,  respondent  presented  the  Ske//y 

officer  with  letters  of  support  from  students,  parents,  and  colleagues.  The  Ske//y  officer 

upheld  the  District's  recommendation  and  also  noted  that  she  found  it  inappropriate 

for  respondent  to  have  gathered  the  supporting  letters  while  on  leave.  The  Statement 

of  Charges  against  respondent  was  subsequently  amended  to  include  references  to 

the  Ske//y  hearing,  including  the  District's  belief  that  resoondent  had  not  been  truthful 

with  District  representatives  during  the  investigation. 

54. 

—  Hiner  and  Minahen  both  testified  about  the  impact  respondent's  conduct 

had  on  them  as  school  administrators. 

Hiner  felt  upset  for  the  girls  he  interviewed,  because  he  wants  to  ensure 

students  are  safe  and  comfortable  at  school.  Hiner  believes  respondent  created  a 

sexually  charged  environment  in  his  classroom.  He  believes  that  a  male  teacher  should 

know  better  than  to  put  himself  in  a  situation  that  may  be  perceived  negatively  by 

20

students,  and  that  even  if  the  teacher's  intent  in  touching  female  students  is  not 

sexual,  it  may  be  perceived  as  such  by  the  students. 

Hiner  reported  that  as  a  male  administrator,  he  is  not  comfortable  making 

comments  about  female  students’  clothing,  and  if  he  observes  a  dress  code  violation 

by  a  female  student,  he  asks  a  female  teacher  or  staff  member  to  talk  to  the  student. 

As  Minahen  conducted  student  interviews,  the  impact  on  students  and  their 

families  became  evident  to  him.  Students  did  not  feel  safe  in  respondent's  class.  Many 

of  them  used  the  word  “victim”  to  describe  themselves  or  said  they  felt  violated.  Some 

students  broke  down  crying  in  interviews,  including  those  who  were  eyewitnesses  and 

had  not  themselves  been  touched  by  respondent.  Parents  had  noticed  changes  in  girls 

not  acting  like  themselves.  Minahen’s  goal  as  an  administrator  is  for  students  to  thrive. 

He  was  very  disheartened  by  what  he  found  in  his  investigation,  saying  it  “weighed 

heavy  on  me”  that  so  many  girls  “felt  squashed.” 

Minahen  also  noted  how  unusual  it  was  for  high  school  students  to  “break  the 

code”  and  come  forward  to  make  a  complaint  about  a  teacher,  especially  a  leadership 

teacher  who  has  influence  over  student  activities  throughout  the  entire  school. 

Respondent's  Additional  Evidence 

55. 

|  Respondent  described  himself  as  a  good  teacher,  and  he  wants  to 

continue  to  teach. 

56. 

Respondent's  classroom  was  very  crowded,  making  it  difficult  at  times  to 

walk  around  the  class  while  all  the  students  were  working  at  tables.  He  conceded  at 

hearing  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  touch  students  to  walk  through  his  classroom. 

21

57. 

|  Respondent  denies  paying  more  attention  to  girls  than  boys,  saying  he 

goes  to  whoever  is  asking  questions,  and  girls  asked  more  questions.  His  advanced 

math  classes  were  approximately  60  percent  female  and  40  percent  male. 

58. 

The  Associated  Student  Body  (ASB)  officers  ran  the  leadership  class 

under  respondent's  direction.  In  discussing  this  dynamic,  respondent  described  himself 

as  “the  man  behind  the  curtain.”  Respondent  denied  favoring  his  leadership  students. 

He  admitted,  however,  to  having  a  more  bonded  relationship  with  his  leadership 

students,  because  he  spent  so  much  time  with  them  over  multiple  years. 

59. 

Respondent  denies  having  “massaged”  students’  shoulders,  but  admits 

“rubbing”  them.  He  distinguishes  between  “massage”  and  “rubbing,”  characterizing 

massage  as  a  kneading  motion,  and  rubbing  as  a  circular  patting  motion.  This  is  a 

distinction  without  a  difference.  When  asked  to  explain  how  multiple  students  could 

have  described  his  actions  as  massaging,  including  students  to  whom  it  had  happened 

personally,  respondent  suggested  that  the  students  had  misinterpreted  what  he  called 

a  few  squeezes  or  shakes,  saying  “maybe  it  looked  like  massage  to  them.” 

60. 

Respondent's  version  of  events  has  changed  over  time  when  asked  to 

explain  his  touching  of  students.  When  Hiner  spoke  with  him  in  Spring  2018, 

respondent  said  he  was  touching  students  on  the  shoulders  to  move  them  forward  in 

their  chairs  when  he  moved  around  his  crowded  classroom.  When  respondent  was 

interviewed  by  Minahen  in  October  2018,  he  said  he  occasionally  put  his  hands  on 

students’  shoulders  and  gave  them  a  couple  of  squeezes.  By  the  time  of  the  hearing, 

respondent  admitted  to  rubbing  students’  shoulders  in  class,  in  addition  to  touching, 

squeezing,  shaking,  and  patting  them. 

22

Respondent  explained  that  he  was  trying  to  touch  students  in  an  encouraging 

and  supportive  manner,  to  convey  that  “you've  got  this”  when  working  on  math 

problems.  Respondent  denies  any  sexual  motivation  in  touching  students. 

61. 

Respondent  admits  having  a  tendency  to  touch  students  in  class, 

including  putting  his  hands  on  students’  shoulders  while  talking  about  math  problems 

or  seeing  if  anyone  needed  help.  He  concedes  he  may  have  gotten  “too  close  for 

comfort”  for  some  students,  and  that  he  invaded  students’  personal  space,  but  noted 

that  everyone  was  very  close  together  in  his  classroom. 

62. 

Respondent  contends  that  he  would  have  stopped  putting  his  hands  on 

students’  shoulders  if  he  had  gotten  a  “clear  warning”  not  to  do  so.  He  thought  that 

Hiner  telling  him  to  “be  careful”  touching  students  meant  that  It  was  fine  to  continue 

doing  what  he  was  doing,  as  long  as  he  was  not  “massaging”  students.  Respondent 

contends  he  did  not  know  what  Klein  meant  by  her  March  22,  2018  email,  in  which  she 

cautions  him  and  says  “[t]he  classroom  and  school  setting  in  my  opinion  are  not  [the] 

appropriate  time/place  for  ...  physically  touching  students,”  because  Klein  never 

talked  with  him  about  touching  students.  Respondent  did  not  follow  up  with  Klein. 

Respondent  did  go  to  a  union-involved  colleague,  Richard  Bryan,  to  discuss  his 

concerns  about  interactions  with  Hiner  and  Klein  in  Spring  2018.  On  Bryan's  advice, 

respondent  went  to  principal  Isadore,  and  said  he  did  not  feel  comfortable  with  Klein 

being  his  assigned  workplace  evaluator.  Respondent  thought  the  matter  was  resolved. 

63. 

Respondent  admits  making  comments  about  female  students’  clothing, 

but  only  in  the  context  of  enforcing  the  dress  code.  He  was  told  by  administrators 

when  he  first  began  teaching  in  2001  or  2002  that  he  should  enforce  the  dress  code, 

including  by  using  the  fingertip-length  test. 

23

64. 

Respondent  explained  at  hearing  that  he  did  not  intend  to  make  students 

feel  uncomfortable,  and  he  regrets  that  some  students  did  not  feel  safe  in  his  class.  He 

believes  that  because  he  was  so  comfortable  with  his  leadership  students,  he  got  used 

to  doing  certain  things  with  them,  and  his  actions  carried  over  to  math  students  who 

were  not  as  close  to  him  and  for  whom  his  actions  did  not  have  the  same  effect. 

65. 

As  for  comments  he  made  to  students,  respondent's  testimony  has  a 

theme,  that  multiple  students  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted  his  remarks.  Overall, 

respondent's  testimony  evidenced  an  attempt  to  downplay  and  minimize  his  actions, 

and  a  failure  to  fully  acknowledge  and  take  responsibility  for  his  behavior. 

RESPONDENT S  WITNESSES  AT  HEARING 

66. 

Four  former  students,  three  current  or  former  teachers,  and  one  current 

staff  member  testified  on  respondent's  behalf.  Respondent's  witnesses  were  not  aware 

of  the  details  of  the  allegations  against  respondent,  for  the  most  part  only  being  aware 

of  a  general  allegation  that  respondent  touched  shoulders  of  one  or  two  students. 

67. 

 O.F.  is  a  former  student  who  graduated  in  June  2019.  She  was  in 

leadership  class  for  four  years,  was  an  ASB  officer  her  senior  year,  and  was  in 

respondent's  AP  Calculus  class  her  junior  year.  O.F.  described  respondent  as  caring 

about  his  students,  saying  that  he  is  almost  like  a  second  parent  to  her,  and  that  she 

felt  at  home  in  his  class.  Respondent  touched  O.F.’s  shoulders  in  conversation,  with 

what  she  called  a  gentle  squeeze,  which  she  did  not  find  uncomfortable.  O.F.  also  saw 

respondent  with  his  hands  on  other  students’  shoulders,  which  she  did  not  think  was 

inappropriate.  Respondent  enforced  the  dress  code  when  O.F.  wore  a  tank  top,  telling 

her  to  wear  something  over  it;  she  did  not  think  this  was  inappropriate.  O.F.  saw 

respondent  wear  the  “pimp”  shirt,  which  she  thought  was  a  joke. 

24

68. 

__K.H.  is 

a  former  student  who  graduated  in  June  2019.  She  was  in 

leadership  class  for  three  years,  and  was  an  ASB  officer  her  senior  year.  K.H.  was  in 

respondent's  math  classes  her  freshman  through  junior  years,  and  was  his  teaching 

assistant  for  AP  Calculus  her  senior  year.  She  described  respondent  as  a  good  teacher 

who  was  an  encouraging  and  supportive  mentor,  inspiring  her  love  of  math. 

Respondent  put  his  hands  on  K.H.’s  shoulders,  squeezing  or  rubbing  them,  which  did 

not  make  her  uncomfortable.  She  did  not  see  him  massage  other  students’  shoulders, 

but  did  see  him  put  hands  on  students  to  move  them  out  of  the  way  as  he  passed. 

Respondent  enforced  the  dress  code  when  K.H.  wore  short  shorts  her  freshman  year, 

having  her  stand  up  with  her  fingertips  at  her  sides;  she  then  unrolled  the  cuffs  on  her 

shorts  to  make  them  longer.  She  did  not  think  this  was  an  inappropriate  interaction. 

69. 

 C.B.  is 

a  former  student  who  graduated  in  June  2018.  She  was  in 

leadership  class  for  three  years.  She  was  in  respondent's  AP  Calculus  class  her  senior 

year  and  was  also  his  teaching  assistant  for  Math  2-3  that  year.  She  described 

respondent  as  a  good  teacher  who  cares  about  his  students,  a  mentor,  a  friend,  and 

her  favorite  teacher.  She  felt  safe  in  his  class.  Respondent  would  put  his  hands  on 

C.B.'s  shoulders,  and  she  did  not  think  this  was  out  of  the  ordinary  or  find  it 

uncomfortable.  She  also  saw  respondent  with  his  hands  on  other  students’  shoulders. 

When  asked  if  she  thought  massaging  or  rubbing  female  students’  shoulders  in  class 

was  appropriate,  she  said  it  was  not  something  that  was  really  taken  notice  of  in 

respondent's  class.  C.B.  saw  respondent  wear  the  “pimp”  shirt,  and  did  not  understand 

it  at  the  time.  She  thinks  the  joke  went  over  most  students’  heads. 

70. 

A.M.  is  a  former  student  who  graduated  in  June  2019.  She  was  in 

leadership  class  for  four  years,  as  was  her  older  sister.  A.M.  was  in  respondent's  AP 

Calculus  class  her  junior  year,  and  was  his  teaching  assistant  for  Math  2-3  her  senior 

25

year.  A.M.  described  respondent  as  a  great  math  teacher  and  activities  director  who 

cared  about  his  students,  and  she  felt  like  his  classroom  was  a  second  home  to  her.  He 

is  a  family  friend  and  was  her  favorite  teacher.  Respondent  put  his  hands  on  A.M.'s 

shoulders  and  rubbed  them,  starting  when  she  was  a  freshman  in  leadership.  She 

found  respondent  to  be  acting  in  a  supportive  manner.  They  would  often  hug  after 

conversations.  A.M.  does  see  how  some  female  students  could  feel  uncomfortable  with 

respondent  rubbing  their  shoulders. 

71. 

Richard  Bryan  was  a  math  teacher  at  Rodriguez  for  18  years,  beginning 

the  same  year  as  respondent.  He  retired  in  June  2019.  Bryan  occasionally  went  into 

respondent's  classroom;  he  never  observed  respondent  act  inappropriately  with 

students.  Bryan  describes  respondent  as  being  professional  and  of  good  character, 

and  does  not  believe  he  would  knowingly  do  anything  to  harm  a  student. 

Bryan  was  an  executive  board  member  of  the  teacher's  union  during  the  last 

two  years  of  his  career.  Respondent  came  to  Bryan  with  concerns  after  assistant 

principals  Hiner  and  Klein  spoke  with  respondent  and  after  Klein’s  March  22,  2018 

cautioning  email.  In  describing  his  conversation  with  Hiner  about  touching  students’ 

shoulders,  respondent  said  Hiner  had  told  him  “don’t  do  it  again.”  Bryan  advised 

respondent  to  talk  with  the  principal  and  follow  up  with  Bryan  if  he  needed  more  help. 

Bryan  has  enforced  the  dress  code  with  students.  For  girls  wearing  short  shorts 

or  tank  tops,  he  would  tell  them  it  was  a  violation  and  in  some  cases  would  send  them 

to  the  office  or  tell  them  to  put  on  a  jacket.  Many  years  ago,  he  conducted  the 

fingertip-length  test  by  asking  girls  to  put  their  arms  down  at  their  sides,  but  at  some 

point  he  stopped  doing  so. 

26

72. 

Scott  Miller  has  been  a  music  teacher  at  Rodriguez  since  2000.  His 

classroom  connects  to  the  multipurpose  room,  as  did  respondent's,  and  Miller  teaches 

jazz  band  during  zero  period  when  respondent  was  teaching  leadership.  The  two 

teachers  interacted  frequently  due  to  collaborations  between  the  music  and  leadership 

programs.  He  has  not  observed  respondent  acting  inappropriately  with  students. 

Miller  has  socialized  with  respondent  outside  school,  and  considers  him  a  friend. 

Respondent  has  also  tutored  Miller’s  teenage  daughter  in  math.  Miller  describes 

respondent  as  a  positive  and  good  person  with  a  strong  work  ethic,  and  does  not 

believe  he  would  intentionally  harm  students. 

Miller  reported  that  the  dress  code  was  more  heavily  enforced  when  he  first 

started  teaching,  and  he  has  sent  students  to  the  office  with  referrals  for  violations. 

Miller  understands  that  teachers  should  be  positive  role  models  for  students, 

saying  “you're  on  stage  all  the  time.”  He  believes  that  it 

is  common  knowledge  that 

sexual  harassment  is  against  the  school  rules,  and  that  teachers  “should  know  better” 

without  having  to  be  warned  against  sexual  harassment  violations. 

73. 

Edward  “Mike”  Sagan  teaches  videogame  design  and  video  production, 

and  has  taught  at  Rodriguez  for  17  years.  His  classroom  and  computer  lab  were 

adjacent  to  respondent's  classroom.  Sagan  has  socialized  with  respondent  outside 

school  and  considers  him  a  friend.  He  describes  respondent  as  a  good  and  trustworthy 

person  who  would  not  intentionally  harm  a  student. 

Sagan  was  told  by  administrators  to  conduct  the  fingertip-length  test  in  the 

early  2000's,  and  enforced  the  dress  code  strictly  “for  a  while.” 

Sagan  does  not  believe  he  needs  to  be  warned  against  sexually  harassing 

students,  saying  “students  are  children”  and  “I  know  it's  wrong.” 

2/7

74. 

Yvette  Nanney  has  worked  as  a  campus  monitor  at  Rodriguez  for  18 

years.  Her  assigned  spot  to  monitor  in  the  mornings,  starting  at  7:00  a.m.,  is  the 

cafeteria,  and  she  often  walked  into  respondent's  classroom.  She  describes  respondent 

as  a  great  teacher  and  positive  role  model,  who  has  a  “goofy”  character  and  connects 

well  with  students.  She  does  not  believe  he  would  intentionally  harm  a  student. 

Nanney  enforces  the  dress  code  with  students  by  pulling  them  aside  and  saying 

their  clothing  is  not  appropriate  for  school,  and  sometimes  sends  them  to  the  office. 

75. 

All  of  respondent's  witnesses  answered  questions  on  cross-examination 

about  their  reactions  to  hypothetical  scenarios  mirroring  the  allegations  in  this  matter. 

All  eight  witnesses  would  find  it  inappropriate  for  a  teacher  to  massage  or  rub  a 

student's  neck  underneath  her  hair.  Sagan  and  Miller  would  find  it  inappropriate  for  a 

teacher  to  massage  students  in  class,  with  Miller  commenting,  “you're  there  to  teach.” 

Both  Bryan  and  Miller  would  feel  upset  if  they  heard  that  female  students  were  afraid 

to  raise  their  hands  in  class  because  they  did  not  want  to  be  touched  by  the  teacher. 

All  four  former  students  would  find  it  unnecessary  and  inappropriate  for  a 

teacher  to  remove  a  cell  phone  from  a  female  student's  back  pocket.  Three  former 

students  (O.F.,  K.H.,  and  A.M.)  and  Sagan  would  find  it  inappropriate  for  a  teacher  to 

grab  a  student’s  hand  to  conduct  a  fingertip-length  test. 

Bryan  would  find  it  inappropriate  for  a  teacher  to  wear  a  shirt  saying  “pimp”  to 

school,  even  as  a  joke.  Miller  thinks  it  might  be  inappropriate,  but  notes  that  the  word 

“pimp”  has  an  alternate  connotation  now,  such  that  to  “pimp  something  out”  could 

mean  to  “bling  it  out.” 

28

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  matter,  and  the  standard  of 

proof  in  a  teacher  dismissal  hearing  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v. 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1038-1039.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  provides  that  a  permanent 

employee  shall  not  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the  causes  set  forth  in  that 

subdivision.  The  causes  alleged  in  this  matter  are:  immoral  conduct,  including  but  not 

limited  to  egregious  misconduct;  evident  unfitness  for  service;  and  persistent  violation 

of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed 

for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  state  board  or  by  the  governing  board 

of  the  school  district.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  (6)  &  (8).) 

3. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against  the  dismissal;  the  Commission 

may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative 

sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subd.  (d)(1)  &  (3).)  The  Commission's  decision  is  deemed 

to  be  the  final  decision  of  the  school  district's  governing  board.  (/d!,  subd.  (d)(4).)  The 

Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes  unfitness  to  teach, 

and  whether  dismissal  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  (Ca//fornia  Teachers  Ass’n  v.  State  of 

California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343-344;  Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman 

(1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220-222.) 

29

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

4. 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent  for  immoral  conduct,  including 

but  not  limited  to,  egregious  misconduct,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(1). 

5. 

Egregious  misconduct  is  “defined  exclusively  as  immoral  conduct  that  is 

the  basis  for  an  offense  described  in  Section  44010  [sex  offenses]  or  44011  [controlled 

substance  offenses]  of  this  code,  or  in  Sections  11165.2  to  11165.6,  inclusive,  of  the 

Penal  Code  [child  abuse,  neglect,  endangerment].”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1).)  At 

hearing,  the  District  clarified  that  its  charge  of  “egregious  misconduct”  was  based  on 

Penal  Code  section  11165.3,  which  defines  willful  harming  or  endangering  of  a  child  as 

“a  situation  in  which  any  person  willfully  causes  or  permits  any  child  to  suffer,  or 

inflicts  thereon,  unjustifiable  physical  pain  or  mental  suffering,  or  having  the  care  or 

custody  of  any  child,  willfully  causes  or  permits  the  person  or  health  of  the  child  to  be 

placed  in  a  situation  in  which  his  or  her  person  or  health  is  endangered.”  The 

Commission  does  not  find  that  respondent's  conduct  meets  the  statutory  definition  of 

egregious  misconduct. 

6. 

Immoral  conduct  has  been  defined  to  mean  that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immoral  conduct  is  not 

confined  to  sexual  matters.  It  includes  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the 

opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  conduct  showing  an 

inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San 

Francisco  Unitied  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.  App.2d  808,  811.)  The 

definition  of  immoral  conduct  “must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  unique 

position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed  responsibilities  and 

limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.”  (San 

30

Diego  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 

Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466  [quotation  marks  and  citation  omitted].) 

7. 

Based  upon  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  19-21,  24-25,  29, 

33-34,  39-40,  42,  and  59-60,  it  was  established  that  resoondent  committed  acts 

constituting  immoral  conduct.  Respondent  repeatedly  touched  students  during  class 

(primarily  girls),  including  massaging,  rubbing,  squeezing,  shaking,  and  patting.  He 

grabbed  a  student's  hand  and  held  it  against  her  leg  to  demonstrate  the  length  of  her 

shorts.  He  invaded  students’  personal  space.  These  repeated  physical  contacts  took 

place  in  an  atmosphere  where  respondent  paid  close  attention  and  made  comments 

about  what  female  students  were  wearing,  made  suggestive  comments  to  students, 

and  himself  wore  a  shirt  reading  “pimp.”  Respondent's  overall  course  of  conduct 

demonstrated  a  moral  indifference  to  community  opinion  and  inconsiderate  attitude 

toward  the  public  welfare,  by  showing  an  inability  or  unwillingness  to  recognize 

appropriate  boundaries  between  teachers  and  students.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss 

respondent  for  immoral  conduct  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(1). 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

8. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  provides  that  the  District  may  dismiss  a 

permanent  employee  for  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Evident  unfitness  for  service 

means  clearly  not  fit  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  a  temperamental 

defect  or  inadequacy.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal. App.4th  1429,  1444.)  The  term  “connotes  a  fixed 

character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s 

conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (J6/d/) 

31

9, 

The  evidence  established  that  respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service, 

based  upon  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  19-21,  23-25,  27-29,  30-31,  33-34, 

39-40,  42,  59-62,  64-65,  and  67-70.  Respondent  repeatedly  engaged  in  inappropriate 

behavior  with  students,  over  the  course  of  two  school  years.  His  own  witnesses 

confirmed  that  he  had  been  massaging  or  rubbing  students  in  prior  years. 

Respondent  has  been  very  slow  to  recognize  or  acknowledge  that  any  of  his 

behaviors  crossed  the  boundaries  of  appropriate  conduct,  has  consistently  tried  to 

minimize  or  downplay  his  inappropriate  behavior,  and  repeatedly  has  insisted  that 

students  must  have  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted  him.  Respondent  persisted  in  his 

behaviors,  even  after  he  was  warned  by  administrators  about  touching  students, 

inappropriate  innuendo, and  jokes  in  poor  taste.  Even  now,  he  contends  that  he  was 

not  adequately  warned  and  had  no  idea  his  conduct  was  problematic.  (However,  even 

respondent's  own  teacher  witnesses  recognized  his  actions  as  inappropriate,  as  set 

forth  in  Factual  Finding  75.)  Respondent's  inability  or  unwillingness  to  fully 

acknowledge  his  misconduct,  and  his  resistance  to  counseling,  demonstrate  a 

temperamental  defect  or  inadequacy  that  connotes  a  non-remediable  fixed  character 

trait.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  under 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6). 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  SCHOOL  LAWS  OR  REGULATIONS 

10. 

Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  provides  that  the  District  may  dismiss  a 

permanent  employee  for  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or 

regulations.  Dismissal  under  this  subdivision  requires  that  the  violation  be  persistent, 

that  is,  continuing  or  constantly  repeated.  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union 

School  Dist.  v.  Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal.App.3d  77,  82.)  A  single  violation  of  a  school 

board's  rules  is  not  itself  cause  for  dismissal  under  this  subdivision,  which  pertains  to 

32

unintentional  as  well  as  intentional  transgressions;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard  of 

school  rules  that  the  subdivision  is  designed  to  regulate.”  (Jd!  at  84  [citation  omitted].) 

11. 

The  evidence  established  that  respondent  persistently  violated  school 

laws  and  regulations  over  the  course  of  two  school  years.  Respondent  was  aware  of 

the  District's  policies  and  regulations,  and  had  completed  required  training. 

Respondent  repeatedly  violated  the  professional  standards  policy  by  failing  to  exercise 

good  judgment  when  interacting  with  students  and  behaving  in  a  way  that  did  not 

contribute  to  a  positive  school  climate.  Respondent  repeatedly  engaged  in  behaviors 

that  undermined  students’  ability  to  learn  in  a  safe,  orderly,  nurturing  school 

environment,  and  thus  violated  the  policy  on  positive  school  climate.  Respondent 

repeatedly  engaged  in  behaviors  that  constituted  sexual  harassment  of  female 

students,  including  unwanted  touching  and  verbal  comments,  violating  the  state  law 

and  the  board's  policy  and  regulation  against  sexual  harassment.  Cause  exists  to 

dismiss  respondent  for  persistent  violation  of  school  laws  and  regulations  under 

Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(8),  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in 

Factual  Findings  14-17,  19-21,  24-25,  29,  33-34,  39-40,  42-49,  and  59  through  61. 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

12. 

The  ultimate  question  is  whether  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach  under  the 

factors  established  by  the  California  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230.  The  Morrison  factors  are:  (1)  the  likelihood 

that  the  conduct  in  question  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers; 

(2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of 

the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  the  extenuating 

or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness 

or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  of  the 

33

recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  and  (8)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action 

may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 

teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Only  the  pertinent  factors  must  be  addressed. 

(West  Valley-Mission  Community  College  Dist.  v.  Concepcion  (1993)  16  Cal.App.4th 

1766,  1777.)  The  factors  may  be  applied  to  all  of  the  proven  conduct  in  the  aggregate. 

(Woodland  Joint  Unitied  School  Dist.,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1456-1457.) 

13. 

In  this  case,  application  of  the  pertinent  Morrison  factors  demonstrates 

that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

Respondent's  conduct  adversely  affected  students  and  administrators,  in  some 

cases  quite  seriously.  Students  were  afraid  to  participate  in  class,  and  were  distressed 

by  being  touched  and  by  the  prospect  of  being  touched  in  the  future.  Students  sought 

to  transfer  out  of  respondent's  class,  avoided  taking  his  class  in  the  future,  and 

refrained  from  seeking  any  extra  help  from  respondent  outside  class.  Even  students 

who  were  not  themselves  touched  by  respondent  were  uncomfortable  witnessing  it. 

One  student  had  a  panic  attack  and  another  sought  psychological  treatment  after 

interactions  with  respondent.  Administrators  were  upset  by  witnessing  students’ 

distress  and  the  knowledge  that  multiple  students  were  experiencing  a  negative  school 

environment  due  to  respondent's  behavior. 

Respondent's  conduct  was  very  recent. 

Respondent  has  received  training  in  sexual  harassment  prevention.  This  is  an 

aggravating  circumstance. 

Respondent  characterizes  his  motives  as  praiseworthy,  especially  in  connection 

with  his  touching  of  students,  but  his  testimony  on  this  point  is  not  persuasive. 

Respondent's  behaviors  appear  to  have  been  primarily  out  of  self-interest  and  to  lack 

34

a  credible  educational  purpose.  In  some  of  his  verbal  comments  and  wearing  the 

“pimp”  shirt,  respondent  may  have  been  trying  to  be  funny,  but  his  jokes  were 

offensive  or  inappropriate. 

The  likelihood  of  recurrence  is  high.  Respondent  continued  to  engage  in  a 

pattern  of  inappropriate  behaviors  despite  being  warned.  He  spent  years  developing 

habits  and  normalizing  behaviors.  He  denied  conduct  that  was  credibly  established  by 

other  witnesses,  and  consistently  minimized  his  misconduct.  Respondent  has  failed  to 

fully  accept  responsibility.  Over  time  he  has  shown  that  he  cannot  or  will  not  exercise 

good  judgment. 

Disposition 

14.  |  Respondent  is  a  veteran  teacher  who  should  understand  the  high  societal 

expectations  for  public  school  teachers.  Respondent  engaged  in  a  pattern  of  immoral 

conduct  and  acts  constituting  sexual  harassment  over  an  extended  period  of  time.  He 

failed  to  change  his  behavior  despite  warnings,  and  has  failed  to  fully  acknowledge  his 

misconduct.  He  has  repeatedly  shown  an  inability  or  unwillingness  to  use  good 

judgment  in  his  interactions  with  students,  or  to  understand  appropriate  boundaries. 

Respondent  does  have  positive  qualities  as  an  educator,  as  evidenced  by  a 

positive  performance  review,  the  testimony  of  former  students,  and  a  lack  of  prior 

discipline.  These  factors,  however,  do  not  mitigate  the  serious  nature  and  extent  of 

respondent's  misconduct. 

15. 

|The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  concludes  that  cause  exists 

to  dismiss  respondent  based  on  immoral  conduct,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and 

persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  or  regulations.  The  Commission 

35

reached  this  decision  on  a  unanimous  vote.  Each  ground  for  dismissal  provides  a 

separate  and  independent  basis  for  respondent's  dismissal. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Jason  Agan  is  hereby  dismissed  from  his  position  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  the  Fairfield-Suisun  Unified  School  District. 

-  October  29,  2019 

DATE: 

DATE: 

November  6, 

2019 

DATE:  October  28, 

2019 

DocuSigned  by: 

ea  Villauy 
ANCY VIELHAUER 

Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Carmen  Wright 

. 

Feds /Peddb Ag RIGH  T 

Commission  Member 

Ce 

OLTYMBALDWIN 

Commission  Chair 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

36

