BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

CARLOS  POLANCO, 

a  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2019040983 

DECISION 

The  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter 

in  Los  Angeles,  on  October  22  through  24,  2019,  October  28  through  November  1, 

2019,  November  4  through  8,  2019,  January  14  through  17,  2020,  and  by 

videoconferencing  on  July  1  and  2,  2020,  July  6  through  10,  2020,  and  July  13,  2020." 

The  Commission  consists  of  Dr.  Carolyn  Monroe,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

(retired);  Robert  Earl,  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education;  and  Administrative  Law 

  

'  Videoconferencing  was  due  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic.

Judge  Eric  Sawyer,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  who 

presided. 

Ellen  C.  Wu,  Esq.,  and  Lynn  Ibarra,  Associate  General  Counsel,  represented 

complainant  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Rosty  Gore,  Esa.,  and  Richard  J.  Schwab,  Esq.,  represented  Carlos  Polanco 

(Respondent),  who  was  present  each  hearing  day. 

The  parties  presented  opening  statements,  oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and 

closing  arguments.  The  case  was  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the 

hearing  on  July  13,  2020.  The  Commission  thereafter  conducted  its  deliberations  in 

executive  Session. 

SUMMARY 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  Respondent,  a  veteran  teacher  who  has  taught  for 

the  District  since  2000.  Primarily,  three  principals,  who  observed  Respondent  teach  16 

lessons  over  three  school  years,  consistently  concluded  Respondent  is  an  ineffective 

teacher.  Respondent  was  provided  with  substantial  assistance  and  guidance  in 

response  to  noted  deficiencies,  including  teaching  coaches  for  over  two  years,  without 

success.  Respondent  also  received  Below  Standard  performance  ratings  in  his  Final 

Evaluations  for  2076,  2017,  and  2018.  Finally,  Respondent  acted  unprofessionally  in 

comments  he  made  in  front  of  students  in  class  and  on  a  field  trip,  during  a  History 

Department  meeting  with  colleaques,  and  to  one  of  his  teaching  coaches. 

Respondent's  excuses  and  justifications  for  his  ineffective  teaching  and  unprofessional 

comments  were  not  convincing.  The  Commission  therefore  concludes  Respondent's 

dismissal  from  the  District  is  warranted.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1. 

The  Board  of  Education  (Board)  is  the  duly  elected,  qualified,  and  acting 

governing  board  of  the  District,  organized,  existing,  and  operating  pursuant  to  the 

provisions  of  the  California  Education  Code  and  other  laws  of  the  State  of  California. 

2. 

Respondent  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

3, 

On  February  15,  2019,  Jose  R.  Cantu,  Ed.D,  in  his  official  capacity  as  the 

District's  Assistant  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  signed  a  Statement  of  Charges 

against  Respondent,  alleging  factual  and  legal  grounds  for  termination  of  his 

employment  with  the  District.  (Ex.  30,  pp.  2-98.) 

4. 

By  a  letter  dated  March  20,  2019,  Respondent  was  advised  by  Mr.  Cantu 

that  the  Statement  of  Charges  had  been  filed  with  the  Board,  and  that,  during  a  closed 

session  of  a  Board  meeting  held  on  March  19,  2019,  the  Board  decided  to  dismiss 

Respondent  within  30  days,  unless  he  requested  a  hearing.  (Ex.  30,  p.  1.)  On  April  18, 

2019,  Respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing.  (Ex.  37.) 

5. 

On  April  26,  2079,  the  District  filed  an  Accusation  with  OAH  and  served  it 

on  Respondent,  including  the  allegations  made  in  the  Statement  of  Charges.  (Ex.  32.) 

Respondent  filed  a  Corrected  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense.  (Ex.  33.) 

6. 

On  June  11,  2079,  the  District  fled  the  operative  pleading  in  this  matter, 

the  Amended  Accusation,  and  served  it  on  Respondent.  (Ex.  34.)  By  operation  of

Government  Code  section  11507  and  the  Education  Code,  Respondent  was  not 

required  to,  and  did  not,  file  a  response. 

Respondent's  Background  Information 

PERSONAL 

7. 

Respondent  is 

a  47-year-old  married  man  with  one  child.  He  was  born  in 

El  Salvador.  He  and  his  family  came  to  this  country  when  he  was  12.  After  graduating 

from  a  District  high  school,  Respondent  served  in  the  military  for  four  years.  In  1993 

Respondent  graduated  from  East  Los  Angeles  Community  College  with  a  degree  in 

electronics,  but  by  then  he  was  interested  in  teaching. 

EDUCATION  AND  CREDENTIAL 

8, 

In  1993,  Respondent  enrolled  in  California  State  University,  Los  Angeles. 

He  majored  in  Latin  American  Studies,  which  had  an  emphasis  in  history.  Respondent 

remained  enrolled  in  college  while  also  working  as  a  Teacher  Assistant  (TA)  for  the 

District  as  discussed  below  in  more  detail.  Respondent  earned  his  Bachelor  of  Arts 

degree  in  2003. 

9, 

In  2004,  Respondent  obtained  a  clear  single-subject  teaching  credential 

in  social  science  from  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC).  He 

also  has  a  bilingual,  cross-cultural,  language  and  academic  development  (BCLAD: 

Spanish)  authorization,  which  allows  him  to  instruct  for  English  language  development 

in  grades  twelve  and  below.

TEACHING  EXPERIENCE  WITH  THE  DISTRICT 

10. 

In  1995,  Respondent  was  hired  by  the  District  as  a  TA.  He  worked  as  a  TA 

in  District  elementary  schools  from  1995  through  2000. 

11. 

From  2000  through  2004,  Respondent  taught  history  for  sixth,  seventh, 

and  eighth  grade  classes  at  the  District's  Virgil  Middle  School  under  an  emergency 

permit  and  thereafter  under  a  pre-intern  certificate.  The  record  is  unclear  concerning 

Respondent's  employment  with  the  District  in  2005  and  2006.  However,  he  was 

assigned  as  a  pool  teacher  at  Franklin  High  School  in  2007  through  2008.*  He  was 

thereafter  assigned  to  teach  social  studies  at  East  Valley  High  School  from  2009 

through  2013.  From  June  2013  through  October  2015,  Respondent  did  not  teach  or 

interact  with  students  for  reasons  that  are  not  pertinent  to  this  case. 

12.  —  This  case  involves  events  that  occurred  in  October  2015  through  March 

2019.  During  that  time,  Respondent  was  assigned  as  a  history  teacher  at  Vista  Middle 

School,  Richard  E.  Byrd  Middle  School,  Sylmar  Leadership  Academy,  and  Walter  Reed 

Middle  School. 

  

*  A  pool  teacher  is 

a  substitute  teacher  assigned  to  a  particular  school  and 

performs  whatever  teaching  duties  are  needed  at  that  school,  e.g.,  helping  the 

librarian,  teaching  classes  following  the  direction  of  a  permanent  teacher  assigned  to 

that  class,  etc.  A  pool  teacher  may  be  assigned  to  his  or  her  own  class,  but  performs 

the  other  duties  as  needed  the  rest  of  the  day.  A  pool  teacher  is  still  subject  to 

evaluation  of  their  performance  by  the  principal  of  the  school  where  assigned.

State  Standards,  District  Assignments,  Assistance,  and  Guidance 

13. 

(Charge  1.)?  As  a  District  secondary  teacher,  certain  of  Respondent's 

regular  assignments  were  identified  and  provided  to  him  in  the  District's  Secondary 

Teacher  Class  Description,  and  included  but  were  not  limited  to: 

a.  Teaching  classes  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  approved 

courses  of  study  and  at  a  rate  and  level  commensurate  with  established  student 

progress  expectations,  using  adopted  textbooks  and  other  instructional  materials 

authorized  for  such  courses; 

needs,  and  progress  in  planning; 

aligned  to  state  standards; 

engagement  in  the  classroom; 

b.  Using  information  about  individual  students’  academic  strengths, 

c.  Designing  activities  to  engage  students  in  cognitively  challenging  work 

d.  Using  resources  to  promote  high  levels  of  learning  and  student 

e.  Closely  monitoring  student  learning  to  understand  how  students  are 

progressing,  and  providing  instructive  and  timely  feedback  that  will  move  student 

learning  forward; 

  

>  For  ease  of  reference,  the  “charges”  alleged  in  the  Amended  Accusation  are 

specified  at  the  beginning  of  the  Factual  Findings  resolving  them.

f.  Establishing  a  safe  and  supportive  classroom  environment  where  risk 

taking  is  encouraged,  students  feel  free  to  contribute  ideas,  and  teacher/stucdent 

interactions  are  respectful  and  polite:  and, 

g.  Providing  clear  behavioral  expectations  for  students  and  monitoring 

student  behavior  in  class  and  on  campus. 

14. 

(Charge  2.)  As  a  District  Secondary  Teacher  credentialed  by  the  CTC, 

certain  of  Respondent's  regular  assignments  were  identified  and  provided  to  him  in 

the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  (CSTP  or  standards},  and  included 

but  were  not  limited  to: 

a.  Engaging  and  supporting  ail  students  in  learning; 

b.  Creating  and  maintaining  effective  environments  for  learning; 

c.  Understanding  and  organizing  subject  matter  for  student  learning; 

d.  Planning  instruction  and  designing  learning  experiences  for  ail 

students; 

e.  Assessing  students  for  learning;  and 

f.  Developing  as  a  professional  educator. 

15. 

(Charges  3  &  4.)  On  or  about  June  6,  2013,  while  assigned  to  East  Valley 

High  School,  Principal  Carrie  H.  Allen  provided  Respondent  with  verbal  assistance  and 

guidance  on,  among  other  things,  adhering  to  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with 

Students,  the  Board's  resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons,  and  the 

District's  Employee  Code  of  Ethics.  Respondent  was  given  the  same  assistance  and

guidance  in  writing  on  or  about  June  7,  2013.  No  evidence  was  presented  concerning 

any  other  assistance  and  guidance  that  was  provided  to  Respondent  at  that  time. 

16. 

A.  The  District's  practice  is  for  a  school’s  principal  or  assistant  principal  to 

conduct  one  or  more  informal  observation(s)  of  a  teacher  each  school  year  to  ensure 

that  teaching  is  in  alignment  with  the  District's  regular  assignments  and  the  CSTPs, 

including  those  described  in  Factual  Findings  13  and  14. 

B.  The  teacher  in  question  is  notified  in  advance  of  the  date  the  informal 

observation  will  be  conducted,  giving  him  or  her  time  to  prepare  for  it.  The  teacher's 

performance  is  evaluated  against  the  District’s  regular  assignments  described  above. 

C.  After  the  informal  observation,  the  teacher  meets  with  the 

administrator  to  receive  feedback,  provide  a  response,  and  receive  assistance  and 

guidance  if  needed.  The  teacher  subsequently  receives  a  conference  memorandum,  in 

which  the  administrator  documenis  what  was  discussed  during  the  meeting,  as  well  as 

any  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  provided. 

DB.  Any  subsequent  informal  observation{s)  is/are  also  done  to  determine 

whether  a  teacher  implements  previous  suggestions,  guidance,  and  directives. 

Teachers  are  expected  to  implement  a  directive  immediately  after  one  is  issued. 

17. 

Every  school  year  a  teacher  also  receives  a  formal  observation,  which  is 

pre-planned  with  the  teacher  before  the  observation.  The  formal  observation  provides 

an  administrator  the  opportunity  to  observe  a  teacher  and  provide  feedback  and 

ratings  around  seven  "Focus  Elements”  chosen  from  a  list  of  15.  Three  of  these 

elements  are  selected  by  the  District,  three  selected  by  the  teacher,  and  the 

administrator  and  teacher  jointly  select  the  remaining  element.

18 

Toward  the  end  of  the  school  year,  a  teacher  receives  a  Final  Evaluation, 

in  which  his  or  her  overall  performance  is  rated  under  various  categories.  The  results  of 

the  formal  observation  are  noted  in  the  Final  Evaluation,  as  well  as  information  from 

informal  observations.  The  teacher  in  question  receives  a  rating  of  either  Below 

Standard  Performance,  Meets  Standard  Performance,  or  Exceeds  Standard 

Performance. 

Vista  Middle  School 

19. 

After  his  absence  from  teaching  for  well  over  two  years,  Respondent  was 

assigned  to  Vista  Middle  School  (Vista)  in  late  Septernber  2015. 

20. 

 Vista‘’s  principal  is  Joe  Nardulll.  Principal  Nardulli  is  well  experienced, 

having  been  with  the  District  for  32  years,  the  last  eight  of  which  as  Vista's  principal.  As 

explained  below,  he  treated  Respondent  like  any  other  new  teacher  to  his  school,  and 

even  assigned  him  to  shadow  another  history  teacher  for  eight  days  before  taking  over 

his  own  class.  While  testifying,  Principal  Nardulll  appeared  calm,  even-tempered,  and  a 

good  historian.  His  testimony  was  consistent  with  conference  memoranda  he  issued  to 

Respondent.  He  was  clear  and  definitive  in  his  testimony  and  did  not  appear  to 

embellish  the  facts.  Based  on  these  circumstances,  the  Commission  found  Principal 

Nardulli's  conference  memoranda  and  testimony  concerning  Respondent  to  be 

credible  and  a  reliable  source  to  make  factual  findings. 

21. 

On  October  19,  2015,  Respondent  met  with  Principal  Nardulli  for  about 

30  minutes.  Principal  Nardulll  went  over  Vista's  policies  and  procedures,  as  well  as 

important  District  policies  and  Board  resolutions.  Respondent  also  was  given  several 

hours  on  his  own  to  study  Vista  materials  and  District  policies.  Respondent  also  met 

with  History  Departrnent  Chair  Denise  M.  Harper  for  about  30  minutes.

22. 

On  October  20,  2015,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  co-teach  with  Mr. 

Herrera  in  an  eighth  grace  history  class  as  a  way  of  acclimating  Respondent  to  Vista. 

Respondent  co-taught  with  Mr.  Herrera  until  he  (Mr.  Herrera)  left  the  school  in  late 

October,  at  which  time  Respondent  took  over  the  class.  Respondent’s  attempt  tn  his 

testimony  to  denigrate  the  value  of  Mr.  Herrera’s  assistance  was  not  convincing.  Mr. 

Herrera  had  taught  for  the  District  for  many  years  and  was  familiar  with  the  workings 

of  Vista.  Moreover,  it  was  an  opportunity  few  teachers  enjoy  when  they  transfer  to  a 

new  school, 

23. 

The  Commission  finds  Principal  Nardulll's  treatrnent  of  Respondent  more 

generous  than  one  would  expect  a  veteran  teacher  like  Respondent  to  receive;  it  more 

resembled  how  a  new  teacher  to  the  profession  would  be  treated. 

24. 

During  the  hearing,  Respondent  complained  that  he  felt  rusty  from  not 

teaching  for  over  two  years  and  because  he  had  last  worked  with  high  school  students. 

His  complaint  was  not  credible,  in  light  of  his  overall  teaching  experience  with  the 

District,  including  several  years  teaching  middie  schooi  students,  and  the  fact  he  was 

allowed  to  co-teach  for  a  number  of  days  with  Mr.  Herrera.  Moreover,  Respondent's 

overall  high  school  experience  was  not  as  extensive  as  he  intimated  in  his  resume  (ex. 

201)  or  his  direct  testimony,  meaning  he  should  have felt  just  as  comfortable  teaching 

middie  school  students  as  high  school  students. 

25. 

A.  (Charge  5.)  While  he  taught  at  Vista  from  late  October  through  early 

December  2015,  Respondent  failed  to  treat  students  respectfully  on  one  occasion,  and 

acted  inappropriately  in  front  of  students  on  another  occasion,  as  follows: 

B.  On  one  occasion  occurring  no  iater  than  early  December  2015,  student 

Alexay  was  being  consoled  by  a  few  other  students  in  class  because  she  was  upset.  The 

10

other  students  hugged  her.  Respondent  toid  the  students  to  go  back  to  their  tables, 

but  they  did  not  respond.  Respondent  told  the  students  he  would  take  their 

ohotographs  and  show  them  to  their  parents  if  they  did  not  do  as  directed.  At  some 

point  during  the  discussion,  Alexay  threatened  to  sue  Respondent.  Respondent  told 

her  to  not  be  a  “cry-baby,”  but  he  did  so  in  front  of  the  class,  which  embarrassed 

Alexay.  As  the  teacher,  Respondent  is  obligated  to  be  cautious  when  dealing  with  the 

emotions  of  a  teenager  in  distress.  Respondent  showed  disregard  for  Alexay  and  said 

something  that  could  have  worsened  her  distress,  especially  in  front  of  her  peers. 

C.  During  the  above-described  situation  with  student  Alexay,  Respondent 

intended  to  take  the  students’  pictures  on  his  phone  so  that  he  could  document  the 

students’  behavior  to  their  parents.  Respondent  tried  but  was  unable  to  take  pictures 

because  the  camera  on  his  phone  was  not  working.  The  students  did  not  know  that. 

One  of  the  students  complained  to  her  mother,  who  became  upset  and  complained  to 

Principal  Nardulli.  In  threatening  to  take  photographs  of  the  students,  including 

Alexay,  Respondent  rade  the  students  feel  uncomfortable.  Doing  so  also  escalated  an 

emotional  situation.  Taking  a  photograph  also  would  have  invaded  the  privacy  of  the 

students  and  not  been  an  appropriate  disciplinary  technique,  so  the  student’s  mother 

was  rightfully  upset. 

D.  By  no  later  than  early  December  2015,  Respondent  and  his  class  were 

on  a  field  trip  at  the  Museum  of  Tolerance.  Another  teacher  on  the  field  trip  got  into  a 

pointed  political  discussion  with  a  docent.  After  the  discussion,  Respondent  consoled 

the  other  teacher  by  saying,  “Now I  understand  why  Donald  Trump  doesn't  like 

Hispanics.”  At  least  one  student  overheard  the  comment  and  complained  to  her 

parent,  causing  the  parent  to  complain  to  Principal  Nardull,  Respondent  should  not 

have  engaged  in  political  discussions  like  that  within  earshot  of  students,  and  his 

14

comment  caused  at  least  one  student  to  complain  to  a  parent,  which  negatively 

impacted  his  relationshio  with  that  student.  Respondent  also  escalated  a  potentially 

volatile  situation  in  front  of  students,  instead  of  either  trying  to  de-escalate  it  or  at 

least  use  it  as  a  teachable  moment  with  students  the  next  day  in  class. 

26. 

A.  (Charge  6.)  On  November  10,  2015,  Respondent  attended  a  History 

Department  meeting  being  led  by  Ms.  Harper,  the  History  Department  Chair. 

B.  During  the  meeting,  one  attendee  advised  he  was  thinking  of  teaching 

in  high  school.  Respondent  explained  to  him,  and  to  all  those  in  attendance,  how  high 

school  students  are  different  frorn  middie  school  students.  In  the  course  of  explaining 

the  difference,  Respondent  made  the  following  remarks: 

i.  "It's  better  being  at  a  high  schoo!  than  a  middie  school.” 

i.  "High  school  girls  come  on  to  you  and  try  to  get  me  alone.” 

il.  Mimicking  a  female  voice,  he  said,  "Mister,  rny  uncle  has  a  place 

in  Tyuana,  Let's  go  for  the  weekend.” 

iv.  "The  problem  with  gay  students,  you  have  to  watch  out  because 

they  will  try  to  get  you  alone,  especially  if  you  are  young.” 

v.  "All  the  pretty  girls  in  high  school  want  private  tutoring.” 

vi.  "The  female  students  can  be  flirty  and  try  to  get  you  alone  in 

the  classroom." 

C.  Respondent's  comments  made  his  colleagues  feel  uncomfortable.  Ms. 

Harper  became  offended,  left  the  meeting,  and  several  days  later  complained  about 

Respondent  to  her  husband  and  then  Principal  Nardulll.  Ms.  Harper  also  credibly 

12

testified  that  the  other  meeting  attendees,  all  males,  looked  shocked  and  then  began 

shifting  their  bodies  away  from  Respondent  as  he  continued  talking.  Respondent's 

comments  would  have  made  a  reasonable  person  feel  uncomfortable  in  that  setting. 

af. 

{Charges  7  &  &.)  On  December  11,  2015,  Respondent  met  with  Principal 

Nardulli  to  discuss  these  events.  Respondent  was  also  provided  with  verbal  assistance 

and  guidance  including,  among  other  things,  not  making  inappropriate,  disrespectful, 

and  derogatory  comments  to  District  staff  or  students;  his  responsibility  to  behave  in  a 

professional  manner  at  all  times;  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students;  the 

Board's  resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  Ail  Persons;  and  Standard  Two  of 

the  CSTP,  Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective  Environments  for  Student  Learning. 

Principal  Nardulli  provided  Respondent  with  the  same  assistance  and  guidance  in  his 

conference  memorandum  dated  December  14,  2075. 

28. 

The  Commission  finds  that  Respondent's  comments  and  actions  subject 

to  Principal  Nardulll’s  conference  memorandum  violated  the  directives  Respondent 

were  given  by  Principal  Allen  of  East  Valley  High  School  on  or  about  June  6,  2013,  in 

that  Respondent  was  not  respectful  to  students  and  colleagues. 

29. 

During  the  meeting  with  Principal  Nardulll,  Respondent  said  he  did  not 

want  to  work  with  “Ms.  Harper  and  these  people.”  (Ex.  5,  p.  3.)  Principal  Narcdulll 

testified  that  Respondent  was  upset  that  other  teachers  complained  about  him.  So  he 

asked  Principal  Nardulli  during  the  meeting,  “Can  you  please  transfer  me  to  another 

school  over  the  vacation?”  (Ex.  5,  p.  3.3 

30. 

On  December  16,  20175,  Principal  Nardulll  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice 

of  Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Act  and  suspended  him  for  11  days,  based  on  his  conduct 

13

with  students  and  his  comments  made  during  the  History  Department  meeting. 

Respondent  unsuccessfully  appealed  the  suspension. 

Richard  £.  Byrd  Middie  School 

31. 

Respondent  was  transferred  to  Richard  E.  Byrd  Middle  School  (Byrd) 

during  the  winter  break.  Respondent’s  testimony  that  he  felt  he  was  being  punished  by 

a  mid-school-year  transfer  was  disingenuous,  in  that  he  had  requested  the  transfer. 

32. 

Deborah  Wiltz,  Ed.D,  is  the  principal  at  Byrd.  She  was  advised  by  the 

District  that  Respondent  was  being  assigned  to  Byrd,  but  she  was  provided  no 

information  about  the  transfer.  She  therefore  mistakenly  believed  Respondent  was  the 

long-term  substitute  teacher  for  Ms.  Bell,  a  history  teacher  who  was  about  to  go  on 

extended  maternity  leave. 

33. 

Respondent  arrived  at  Byrd  on  January  11,  2016.  Principal  Witz  assigned 

Respondent  as  the  long-term  substitute  for  Ms.  Bell.  Respondent  shadowed  Ms.  Bell 

for  a  few  days  until  she  left  and  Respondent  took  over  her  classes.  However,  Principal 

Wiltz  shortly  later  learned  Respondent  was  not  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  and  so 

she  reassigned  Mr.  Mayorga  to  Ms.  Bell's  classes,  and  reassigned  Respondent  to  be  a 

history  pool  teacher. 

34. 

On  February  22,  2016,  Respondent  took  over  Ms.  Bell's  classes  again 

when  Mr.  Mayorga’s  contract  expired.  Respondent  remained  in  that  assignment  until 

Ms.  Bell  returned  to  teaching  on  April  25,  2016.  Thereafter  Respondent  served  as  a 

history  pool  teacher  for  the  rest  of  the  Spring  semester. 

35. 

Principal  Wiltz  is  an  experienced  educator.  She  nas  been  with  the  District 

since  1984.  In  addition  to  having  a  doctorate  in  education,  she  also  has  multiple 

14

credentials,  including  as  a  teacher,  counselor,  and  administrator.  In  fact,  she  has  a 

credential  allowing  her  to  teach  history.  During  the  hearing,  her  testimony  was  clear, 

thorough,  and  definitive.  Based  on  these  circurnstances,  the  Commission  found 

Principal  Wiltz’s  conference  rnemoranda  and  testimony  concerning  Respondent  to  be 

credible  and  a  reliable  source  to  determine  factual  findings. 

JANUARY  13,  2016  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

36. 

Principal  Wiltz  decided  to  do  an  informal  observation  of  Respondent  in 

the  classroom.  In  addition  to  the  above-described  District  practice  regarding  informal 

observations,  Principal  Wiltz  felt  observing  Respondent  was  warranted  because  he  was 

new  to  the  school. 

the  following. 

37, 

On  January  13,  2016,  Principal  Wiltz  conducted  an  informal  observation 

of  Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  medieval  Japan  to  his  period  3  Honors  World 

History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established 

38 

(Charge  9.)  Respondent  failed  to  design  rigorous  activities  to  address  the 

needs  of  his  World  History  Honors  students,  despite  having  a  full  workday  to  plan  with 

the  students’  previous  teacher,  Ms.  Bell.  Respondent's  agenda  only  listed  low-level 

activities  that  did  not  provide  students  with  opportunities  to  evaluate,  synthesize, 

and/or  analyze  the  content  of  the  lesson.  This  was  especially  problematic  given  that 

these  were  Honors  students  who  were  capable  of  more. 

39. 

{Charge  10.}  Respondent  failed  to  post  a  learning  objective  to 

communicate  learning  expectations  to  students.  Instead,  he  posted  the  content 

standard  number  and  the  word  “Japan,”  which  is  not  a  proper  objective.  In  fact, 

Respondent  never  explained  the  standard  he  would  teach  that  day. 

15

AQ. 

(Charge  11.)  Respondent  failed  to  adhere  to  even  the  low-level  agenda 

he  posted.  In  particular,  ne  told  students,  "I'm  going  to  go  over  the  notes.  Copy  the 

warm  up."  He  then  had  students  copy  notes  projected  on  a  screen  regarding  Japan's 

geography,  society,  and  religion,  but  Respondent  did  not  review  the  notes  as  he  had 

promised  on  the  agenda. 

44, 

(Charge  12.)  Respondent  failed  to  deliver  coherent  instruction.  Instead, 

ne  taught  an  undirected  lesson  not  aligned  to  the  standard  he  was  supposed  to  teach 

(analyze  the  geographic,  political,  economic,  religious,  and  social  structures  of  the 

civilization  of  medieval  Japan).  Respondent’s  lesson  was  erratic,  had  little  structure, 

and  was  confusing  to  the  students. 

42. 

{Charge  13.)  Providing  teacher-directed  lessons  is 

a  regular  assignment 

of  all  District  teachers  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and  regulations  of  the  District. 

Respondent  failed  to  do  so  during  this  lesson,  without  reasonable  cause,  for  the 

reasons  described  above  in  resolving  charges  9  through  72. 

43. 

(Charge  14.)  Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  sufficient  knowledge  of 

the  subject  matter  by  not  providing  students  with  accurate,  complete  information,  and 

not  modeling  correct  academic  language.  For  example,  Respondent  asked  students 

about  their  ancestors  in  Mexico,  but  did  not  link  that  to  the  lesson  on  Japan.  He 

mentioned  medieval  Europe  but  did  not  sufficiently  link  that  to  the  lesson  on  Japan. 

He  made  confusing  comments  about  the  Samurai  but  failed  to  discuss  important  facts 

about  the  Samurai  that  students  would  find  interesting. 

44 

(Charge  15.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  clear,  explicit  instructions  fora 

stent  reading  activity.  Respondent  simply  told  the  students  to  read,  but  provided  no 

16

direction  or  examples.  He  did  not  properly  monitor  the  students’  activity  to  confirm 

whether  they  were  reading  or  understanding  the  material. 

A5, 

(Charge  16.)  Respondent  failed  to  ask  questions  to  reveal  students’ 

understanding  of  the  concept/content  of  the  lesson,  nor  did  he  use  effective 

discussion  techniques  to  ensure  ail  students  shared  their  thinking  around  challenging 

questions.  Instead,  ne  asked  irrelevant,  off-topic  questions.  He  provided  no  coherent 

or  systematic  discussion  of  the  concepts  or  terminology. 

46. 

(Charge  17.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  during  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  failed  to  perform  certain  of  his  requiar  assignments, 

including  but  not  limited  to,  designing  activities  to  engage  students  in  cognitively 

challenging  work  aligned  to  standards;  closely  monitoring  student  learning  to 

understand  how  students  are  progressing;  understanding  and  organizing  subject 

matter  for  student  learning:  and  planning  instruction  and  designing  learning 

experiences  for  all  students  (regular  assignments  as  prescribed  by  the  District). 

Respondent's  failure  to  perform  these  regular  assignments  as  prescribed  by  the 

District  was  without  reasonable  cause. 

47. 

(Charge  18.)  On  January  27,  2016,  Principal  Wiltz  met  with  Respondent  to 

discuss  the  informal  observation,  including  her  critiques  discussed  above.  She  also 

provided  Respondent,  verbally  and  in  her  conference  memorandum  given  to 

Respondent  the  same  day,  with  assistance  and  guidance  including,  among  other 

things,  preparing  and  delivering  effective  and  coherent  Common  Core  State 

Standards-based  instruction,  as  well  as  teaching  directed  lessons  every  day.  (Ex.  7,  pp. 

5-6.)  She  also  gave  Respondent  a  District  Lesson  Design  Template,  a  Gradual  Release 

of  Responsibility  handout,  and  a  Depth  of  Knowledge  Question  Stems  handout  to 

assist  him.  (/d/,  6.  6.) 

17

48. 

(Charge  19.)  On  January  27,  2016,  Principal  Wiltz,  verbally  and  in  writing, 

directed  Respondent  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well-planned,  appropriate  for  the 

level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  the  students  in  active  and  meaningful 

learning;  and  b)  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed  lessons  daily  for  all  his  classes. 

(Ex.  7,  p.  6.) 

the  following. 

FEBRUARY  24,  2016  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

49. 

On  February  24,  2016,  Principal  Wiltz  conducted  an  informal  observation 

of  Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  about  the  Crusades  to  his  period  1  Honors  World 

History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established 

50. 

(Charge  22.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  students  with  opportunities  to 

analyze,  synthesize,  and  think  critically.  Instead,  he  assigned  low-level  activities  that 

primarily  involved  copying  text.  By  doing  so,  Respondent  failed  to  differentiate* 

instruction  for  the  Honors-level  students,  who  required  a  greater  level  of  challenge 

and  engagement. 

  

4  Differentiated  instruction  is  an  approach  that  helps  educators  tailor  their 

teaching  so  that  all  students,  regardless  of  their  ability,  can  learn  the  classroom 

material.  The  primary  hallmarks  of  differentiated  instruction  are  providing  different 

mediums  for  learning  to  the  different  students  in  a  class,  as  opposed  to  offering  the 

same  activities  to  all  of  the  students,  and  having  different  expectations  for  successful 

completion  of  the  work.  The  District  requires  differentiated  instruction  because  most 

District  classes  have  a  blend  of  typical  students  with  those  who  are  English  learners, 

have  learning  disabilities,  or  require  special  education. 

18

51. 

(Charge  23.)  Respondent  failed  to  engage  students  in  meaningful  whole- 

group  or  small  group  discussions  in  order  for  thern  to  develop  grade  level  listening 

and  speaking  skills.  For  example,  during  a  warm-up  activity,  Respondent  said,  "Explain 

how  you  can  motivate  people.  I'm  going  to  give  you  two  minutes  to  explain  to 

somebody  how  you  can  motivate.”  For  approximately  two  minutes,  most  students  held 

off-topic  conversations  rather  than  discuss  “how  you  can  motivate.”  When  he  asked 

for  volunteers  to  share  their  responses  with  the  whole  group,  only  one  of  the  35 

Students  raised  a  hand.  Respondent  did  not  call  on  other  students  or  encourage 

participation. 

52. 

(Charge  24.)  Respondent  failed  to  ask  questions  to  reveal  students’ 

understanding  of  the  posted  content  standard.  Instead,  he  asked  low-level,  recall, 

loosely  related  questions.  For  example,  rather  than  ask  questions  regarding  the 

multiple  causes  and  effects  of  the  Crusades,  Respondent  only  focused  on  one  factor 

(trading)  that  motivated  European  Christians  to  begin  their  military  expeditions. 

53. 

(Charge  25.)  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  students’  work,  offer 

corrective  feedback,  or  listen  to  student  responses  in  order  to  understand  how  they 

were  progressing.  It  is  important  to  monitor  student  work  and  give  feedback.  Students 

need  to  know  how  they  are  doing  and  where  correction  is  necessary. 

54. 

(Charge  26.)  Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  sufficient  knowledge  of 

the  subject  matter  when  he  did  not  provide  clarifying  or  additional  information  to 

support  student  achievement  of  the  learning  objectives.  Instead,  he  offered  tangential, 

ambiguous,  irrelevant  comments,  followed  by  disconnected  questions  after  each 

section.  Some  of  Respondent's  comments  were  trivially  true,  but  did  not  acknowledge 

historic  significance.  Respondent  also  failed  to  offer  important  historic  facts,  such  as 

that  Jerusalem  was  later  lost  by  the  Crusaders.  Even  though  Respondent's  comment  on 

19

what  students  may  learn  in  high  school  (Hitler's  Germany)  was  potentially  intriguing, 

Respondent  was  so  vague  about  the  topic  that  students  did  not  know  what  he  was 

talking  about  or  how  to  connect  that  to  his  current  lesson. 

55. 

(Charge  27.)  Respondent  failed  to  establish  an  effective  classroom 

management  system  and  failed  to  redirect  student  off-task  behavior,  resulting  in 

unclear  behavioral  expectations.  For  example,  throughout  the  lesson  class,  ail  table 

groups  held  off-topic  conversations  but  Respondent  did  not  redirect  any  students. 

One  maie  student  played  with  a  purple  flyer  during  the  entire  class  but  Respondent 

did  not  direct  him  to  the  assigned  activity.  On  other  occasions,  when  Respondent  tried 

to  redirect  off-task  students,  he  was  not  effective:  he  just  told  students  to  get  into 

groups,  but  did  not  provide  direction  on  what  would  then  happen.  Without  the 

foundation  or  structure  such  direction  would  provide,  students  assumed  the  table 

group  time  was  free-time  for  talking.  Finally,  Respondent  did  not  discuss  a  rubric  for 

the  activity,  which  also  prompted  off-topic  discussion. 

56. 

(Charge  28.)  Respondent  similarly  failed  to  establish  clear  routines  and 

procedures  to  maintain  an  orderly,  well-managed  class.  For  example,  because  he  did 

not  establish  a  seating  chart,  he  asked  other  students  if  certain  peers  were  present, 

which  is  not  appropriate.  Respondent  should  have  had  a  way  of  knowing  if  students 

were  in  their  seats.  That  activity  sent  a  message  to  students  that  Respondent  did  not 

care  who  was  there.  Another  example  was  when  the  bell  rang  and  students  attempted 

to  leave  the  classroom.  Respondent  tried  to  maintain  order  by  telling  them  to  sit 

down.  However,  he  should  have  prefaced  his  comments  by  reminding  students  that 

they  had  already  been  told  to  not  leave  the  class  when  the  bell  rang  and  then 

confirming  with  students  that  they  had  been  so  instructed  before.  Respondent's 

actions  did  not  show  a  professional  level  of  planning. 

20

57. 

{Charge  29.)  During  this  lesson,  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the 

verbal  and  written  directives  provided  to  him  by  Principal  Wiltz  on  January  27,  2016.  By 

this  time,  Respondent  had  been  teaching  for  the  District  for  approximately  16  years. 

Principal  Wiltz  one  month  before  gave  him  specific  directives  on  how  to  teach  and 

what  not  to  do.  Respondent  did  not  provide  a  meaningful  explanation  for  his  failure  to 

execute  those  directions  in  this  lesson.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  most 

reasonable  explanation  is  that  Respondent  willfully  refused  to  follow  her  directives. 

58. 

(Charge  30.)  Respondent  was  aware  of  but  failed  to  perform  his  regular 

assignments  as  prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

59. 

On  March  17,  2016,  Principal  Wiltz  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the 

informal  observation.  She  issued  him  a  conference  memorandum  on  the  same  day. 

During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Wiltz  provided 

Respondent  with  12  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above.  (Ex.  8,  pp.  5-6.)  She  also  provided  him  with  the  same 

directive  she  gave  him  the  preceding  January,  which  was  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that 

is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages 

students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed 

lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes.  Ud’,  p.  6) 

60. 

Part  of  Principal  Wiltz's  assistance  and  guidance  for  Respondent  was  to 

take  him  to  observe  another  Byrd  history  teacher,  Mr.  White,  teach  a  lesson.  Principal 

Wiltz  and  Respondent  did  so  in  April  2016.  Principal  Wiltz  selected  Mr.  White  because 

ne  taught  a  Magnet  class  similar  to  Respondent’s  Honors  class.  The  two  observed  Mr. 

White,  who  was  teaching  an  engaging  jesson,  for  about  40  minutes.  Principal  Wiltz 

liked  Mr.  White's  lesson.  But  Respondent  told  Principal  Wiltz  that  he  did  not  learn 

anything  because  he  believed  he  taught  the  same  way  as  Mr.  White.  Respondent  also 

21

told  Principal  Wiltz  that  she  only  liked  Mr.  White's  lesson  because  he  was  her  friend 

and  "kissed  her  butt,”  or  a  phrase  to  that  effect. 

2016  FINAL  EVALUATION 

61. 

A.  (Charge  31.)  On  April  28,  2016,  Principal  Wiltz  issued  Respondent's 

Final  Evaluation,  in  which  he  received  a  Below  Standard  performance  rating. 

B.  The  evaluation  was  based  on  determinations  that  Respondent  failed  to 

deliver  effective  teacher-directed  lessons;  ask  questions  designed  to  reveal  students’ 

understanding  of  concepts  being  taught;  deliver  coherent  instruction;  provide  students 

with  opportunities  to  analyze,  synthesize,  and  think  critically;  monitor  student  work 

and  listen  to  their  responses  to  understand  how  they  were  progressing  toward 

learning  objectives;  demonstrate  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  subject  matter,  and 

establish  clear  routines  and  procedures  to  maintain  an  orderly  and  well-managed 

classroom. 

C.  Principal  Wiltz  believed  that  Respondent  had  not  improved  his 

teaching  despite  her  assistance  and  guidance.  Based  on  her  above-described  informal 

observations  of  Respondent,  as  well  as  a  formal  observation  she  conducted  on  April  4, 

2016,  Principal  Wiltz  concluded  Respondent  was  ineffective,  which  warranted  his  Below 

Standard  performance  rating. 

Sylmar  Leadership  Academy 

62. 

In  June  2016,  Respondent  heard  that  two  pool  teachers  {including  him} 

would  not  be  retained  at  Byrd.  At  that  time,  Suellen  Helm-Torres,  the  principal  of 

Sylmar  Leadership  Academy  (Syimar}  was  advised  by  the  District  that  Respondent 

would  be  assigned  to  Sylmar,  even  though  she  had  no  vacant  history  positions. 

22

63. 

In  August  2016,  Respondent  was  ordered  to  report  to  Sylmar.  Principal 

Helm-Torres  assigned  Respondent  to  be  a  pool  history  teacher.  She  also  assigned  him 

to  co-teach  one  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  grade  history  class  with  three  other  history 

teachers  who  she  felt  would  be  good  role  models  for  him.  Respondent  did  not  have 

his  own  classroom,  did  not  prepare  lesson  plans,  and  was  not  the  lead  instructor  in  any 

of  the  classrooms  where  he  co-taught. 

64. 

Principal  Helm-Torres  has  been  with  the  District  for  31  years,  the  last 

eight  of  which  as  principal  at  Sylmar.  She  previously  was  a  Beginning  Teacher  Support 

and  Assessment  (BTSA)}  support  provider,  in  which  she  was  trained  to  foster  and 

mentor  new  teachers.  Thus,  she  had  a  good  understanding  of  how  to  welcome  a  new 

teacher  to  Syimar  and  facilitate  his  or  her  growth.  As  described  above,  she  was  more 

generous  in  helping  to  acclimate  Respondent  to  Syimar  than  one  would  expect  a 

veteran  teacher  to  receive.  During  the  hearing,  her  testimony  was  clear  and  succinct. 

The  Commission  also  notes  her  observations  of  Respondent's  teaching  were  consistent 

with  those  offered  by  the  principals  who  supervised  Respondent  before  and  after  her. 

Based  on  these  circumstances,  the  Commission  found  Principal  Helm-Torres’s 

conference  memoranda  and  testimony  concerning  Respondent  to  be  credible  and  a 

reliable  source  to  determine  factual  findings. 

65. 

Principal  Helm-Torres  informally  observed  Respondent  in  September  and 

October  2016  and  conducted  a  formal  observation  of  him  in  November  2016. 

However,  because  Respondent  cid  not  have  his  own  classroom,  did  not  prepare  lesson 

plans,  and  was  not  the  lead  instructor,  Respondent  and  Principal  Helm-Torres  agreed 

the  informal  observations  would  not  be  recorded.  Respondent  testified  he  received 

nothing  but  good  comments  from  Principal  Helm-Torres  after  those  observations; 

23

Principal  Helm-Torres  testified  that  she  limited  herself  only  to  offering  a  few 

suggestions  because  Respondent  was  not  teaching  from  his  own  lesson  plan. 

66. 

In  December  2016,  Principal  Helm-Torres  was  contacted  by  the  District 

and  advised  that  Respondent  needed  to  be  assigned  to  his  own  classroom.  As  of 

December  18,  2016,  Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  one  class  in  each  of  the  sixth, 

seventh,  and  eighth  grades.  He  was  given  his  own  classroom.  He  also  was  assigned 

two  periods  as  a  pool  history  teacher,  and  one  conference  period.” 

JANUARY  27,  2017  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

67. 

Now  that  he  had  his  own  classes,  Principal  Helm-Torres  felt  an  informal 

observation  of  Respondent  was  warranted.  This  was  especially  so  because  Respondent 

was  still  fairly  new  to  Sylmar  and  had  received  a  Below  Standard  performance  Final 

Evaluation  the  prior  spring  semester. 

68. 

On  January  27,  2017,  Principal  Helm-Torres  conducted  an  informal 

observation  of  Respondent  teaching  his  period  4  eighth  grade  United  States  History 

class.  Based  on  the  dynamics  described  below,  the  Commission  was  unable  to 

ascertain  what  lesson  Respondent  had  intended  to  teach  that  day.  Her  observations, 

conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established  the  following,  except  where 

noted  otherwise. 

  

>  A  conference  period  is  time  set-aside  for  a  teacher  during  which  the  District 

cannot  require  the  teacher  to  engage  in  any  activity  other  than  parent-teacher 

conferences,  evaluating  student  work,  planning,  and  preparation. 

24

69. 

(Charge  32.)  lt  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence, 

as  alleged,  that  Respondent  failed  to  sufficiently  plan  for  his  lesson  by  not  having  an 

agenda  or  instructional  objective  posted  to  inform  students  of  the  day’s  learning.  The 

parties  presented  conflicting  evidence  whether  Respondent  had  actually  posted  the 

agenda  or  objective  on  the  white-board  that  day. 

70. 

(Charge  33.)  Respondent  failed  to  deliver  effective  instruction.  He 

projected  a  non-instructional  Essential  Question  (EQ)  on  the  screen:  “Did  you  study  for 

the  quiz?  Why/Why  not?”  Respondent’s  question  was  not  essential.  The  EQ  is 

supposed  to  summarize  what  is  being  learned  and  why  it  is  important.  A  question 

about  being  prepared  for  a  quiz  did  not  relate  to  the  objective  that  day.  Respondent 

also  did  not  engage  students  in  a  discussion  around  the  EQ,  but  said,  "We  have  our 

Essential  Question.  It's  going  to  be  an  open  IN  [Instructional  Notebook]  for  the  quiz.” 

It  was  evident  his  directions  were  unclear  because  several  students  worked  on  their 

notebooks  rather  than  write  a  response  to  the  EQ. 

71. 

(Charge  34.)  Respondent  failed  to  circulate  in  the  classroom  to  ensure 

that  students  were  writing  their  responses  to  the  EQ.  Instead,  he  worked  on  his  laptop 

at  the  back  table  and  shuffled  through  papers.  Resource  Specialist  Teacher  Ms. 

Connolly  arrived  to  assist  six  of  the  31  students  in  the  class  who  had  Individualized 

Education  Programs  (IEPs).  She  circulated  the  classroom  and  also  assisted  non-IEP 

students  who  raised  their  hands  regarding  the  EQ.  The  excuses  Respondent  provided 

in  his  testimony  for  not  circulating  in  the  classroom  that  day  were  not  convincing. 

72. 

{Charge  35.)  Respondent  provided  unclear,  contradictory  directions  to 

students.  Specifically,  about  four  minutes  after  students  began  working,  Respondent 

called  on  a  student  to  share  his  response.  When  the  stucent  attempted  to  answer, 

Respondent  said,  “Did  you  study  for  the  quiz  or  not?"  The  student  did  not  respond 

25

and  Respondent  did  not  call  on  any  other  student  to  answer  the  EQ.  At  about  noon, 

Respondent  projected  the  quiz  on  the  screen,  informing  students  they  could  use  their 

IN  and  textbooks  for  the  multiple-choice  questions  and  short  answer  response. 

However,  once  they  started  the  quiz,  Respondent  said,  "Don’t  spend  too  much  time 

looking  In  your  book.  Sometimes  it’s  a  distraction.” 

73. 

(Charge  36.)  Respondent  failed  to  have  clear  expectations  for  student 

behavior  and  did  not  redirect  off-task  behavior.  For  example,  several  students  began 

talking.  Respondent  said,  "It's  open  IN,  open  book  [textbook],  but  it's  not  open  friends. 

So  don't  talk.”  They  stopped  momentarily  but  quickly  resumed  talking.  Respondent  did 

not  redirect  them.  For  at  least  15  minutes,  three  male  students  sat  without  completing 

any  work.  A  male  student  sitting  at  the  front  of  the  classroom  fell  asieep  and  did  not 

wake  up  until  Respondent  collected  the  quizzes  at  approximately  12:31  p.m.  There 

were  other  examples  of  off-task  behavior  noted  by  Principal  Helm-Torres.  The  students 

were  off-task  because  Respondent  was  not  clear  in  his  directions.  His  efforts  to  re- 

direct  students’  off-task  behavior  was  ineffective.  Moreover,  some  of  Respondent's 

comments  to  students  were  not  respectful,  which  established  a  dynamic  of  some 

students  in  return  not  being  respectful  to  Respondent. 

74. 

(Charge  37.)  Respondent  did  not  use  class  time  appropriately  but  rather 

engaged  students  in  non-instructional  activities  for  approximately  20  minutes.  For 

example,  he  spent  several  minutes  discussing  the  importance  of  two  handouts  they 

should  have  completed  for  homework.  He  spent  an  additional  six  minutes  collecting 

homework  from  the  few  students  who  completed  it.  At  approximately  12:37  p.m.,  he 

began  discussing  the  importance  of  the  IN  but  few  students  listened  because  most 

were  trying  to  complete  the  homework  assignment  he  had  just  collected.  Several 

students  were  coloring  or  completing  a  map  assignment.  Respondent  spent  the  rest  of 

26

the  class  showing  students  each  page  of  the  IN  and  reviewing  what  they  needed  to 

have  on  each  page.  At  approximately  12:49  p.m.,  he  said,  “Ok  guys,  we  need  to  stop. 

The  rest  we  already  talked  about  it.” 

75. 

(Charge  38.)  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated 

that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  January  27,  2016  verbal  and 

written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for 

the  jevel  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful 

learning;  and  b)  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes. 

Given  that  Respondent  had  taught  for  the  District  since  2000,  he  clearly  understood 

the  directives.  Since  Respondent  had  been  allowed  to  co-teach  for  several  months  at 

Sylmar  before  this  lesson,  he  clearly  had  the  preparation  time  and  means  available  to 

comply.  The  most  reasonable  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  is  that  Respondent  did  not 

comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  directives  because  he  willfully  disregarded  what  she  toid 

him  the  year  before  and  decided  to  just  teach  his  own  way. 

76. 

(Charge  39.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as  prescribed 

by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

77. 

On  February  9,  2017,  Principal  Helm-Torres  met  with  Respondent  to 

discuss  the  informal  observation.  She  thereafter  issued  him  a  conference 

memorandum  dated  February  10,  2017.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference 

memorandum,  Principal  Helm-Torres  provided  Respondent  with  nine  different  points 

of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the  deficiencies  noted  above,  as  well  as  that 

of

Respondent  would  be  provided  with  a  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  (PAR)  coach  to  help 

him  develop  and  implement  rigorous  teaching.°  (Ex.  10,  p.  4.) 

FEBRUARY  23,  2017  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

78.  —  Principal  Helm-Torres  conducted  an  informal  observation  of  Respondent 

teaching  a  lesson  on  the  Bill  of  Rights  to  his  period  4  eighth  grade  United  States 

History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established 

the  following. 

79. 

(Charge  40.)  Respondent  failed  to  cognitively  engage  students  in  the 

lesson  when  he  had  them  copy  the  Bill  of  Rights  from  the  PowerPoint  presentation, 

copy  what  he  wrote  under  the  &///  of  Rights  in  my  own  words  section,  and  lectured  for 

several  minutes,  giving  examples  of  each  Amendment  in  the  Bill  of  Rights.  Respondent 

did  not  effectively  discuss  vocabulary  for  the  lesson.  For  example,  he  did  not  explain 

what  is  a  bill  and  how  that  is  different  from  the  Bill  of  Rights.  He  did  not  explain  that 

the  Bill  of  Rights  enumerates  rights  the  government  cannot  abridge;  it  is  not  a  list  of 

things  you  have  the  right  to  do.  Asking  students  to  discuss  the  Bill  of  Rights  without 

first  explaining  it  was  not  effective.  Copying  material  is  not  cognitively  stimulating. 

80. 

(Charge  41.)  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  student  learning  when  he 

circulated  the  classroom  several  times  but  did  not  engage  students  in  meaningful 

discussion  about  the  work.  In  particular,  he  circulated  the  classroom  and  asked 

  

©  PAR  is  a  confidential  program  provided  by  the  District  in  which  a  consulting 

teacher,  with  at  least  eight  years  of  full-time,  satisfactory  performance  with  the  District, 

works  jointly  with  the  participating  teacher  to  provide  review,  assistance,  and  guidance 

to  the  participating  teacher  in  order  to  improve  his  or  her  instructional  skills. 

28

students  to  discuss  what  a  right  is  with  their  partners,  but  did  not  ask  many  of  them  to 

share  their  answers  with  him,  nor  did  he  provide  feedback  to  those  who  did.  He 

completed  a  loop  around  the  classroom,  went  back  to  his  computer  and  then  said, 

"Let's  stop.”  He  later  asked  students  what  they  thought  the  Second  Amendment  was 

going  to  be  and  again  circulated  the  classroom,  but  walked  away  when  a  group  of 

students  did  not  answer.  When  he  approached  a  couple  of  female  students,  they 

looked  at  him  and  giggled.  Respondent  also  giggled  and  walked  away.  Principal  Helm- 

Torres  found  Respondent's  circulation  to  be  robotic  and  his  questions  not  thoughtful. 

The  Commission  agrees. 

81. 

(Charge  42.)  Respondent  failed  to  manage  technology  effectively.  At  least 

four  times  he  switched  from  the  document  reader  to  the  PowerPoint  presentation  on 

his  laptop,  losing  valuabie  instructional  time.  During  these  transitions,  students  also 

lost  attention,  resulting  in  non-engagement  in  the  lesson. 

82. 

(Charge  43.)  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  manage  or  address  student 

off-task  behavior.  For  example,  some  students  did  not  respond  when  he  attempted  to 

redirect  them  by  several  times  saying,  “Shhh.”  He  also  counted  back  from  five  to  one. 

He  said,  “Attention,  Stop.  Twenty  seconds  ts  over"  or  "I'm  waiting  for  you  to  be  quiet.” 

Respondent's  techniques  were  ineffective,  and  seerned  more  punitive  than  effarts  to 

redirect. 

83. 

(Charge  44.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges  29 

and  38,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  he  willfully 

refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  January  27,  2016  verbal  and  written  directives 

to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’ 

achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)  deliver 

bell-to-bell  teacher-cirected  lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes. 

29

84. 

(Charge  45.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as  prescribed 

by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

85. 

On  March  2,  2017,  Principal  Helm-Torres  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  thereafter  issued  him  a  conference  memorandum  dated 

March  3,  2017.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal 

Helm-Torres  provided  Respondent  with  five  different  points  of  assistance  and 

guidance  responding  to  the  deficiencies  noted  above,  including  that  he  should 

continue  working  with  his  PAR  coach.  (Ex.  11,  p.  4) 

MARCH  30,  2017  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

86. 

Principal  Helm-Torres  conducted  an  informal  observation  of  Respondent 

teaching  his  period  7  sixth  grade  Ancient  Civilization  class  a  lesson  on  the  conflict 

between  the  Persians  and  Greeks.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and 

testimony  established  the  following. 

87. 

(Charge  46.)  Respondent  failed  to  sufficiently  plan  for  and  deliver 

instruction  to  his  class.  For  example,  he  did  not  review  or  identify  the  learning 

objective  for  the  day's  activity.  Although  he  began  the  activity  by  grouping  students  to 

work  on  their  Persian  Ernpire/Greek  City-States  projects  with  up  to  four  students 

working  on  one  poster,  he  let  one  student,  Angel,  work  alone.  Not  all  students  in  the 

group  were  able  to  work  on  the  poster  at  the  sarne  time,  some  students  sat  at  their 

desks  looking  on  or  visiting  students  in  other  groups.  Respondent  thereafter  failed  to 

adjust  the  activity  to  ensure  all  students  were  accountable  for  the  work.  While  he  told 

one  student,  “You  have  to  work  with  your  group,”  he  did  not  give  specific  directions 

30

before  walking  away.  Respondent  also  did  not  redirect  other  students  who  were  not 

working  on  the  poster, 

88. 

(Charge  47.)  Respondent  failed  to  communicate  the  criteria  and  rubric  by 

which  their  Persian  Empire/Greek  City-States  poster  project  and  oral  presentations 

would  be  evaluated,  nor  did  he  give  them  directions  on  how  to  effectively  present 

their  projects  to  the  class  or  provide  constructive  feedback.  Overall,  Respondent  did 

not  manage  this  activity  adequately.  As  a  result,  the  students  did  not  understand  the 

activity. 

89, 

(Charge  48.)  Respondent  failed  to  create  an  environment  of  respect  and 

rapport,  or  manage  student  off-task  behavior.  For  exarnple,  other  students  were 

talking  when  student  Angel  was  ready  to  present  his  poster.  Respondent  said,  “I'm 

waiting.”  When  student  Jocelyn  continued  talking  to  students  at  another  table,  he  said, 

"That's  it.  Go  back  to  your  place.  It's  time  for  the  presentations.  Sit  down.  That's  it.  No 

more  time.”  At  least  four  students  had  their  heads  down  on  their  desks  during  the 

presentation.  Respondent  did  not  redirect  them.  Students  continued  talking  as  Table  6 

was  presenting.  Respondent  said,  "We're  not  ready.  Quiet  down.”  The  students’  off- 

task  behavior  was  a  product  of  the  problems  discussed  above.  Respondent  was  not 

clear  on  his  expectations  for  the  poster  presentations,  so  students  did  not  know  what 

to  do  or  how  to  behave  when  other  students  were  talking.  Respondent  did  not 

respond  to  the  off-task  behavior  with  respect. 

90. 

(Charge  49.)  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  manage  instructional  time 

to  ensure  that  all  students  were  able  to  present,  and  that  all  students  could  hear  the 

presentations.  In  particular,  when  the  last  group  presented,  Respondent  asked  them  to 

continue  even  though  there  was  only  one  minute  left  in  the  instructional  period.  The 

bell  rang  shortly  after  they  began  so  Respondent  asked  the  class  to  wait  until  that 

31

group  finished.  However,  several  students  started  putting  their  materials  away  and 

packing  their  backpacks. 

91. 

(Charge  50.)  For  the  sare  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  and  44,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  he 

willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  January  27,  2016  and  March  17,  2076 

verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned, 

appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and 

meaningful  learning;  and  b)}  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for 

all  classes. 

92. 

(Charge  51.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as  prescribed 

by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

93. 

A.  On  April  17,  2017,  Principal  Helm-Torres  met  with  Respondent  to 

discuss  the  informal  observation.  She  thereafter  issued  him  a  conference 

memorandum  dated  April  20,  2017. 

B.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal 

Helm-Torres  provided  Respondent  with  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above.  (Ex.  12,  6.  4.)  Principal  Helm-Torres  also  reminded 

Respondent  of  her  directives  from  prior  informal  observations.  (/b/d)} 

C.  Collectively,  Principal  Helm-Torres  directed  Respondent  to: 

i.  communicate  the  learning  objectives  during  the  day's 

instructional  period: 

32

H.  when  putting  students  in  groups,  ensure  that  they  are  all  held 

accountable  to  the  work  by  assigning  tasks  for  each  of  them; 

Hi.  inform  students  of  the  criteria  and  performance  standards  by 

which  their  oral  and  written  work  will  be  evaluated: 

iv.  continue  working  with  his  PAR  coach  to  implement  rigorous 

lesson  plans,  use  a  variety  of  instruction  to  respond  to  students’  diverse  needs,  and 

create  a  classroom  environment  that  engages  all  students; 

v.  State  the  daily  agenda  and  objectives  for  each  lesson; 

vl.  monitor  student  learning  by  circulating  the  classroom  and 

engaging  students  by  asking  questions;  and 

of  class,  including  sitting  up  in  their  seats. 

2077  FINAL  EVALUATION 

vil  remind  students  of  the  standards  of  behavior  before  the  start 

94, 

A.  (Charge  52.)  On  April  28,  2017,  Principal  Helm-Torres  issued 

Respondent  a  Below  Standard  performance  rating  in  his  Final  Evaluation. 

B.  The  rating  was  based,  in  part,  on  Principal  Helm-Torres’s 

determinations  that  Respondent,  among  other  things,  failed  to:  post  an  agenda  or 

instructional  objective  to  inform  students  of  the  day's  learning;  circulate  the  classroom 

and  redirect  off-task  behavior;  use  instructional  time  effectively;  set  clear  expectations 

for  student  behavior  cognitively  engage  students  in  the  lesson;  monitor  student 

learning;  and  manage  technology  in  the  classroom. 

33

C.  Based  on  her  above  described  informal  observations  of  Respondent,  as 

well  as  a  formal  observation  she  conducted  in  November  2016,  Principal  Helm-Torres 

concluded  Respondent  was  ineffective,  which  warranted  his  Below  Standard 

performance  final  rating. 

May  22,  2017  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

95. 

Principal  Helm-Torres  conducted  an  informal  observation  of  Respondent 

teaching  a  lesson  on  the  astronomer  Galileo  to  his  seventh  grade  Honors  History  class. 

Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established  the  following. 

96. 

(Charge  53.)  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  deliver  instruction  by  having 

35  Honors  students  in  his  class  complete  low  level  activities.  In  particular,  Respondent 

projected  a  PowerPoint  slideshow  on  the  board  and  asked  students  to  copy  the 

information  from  the  four  slides  onto  a  Cornell  notes  handout.  He  also  asked  students 

to  write  a  one-paragraph  summary  of  the  slideshow,  using  the  sentence  stem  7hese 

are  facts  that  know  about  as  a  guide.’  Students  were  to  use  the  Cornell  notes  they 

had  copied  to  write  their  summaries  and  after  only  four  minutes  of  independent 

writing,  Respondent  asked  several  students  to  read  their  summaries  aloud.  Honors 

students  are  capable  of  more  challenging  work  than  this.  Suppressing  their  cognitive 

skills  by  giving  them  low  level  material  like  this  was  a  waste  of  instructional  time. 

97. 

(Charge  54.)  Respondent  failed  to  encourage  students  to  use  the  Cornell 

notes  and  write  their  own  questions  to  elicit  higher  level  thinking.  Instead,  he 

summarized  most  of  the  information  on  the  slides  for  the  students.  Respondent  did 

  

’  A  sentence  stem  is  the  beginning  of  an  unfinished  sentence,  which  helps 

students  get  their  sentence  started  and  finished. 

34

not  need  to  summarize  the  slides  for  them.  The  students  should  have  been  prompted 

to  use  Cornell  notes  to  create  their  own  thinking,  understanding,  and  questioning,  not 

rely  on  Respondent's  summary. 

98. 

(Charge  55.)  Respondent  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively  when 

the  slow,  drawn  out  pace  of  his  lesson  opening  resulted  in  student  off-task  behavior 

that  he  did  not  redirect.  Respondent  spent  approximately  10  minutes  reading,  or 

having  students  read  aloud,  the  standard,  lesson  objective,  EQ,  homework,  and 

agenda.  Each  time  Respondent  asked  a  student  to  read  one  of  the  items  above  aloud, 

he  talked  several  rninutes  more  to  expound  upon  the  item.  Because  he  belabored  the 

obvious,  his  students  became  bored  and  engaged  in  off-task  behavior.  Respondent 

redirected  students  who  were  talking  off-task  by  saying,  "You're  so  disrespectful  when 

you  don't  listen.”  Respondent  showed  no  understanding  of  timing  and  sequencing  his 

lesson. 

99. 

(Charge  56.)  Respondent  was  unsuccessful  in  engaging  students  ina 

productive  classroom  discussion  about  Galileo.  Rather  than  facilitate  a  discussion  with 

the  Honors  students,  he  asked  and  answered  his  own  questions,  resulting  in  student 

off-task  behavior.  For  example,  he  used  anecdotes  when  he  asked,  "Have  you  heard 

some  athletes  are  saying  that  the  Earth  is  flat?"  He  asked  students  to  talk  to  their  peers 

about  a  current  idea  that  they  would  challenge.  When  a  student  said  he  would 

challenge  the  high  tax  rate  in  our  state,  Respondent  again  expanded  on  his  idea  by 

saying,  “The  concept  of  paying  taxes,  paying  the  government.  ..."  Students  started 

having  side-bar  conversations.  Respondent  became  irritated,  and  said,  “I'm  waiting  for 

everyone  to  listen  and  pay  attention.”  He  called  on  another  student  to  share  what  she 

would  challenge.  She  indicated  the  school  uniform  policy.  Again,  Respondent 

expanded  on  her  idea  and  by  telling  a  story  about  growing  up  in  an  all  boy's  school 

35

where  he  had  to  wear  uniforms.  Asking  and  answering  his  own  questions  before 

Honors  students  was  a  waste  of  instructional  time  and  prompted  off-task  behavior. 

100. 

(Charge  57.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  specific  feedback  to  move 

students’  learning  forward  and  align  it  with  the  lesson  objective  by  making  generic 

comments  after  students  shared  their  summaries.  For  example,  he  said:  “Very  good, 

excellent  [liked  the  way  it  moved,  good  job.”  He  also  said,  "Excellent,  excellent.  l  wish  ! 

could  write  like  that.”  Respondent's  feedback  was  so  general  it  did  not  advance  what 

the  students  learned  frorn  the  material.  This  interaction  added  nothing  to  the  lesson. 

107. 

(Charge  58.)  Respondent  failed  to  maximize  instructional  time  by  not 

managing  technology  effectively.  At  the  beginning  of  the  lesson,  he  used 

approximately  eight  minutes  switching  from  the  Gocument  reader  to  the  slideshow  on 

his  laptop,  resulting  in  students’  off-task  behavior.  He  then  asked  the  various  tables’ 

paper  monitors  to  distribute  the  Cornell  notes  handout  while  he  connected  the 

projector  to  nis  laptop.  As  students  waited  at  their  desks,  they  began  to  talk  loudly. 

Respondent  atternpted  to  redirect  them  by  saying  several  times,  “Shhh.  Silence.  We're 

getting  noisy.” 

102. 

(Charge  59.}  Respondent  failed  to  establish  procedures  for  dismissing 

students  at  the  end  of  the  instructional  period,  when  he  allowed  stucents  to  leave  the 

classroom  after  the  bell  rang.  More  specifically,  at  approximately  10:11  a.m. 

Respondent  said,  “Let's  clean  up.”  By  this  time,  several  students  had  their  backpacks 

on  and  were  ready  to  leave.  When  the  bell  rang  at  approximately  10:12  a.m.,  three 

students  immediately  left  the  classroom.  Respondent  told  the  remaining  students,  "If 

your  chairs  are  in,  you  may  go.”  The  students  simply  walked  out  of  the  classroom. 

Respondent  failed  to  establish  a  clear  process  for  ending  class  and  for  the  students  to 

be  dismissed.  Respondent  should  have  dismissed  the  students  and  not  simply  let  them 

36

walk  out  of  the  classroom  when  the  bell  rang.  In  that  sense,  Respondent  allowed  the 

students  to  take  control  of  the  classroom  dismissal,  which  should  never  happen. 

103. 

(Charge  60.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  and  50,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  he 

willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  January  27,  2016  and  March  17,  2076 

verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned, 

appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and 

meaningful  learning;  and  b)}  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for 

all  classes. 

104, 

A.  (Charge  61.)  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  following  of 

Principal  Helm-Torres’s  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of 

April  20,  2017:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of 

Students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning; 

monitor  student  learning  by  circulating  the  classroom  and  engaging  students  in 

conversation  by  asking  questions;  and  remind  students  of  the  behavior  standards 

before  class  starts.  However,  it  was  not  established,  as  alleged,  that  Respondent  failed 

to  state  an  agenda  and  objective  for  the  lesson. 

B.  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  his 

failure  to  comply  with  those  directives  was  willful.  As  a  veteran  teacher,  Respondent 

knew  he  was  required  to  comply  with  these  directives  in  the  regular  course  of 

teaching.  Principal  Helmn-Torres  was  simply  reminding  him  of  requirements  he  already 

knew  fromm  his  many  years  of  service  and,  in  a  sense,  from  what  Principal  Wiltz  had  also 

directed  him  to  do.  Respondent  failed  to  offer  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  not 

executing  those  directives.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  only  reasonable 

explanation  is  that  Respondent  decided  to  not  comply  with  those  directives. 

37

105. 

(Charge  62.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

106. 

(Charge  62.4.)  As  noted  above,  Principal  Helm-Torres  had  Respondent 

work  with  a  PAR  coach  during  the  Spring  semester.  Principal  Helm-Torres  met  with 

Respondent's  PAR  coach  before  the  coach  began  working  with  Respondent.  Principal 

Helmm-Torres  told  the  PAR  coach  she  was  primarily  concerned  with  Respondent's 

classroom  management,  student  engagement,  and  ability  to  cognitively  challenge 

students.  Respondent  worked  with  his  PAR  coach  from  February  17,  2017,  through 

May  4,  2017,  usually  on  Mondays,  Wednesdays,  and  Fridays.  The  Commission  notes 

that  Respondent's  poor  performance  demonstrated  during  the  May  22,  2077  informal 

observation  was  after  Respondent  had  completed  his  PAR  coaching  that  sernester. 

107. 

On  May  31,  2017,  Principal  Helm-Torres  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  thereafter  issued  him  a  conference  memorandum  dated 

June  6,  2017.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Helm- 

Torres  provided  Respondent  with  six  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance 

responding  to  the  deficiencies  noted  above.  (Ex.  14,  p.  4) 

108. 

Near  the  end  of  the  school  year,  Respondent  was  advised  he  would  not 

return  to  Sylmar  the  following  year.  During  the  summer,  the  District  reassigned 

Respondent  to  Walter  Reed  Middle  School  (Reed)  for  the  2017-2018  school  year. 

However,  Respondent  was  not  advised  of  the  reassignment  until  just  before  the  Fall 

semester  began. 

38

Walter  Reed  Middle  Schoo! 

109, 

Reed  is  a  high  performance  school.  Reed  has  many  students  living 

outside  the  school’s  boundary  whose  parents  petitioned  to  have  their  children 

enrolled  at  Reed  because  the  school  is  so  well  regarded.  The  principal  then  at  Reed 

was  Jeanne  Gamba.  She  stressed  creating  a  positive  and  nurturing  climate  at  Reed 

because  it  is  a  high  performance  school.  Therefore,  it  was  important  to  Principal 

Gamba  to  have  good  teachers  who  could  provide  a  quality  education. 

110. 

There  was  no  vacancy  for  a  history  teacher  at  Reed  when  Respondent 

was  assigned  there.  So  Principal  Garba  assigned  Respondent  to  teach  one  class,  the 

period  1  eighth  grace  United  States  History  class,  and  assigned  him  to  be  a  pool 

history  teacher  for  periods  2  through  6.  Respondent  also  was  assigned  to  a  PAR  coach, 

beginning  the  third  week  of  the  Fall  semester.  This  was  a  light  schedule  for  a  veteran 

teacher  like  Respondent. 

171. 

Principal  Garnba  taught  in  middie  schools  for  over  10  years  at  the  District 

and  also  was  an  instructional  coach  to  other  teachers.  She  had  been  an  administrator 

for  over  eight  years.  During  the  hearing,  Principal  Gamba  displayed  a  candid 

demeanor  when  testifying.  She  was  clear  and  definitive.  She  kept  calm  and  non- 

emotional  when  handling  pointed  cross-examination.  Based  on  these  circumstances, 

the  Commission  found  Principal  Gamba’s  conference  memoranda  and  testimony 

concerning  Respondent  to  be  credible  and  reliable  source  to  determine  factual 

findings. 

39

AuGust  21,  2017  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

112. 

Principal  Gamba  decided  to  conduct  an  informal  observation  of 

Respondent  early  in  the  Fall  sernester.  Her  personal  policy  was  to  informally  observe 

all  new  teachers  to  Reed,  even  veteran  teachers  like  Respondent. 

113. 

Principal  Gamba  observed  Respondent  teach  a  lesson  to  his  period  1 

eighth  grade  United  States  History  class.  This  was  the  second  week  of  school.  Her 

observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established  the  following. 

114. 

(Charge  63.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  and  prepare  a  lesson  aligned  to 

the  Common  Core  State  Standards  (CCSS)  for  his  class.  He  first  wrote  an  incomplete, 

generic  agenda  on  the  board  and  did  not  identify  a  learning  objective  or  an 

appropriate  history  standard.  Much  later  in  the  period,  he  projected  a  second  agenda 

on  the  board,  which  he  later  submitted  to  Principal  Gamba  as  a  lesson  plan.  The 

second  agenda  included  only  a  list  of  class  rules  and  procedures  to  “talk  about,”  rather 

than  a  detailed  outline  of  what  would  be  taught.  During  the  lesson,  Respondent  did 

not  access  the  Teacher's  Edition  (TE}  textbook;  he  later  complained  about  the  TE  to 

Principal  Gamba,  indicating  he  did  not  want  to  use  it,  which  was  not  appropriate. 

Finally,  Respondent  did  not  have  the  lesson  plan  available  for  reference  during  the 

instructional  period,  which  is  a  requirement  of  all  District  teachers. 

115. 

(Charge  64.}  Respondent  failed  to  differentiate  activities  to  support  four 

Reclassified  English  Proficient  (RFEP)  students.  Instead,  he  had  all  students  complete 

the  same  activities.  Respondent  could  have  differentiated  activities  for  his  RFEP 

students  by  simply  having  them  work  on  vocabulary  and  sentences,  and  then  asking 

therm  to  write  a  sentence  using  the  vocabulary  words. 

40

116. 

(Charge  65.)  Respondent  failed  to  communicate  the  purpose  of  a 

handout  on  research  questions.  He  did  not  explain  the  purpose  of  using  the  questions, 

nor  did  he  connect  them  to  the  CCSS  or  the  upcoming  assignment. 

117. 

(Charge  66.)  A  review  of  the  entire  lesson  reveals  that  Respondent  failed 

to  effectively  use  instructional  time  for  approximately  half  of  the  class  period.  He  first 

reviewed  the  packet  assigned  the  week  prior.®  At  approximately  8:50  a.m.,  after  talking 

at  length  about  the  packet,  Respondent  distributed  and  reviewed  the  research 

questions  handout.  From  approximately  8:50  to  9:00  a.m.,  Respondent  took 

attendance,  and  then  projected  and  reviewed  the  second  agenda,  which  covered  class 

procedures.  He  next  informed  students  that  since  he  ran  out  of  time,  he  would 

continue  with  the  handout  the  next  day.  Respondent  asked  students  to  put  their 

materials  away  but,  when  reminded  by  a  student,  realized  the  instructional  period  did 

not  end  until  9:17  a.m.,  so  he  asked  students  to  sit  down  again.  Respondent  re- 

projected  the  agenda  on  the  board  and  reviewed  the  research  questions  handout.  He 

spent  the  remaining  10  minutes  asking  a  few  students  to  share  their  answers  aloud, 

but  ran  out  of  time  and  did  not  complete  all  items  on  the  agenda.  It  was  too  late  in  the 

semester  still  to  be  covering  class  procedures.  By  doing  so,  Respondent  demonstrated 

he  was  not  prepared  to  teach  that  day. 

  

8  A  packet  is  handed  out  to  students  and  contains  worksheets,  handouts, 

homework,  and  other  materials  used  during  class.  Respondent  usually  had  his  students 

hand  in  the  packets  on  Friday,  which  he  reviewed  over  the  weekend,  and  returned  to 

students  the  following  Monday.  Respondent  testified  on  cross-examination  that  it  only 

took  him  three  to  five  minutes  to  review  a  student's  packet  for  that  week,  which  to  the 

Commission  seems  less  than  necessary. 

41

118. 

(Charge  67.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  clear,  comprehensible 

directions  when  he  distributed  the  research  questions  handout  and  read  from  it.  As  a 

result,  students  did  not  know  what  he  expected  therm  to  do.  One  male  student  shook 

his  head,  raised  his  hand,  and  asked  if  Respondent  was  assigning  hornework. 

Respondent  said  there  would  be  no  homework  assigned  that  night.  Two  male  students 

looked  at  each  other  and  shook  their  heads.  Two  other  male  students  simply  sat  and 

put  their  heads  down  on  their  desktops.  Two  female  students  looked  at  each  other 

and  one  said,  "Now  I'm  really  confused.”  The  students  were  baffled  because 

Respondent  was  unclear  or  provided  contradictory  instructions. 

119. 

(Charge  68.)  Respondent  interacted  with  students  in  a  manner  that  did 

not  promote  fairness  and  respect  by  using  a  negative,  sarcastic,  and  humiliating  tone 

with  several  students.  In  particular,  one  male  student  turned  around  tn  his  seat  and 

talked  to  the  student  behind  him.  Rather  than  tell  him  to  turn  around  and  stop  talking, 

Respondent  said,  "Face  this  way.”  When  the  student  only  partially  turned  around, 

Respondent  said,  "Do  you  understand  ‘face  this  way'?”  When  several  students 

repeatedly  called  out  answers  to  the  research  questions  handout,  Respondent  said, 

“You've  been  in  school  half  of  your  lives  and  you  don't  know  how  to  raise  your 

hands?”  When  a  male  student  cid  something  to  upset  him,  Respondent  paused  and 

Stared  at  him  for  several  seconds.  He  did  not  address  the  behavior  directly  with  the 

student  but  said  to  the  class,  “I'm  disappointed.  [don’t  think  other  teachers  allow  you 

to  do  that.” 

120. 

(Charge  69.)  Respondent  failed  to  establish  a  classroom  culture  that 

reflected  high  expectations  of  students  to  learn  and  achieve  when  he  posted 

incomplete  and  blank  bulletin  boards  in  the  classroom.  One  bulletin  board  contained  a 

list  of  the  state  capitals  but  did  not  include  a  title,  or  corresponding  CCSS.  Another 

42.

bulletin  board  contained  a  list  of  geography  vocabulary  but  did  not  include  a  title,  or 

corresponding  CCSS.  The  large  bulletin  board  had  a  blank  calendar  posted. 

Respondent  only  had  one  period  to  teach,  so  he  had  enough  time  to  complete  the 

bulletin  boards  by  the  second  week  of  school.  He  also  had  time  after  class  to  do  so. 

Completing  the  bulletin  boards  is  worth  the  effort  because  it’s  an  investment  for  the 

entire  school  year  and  shows  students  that  you  care.  Respondent's  excuses  for  not 

completing  the  bulletin  boards  by  the  second  week  of  school  were  not  credible. 

121. 

(Charge  70.)  Respondent  failed  to  manage  routines,  procedures,  and 

transitions  for  students  sharing  their  answers  with  the  class  and  class  dismissals, 

resulting  in  a  chaotic  classroom  environment.  Specifically,  Respondent  asked  students 

to  share  their  answers  to  the  questions  on  the  research  handout;  however,  several 

simply  called  out  their  answers.  He  reminded  them  to  raise  their  hands  but  he 

continued  to  accept  answers  from  students  who  did  not.  As  a  result,  only  a  few 

students  shared  their  answers.  When  the  bell  rang,  students  got  up,  put  their 

backpacks  on,  and  walked  towards  the  doors.  Respondent  asked  them  to  return  to 

their  seats  since  he  had  not  dismissed  them.  Despite  eight  students  not  taking  their 

seats,  Respondent  dismissed  them  without  enforcing  his  command.  These  events 

highlight  Respondent's  ineffective  teaching:  even  after  soending  so  many  days 

covering  rules  and  procedures,  students  still  were  not  following  them. 

122. 

(Charge  71.)  Respondent  failed  to  support  student  learning  when  he 

inconsistently  reminded  students  engaged  in  off-task  behavior  to  stay  on  task  but  did 

not  introduce,  teach,  or  reinforce  a  classroom  management  plan.  For  example,  when  a 

rnale  student  did  not  have  his  materials  on  his  desk,  Respondent  reminded  him  to  stay 

on  task  and  to  take  out  his  materials.  But  at  least  three  other  male  students  did  not 

retrieve  their  materials  and  Respondent  did  not  redirect  them.  Respondent  asked  a 

43

rnale  student  to  stop  talking  even  though  two  male  students  next  to  him  were  talking. 

When  the  two  male  students  put  their  heads  on  their  desks,  Respondent  did  not 

redirect  their  behavior,  or  encourage  them  to  complete  the  tasks.  These  events 

demonstrate  that  Respondent's  efforts  were  ineffective,  inconsistent,  and  that  students 

ignored  him. 

123. 

(Charge  72.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  50,  and  60,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that 

he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  January  27,  2016  and  March  17, 

2016  verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well 

planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in 

active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed  lessons 

daily  and  for  all  classes. 

124. 

(Charge  73.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charge  61, 

Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to 

comply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm-Torres’s  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2077, 

and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned, 

appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and 

meaningful  learning:  and  state  the  daily  agenda  and  the  objectives  for  the  daily  lesson. 

125. 

(Charge  74.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause, 

126. 

A.  On  August  31,  2017,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  thereafter  issued  him  a  conference  memorandum  dated 

September  5,  2017. 

44

B.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal 

Gamba  provided  Respondent  with  11  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance 

responding  to  the  deficiencies  noted  above.  (Ex.  15,  pp.  5-6.)  Her  verbal  and  written 

directives  to  Respondent  are  summarized  as  requiring  him  to: 

i.  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level 

of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning; 

Hi.  State  the  daily  agenda  and  the  objectives  for  the  daily  lesson; 

il,  monitor  student  learning  by  not just  circulating  the  classroom, 

but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions; 

iv.  remind  students  of  the  behavior  standards  before  class  starts 

and  redirect  students  who  are  not  following  the  standards; 

v.  plan  differentiated  activities  for  students,  e.g.,  English  learners; 

and 

vi.  adhere  at  all  times  to  the  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful 

Treatment  of  All  Persons,  as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students. 

C.  Principal  Gamba  also  gave  Respondent  handouts  entitled  ££D 

Standards  for  Grade  8 and  Knowing  Your  Learning  Target  as  well  as  copies  of  the 

Board's  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  and  the  District's  Code 

of  Conduct  with  Students.  bd} 

127. 

On  October  5,  2017,  Principal  Gamba  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Act,  and  suspended  him  for  11  days,  based  on  the  events  that 

45

occurred  at  Byrd  and  Sylmar  discussed  in  resolving  Charges  9  through  62  above. 

Respondent  unsuccessfully  appealed  the  suspension. 

NOVEMBER  9,  2017  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

128. 

Principal  Gamba  conducted  an  informal  observation  of  Respondent 

teaching  a  lesson  on  the  three  branches  of  government  to  his  period  1  eighth  grade 

United  States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony 

established  the  following. 

129. 

(Charge  75.)  Respondent's  lesson  plan  for  this  class  was  not  in  alignment 

with  what  he  wrote  on  the  board  at  the  beginning  of  class. 

130. 

(Charge  76.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  effective  differentiated  activities 

or  accommodations  for  four  students  with  IEPs,  as  he  designed  the  same  activities  for 

ali  the  students. 

131. 

(Charge  77.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  activities  aligned  to  the  learning 

objective  or  History/Social  Science  Content  Standards  he  wrote  on  the  board. 

Specifically,  the  planned  activities  focused  solely  on  the  three  branches  of  government 

but  did  not  address  the  Seven  Principles  of  Federalism  that  he  also  wrote  on  the 

board, 

132. 

(Charge  78.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  an  EQ  to  assist  students  with  their 

understanding  of  the  Constitution  and  the  Seven  Principles  of  Federalisrn.  Instead,  he 

designed  a  low-level,  recall  activity  that  required  students  to  simply  "list  the  three 

branches  of  government.” 

133. 

(Charge  79.)  Respondent  failed  to  communicate  the  purpose  of  the 

lesson  as  written  on  the  board  in  order  to  give  students  context  for  the  learning.  He 

46

told  students,  "Today,  we  will  focus  on  the  three  branches  of  government,”  but  he  did 

not  review  the  two  History/Social  Science  Content  Standards  that  he  also  wrote  on  the 

board.  Respondent  did  not  make  connections  between  the  three  branches  of 

government  and  the  learning  objective  or  standards.  He  did  not  review  the  learning 

objective  at  the  end  of  the  lesson  to  recap  and/or  check  for  student  understanding. 

134. 

A.  (Charge  8&0.)  Respondent  failed  to  engage  students  in  standards-based 

activities  when  he  asked  them  to  discuss  the  three  branches  of  government  and  copy 

information  onto  their  packets. 

B.  More  specifically,  he  showed  a  video  about  the  three  branches  of 

government,  pausing  it  three  times  to  lecture  about  the  information,  When  the  video 

ended,  Respondent  asked  students  to  work  in  "little  groups  of  three”  in  order  to  add 

information  to  their  Tree  Maps.  Later  he  called  on  two  students  to  share  a  detail  from 

their  map,  which  they  did.  He  projected  an  image  of  the  three  branches  of  government 

with  their  corresponding  duties,  then  had  students  copy  the  information  from  the 

image  onto  their  Tree  Maps. 

C,  However,  several  students  already  completed  their  maps  during  the 

video,  so  they  sat  idly  at  their  desks  during  the  copying  exercise.  As  the  other  students 

copied  the  information,  Respondent  lectured  about  the  duties  assigned  to  each  branch 

but  did  not  make  connections  between  the  three  branches  in  order  to  assist  students 

with  understanding  how  the  federal  government  functions.  Respondent  did  not 

adequately  explain  the  exercise. 

D.  In  sum,  students  were  merely  copying  materials  and  Respondent  was 

not  properly  explaining  the  concepts.  This  was  a  wasted  lesson. 

af

135. 

(Charge  81.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  a  model  that  followed  a 

gradual  release  to  independent  writing.?  Student  Keanu  raised  his  hand  and  asked  if 

he  had  to  complete  the  work  on  the  blank  page  of  his  packet.  Respondent  did  not 

directly  address  Keanu’s  question.  He  essentially  dismissed  Keanu  and  moved  on  to  a 

discussion  about  writing  sentences,  but  his  explanation  of  what  he  wanted  students  to 

do  was  disjointed.  Respondent  did  not  gradually  release  students.  He  just  told  them 

what  to  do  all  at  the  same  time,  which  was  not  a  gradual  release,  but  a  sudden  release. 

136. 

(Charge  82.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  feedback  to  students  as  they 

worked  within  their  groups  on  adding  two  concrete  details  and  commentary  to  a 

writing  frame  exercise.  He  did  not  ask  students  if  they  understood  the  exercise  before 

he  asked  them  to  begin.  He  did  not  monitor  their  work  or  check  for  student 

understanding.  Only  one  of  15  students  sampled  by  Principal  Gamba  correctly 

completed  the  exercise  while  many  others  sat  passively  and  waited  for  Respondent  to 

write  the  sentences,  which  they  then  copied. 

137. 

(Charge  83.)  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  equitable  participation  in  the 

classroom  discussion.  He  used  equity  sticks  only  three  times  to  call  on  students,  but 

then  called  on  student  Keanu  approximately  nine  times,  allowing  Keanu  to  dominate 

  

’  The  gradual  release  of  responsibility  involves  the  process  of  devolving 

responsibility  within  the  learning  process  from  the  teacher  to  the  students.  The 

teacher,  by  design,  transitions  from  assuming  all  the  responsibility  for  performing  an 

activity  to  a  situation  in  which  the  students  gradually  assume  more  of  the 

responsibility  until  they  completely  take  over  the  activity. 

48

the  classroom  discussion.'?  Respondent  improperly  used  the  equity  sticks.  He  should 

have  used  them  until  every  student  was  called  on.  Instead,  he  stopped  before  many 

were  called  on.  Although  Respondent  testified  he  used  alternative  measures  to  obtain 

equitable  participation  by  students,  his  alternatives  were  not  effective  because  many 

students  did  not  participate.  Respondent's  testimony  that  he  did  not  repeatedly  call  on 

Keanu  was  not  credible.  Contrary  to  Respondent's  assertion,  the  fact  that  one  student 

spoke  so  often  shows  not  that  the  student  was  “on  fire”  for  the  lesson,  but  rather  that 

the  other  students’  fires  had  been  extinguished. 

138. 

(Charge  84.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  protocols  to  encourage  small 

group  discussion  to  support  student  learning  of  the  three  branches  of  government. 

When  he  prompted  students  to  talk  with  their  peers  about  this  topic,  only  one  of  the 

10  groups  engaged  in  content-related  discussion.  Most  of  the  other  groups  sat 

passively  at  their  seats  and  did  not  engage  in  conversation. 

139. 

A.  (Charge  85.)  Respondent  created  a  hostile  classroom  environment  for 

student  Michael. 

B.  In  particular,  when  Michael  shouted  out,  "Magna  Carta,"  without 

raising  his  hand,  Respondent  waved  his  hand  towards  Michael  and  said,  "Raise  your 

hand  Michael,"  even  though  other  students  also  called  out  answers.  Michael 

  

'0  Equity  sticks  are  a  set  of  sticks  (usually  popsicle  sticks)  on  which  the  names  of 

individual  students  in  a  class  are  written.  The  teacher  pulls  from  the  equity  sticks  at 

random  when  choosing  students  to  ensure  an  equal  chance  of  participation.  Equity 

sticks  help  reduce  any  intentional  or  unintentional  bias  a  teacher  may  have  when 

calling  on  students. 

49

immediately  raised  his  hand,  and  repeated,  "Magna  Carta.”  Respondent  looked  at  him, 

thanked  another  student  who  raised  his  hand,  and  sarcastically  said  to  Michael,  "I 

appreciate  the  participation,  but  by  calling  out  without  raising  your  hand,  then  it 

deprives  the  students  from  having  time  to  think  and  answer." 

C.  When  Michael  later  asked  to  use  the  restroom,  Respondent  paused  for 

a  few  seconds,  and  said,  "Go  ahead,”  and  allowed  him  to  leave  without  a  restroom 

pass.  When  Michael  returned,  he  walked  past  Respondent,  wno  looked  at  the  clock, 

looked  at  Michael,  and  shook  his  head  in  disdain,  even  though  Michael  was  only  gone 

a  few  minutes.  Respondent's  testimony  that  he  did  not  shake  his  head  upon  Michael's 

return  to  the  classroom  was  not  convincing. 

D.  Because  Michael  did  not  have  his  packet  and  therefore  could  not 

complete  the  classwork,  he  sat  at  his  desk  for  over  50  minutes  without  comment  from 

Respondent.  Upon  learning  that  Michael  left  his  packet  at  home,  Respondent  walked 

away,  saying  he  did  not  have  additional  packets,  and  as  a  result,  Michael  did  not 

access  the  curriculum,  and  did  not  complete  any  work  during  the  instructional  period. 

140. 

(Charge  86.)  Respondent  failed  to  integrate  technology  effectively.  In 

particular,  Respondent  did  not  reduce  the  size  of  the  Tree  Map  to  fit  on  the  screen  so 

students  could  see  it.  He  did  not  increase  the  size  of  the  model  of  the  three  branches 

of  government,  so  it  was  difficult  to  see  the  print  from  the  back  of  the  classroom.  He 

did  not  adjust  the  laptop  settings  so  the  computer  would  not  go  to  “sleep”  after  a 

short  period  of  time.  As  a  result,  the  computer  screen  went  blank  at  least  four  times 

during  the  instructional  period. 

141. 

(Charge  87.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  50,  60,  and  72,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated 

30

that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz’s  January  27,  2016  and  March 

17,  2016  verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide  instruction  that  is  well 

planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in 

active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)  deliver  bell-to-bell  teacher-directed  lessons 

daily  and  for  all  classes. 

142. 

(Charge  88.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges  61 

and  73,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  he  willfully 

refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm-Torres’s  verbal  directives  of 

April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017,  or  Principal  Gamba’s  verbal 

directives  of  August  31,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017:  provide 

instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and 

engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  state  the  daily  agenda  and  the 

objectives  for  the  daily  lesson;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating  the 

classroom,  but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions;  rernind  students  of  the 

behavior  standards  before  class  starts  and  redirect  students  who  are  not  following  the 

standards:  and  achere  at  all  times  to  the  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful 

Treatment  of  All  Persons,  as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students 

(Principal  Gamba’s  directive  only). 

143. 

(Charge  89.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

144. 

On  December  1,  2017,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  inforrnal  observation.  She  thereafter  issued  him  a  conference  memorandum  dated 

December  4,  2017.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal 

Gamba  provided  Respondent  with  13  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance 

oT

responding  to  the  deficiencies  noted  above,  including  to  provide  differentiated 

activities  for  IEP  students  as  well  as  her  prior  directives.  (Ex.  17,  pp.  6-7.)  She  also  gave 

Respondent  handouts  entitled  Knowing  Your  Learning  Target.  Gradual  Release  of 

Responsibility,  and  Making  Cooperative  Learning  Powerful  as  well  as  copies  of  the 

Board’s  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons  and  the  District's  Code 

of  Conduct  with  Students.  Ubi} 

JANUARY  10,  20178  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

145. 

On  January  10,  2018,  Principal  Garba  conducted  an  informal  observation 

of  Respondent  teaching  to  his  period  1  eighth  grade  United  States  History  class  a 

lesson  on  the  daily  life  of  pre-Civil  War  America  portrayed  in  literature,  art,  and  music. 

Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony  established  the  following. 

146. 

(Charge  90.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  and  prepare  a  learning  objective 

that  indicated  what  students  would  be  learning  in  class.  Instead,  he  prepared a  list  of 

activities  that  students  would  complete.  A  list  of  activities  to  be  done  does  not  advise 

students  what  they  will  learn  that  day.  Evan  if  so,  Respondent  did  not  even  do  all  of 

the  activities  he  listed.  Principal  Gamba  had  previously  instructed  Respondent  on  how 

to  specify  the  daily  objective,  which  he  should  have  followed.  Instead,  Respondent 

disregarded  her  prior  directive  and  wrote  the  objective  his  way. 

147. 

(Charge  91.}  Respondent  failed  to  plan  differentiated  activities  or 

accommodations  for  four  students  with  IEPs.  He  designed  the  same  activities  for  all 

students. 

148. 

(Charge  92.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  activities  aliaqned  to  the 

History/Social  Science  Content  Standards  he  had  identified  on  the  board:  Standard 

8.4.4,  which  is  to  discuss  daily  life,  including  traditions  in  art,  music,  and  literature  of 

32

early  national  America.  Respondent's  planned  activities  focused  solely  on  having 

students  copy  facts  from  a  PowerPoint  presentation  about  the  life  of  Washington 

Irving  and  answer  questions  about  the  Main  Idea  in  Chapter  14  of  their  textbook. 

Respondent  did  not  make  any  comparisons  to  American  life  during  other  times  and  he 

did  not  show  the  students  anything  tangible  by  Irving,  such  as  his  writings,  art,  etc. 

149. 

(Charge  93.)  Respondent  failed  to  deliver  the  lesson  in  understandable 

ways  the  students  by  asking  ther  to  compiete  two  low-level  activities  and  not 

explaining  how  they  were  related.  Specifically,  Respondent  told  students  to  copy  the 

information  they  deemed  relevant  from  the  PowerPoint  slides  about  Washington 

Irving,  but  did  not  preface  the  activity  by  explaining  how  Irving's  work  contributed  to 

and  shaped  American  literature.  Most  of  the  information  on  the  slides  included  facts 

about  Irving's  life  but  little  about  his  contributions  to  American  literature.  Without 

connecting  the  PowerPoint  presentation  to  the  textbook  questions,  Respondent  next 

instructed  students  to  work  with  their  groups  to  complete  the  Chapter  14  Main  Idea 

questions  without  reviewing  the  section  or  reading  it  with  them  first. 

150. 

(Charge  94.)  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  equitable  participation  in 

activities  when  he  did  not  use  a  consistent  method  for  calling  on  students  to  share 

their  answers.  Instead,  he  selected  students  randomly  or  allowed  them  to  call  out  their 

answers.  He  did  not  use  equity  sticks  as  Principal  Gamba  previously  instructed  him. 

157. 

(Charge  95.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  feedback  to  students  as  they 

took  notes  on  the  PowerPoint  presentation  or  worked  with  their  groups  on  completing 

the  Main  Idea  questions.  He  did  not  check  for  understanding  by  asking  students 

questions  throughout  the  PowerPoint  presentation.  Instead,  he  lectured  for 

approximately  20  minutes  about  the  life  of  Washington  Irving  while  students  sat 

passively  in  their  seats.  Respondent  did  not  monitor  students  as  they  completed  the 

33

Main  Idea  questions  to  ensure  they  were  all  held  accountable  for  the  work.  Although 

he  circulated  during  this  time,  Respondent  only  made  generic  comments  about  the 

completion  of  the  work,  but  not  about  the  content.  This  lesson  confirmed  to  the 

Commission  that  Respondent's  preferred  teaching  mode  is  for  students  to  copy 

material  from  notes  on  the  board  or  projected,  and  then  for  him  to  lecture  on  the 

material  without  engaging  students  in  a  conversation  about  the  lesson  to  check  for 

understanding.  That  style  of  teaching  is  not  satisfactory  to  the  District. 

152. 

(Charge  96.)  Respondent  failed  to  successfully  use  protocols  to 

encourage  small  group  discussion  to  support  student  understanding  of  the  Main  Idea 

questions  in  their  textbooks.  Respondent  reviewed  the  handout  Group  Daily 

Guidelines  included  in  the  student  packet  at  the  start  of  the  lesson  but  did  not  remind 

students  of  their  respective  roles  before  later  asking  them  to  complete  the  questions. 

As  students  worked,  they  did  not  engage  in  discussions  about  the  text,  and  only  one 

student  in  each  group  completed  the  work  while  the  others  sat  passively.  Respondent 

testified  he  glued  the  small  group  protocols  onto  the  students’  desks;  but  even  if  so, 

there  was  no  evidence  that  Respondent  made  students  accountable  for  executing 

those  protocols. 

153. 

(Charge  97.)  Respondent  failed  to  prepare  activity  packets  for  all 

students,  and  did  not  have  enough  textbooks  for  each  student  to  reference  content 

and  answer  the  Main  Idea  questions  in  the  textbook.  As  the  students  worked  in  their 

groups,  only  one  student  was  held  accountable  for  completing  the  work  as  the  others 

sat  passively  in  their  seats  until  the  packet  and  textbook  were  passed  to  the  next 

student.  While  reviewing  answers  to  the  questions,  Respondent  frequently  said,  “It’s 

okay  if  you  don't  know  the  answer”  when  few  or  no  students  raised  their  hands.  He 

then  instructed  students  to  complete  the  questions  for  homework  but  provided  no 

a4

direction  on  which  student  in  the  group  would  complete  the  questions  since  there  was 

only  one  packet  per  group.  This  situation  was  entirely  Respondent's  fault.  He  only  had 

one  class  to  teach  that  semester.  It  would  not  have  been  difficult  for  him  to  get 

enough  textbooks  for  one  class.  Respondent's  testimony  that  all  students  had 

textbooks  and  packets  but  that  the  tables  decided  to  share  just  one  or  two  was  not 

credible.  Every  child  should  have  been  working  with  his  or  her  own  textbook  and 

packet.  Having  an  entire  table  share  one  textbook  and  packet,  even  if  true,  was  not 

efficient  or  effective. 

154. 

(Charge  98.}  Respondent  failed  to  integrate  technology  effectively.  In 

particular,  he  did  not  adjust  the  PowerPoint  slides  so  students  could  see  each  image 

completely.  When  he  reviewed  the  Main  Idea  questions  with  students,  he  projected 

the  wrong  page  and  students  appeared  confused.  However,  Respondent  continued 

calling  on  students  to  provide  the  answers  even  though  he  never  projected  the  correct 

page.  Respondent  testified  he  had  longstanding  problems  with  the  document  reader 

provided  in  his  classroom.  If  so,  he  should  have  practiced  working  with  the  document 

reader  before  this  planned  observation  to  make  sure  there  would  be  no  problems.  Or 

he  should  have  developed  another  way  of  displaying  the  content  to  side-step  the 

allegedly  faulty  document  reader.  Respondent  presented  no  evidence  of  complaints 

about  the  document  reader  to  administrators.  His  testimony  was  not  credible,  The 

Commission  concludes  the  technological  problern  here  was  with  the  operator  and  not 

the  equipment. 

155. 

(Charge  99.)  Respondent  failed  to  have  and  enforce  an  effective 

classroom  management  system.  Throughout  the  lesson,  students  quietly  talked  or 

giggled  during  the  lecture.  Respondent  did  not  enforce  consequences  for  the 

behavior.  Respondent  became  frustrated  and  rather  than  acknowledge  students  who 

33

were  compliant,  he  repeatedly  said,  “Shhh.”  When  students  still  did  not  respond,  he 

became  frustrated.  He  told  students  Hector  and  Joanna  that  he  was  losing  patience 

with  thern.  Overail,  students  in  the  class  were  frustrated  and  did  not  take  the  lesson 

seriously.  This  resulted  in  their  misbehavior.  Having  a  solid  and  engaging  lesson  would 

have  prevented  or  at  least  reduced  this  behavior. 

156. 

(Charge  100.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  50,  60,  72,  and  87,  Respondent's  performance  described  above 

demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  cormply  with  Principal  Wiltz's  January  27, 

2016  and  March  17,  2016  verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide 

instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and 

engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b}  deliver  beil-to-bell 

teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes.  By  this  time,  Respondent  had  been 

repeatedly  told  how  to  avoid  the  problems  observed  in  his  lessons,  but  he  continued 

to  repeat  thern.  He  also  had  been  working  with  a  PAR  coach  for  parts  of  two  schoo! 

years.  Respondent's  failures  are  best  explained  by  his  willful  refusal  to  teach  as 

instructed  by  his  current  and  past  supervisors. 

157. 

(Charge  101.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  and  100,  Respondent’s  performance  described  above  demonstrated  that  he 

willfully  refused  to  cornply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm-Torres’s  verbal 

directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017,  or  Principal 

Gamba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  September  5, 

2017:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’ 

achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  state  the  daily 

learning  objective  for  the  daily  lesson;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating 

the  classroom,  but  also  engaging  students  in  conversation  by  asking  questions:  remind 

36

students  of  the  behavior  standards  before  class  starts,  and  when  circulating,  redirect 

students  who  are  not  following  the  standards;  and  adhere  at  all  times  to  the  Board 

Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatrnent  of  All  Persons,  as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of 

Conduct  with  Students  (Principal  Gamba’s  directive  only}. 

158. 

(Charge  102.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

159. 

On  January  16,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation,  and  issued  him  a  conference  memorandum.  During  the 

meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba  provided  Respondent 

with  13  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the  deficiencies 

noted  above,  including  essentially  her  prior  directives.  (Ex.  18,  pp.  5-6.)  She  also  gave 

him  a  handout  entitled  Grant  Wiggins  on  the  Fine  Art  of  Giving  Feedback.  bid} 

FEBRUARY  5,  2018  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

160. 

On  February  5,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  conducted  an  informal  observation 

of  Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  the  Indian  Removal  during  the  Jackson  Presidency 

to  his  period  1  eighth  grade  United  States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference 

memorandum,  and  testimony  established  the  following. 

167. 

(Charge  103.)  Respondent  failed  to  write  clear  learning  objectives  in  his 

lesson  plans  for  the  week  of  February  5,  2018,  and  on  the  board  for  his  class  that  day. 

The  learning  objective  Respondent  wrote  on  the  board  included  an  activity  for 

students  to  cornplete  rather  than  a  statement  of  what  they  would  learn. 

of

162. 

(Charge  104.)  Respondent  had  indicated  in  his  lesson  plan  for  the  week 

that  he  would  follow  a  Stanford  History  Education  Group  (SHEG)  Indian  Removal 

lesson  that  day  in  class.  Although  Respondent  attempted  to  follow  the  SHEG  lesson, 

he  did  not  follow  it  effectively,  as  also  discussed  in  more  detail  below. 

163. 

(Charge  105.)  Respondent  was  required  to  but  failed  to  post  the  History- 

Social  Science  Content  Standard  on  the  board  before  the  instructional  period.  Instead, 

he  erased  a  prior  lesson’s  content  standard  number  (8.8.1),  and  wrote  "8.8.2"  on  the 

board,  but  left  the  wording  from  the  prior  content  standard  (8.8.1)  on  the  board. 

164. 

(Charge  106.)  The  activity  Respondent  asked  students  to  complete  that 

day  is  known  as  a  “What  I  Know,  What  1  Want  to  Know,  What 

Learned”  (KWL)  chart. 

However,  before  having  students  complete  the  KWL  chart,  Respondent  failed  to  clearly 

state  the  learning  objective  to  give  them  a  context  for  their  learning  from  that  activity. 

165. 

(Charge  107.)  Respondent  failed  to  engage  students  in  cognitively 

challenging  activities  aligned  to  the  History-Social  Science  Content  Standard  he  had 

intended  to  teach  that  day  (number  8.8.2).  Instead,  Respondent  implemented  the  KWL 

chart  in  a  way  that  made  it  a  low-level  activity  as  follows.  Respondent  asked  students 

to  think  about  what  they  knew  and  wanted  to  learn  about  Indian  Removal,  but  then 

immediately  called  on  several  students  to  share  their  answers  with  the  whole  group. 

Students  simply  copied  what  Respondent  wrote  on  the  KWL  chart  displayed  on  the 

screen  on  their  charts.  Respondent  next  lectured  for  approximately  15  minutes  about  a 

three-sliide  PowerPoint  presentation,  which  contained  an  image  and  a  map  depicting 

the  Indian  Removal.  He  asked  a  series  of  questions  about  the  slides  as  students  sat  idly 

in  their  seats  but  Respondent  did  not  ask  students  to  complete  a  task  associated  with 

the  slides.  Respondent  showed  a  video  about  the  Indian  Removal  but  it  was  inaudible, 

38

so  he  stopped  it  after  four  minutes.  Respondent  did  not  ask  students  to  complete  a 

task  associated  with  the  video  and  continued  lecturing. 

166. 

(Charge  108.)  Respondent  failed  to  dernonstrate  sufficient  knowledge  of 

the  subject  matter  by  failing  to  properly  teach  the  SHEG  Indian  Removal  lesson.  In 

particular,  Respondent  did  not  ask  students  to  write  what  they  saw  on  the  PowerPoint 

presentation  or  elicit  their  responses  after  explaining  the  slides.  He  did  not  review  all 

11  events  on  a  timeline  featured  in  the  materials  or  the  accompanying  essential  notes 

supplementing  the  11  events,  which  would  have  provided  a  context  for  the  students. 

167. 

(Charge  109.)  Respondent  failed  to  check  for  students’  understanding  of 

the  Indian  Removai  lesson  by  not  asking  questions  to  further  their  knowledge.  Instead, 

ne  asked  students  a  series  of  low-level  questions  about  their  opinions,  which  they 

easily  answered,  and  did  not  further  their  knowledge. 

168. 

(Charge  110.)  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  equitable  student 

participation  in  the  classroom  discussion  during  the  KWL  chart  activity.  He  randomly 

called  on  students  or  allowed  them  to  call  out  answers,  which  he  accepted.  He  used 

the  equity  sticks  only  three  times  to  call  on  students  to  read  the  first  three  events  on 

the  timeline,  resulting  in  four  of  the  29  students  dominating  the  discussion.  Overall, 

Respondent  failed  to  instruct  and  enforce  how  students  were  supposed  to  respond  to 

his  questions  in  an  orderly  way. 

169. 

(Charge  111.)  Respondent  failed  to  bring  closure  to  the  instructional 

period  in  order  to  assess  student  understanding  of  the  Indian  Removal  lesson.  Toward 

the  end  of  class,  Respondent  asked  students  to  write  at  least  five  things  they 

remembered  from  the  lecture  about  Indian  Removal.  He  circulated  the  classroom  and, 

as  the  students  finished,  asked  them  to  hold  up  their  charts.  He  glanced  at  the  charts 

39

and  then  told  students  to  put  their  materials  away.  When  he  finally  asked  if  anyone 

wanted  to  share,  the  bell  rang  and  Respondent  dismissed  the  class  without  closing  the 

activity. 

170. 

(Charge  112.)  Respondent  failed  to  create  a  safe,  supportive  classroom 

environment  for  student  Diego.  When  Diego  asked  if  he  could  use  the  restroom, 

Respondent  looked  at  the  clock,  rolled  his  eyes,  and  asked  Diego  to  complete  his 

agenda.  Diego  took  out  his  agenda  and  left  to  use  the  restroom  without  showing  it  to 

Respondent,  which  was  not  in  accordance  with  Respondent's  classroom  restroom 

policy.  Respondent's  testimony  and  physical  demonstration  during  the  hearing  that  he 

is  not  physically  able  to  roll  his  eyes  were  not  convincing.  Even  if  so,  he  just  as  easily 

could  have  been  looking  up  to  the  ceiling  in  disdain  of  Diego  when  Principal  Gamba 

ooserved  this  interaction. 

171. 

(Charge  113.}  Respondent  failed  to  integrate  technology  effectively. 

During  the  PowerPoint  presentation,  he  projected  a  blurry  image  of  the  Indian 

Removal  that  not  all  students  could  see.  The  video  he  played  was  inaudible.  After 

playing  over  four  minutes  of  the  video,  he  turned  it  off,  telling  students  he  did  not 

have  speakers.  Respondent  told  students  they  could  watch  the  video  on  their  own  and 

continued  to  lecture  about  the  PowerPoint  presentation.  Respondent's  excuses  for 

these  technological  problerns  were  not  credible.  Moreover,  given  his  long-standing 

history  of  problems  using  technology,  Respondent  at  least  should  have  had  an 

alternate  plan  if  he  encountered  glitches.  He  only  had  one  class  to  prepare  for,  so  he 

could  have  easily  practiced  with  the  equipment  or  made  alternate  preparations. 

172. 

(Charge  114.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  50,  60,  72,  87,  and  100,  Respondent’s  performance  described  above 

demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz's  January  27, 

60

2076  and  March  17,  2016  verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide 

instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and 

engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)}  deliver  bell-to-bell 

teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes. 

173. 

{Charge  115.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  and  101,  Respondent's  performance  described  above  demonstrated 

that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm-Torres’s  verbal 

directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017,  or  Principal 

Gamba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1,  2017,  and  January  16,  2018, 

and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5,  2017,  and  January  16,  2018: 

provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’ 

achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  state  the  daily 

learning  objective  for  the  daily  lesson;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating 

the  classroom,  but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions;  remind  students  of  the 

behavior  standards  before  class  starts  and  redirect  students  who  are  not  following  the 

standards;  provide  protocols  that  encourage  small  group  discussion  to  support  the 

students’  learning  of  content;  and  adhere  at  all  times  to  the  Board  Resolution  on  the 

Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons,  as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with 

Students  (Principal  Gamba’s  directive  only). 

174. 

(Charge  116.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause, 

175. 

On  February  12,  20178,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  the  same  day. 

During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba  provided 

61

Respondent  with  10  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above,  many  of  which  she  had  included  in  prior  conference 

memoranda  after  informal  observations.  (Ex.  19,  pp.  6-7.)  She  also  gave  him  four 

handouts  on  effective  teaching.  Ud,  p.  7} 

MARCH  2,  2018  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

176. 

On  March  2,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  conducted  an  informal  observation  of 

Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  Texas  Independence  to  his  period  1  eighth  grade 

United  States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony 

established  the  following. 

177. 

(Charge  117.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  and  write  on  the  board  a 

learning  objective  that  described  what  students  would  learn  and  why.  Instead,  he 

wrote  a  goal  on  the  board  that  students  would  perform  an  activity,  writing  an  essay  in 

five  paragraphs,  with  a  score  of  80  percent  or  better.  Respondent's  testimony  that  he 

had  told  students  the  learning  objective  for  that  day  earlier  in  the  week  did  not 

address  Principal  Gamba’s  concerns. 

178. 

(Charge  118.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  and  design  the  assessment 

criteria  by  which  he  intended  to  grade  the  essays  he  asked  students  to  write.  He  did 

not  list  the  assessment  criteria  in  his  lesson  pians,  did  not  write  the  criteria  on  the 

board,  and  did  not  share  any  criteria  with  students  for  grading  the  activity  before  he 

asked  them  to  begin  writing  their  essays.  Respondent's  proffered  excuse  that  Principal 

Gamba  did  not  teil  him  before  the  observation  that  his  lesson  plan  was  lacking  a  rubric 

for  grading  the  essays  was  not valid  justification.  Principal  Gamba  had  no  responsibility 

to  do  so  before  her  observation. 

62

179. 

(Charge  119.)  Respondent  failed  to  satisfactorily  review  or  nave  students 

complete  the  EQs  that  day  to  frame  their  learning.  Instead,  Respondent  asked  students 

to  provide  the  answers  to  EQs  from  three  prior  days  that  week.  As  students  provided 

those  answers,  Respondent  wrote  them  on  the  screen  but  did  not  explain  how  those 

answers  related  to  that  day's  learning.  Respondent's  testimony  that  he  allowed 

students  to  answer  the  EQs  for  the  day  he  was  observed  as  homework  after  class  did 

not  address  Principal  Garnba’s  concern. 

180. 

(Charge  120.)  Before  having  students  write  the  essay,  Respondent  had 

them  do  a  graphic  organizer  activity.  However,  Respondent  failed  to  gradually  release 

the  responsibility  for  completing  the  graphic  organizer  activity  to  students  in  order  to 

assist  them  with  writing  their  essays.  Respondent  only  gave  vague  direction  to  the 

students  so  they  were  left  to  figure  out  on  their  own  how  to  do  the  graphic  organizer 

activity  and  how  to  connect  the  activity  with  their  essay  writing, 

181. 

(Charge  121.)  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  equitable  participation  in 

classroom  discussions  when  he  inconsistently  used  equity  sticks  for  calling  on  students 

to  provide  answers  to  the  graphic  organizer.  Respondent  used  the  equity  sticks  five 

times  during  the  instructional  period.  When  two  students  Respondent  called  on  using 

the  equity  sticks  could  not  immediately  answer,  Respondent  randomly  called  on  other 

students.  He  inconsistently  accepted  answers  from  both  students  who  called  thern  out 

and  those  who  raised  their  hands.  Two  of  the  33  students  dominated  the  discussion; 

Respondent  called  on  student  James  approximately  four  times  and  student  Srabon 

approximately  three  times.  Principal  Gamba  had  continually  told  Respondent  to  use 

the  equity  sticks.  Respondent’s  testimony  that  she  did  not  give  him  precise  direction 

on  how  to  use  the  equity  sticks  was  not  credible,  as  a  teacher  with  his  experience  knew 

or  should  have  known  how  to  use  them. 

63

182. 

(Charge  122.)  Respondent  failed  to  create  a  safe,  supportive  environment 

for  student  Raffi  when  Raffi  attempted  to  talk  to  another  student  about  the  essay. 

Respondent  approached  Raffi  as  he  spoke  to  the  student  sitting  next  to  him  and  asked 

him  to  stop  talking.  Raffi  attempted  to  explain  that  he  was  “helping  out"  his  classmate. 

Respondent  interrupted  Raffi,  raised  his  voice,  and  said,  “Well  don’t  tell  him  anything, 

Ratti,”  then  walked  away  without  allowing  Raffi  to  finish  his  thought. 

183. 

A.  (Charge  123.)  Respondent  failed  to  consistently  implement  his 

procedure  for  allowing  students  to  use  the  restroom. 

B.  In  particular,  a  female  student  asked  to  use  the  restroom  and 

Respondent  requested  her  agenda  so  that  he  could  note  on  it  the  time  she  left.  The 

student  took  her  agenda  with  her  and  returned  within  a  few  minutes.  That  was 

Respondent's  established  restroom  procedure.  However,  when  student  Jesse  asked  to 

use  the  restroom,  Jesse  never  showed  his  agenda  to  Respondent.  Jesse  just 

left 

without  his  agenda  and  returned  several  minutes  later.  Then  student  Trevor  asked  to 

use  the  restroom.  Respondent  requested  his  agenda,  but  Trevor  said  he  did  not  have  it 

and  Respondent  allowed  him  to  leave  anyway.  Trevor  was  away  from  the  classroom  for 

a  long  time,  approximately  74  minutes. 

C.  Respondent's  offered  excuses  for  not  consistently  following  his 

restroom  procedure  were  not  convincing.  For  example,  he  contended  IEP  students 

need  to  be  treated  differently.  However,  a  follow  up  discussion  with  an  IEP  student  or 

his  or  her  parents  still  would  be  warranted  if  the  student  did  not,  or  could  not, 

consistently  follow  the  restroom  procedure.  Respondent  also  contended  that  he  could 

not  interfere  with  a  student  who  urgently  needed  to  use  the  restroom.  But  neither 

Jesse  nor  Trevor  urgently  needed  to  use  the  restroom  that  day.  Rather,  these  events 

show  that  Respondent  failed  to  cormmunicate  his  expectations  to  his  students 

64

regarding  restroom  visits,  and  he  failed  to  consistently  enforce  the  procedure,  so 

students  were  confused  about  whether  the  restroom  procedure  would  be  followed. 

Many  students  simply  chose  to  not  follow  tt. 

184. 

(Charge  124.)  Respondent  failed  to  introduce,  teach,  or  reinforce  a 

classroom  management  plan  when  he  inconsistently  addressed  students’  off-task 

behavior.  For  example,  student  Michael  sat  at  his  desk  for  approximately  38  minutes 

without  any  work.  Respondent  handed  him  a  sheet  of  paper  and  asked  him  to  write  a 

summary  of  what  he  heard  during  class;  however,  Michael  did  nothing.  Respondent 

then  incited  off-task  conversation  when  he  told  Jesse  he  would  call  his  parents  if  he 

continued  talking.  Students  began  commenting  on  Respondent's  calls  home  as  well  as 

those  of  other  teachers.  Respondent's  efforts  to  redirect  those  students  by  saying 

“Shhhhh,“  “No  talking,”  or  counting  down  “3,  2,  1,"  were  ineffective. 

185. 

(Charge  125.)  For  the  sarne  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  50,  60,  72,  87,  100,  and  114,  Respondent's  performance  described  above 

demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz's  January  27, 

2076  and  March  17,  2016  verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a)  provide 

instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and 

engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)  deliver  bell-to-bell 

teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes. 

186. 

(Charge  126.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  101,  and  115,  Respondent's  performance  described  above 

demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm- 

Torres’s  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017,  or 

Principal  Gamba’'s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1,  2017,  and  January 

16,  2018,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5,  2017,  and  January 

65

16,  2018:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’ 

achievernent,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  state  the  daily 

learning  objective  for  the  daily  lesson;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating 

the  classroom,  but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions;  remind  students  of  the 

behavior  standards  before  class  starts  and  redirect  students  who  are  not  following  the 

standards;  use  a  consistent  method  for  calling  on  students  to  give  their  answers; 

achere  at  all  times  to  the  Board  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons, 

as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with  Students  (Principal  Gamba’s  directive 

only}  provide  feedback  to  the  students  as  they  work  independently  and  conduct 

frequent  checks  for  understanding;  and  provide  protocols  that  encourage  small  group 

discussion  to  support  the  students’  learning  of  content. 

187. 

(Charge  127.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  reqular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

188. 

On  March  12,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the 

informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  the  same  cay.  During 

the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Garnba  provided 

Respondent  with  nine  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above,  many  of  which  she  had  included  in  prior  conference 

memoranda  after  informal  observations.  (Ex.  20,  pp.  5-6.)  She  also  promised  to  take 

Respondent  to  observe  Mr.  An‘s  United  States  History  class.  Uc,  p.  6.)  She  also  gave 

him  three  new  handouts  on  effective  teaching.  Ud,  p.  7.)  Respondent  testified  that 

Principal  Gamba  never  followed  through  on  scheduling  an  observation  of  Mr.  An's 

class.  However,  Respondent  never  followed  up  either. 

66

Aprit  9,  2078  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

189. 

On  April  9,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  conducted  an  informal  observation  of 

Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  the  slave  trade  to  his  period  1  eighth  grade  United 

States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony 

established  the  following. 

190. 

(Charge  128.)  Respondent  failed  to  plan  differentiated  activities  or 

accommodations  for  the  various  types  of  learners  in  the  class.  For  example,  he  failed 

to  accommodate  the  four  students  in  his  classroom  with  IEPs  with  any  activity 

differentiated  to  their  needs.  Moreover,  Respondent  presented  a  PowerPoint  slideshow 

on  the  Middle  Passage  to  the  class,  but  his  style  of  lecturing  while  students  idly 

listened  did  not  allow  opportunities  for  engagement  during  his  lecture,  which  deprived 

the  visual  and  kinesthetic  learners. 

191. 

(Charge  129.)  Respondent  failed  to  engage  students  with  standards- 

based  learning  activities  by  lecturing  for  extended  periods  without  allowing 

opportunities  for  active  student  engagement.  During  the  PowerPoint  presentation, 

Respondent  lectured  about  each  slide.  Although  he  asked  questions  throughout  the 

lecture,  only  a  couple  of  students  offered  answers  while  the  rest  of  the  class  sat  idly  in 

their  seats.  When  he  called  on  students  to  answer  the  questions,  rather  than  allow 

students  to  elaborate  on  their  peers’  responses,  he  elaborated  on  them  himself  and 

continued  lecturing.  Principal  Gamba  observed  there  were  three  to  seven  students  at 

any  given  time  with  their  heads  down.  Respondent  did  not  attempt  to  redirect  them. 

192. 

(Charge  130.)  Respondent  failed  to  circulate  the  classroom  and  monitor 

students  to  ensure  they  copied  the  notes  from  the  PowerPoint  presentation.  Instead, 

he  stood  in  the  center  of  the  classroom  by  the  document  reader  and  lectured  so 

67

students  inconsistently  copied  notes  from  the  slides.  According  to  the  lesson  plans 

Respondent  had  previously  submitted  to  Principal  Gamba,  students  that  day  would  be 

able  to  complete  a  Cornell  notes  worksheet  about  the  Middie  Passage  with  a  score  of 

80  percent  or  better.  However,  Respondent  did  not  collect  the  students’  packets  to 

check  for  completion.  Respondent's  excuse  that  he  did  not  circulate  because  he  did 

not  have  a  clicker  to  operate  the  rernote  control  for  the  PowerPoint  presentation  was 

not  convincing;  for  example,  he  could  have  had  a  student  operate  the  machine  for  him 

while  he  circulated, 

193. 

(Charge  131.)  Respondent  failed  to  assess  student  understanding  of  the 

Middle  Passage  lesson.  He  called  on  three  students  to  read  aloud  each  of  the  three 

points  from  a  “summary”  slide  at  the  end  of  the  PowerPoint  presentation,  but  then 

provided  the  summary  for  them  to  copy  onto  their  packets.  After  students  read  aloud, 

he  lectured  about  each  point  and  encouraged  them  to  write  what  he  said.  Respondent 

did  not  allow  students  to  demonstrate  their  understanding  of  the  Middle  Passage  by 

discussing  the  key  points  themselves,  or  writing  their  own  conclusions. 

194. 

(Charge  132.)  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  equitable  student 

participation  in  the  discussion  about  the  Middle  Passage.  He  used  equity  sticks  only 

three  times  when  calling  on  students  to  share  their  answers.  He  otherwise  called  on 

students  randomly,  or  allowed  them  to  call  out  the  answers.  This  demonstrated  that 

Respondent  does  not  know  how  to  lead  a  discussion  in  the  classroom. 

195. 

(Charge  133.)  Respondent  failed  to  enforce  established  procedures  for 

students  to  use  the  restroom.  Reed’s  student  restroom  procedure  required  teachers  to 

sign  the  student's  agenda  each  time  they  leave  the  classroom.  This  also  was 

Respondent's  established  restroom  procedure.  On  this  day,  a  few  students  left  the 

classroom  for  the  restroom  without  Respondent  signing  their  agendas. 

68

196. 

A.  (Charge  134.)  Respondent  failed  to  create  a  safe,  supportive  classroom 

environment  for  student  Raffi.  Specifically,  Respondent  asked  the  class,  “Imagine  that 

you  are  cleaning  the  ships  after  the  journey....”  Raffi  offered  comments,  which  veered 

toward  scatological,  prompting  other  students  to  comment.  Rather  than  allow 

students  to  continue  the  discussion,  Respondent  said,  “Shhh,”  approximately  three 

times.  When  students  did  not  respond,  Respondent  turned  to  Raffi,  raised  his  voice, 

and  said,  “Rafael.”  This  immediately  shut  down  any  ciscussion  about  the  conditions  of 

a  slave  ship  during  a  voyage. 

B.  The  Commission  agrees  this  lesson  is  not  easy,  for  several  reasons. 

However,  a  good  teacher  should  know  how  to  manage  this  discussion  without  shutting 

it  down  because  it  is  going  in  the  wrong  direction.  Respondent  should  have  redirected 

the  discussion  to  keep  it  going  instead  of  squelching  it  because  he  was  unable  to 

handle  the  situation.  This  could  have  been  an  excellent  teachable  moment  for  Raffi 

and  the  entire  class. 

197. 

(Charge  135.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

29,  38,  44,  50,  60,  72,  87,  100,  114,  and  125,  Respondent's  performance  described 

above  demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  Principal  Wiltz's  January 

27,2016  and  March  17,  2016  verbal  and  written  directives  for  him  to:  a}  provide 

instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and 

engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  and  b)  deliver  beil-to-bell 

teacher-directed  lessons  daily  and  for  all  classes. 

198. 

(Charge  136.)  For  the  sarne  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  101,  115,  and  126,  Respondent's  performance  described  above 

demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm- 

Torres's  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017,  or 

69

Principal  Gamba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1,  2017,  and  January 

16,  2018,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5,  2077,  and  January 

16,  2018:  plan  differentiated  activities  for  students  with  IEPs;  provide  instruction  that  ts 

well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students 

in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating  the 

classroom,  but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions;  remind  students  of  the 

behavior  standards  before  class  starts,  such  as  the  restroom  procedure,  and  redirect 

Students  who  are  not  following  the  standards;  use  a  consistent  method  for  calling  on 

students  to  share  their  answers;  adhere  at  all  times  to  the  Board  Resolution  on  the 

Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons,  as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct  with 

Students  (Principal  Gamba’s  directive  only);  and  provide  feedback  to  the  students  as 

they  work  independently  and  conduct  frequent  checks  for  understanding. 

199. 

(Charge  137.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

200. 

On  April  13,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the 

informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  on  Apri  17,  2018. 

During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba  provided 

Respondent  with  10  different  points  of  assistance  and  quidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above,  including  many  of  which  she  had  included  in  prior 

conference  memoranda  after  informal  observations,  as  well  as  her  reminder  for  him  to 

continue  working  with  his  PAR  coach  on  his  areas  of  deficiency.  (Ex.  21,  pp.  4-5.)  She 

also  gave  him  one  new  handout  on  effective  teaching.  (/c/,  p.  6.) 

70

2078  FINAL  EVALUATION 

201. 

A.  (Charge  138.  On  Apni  23,  2018,  Principal  Garba  issued  to 

Respondent  a  Below  Standard  performance  evaluation  in  his  Final  Evaluation. 

B.  The  rating  was  based,  in  part,  on  Principal  Gamba’s  determinations 

that  Respondent,  among  other  things,  failed  to  use  instructional  time  effectively; 

integrate  technology  effectively;  engage  students  in  cognitively  challenging  activities 

aligned  to  the  History-Social  Studies  Content  Standards;  demonstrate  history  content 

knowledge;  check  for  students’  understanding:  plan  a  learning  objective  that  described 

what  students  would  be  learning  and  why;  and  introduce,  teach,  or  reinforce  a 

classroom  management  plan  to  support  student  learning. 

C.  Principal  Gamba  testified  Respondent  showed  minimal  growth  and 

mixed  results.  He  kept  repeating  the  sarne  mistakes  despite  being  given  targeted  and 

specific  feedback  in  those  areas.  Principal  Gamba  felt  Respondent's  formal  observation 

done  in  October  2017  and  the  various  informal  observations  that  school  year  showed 

ne  was  an  ineffective  teacher. 

202. 

(Charge  138A.)  The  parties  stipulated  that  Respondent  participated  in  the 

PAR  Program  fromm  November  2,  2017,  through  April  26,  2078. 

203. 

On  May  25,  2016,  Principal  Gamba  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Act,  suspended  him  for  15  days,  and  recommended  his 

dismissal  of  employment  from  the  District,  based  on  the  results  of  her  informal 

observations  conducted  that  school  year.  Principal  Gamba  believed  Respondent 

should  be  dismissed  because  he  had  shown  inadequate  improvement  over  the  course 

of  the  school  year.  At  this  time,  Respondent  was  advised  by  the  District  that  he  would 

i

not  return  to  Reed  and  that  he  would  be  suspended  indefinitely  due  to  the 

recommendation  that  he  be  dismissed. 

AuGust  22,  2018  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

204. 

Over  the  summer  the  District  decided  not  to  proceed  with  Respondent’s 

dismissal.  The  District  reassigned  Respondent  to  Reed  for  the  following  school  year, 

but  Respondent  was  not  advised  of  this  until  just  before  the  school  year  began. 

205. 

Principal  Garnba  again  assigned  Respondent  to  teach  only  one  class,  the 

period  1  eighth  grade  United  States  History  class  that  he  had  taught  the  prior  school 

year.  Respondent  served  as  a  pool  history  teacher  for  periods  2  through  6. 

206. 

On  August  22,  2018,  Principal  Garnba  conducted  an  informal  observation 

of  Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  the  Great  Awakening  and  development  of 

revolutionary  fervor  in  the  American  colonies  to  his  period  7  eighth  grade  United 

States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony 

established  the  following. 

207. 

(Charge  139.)  Respondent  failed  to  adequately  plan  and  prepare  for  his 

class.  In  particular,  he  posted  a  vague  and  confusing  two-column  agenda  on  the 

board,  but  dic  not  follow  it  during  the  lesson.  The  posted  agenda  noted  there  were 

students  with  IEPs  in  the  class;  however,  other  students  cid  not  need  to  know  about 

their  fellow  students’  educational  needs  and  the  agenda  note  potentially  invaded  the 

confidentiality  of  the  IEP  process.  The  posted  weekly  learning  objective  had  nothing  to 

do  with  content  standards;  instead,  tt  was  about  classroom  procedures  and  routines.  In 

addition,  although  Respondent  specified  two  EQs,  neither  was  aligned  to  content 

standards. 

72

208. 

(Charge  140.)  Respondent  failed  to  differentiate  activities  to  support  four 

Long  Term  English  Learners  (LTELs).  In  addition,  Respondent  failed  to  incorporate  into 

the  lesson  the  accommodations  listed  in  the  IEPs  of  eight  students. 

209. 

(Charge  141.)  Respondent  failed  to  have  legible  weekly  packets  for  all 

students  to  ensure  they  had  access  to  the  curriculum.  During  the  hearing,  Respondent 

tried  to  minimize  this  situation  by  testifying  that  all  students  had  packets  and  only  two 

students  had  one  blurry  page  in  their  packets.  But  Principal  Gamba  credibly  testified 

not  all  students  had  packets  and  Respondent’s  classroorn  screen  projection  included 

one  blurry  page,  indicating  all  students  had  the  blurry  page  in  their  packets. 

210. 

(Charge  142.)  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  deliver  instruction.  In 

particular,  he  used  approximately  38  minutes  to  review  six  pages  of  information  from 

the  students’  current  and  future  weekly  packets  while  they  sat  idly  at  their  seats.  He 

projected  and  reviewed  steps  for  writing  a  paragraph  frorn  a  handout.  But  then  he 

provided  as  an  oral  example  of  a  writing  topic  a  trip  to  Disneyland,  and  failed  to  have 

students  write  a  sample  paragraph  on  their  own  or  complete  the  paragraph  about 

Disneyland  using  the  topic  sentence  he  provided.  In  summary,  this  lesson  had  no 

history  content. 

211. 

(Charge  143.)  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  engage  students. 

Specifically,  he  projected  the  handout  Avstorical  Thinking  Chart  and  called  on  several 

students  to  read  aloud  the  close  reading  questions  from  it.  After  each  student  read  the 

question  aloud,  Respondent  lectured  about  the  topic  for  several  minutes  while 

students  sat  quietly  at  their  seats.  He  then  reviewed  a  graphic  organizer  that  students 

would  use  to  take  notes  in  future  lessons,  and  passed  it  around  for  them  to  review, 

while  students  sat  and  waited  for  the  handout  to  be  passed  around.  He  projected  a 

visual  of  eight  Thinking  Maps  and  lectured  about  the  importance  of  using  them  to 

73

helo  memorize  things  faster  and  organize  their  thoughts.  He  then  spoke  at  length  on 

adjectives  the  students  contributed  using  a  Bubble  Map  while  students  sat  passively. 

He  used  eight  minutes  to  review  sections  of  the  class  syllabus  while  students  sat  and 

listened.  He  displayed  a  three-colurmn  KWL  chart,  provided  a  topic,  and  called  on 

students  to  share  what  they  knew  or  wanted  to  learn  about  it,  but  then  proceeded  to 

elaborate  on  each  student's  response  rather  than  encourage  students  to  expand  on  it. 

212. 

{Charge  144.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  students  with  sufficient 

uninterrupted  time  to  engage  in  independent  writing  after  a  teacher-directed  activity 

so  that,  by  the  end  of  the  class,  none  of  the  students  had  completed  their  paragraphs. 

In  sum,  Respondent  did  not  give  students  enough  time  to  finish,  because  he  had 

consumed  so  much  time  lecturing  on  trivial  points. 

213. 

(Charge  145.)  Respondent  again  failed  to  implement  and  enforce 

procedures  for  allowing  students  to  leave  the  classroom.  In  particular,  student  Kelsey 

was  sent  to  the  counseling  office,  but  Respondent  failed  to  sign  her  agenda  and  ask 

her  to  take  it  with  her  when  she  left.  As  a  result,  Kelsey  left  the  classroom  with  no  pass. 

Respondent's  explanation  that  this  happened  because  he  was  not  sure  whether  he  or 

the  counselor  was  supposed  to  sign  the  agenda  was  not  credible.  By  that  time, 

Respondent  should  have  known  the  school  procedures  for  passes  to  the  counselor's 

office.  If  he  had  a  question,  Respondent  could  have  easily  contacted  the  counselor's 

office  for  clarification.  The  Commission  believes  this  was  a  convenient  excuse  for 

Respondent's  continuing  pattern  of  not  enforcing  classroom  or  school  procedures. 

2i4. 

(Charge  146.)  For  the  sarne  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  101,  115,  126,  and  136,  Respondent's  performance  described  above 

demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal  Helm- 

Torres's  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20,  2017,  or 

74

Principal  Gamba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1,  2017,  and  January 

16,  2018,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5,  2077,  and  January 

16,  2018:  plan  differentiated  activities  for  students  with  IEPs;  provide  instruction  that  ts 

well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students 

in  active  and  meaningful  learning;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating  the 

classroom,  but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions;  and  provide  feedback  to  the 

students  as  they  work  independently  and  conduct  frequent  checks  for  understanding. 

215. 

(Charge  147.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  falied  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

216. 

On  September  6,  2018,  Principal  Garnba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  on  September  11, 

2018.  During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba 

provided  Respondent  with  117  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding 

to  the  deficiencies  noted  above,  many  of  which  she  had  included  in  prior  conference 

memoranda  after  informal  observations.  (Ex.  25,  pp.  6-7)  She  also  gave  him  two 

handouts  on  effective  teaching.  Val,  p.  8) 

MOVEMBER  1,  2018  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

217. 

On  November  1,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  conducted  an  informal 

observation  of  Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  the  Federalists  and  Anti-Feceralists  to 

his  period  7  eighth  grade  United  States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference 

memorandum,  and  testimony  established  the  following. 

218. 

(Charge  148.)  Respondent  did  not  state  a  proper  objective  for  the  day. 

Instead,  he  listed  as  the  objective  of  the  lesson  activities  students  would  complete 

15

rather  than  a  statement  of  what  students  would  learn,  how  they  would  learn  it,  and 

how  they  would  demonstrate  their  mastery  of  the  learning. 

219. 

(Charge  149.)  Respondent  did  not  clearly  communicate  the  purpose  of 

the  first  learning  activity  done  during  the  lesson  in  order  to  give  the  students  a  context 

for  their  learning.  Instead,  he  began  the  activity  by  projecting  the  EQ  ("Explain  one 

reason  you  believe  that  Anti-Federalists  feared  a  strong  government?’)  and  asked  the 

students  to  answer  it  without  making  connections  to  the  standard  of  the  lesson  (8.2.3) 

orto  any  previous  learning. 

220. 

(Charge  150.)  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  deliver  instruction 

regarding  Federalists  and  Anti-Federalists.  For  example,  after  projecting  the  EQ, 

Respondent  did  not  provide  activities  regarding  the  Federalists  and  Anti-Federalists 

that  would  allow  students  to  participate  in  active  engagement  or  intellectual  learning. 

Instead,  he  had  thern  complete  two  low-level  activities:  they  copied  information  he 

wrote  for  a  Double  Bubble  Map  and  a  sheet  of  six  questions  aligned  to  two  documents 

concerning  the  Constitutional  Convention. 

221. 

(Charge  151.)  Respondent  failed  to  check  for  students’  understanding  of 

Federalists  and  Anti-Federalists  by  not  ensuring  the  whole  class  understood  the 

responses  to  his  questions  before  he  moved  on.  For  example,  Respondent  asked  the 

class  what  happened  at  the  Constitutional  Convention;  when  student  George 

responded,  Respondent  toid  him  that  his  response  was  from  a  discussion  the  class  had 

weeks  prior  and  moved  on  to  the  Double  Buoble  Map  activity.  Respondent  later  called 

on  student  Kaitlyn  to  explain  why  Anti-Federalists  were  opposed  to  a  strong 

government.  When  her  response  was  inaudible,  Respondent  did  not  share  her 

contribution  with  the  class;  he  simply  said,  "Thank  you,”  and  continued  to  lecture. 

Similar  events  happened  with  at  least  two  other  students,  Abril  and  Rah. 

76

222. 

{Charge  152.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  101,  115,  126,  136,  and  146,  Respondent's  performance  described 

above  demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal 

Helm-Torres's  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2017,  and  written  directives  of  April  20, 

2017,  or  Principal  Gamba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1,  2017, 

and  January  16,  2018,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5,  2017, 

and  January  16,  2078:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level 

of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning; 

State  the  daily  objective  for  the  daily  lesson;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just 

circulating  the  classroom,  but  also  asking  students  engaging  questions;  and  provide 

feedback  to  the  students  as  they  work  independently  and  conduct  frequent  checks  for 

understanding. 

223. 

(Charge  153.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

224. 

On  November  15,  2018,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  on  the  same  day. 

During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba  provided 

Respondent  with  seven  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above,  many  of  which  she  had  included  in  prior  conference 

memoranda  after  informal  observations  and  most  of  which  were  basic  points  more  apt 

to  be  given  to  a  new  teacher.  (Ex.  26,  pp.  4-5.)  She  also  gave  him  two  basic  handouts 

on  effective  teaching.  Uc,  p.  6.) 

Te

JANUARY  11,  2079  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

225, 

On  January  11,  2079,  Principal  Gamba  conducted  an  informal  observation 

of  Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  early  American  territorial  expansion  to  his  period 

|  eighth  grade  United  States  History  class.  This  was  soon  after  return  from  winter 

break.  By  this  time,  Mr.  An  had  left  Reed,  so  Principal  Gamba  also  had  assigned 

Respondent  to  teach  Mr.  An's  periods  2  through  6  classes  for  six  weeks  until  Mr.  An's 

position  was  filled. 

226. 

(Charge  154.)  Ressondent  failed  to  deliver  standards-based  learning 

activities  aligned  with  Standard  8.4.1.  involving  the  Louisiana  Purchase.  Instead  of 

engaging  stucents,  Respondent  had  them  complete  two  low-level  activities. 

Specifically,  Respondent  instructed  students  to  answer  questions  about  the  Louisiana 

Purchase  that  required  short  phrases  or  sentences.  He  aiso  directed  students  to  a  map 

in  their  textbooks  to  answer  a  question  (“What  is  this  map  teaching  you  about?")  by 

using  the  basic  Schaeffer  paragraph  format  of  Topic  Sentence,  two  Concrete  Details, 

and  a  Concluding  Sentence. 

227. 

{Charge  155.)  Respondent  did  not  use  intentional  discussion  techniques 

to  ensure  all  students  shared  their  thinking  around  the  Louisiana  Purchase  questions. 

For  example,  ne  did  not  ask  students  to  repeat  themselves  when  their  answers  were 

inaudible  to  allow  their  peers  to  participate  in  a  discussion  around  the  topic.  Or  when 

a  "manager"  from  a  table  group  was  not  forthcoming  with  answering  a  question  from 

a  Graphic  Organizer  handout  Respondent  did  not  open  up  the  discussion  for  the  rest 

of  the  students,  some  of  whom  were  calling  out  answers. 

228. 

(Charge  156.)  Respondent  failed  to  provide  clear  directions  on  how  to 

use  the  map  from  the  textbook  to  write  a  paragraph.  Some  students  thought  he 

18

referred  to  page  335  in  the  textbook,  while  others  thought  he  meant  page  325,  while 

stil  others  thought  the  paragraph  was  supposed  to  address  the  question,  “What  is  the 

rap  teaching  you  about?”  None  of  the  students  could  provide  a  Topic  Sentence  for 

the  map  without  much  prompting  by  Respondent.  In  fact,  none  of  the  students  at  one 

table  were  able  to  complete  any  work  on  their  maps  because  they  did  not  understand 

the  assignment. 

229. 

{Charge  157.)  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  student  off-task  behavior 

when  he  allowed  students  to  put  their  heads  down  on  their  desks  or  talk  with  each 

other  when  they  should  have  been  engaged  in  class-work. 

230. 

(Charge  158.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  101,  115,  126,  136,  146,  and  152,  Respondent’s  performance  described 

above  demonstrated  that  he  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following  of  Principal 

Helm-Torres’s  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2077,  and  written  directives  of  April  20, 

2017,  or  Principal  Garba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1,  2017, 

and  January  16,  2018,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5,  2017, 

and  January  16,  2018:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for  the  level 

of  students’  achievernent,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful  learning; 

monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating  the  classroom,  but  also  asking 

students  engaging  questions;  provide  feedback  to  the  students  as  they  work 

independently  and  conduct  frequent  checks  for  understanding;  remind  students  of  the 

behavior  standards  before  class  starts,  such  as  sitting  up  in  their  chairs,  and  redirect 

students  who  are  not  following  the  standards;  and  provide  protocols  that  encourage 

small  group  discussion  to  support  the  students’  learning  of  content. 

19

231. 

(Charge  159.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  willfully  failed  to  perform  these  regular  assignments  as 

prescribed  by  the  District  without  reasonable  cause. 

232. 

On  February  1,  2019,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss 

the  informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  on  the  same  day. 

During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba  provided 

Respondent  with  eight  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

deficiencies  noted  above,  many  of  which  she  had  included  in  prior  conference 

memoranda  after  informal  observations  and  most  of  which  were  basic  points  more  apt 

to  be  given  to  a  new  teacher.  (Ex.  27,  pp.  3-4.)  She  also  gave  him  two  basic  handouts 

on  effective  teaching.  (al,  p.  5.) 

RESPONDENT'S  COMMENTS  TO  HIS  PAR  COACH 

233. 

Arielle  Miler  Cohen  was  Respondent's  PAR  coach  for  the  2018-2019 

school  year.  She  began  working  with  Respondent  in  mid-August  2018.  The  two 

generally  met  three  hours  each  week.  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  would  observe  Respondent 

teach  his  period  1  eighth  grade  United  States  History  class  and  then  meet  with  him 

later  in  the  week  to  debrief,  usually  on  Thursdays.  Because  PAR  is 

a  confidential 

program,  the  two  would  always  meet  alone  in  Respondent's  classroom. 

234. 

(Charge  160.A,}  It  was  not  established  as  alleged  that  Respondent  made 

unsolicited  comments  about  Ms.  Miller  Cohen's  appearance.  Instead,  the  Commission 

finds  both  Respondent  and  Ms.  Miller  Conen  each  made  comments  about  the  other's 

appearance.  While  Respondent  was  probably  the  first  to  make  such  comments,  that 

probably  was  the  result  of  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  telling  him  about  her  interests  in  body- 

building  and  yoga,  as  well  as  showing  him  photographs  of  herself  engaged  in  those 

80

interests.  Nonetheless,  the  Commission  finds  both  parties  acted  unprofessionally  by 

discussing  each  other's  appearance  in  the  context  of  a  PAR  relationship.  Both  parties 

had  an  obligation  to  end  the  discussion  no  matter  who  initiated  it  in  order  to  maintain 

appropriate  professional  boundaries. 

235. 

(Charge  160.8.)  In  the  context  of  the  above  findings,  Respondent 

occasionally  told  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  she  was  a  “beauty”  and  that  ner  husband  was  a 

lucky  man.  While  Respondent's  cormnments  were  not  completely  unsolicited,  they  were 

unprofessional,  as  discussed  above. 

236. 

{Charge  160.C.)  Ms.  Miler  Cohen  mentioned  a  trip  she  and  her  husband 

took  to  the  Mayan  Riviera  of  Mexico.  Respondent  told  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  his  wife's 

family  owned  a  ranch  in  another  part  of  Mexico.  Respondent  told  Ms.  Miller  Cohen 

that  she  and  her  husband  could  visit  the  ranch  if  they  wanted.  However,  it  was  not 

established  as  alleged  that  during  these  discussions  Respondent  told  Ms.  Miller  Cohen 

that  “God  told  me  that  we  would  be  together.”  Nonetheless,  the  Commission  finds 

Respondent  probably  said  something  awkward  enough  for  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  to 

misinterpret  him  making  such  a  comment. 

237. 

(Charge  160.D.)  It  was  not  established  as  alleged  that  on  January  25, 

2019,  Respondent  told  Ms.  Miller  Cohen,  “Wow,  it’s  not  every  day  there's  a  beautiful 

woman  waiting  for  me  outside  of  my  classroom."  Respondent  and  Ms.  Miller  Cohen 

gave  different  versions  of  this  event  in  their  testimony.  There  was  insufficient  evidence 

to  determine  who  said  what. 

238. 

(Charge  160.E.)  However,  on  January  25,  2019,  Respondent  told  Ms. 

Miller  Cohen  that  she  would  look  very  nice  in  a  police  uniform.  Respondent  testified 

he  probably  said  this,  but  only  after  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  showed  him  a  picture  of  her 

31

standing  with  police  officers  during  the  District's  teacher  strike  that  year.  In  light  of 

their  relationship  discussed  above,  the  Commission  finds  Respondent's  comment, 

though  awkward  and  unprofessional,  was  meant  to  be  friendly  and  not  flirtatious. 

239. 

(Charge  160.)  Based  on  the  circumstances  discussed  above,  the 

Commission  finds  Respondent's  various  comments  to  Ms.  Miler  Cohen  were  not 

flirtatious  or  with  sexualized  undertones.  However,  Respondent's  comments  were 

unprofessional  and  demonstrated  poor  judgement  given  his  circumstances.  In  a  sense, 

both  parties  are  to  blarne  for  this  situation.  Nonetheless,  Ms.  Miller  Cohen  interpreted 

the  comments  as  flirtatious  or  sexualized  and  so  she  became  uncomfortable. 

240. 

Ms.  Miller  Cohen  ultimately  made  a  formal  complaint  about  Respondent 

soon  after  January  25,  2019.  She  was  told  to  have  no  further  contact  with  Respondent. 

Respondent  no  longer  had  a  PAR  coach  for  the  rest  of  the  Spring  semester. 

241. 

Principal  Gamba  was  advised  of  Ms.  Miller  Cohen’s  compiaint  in  late 

January  2079,  She  met  with  Respondent  in  March  20179  to  discuss  the  matter.  Principal 

Gamba  concluded  that  Respondent  had  violated  a  number  of  District  policies  and 

Board  resolutions.  However,  she  entirely  believed  Ms.  Miller  Cohen's  version  of  events 

that  Respondent  had  sexually  harassed  her,  and  she  completely  disregarded 

Respondent's  version  of  events.  Based  on  the  various  findings  above  concerning 

Charge  160,  the  Commission  finds  Principal  Gamba’s  conclusion  was  not  valid  that 

Respondent  violated  District  policies  or  Board  resolutions  with  regard  to  his  behavior 

with  Ms.  Miller  Cohen. 

MARCH  4,  2019  INFORMAL  OBSERVATION 

242. 

On  March  4,  2019,  Principal  Garnba  conducted  an  informal  observation  of 

Respondent  teaching  a  lesson  on  Texas  Independence  to  his  period  7  eighth  grade 

82

United  States  History  class.  Her  observations,  conference  memorandum,  and  testimony 

established  the  following. 

243. 

(Charge  161.)  Respondent  failed  to  deliver  standards-based  activities  to 

his  class.  In  particular,  Respondent  failed  to  effectively  monitor  students’  learning  as 

they  worked  on  the  EQ  (“Explain  why  Texas's  land  was  so  desirabie?”):  he  did  not  look 

at  students’  work,  check  for  understanding,  or  provide  feedback  during  the  activity  as 

he  walked  around  the  classroom.  He  next  wrote  student  responses  to  the  What  I  Know 

section  of  a  low-level  KWL  chart  activity  and  had  students  copy  what  he  wrote  instead 

of  giving  them  time  to  think  about  the  topic  and  write  their  own  staternents.  He  used 

the  same  process  when  students  were  asked  to  share  questions  for  the  What  I  Want  to 

Know  section.  Without  bringing  closure  to  the  KWL  chart  activity,  Respondent  had 

studemts  turn  to  a  Book  Report  Vocabulary  handout,  and  copy  three  words  he  had 

written  on  the  handout  and  the  corresponding  definitions  from  the  textbook,  but  did 

not  explain  how  their  questions  from  the  KWL  chart  or  the  vocabulary  words  would 

help  their  understanding  of  the  Texas  Revolution. 

244. 

(Charge  162.)  Respondent  failed  to  correctly  use  equity  sticks  during  a 

question  and  answer  sequence,  so  there  was  no  equitable  participation  by  all  students. 

Instead,  two  students,  Rah  and  David,  dominated  the  discussion.  Specifically,  instead 

of  pulling  another  student's  name  on  a  stick  when  the  first  student  could  not  answer  a 

question,  Respondent  continued  to  call  on  Rah  or  David  for  the  answers. 

245. 

(Charge  163.)  Respondent  did  not  have  or  enforce  a  routine  or  procedure 

to  ensure  all  students  had  a  textbook.  During  this  lesson,  it  did  not  appear  that 

Respondent  noticed  12  of  the  32  students  did  not  have  a  history  textbook.  Eight  of 

those  12  students  got  up  on  their  own  to  retrieve  textbooks  while  Respondent  talked. 

Without  any  guidance  from  Respondent  on  returning  the  books  at  the  end  of  the 

83

lesson,  the  eight  stucents  who  had  retrieved  books  got  up  and  returned  them  to  the 

shelf  while  Respondent  was  stil  talking,  thus  disrupting  the  attempted  closure  of  the 

lesson  for  students  in  the  back. 

246. 

(Charge  164.)  For  the  same  reasons  explained  above  regarding  Charges 

61,  73,  88,  100,  101,  115,  126,  136,  146,  152,  and  158,  Respondent's  performance 

described  above  demonstrated  that  ne  willfully  refused  to  comply  with  the  following 

of  Principal  Helm-Torres’s  verbal  directives  of  April  17,  2077,  and  written  directives  of 

April  20,  2017,  or  Principal  Gamba’s  verbal  directives  of  August  31,  2017,  December  1, 

2017,  and  January  16,  2018,  and  written  directives  of  September  5,  2017,  December  5, 

2017,  and  January  16,  2018:  provide  instruction  that  is  well  planned,  appropriate  for 

the  level  of  students’  achievement,  and  engages  students  in  active  and  meaningful 

learning;  monitor  student  learning  by  not  just  circulating  the  classroom,  but  also 

asking  students  engaging  questions;  remind  students  of  the  behavior  standards  before 

class  Starts,  and  redirect  students  who  are  not  following  the  standards;  use  one 

consistent  method  for  calling  on  students  to  share  their  answers;  provide  feedback  to 

the  students  as  they  work  independently  and  conduct  frequent  checks  for 

understanding;  and  provide  protocols  that  encourage  smail  group  discussion  to 

support  the  students’  learning  of  content. 

247, 

(Charge  165.)  As  demonstrated  by  his  performance  in  this  lesson, 

Respondent  was  aware  of  but  failed  to  perform  his  regular  assignments  as  prescribed 

by  the  District  willfully  and  without  reasonable  cause. 

248. 

On  March  12,  2019,  Principal  Gamba  met  with  Respondent  to  discuss  the 

informal  observation.  She  gave  him  a  conference  memorandum  on  the  same  day. 

During  the  meeting  and  in  the  conference  memorandum,  Principal  Gamba  provided 

Respondent  with  seven  different  points  of  assistance  and  guidance  responding  to  the 

84.

deficiancies  noted  above.  (Ex.  29,  pp.  5-6.)  She  also  gave  him  two  handouts  on 

effective  teaching.  Ua’,  p.  6.) 

249. 

At  or  about  this  time,  Principal  Gamba  met  and  conferred  with 

Respondent  concerning  the  complaint  made  by  Ms.  Miller  Cohn.  Respondent  was 

removed  from  the  classroom  and  Reed  by  no  later  than  March  19,  2019,  which  is  wnen 

the  Board  decided  cause  existed  to  dismiss  Respondent's  employment  with  the 

District.  (Ex.  30,  p.  1.3 

RESPONDENT'S  CONTENTIONS 

250. 

Respondent's  primary  evidence  was  his  written  responses  to  many  of  the 

conference  memoranda  described  above,  as  well  as  his  testirnony.  Neither  source  was 

convincing.  Many  of  the  written  responses  were  vague  or  obfuscated  actual  events. 

Over  time  the  responses  became  more  defensive  and  contained  personal  attacks  on 

the  involved  principals.  The  Commission  did  not  find  the  responses  to  be  a  reliable 

source  of  information.  Respondent's  testimony  was  the  sarne.  Many  times  Respondent 

prefaced  an  answer  by  saying  something  “probably”  happened.  The  Commission  was 

left  with  the  impression  that  Respondent  was  guessing  in  many  of  his  answers. 

Moreover,  Respondent  called  no  witness  to  corroborate  any  of  his  evidence. 

251. 

The  closest  Respondent  came  to  atternpting  to  corroborate  his  version  of 

events  were  three  letters  of  recommendation  from  fellow  teachers  at  Byrd.  (Exs.  211- 

213.)  Interestingly,  one  of  the  letters  is  from  Mr.  White,  who  Respondent  denigrated  to 

Principal  Wiltz  when  the  two  observed  Mr.  White  teach  his  Magnet  class.  However,  the 

letters  have  little  probative  value  because,  as  Respondent  admitted  during  his  cross- 

examination,  none  of  the  three  teachers  came  to  Respondent's  classroom  to  observe 

nim  teach. 

85

252. 

Respondent  blamed  some  of  his  performance  problems  on  being 

assigned  to  four  different  schools  over  a  four-year  period.  The  Commission  does  not 

find  that  is  a  convincing  excuse.  A  trained  teacher  does  not  need  much  time  to  get 

acclimated  to  a  new  school.  For  example,  the  state  standards  have  not  changed  since 

1998,  and  the  District's  lesson  plan  template  has  not  changed  in  along  time.  All  four 

of  the  schools  in  question  were  in  the  District's  Northeast  Local  District,  so  each  school 

had  common  and  shared  expectations.  In  Respondent's  case,  each  principal  gave  him 

easy  assignments  when  he  first  arrived  at  a  new  school.  Much  of  the  time  he  only  had 

one  class  to  teach.  In  many  respects,  the  four  principals  treated  him  as  if  he  were  a 

new  teacher,  not  a  long-time  veteran  of  the  District. 

253. 

Respondent  also  blamed  some  of  his  performance  problems  on  the 

timing  of  many  informal  observations  done  early  in  a  new  school  year  or  after 

returning  from  winter  break.  The  Commission  does  not  find  this  is 

a  convincing  excuse 

either.  A  good  teacher  will  provide  a  good  lesson  regardiess  of  its  timing.  Respondent 

had  advance  notice  of  each  observation,  so  he  had  sufficient  time  to  prepare.  Not  all 

of  the  informal  observations  were  close  to  breaks,  but  all  of  them  showed  perforrnance 

deficiencies.  In  any  event,  the  principals’  observations  did  not  depict  unruly  or  restless 

students  because  of  a  new  school  year  or  the  return  from  winter  break;  rather,  the 

students  were  disinterested  in  non-engaging  instruction,  Even  if  students  were  having 

problems  with  attention  caused  by  coming  back  from  a  break,  it  is  the  teacher's 

responsibility  to  set  the  tone  of  instruction  and  take  control  of  behaviors. 

254. 

Respondent  also  blamed  some  of  his  misfortune  on  his  long  commute. 

However,  Respondent  had  requested  being  assigned  in  the  Northeast  Local  District, 

which  is  where  all  four  of  the  involved  schools  were  located.  In  any  event,  a  long 

commute  does  not  prevent  one  from  performing  in  the  classroom. 

86

255. 

Respondent  points  to  the  fact  that  this  case  involves  no  evidence  of 

injuries,  Major  incidents  in  the  classroom,  the  need  for  student  discipline,  or  parent 

complaints.  Respondent  also  contends  there  was  no  evidence  presented  of  lack  of 

learning  such  that  a  student  was  transferred  to  another  class,  withheld  from  advancing, 

unable  to  perform  in  subsequent  school  years,  etc.  Respondent  is  generally  correct, 

although  there  was  evidence  of  a  couple  of  parent  complaints.''  Nonetheless, 

evidence  of  lack  of  learning  in  this  case  was  established  by  the  frequent  informal 

observations  by  three  different  principals.  Those  observations  showed  that  students 

had  their  heads  down,  were  not  engaged,  or  were  talking  among  themselves.  Also, 

Respondent's  testimony  that  he  would  not  start  using  depth  of  knowledge  (DOK) 

question  levels  3  or  4  until  later  in  the  semester  showed  he  did  not  think  his  students 

could  handle  engaging  lessons  for  most  of  the  semester.  Finally,  the  observations 

portrayed  a  poor  quality  of  interaction  between  Respondent  and  his  students.  All  of 

this  evidence  showed  a  lack  of  teaching  by  Respondent  and  learning  by  his  students. 

256. 

Respondent  defended  letting  a  few  students  dominate  a  lesson  by 

arguing  the  children  in  question  were  either  “on  fire”  for  the  lesson  or  did  not 

otherwise  participate  in  class.  However,  the  pattern  of  inequitable  participation  did  not 

support  Respondent.  If  he  were  correct,  one  would  expect  to  see  a  pattern  of  entire 

class  participation,  with  an  occasional  instance  of  one  or  two  students  getting  “on  fire” 

and  dominating  the  discussion.  Instead,  the  observing  principals  frequently  saw  one  or 

two  students  dominate  a  class  without  much  participation  from  the  other  students. 

  

'l  See  Factual  Findings  25.C.  and  25.D.  In  addition,  Respondent  admitted  on 

cross-examination  that  by  or  before  March  2019,  one  or  more  students  and/or  parents 

complained  about  comments  Respondent  made  in  class  while  teaching  at  Reed. 

8/

Even  if  a  student  like  Raffi  or  Michael  gets  “on  fire,”  an  effective  teacher  does  not  let 

the  student  dictate  the  tone  for  the  class  and  stifle  other  students  from  participating. 

An  effective  teacher  can  find  creative  ways  to  harness  that  “on  fire”  energy,  such  as 

telling  the  student  he  or  she  can  pick  on  other  students  to  answer  questions  and  make 

notes  on  the  board. 

257. 

Respondent  blamed  his  technological  hiccups  in  class  on  faulty 

equipment  provided  by  the  District.  The  Commission  is  dubious.  Respondent  had  an 

electronics  degree  from  a  community  college.  Given  his  technical  background,  it  is 

unclear  why  he  was  not  able  to  address  the  technological  problems.  In  addition, 

Respondent  was  an  experienced  District  teacher.  He  was  aware  of  the  scheduled 

observations,  and  he  had  time  to  either  practice  with  the  equipment  or  find  “work- 

arounds”  if  any  of  the  equipment  was  not  functioning.  If  the  equipment  had  been 

faulty,  the  Commission  expected  to  see  evidence  of  requests  from  Respondent  to  his 

orincioals  for  new  or  repaired  equipment  but  Respondent  offered  no  requests  into 

evidence.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  Commission  believes  Respondent’s  testimony 

was  self-serving  and  that  Respondent  never  took  the  initiative  about  the  technology  or 

equipment  used  in  his  classroom. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

1. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  charges  by  a  preponderance 

of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164 

Cal Apo.3d  1035,  1038-1039.)  Preponderance  of  the  evidence  means  “the  evidence  on 

88

one  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  is  more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side.” 

(Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226  Cal.  App.3d  314,  325.) 

Cause  for  Termination 

2. 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  Education  Code 

sections  44932,  subdivision  (a),  44939,  and  44942"?  are  established  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

3. 

A.  Certificated  employees  are  subject  to  dismissal  for  immoral  conduct 

pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

B.  The  term  “immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct 

inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity, 

dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference 

to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate 

attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Board  of  Ed.  of  San  Francisco 

Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

C.  In  this  case,  it  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  Respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(1).  Respondent's  behavior  during  the  History  Department  meeting  in  2015  was 

awkward  and  inappropriate,  as  was  his  later  interactions  in  2018  and  2019  with  his  PAR 

coach,  Ms.  Miller  Cohen.  However,  none  of  his  behavior  was  sexually  motivated, 

  

'°  Further  undesignated  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

89

harassing,  indecent,  corrupt,  or  intended  to  offend  others.  The  Commission  cannot 

conciude  that  Respondent's  conduct  was  extreme  enough  to  be  deemed  immoral,  as 

that  term  is  defined  in  the  case  law. 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

4. 

A.  Certificated  employees  are  subject  to  dismissal  for  unprofessional 

conduct  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a}{2). 

B.  Unprofessional  conduct  in  the  teaching  profession  has  been  defined  as 

that  which  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  the  profession  or  is  unbecoming  a 

member  of  the  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of  Educ.  of  City  of  Los  Angeles  v. 

Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553  overruled,  on  another  ground,  by  Bexiaris  v.  Board  of 

Education  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575) 

C.  In  this  case,  the  District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  Respondent  engaged  in  unprofessional  conduct  within  the  meaning  of 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2).  In  2015,  Respondent  threatened  to  take  pictures  of 

stucemts  in  his  classroom,  which  escalated  an  emotional  situation,  was  an  improper 

form  of  discipline,  and  could  have  invaded  the  students’  privacy.  Respondent's 

comments  during  the  2015  History  Department  meeting  were  also  unprofessional,  as 

they  offended  one  colleague  and  made  his  other  colleagues  uncomfortable. 

Respondent's  interactions  in  2078  and  2019  with  his  PAR  coach,  Ms.  Miller  Cohen, 

were  also  unprofessional,  especially  given  the  remedial  and  confidential  setting  of  the 

interactions.  Complaints  were  made  to  the  involved  principals  about  all  those 

incidents.  The  principals  viewed  Respondent's  conduct  to  be  unbecoming  of  a  teacher 

and  directed  him  to  not  repeat  it,  thus  indicating  they  too  believed  Respondent  had 

acted  unprofessionailly.  (Factual  Findings  15,  19-30,  233-235,  and  238-239.) 

90

UNSATISFACTORY  PERFORMANCE 

5. 

A.  Certificated  employees  are  subject  to  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory 

performance  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a}(5). 

B.  The  term  “unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 

unprofessional  conduct  in  section  44932,  as  discussed  above,  and  it  is  not  to  be 

presumed  that  the  Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  Un  re 

Maes  (2010)  185  Cal App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean 

something  different  from  unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision 

(c},  specifies  that  “unsatisfactory  performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for 

dismissal  specified  in  section  44932. 

C.  While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a 

teacher's  conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community,  unsatisfactory 

performance  must  be  analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher's  performance  as 

evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing  school  district.  This  is  demonstrated  by  section 

44938,  which  requires  a  charge  of  unsatisfactory  performance  to  be  preceded  by  a 

written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  which  refers  to  section  44660  et  seq. 

Those  provisions  establish  guidelines  for  how  school  districts  should  evaluate  and 

assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees.  Thus,  cause  for  discipline  may 

be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs  in  a  manner  unsatisfactory  to  his 

employing  school  district. 

D.  However,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  purpose  of  the  statute  giving 

tenure  to  teachers  is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose  members 

are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct  themselves 

91

properly  and  perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakerstreld  Elemantary  Teachers 

Ass'n  v.  Bakerstiald  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal App  4th  1260,  1293,  fn  20,  citing  56 

Cal Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411,  9.  757.)  Therefore,  an  employing  school  district  cannot 

be  arbitrary  or  capricious  in  making  decisions  regarding  whether  a  certificated 

employee  has  performed  in  an  unsatisfactory  manner. 

E.  In  this  case,  it  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

Respondent's  performance  from  late  2075  through  March  2079  was  consistently 

unsatisfactory  to  the  District  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a}{5}.  The  District 

had  expressed  reasonable  expectations  in  its  policies  and  Board  Resolutions. 

Respondent  consistently  failed  to  uphoid  the  District's  expectations,  as  well  as  the 

CSTPs.  Respondent's  performance  in  the  classroom  was  consistently  deficient,  as 

determined  by  three  different  principals  who  conducted  many  informal  observations. 

Respondent  also  received  Below  Standard  performance  ratings  in  his  Final  Evaluations 

in  2016,  2017,  and  2018.  Respondent  was  consistently  given  the  same  assistance  and 

guidance  in  response  to  his  poor  teaching  performances  from  the  three  involved 

principals,  which  were  reasonable.  Yet,  Respondent  continually  ignored  or  refused  the 

assistance  and  guidance,  and  continually  failed  to  meet  the  District's  expectations  and 

standards.  Respondent's  poor  behavior  before  students  in  2015  at  Vista,  his  antics 

during  the  Vista  History  Department  meeting  in  2015,  and  his  improper  interactions  in 

2018  and  2019  with  his  PAR  coach  were  also  unsatisfactory  to  the  District,  and 

reasonably  so.  (Factual  Findings  1-68,  70-240  &  242-249) 

EVIDENCE  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

6, 

A.  Certificated  employees  are  subject  to  dismissal  for  evident  unfitness 

for  service  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6). 

92

B.  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuttable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  ternperamental  defects  or 

inadequacies.  (Woodland  Joint  Unitied  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Protessional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal  App.4th  1429,  1444.)  "Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes 

a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that 

one's  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  bid} 

C.  In  this  case,  it  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  Respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  as  a  teacher  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a){6). 

D.  Over  the  four-year  period  in  question,  Respondent  taught  at  four 

schools  for  four  different  principals.  Each  principal,  particularly  the  last  three,  gave 

Respondent  opportunities  to  co-teach  with  other  good  teachers,  to  teach  Honors 

students  who  were  not  a  behavior  problem,  to  have  access  to  PAR  coaches,  and 

countless  instances  of  assistance  and  quidance.  Despite  all  of  that,  Respondent 

continued  to  engage  in  the  same  or  similar  poor  performance  in  the  classroom,  and 

showed  little  to  no  improvement. 

E.  Respondent  also  acted  inappropriately  and  unprofessionally  before 

students  and  with  colleagues  at  Vista,  after  having  been  previously  directed  to  not  do 

s0  when  he  was  at  East  Valley  High  School;  and  he  again  acted  unprofessionally  with 

Ms.  Miller  Cohen  at  Reed,  after  having  been  directed  not  to  do  so  when  he  was  at 

Vista. 

F.  The  fact  that  Respondent  is  a  veteran  teacher  of  the  District  with  more 

than  18  years  of  teaching  experience  is  particularly  troubling.  Under  these 

circumstances,  it 

is  clear  that  Respondent  has  a  fixed  character  trait  preventing  him 

93

from  following  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives.  Instead,  Respondent  simply 

decided  to  teach  as  he  wanted  and  to  disregard  his  supervisors’  directives.  During  the 

hearing,  Respondent  failed  to  accept  responsibility  for  his  poor  performance,  and 

instead  blarned  his  principals  or  allegedly  defective  District  equipment.  After  all  of  this, 

the  Commission  can  think  of  no  other  way  to  improve  his  performance  as  a  teacher. 

(Factual  Findings  1-68,  70-240  &  242-249 } 

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION  OF  SCHOOL  LAWS 

7. 

A.  Certificated  employees  are  subject  to  dismissal  for  persistent  violation 

of,  or  refusal  to  obey,  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed 

for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 

governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him,  pursuant  to  section  44932, 

subdivision  (ay{g). 

B.  Cause  for  dismissal  here  may  be  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules 

or  district  policies.  (San  Dreguite  Union  High  Schoo/  Dist.  v.  Commission  On 

Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal  App.3d  1176,  1180-1181.)  However,  there 

must  be  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (/c!,  p.  1196.) 

The  violation  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an  attitude  of  continuous 

insubordination.”  (Governing  Board  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School  Dist.  v.  Seaman 

(1972)  28  Cal App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving  an  issue 

unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered  persistent.  (Bourland  v. 

Commission  On  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal App.3d  317) 

C.  In  this  case,  it  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  Respondent  persistently  violated,  and  refused  to  obey,  the  school  laws  of  the 

94.

State  and  reasonable  District  rules  and  policies,  pursuant  to  section  44932,  subdivision 

(a}(8).  (Factual  Findings  13-14,  31-68,  70-232  &  242-249} 

D.  For  four  years  Respondent  persistently  violated  CSTPs,  as 

demonstrated  by  the  numerous  informal  observations,  in  which  three  different 

principals  documented  that  Respondent  repeatedly  failed  to  engage  and  support 

student  learning,  create  and  maintain  an  effective  environment  for  teaching, 

understand  the  subject  matter  and  organize  it  for  students  to  make  it  understandable 

to  them,  plan  instruction  for  all  students  and  differentiate  it  when  necessary,  and  check 

with  students  for  understanding  in  order  to  assess  their  learning. 

E.  Over  a  four-year  period,  Respondent  repeatedly  violated  the  various 

directives  given  to  him  by  all  four  principals,  as  well  as  the  District's  Code  of  Conduct 

with  Students  and  the  Board’s  Resolution  on  the  Respectful  Treatment  of  All  Persons. 

VWILLFUL  REFUSAL  TO  PERFORM  A  REGULAR  ASSIGNMENT 

8. 

A.  Certificated  employees  are  subject  to  dismissal  for  willfully  refusing  to 

perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  the  rules  and 

regulations  of  an  employing  school  district,  pursuant  to  section  44939, 

B.  The  willful  refusal  of  a  teacher  to  obey  the  reasonable  rules  and 

regulations  of  the  employing  school  district  is  tantamount  to  insubordination.  (Board 

of  Educ.  of  City  of  Los  Angeles  v.  Swan,  supra,  41  Cal.2d  at  p.  552,  overruled,  on 

another  ground,  by  Bexaris  v.  Board  of  Education  (1972)  6  Cal.3d  575.)  Although  there 

are  no  cases  interpreting  the  term  “willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments 

without  reasonable  cause”  under  section  44939,  case  law  from  related  settings  reflects 

that  the  term  “willful”  “carries  a  volitional  coloration  which  excludes  the  notion  of 

accidental  or  even  negligent  conduct.”  (Coomes  v.  State  Personnel  Bd.  (1963)  215 

95

Cal App.2d  770,  775.)  Declining  to  obey  an  employer's  directions,  without  reason,  is 

sufficient  to  establish  willful  refusal.  (See,  e.g.,  Wilbur  v.  Office  of  City  Clerk  of  City  of 

Los  Angeles  (1956)  143  Cal  App.2d  636,  642  [observing  an  employee  who  “did  not 

attribute  his  refusals  to  iliness”  and  made  “no  showing  before  the  hearing  examiner  of 

willingness  to  comply  with  the  reasonable  orders  of  his  superiors,”  dernonstrated 

“wilful  refusal  to  obey  the  reasonable  orders  of  an  amployer"]) 

C.  In  this  case,  it  was  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

that  Respondent  willfully  refused  to  perform  his  reqular  assignments  prescribed  by  the 

District  without  reasonable  cause,  in  violation  of  section  44939,  subdivision  (b).  As  the 

District  argued  in  closing,  Respondent  was  continually  advised  and  directed  to  clearly 

specify  and  enforce  classroom  procedures  {like  restroom  breaks  or  adjourning  class), 

post  rubrics  for  students,  present  cognitively  challenging  lessons,  practice  technology 

before  using  it  during  lessons  to  avoid  wasting  time,  use  equity  sticks  or  otherwise 

fairly  implement  equitable  participation  of  students,  etc.  Respondent  persistently  failed 

to  follow  those  directives.  Given  Respondent’s  time  teaching  at  the  District  and  the 

numerous  opportunities  and  guidance  he  was  given,  the  Commission  finds 

Respondent's  failure  to  carry  out  those  assignments  was  willful.  (Factual  Findings  13- 

14,  31-68,  70-232  &  242-249) 

Analysis  of  the  Morrison  Factors 

9, 

A.  In  deciding  whether  cause  for  dismissal  exists  under  the  amorphous 

concepts  of  immoral  conduct,  unprofessional  conduct,  and  evident  unfitness  for  service,  it 

also  must  be  established  that  a  teacher's  misconduct  relates  to  his  fitness  to  teach,  within 

the  meaning  of  Aforrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  274,  227-230.  The 

Morrison  analysis  does  not  apply  to  causes  for  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance, 

willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments,  or  persistent  violation  of  school  rules,  laws 

96

or  policies,  because  such  theories,  by  definition,  have  a  direct  nexus  with  teaching.  (Jd,  pp. 

227-230). 

B.  With  regard  to  the  two  Identified  causes  for  dismissal  that  were 

established  in  this  case  that  must  be  analyzed  (unprofessional  conduct  and  evidence 

unfitness),  all  of  the  factors  suggested  by  Morrison  were  considered  and  applied  to  the 

Factual  Findings.  Not  all  “Morrison  factors”  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 

satisfied.  (Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.)  Moreover,  the  Morrison 

analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact  established,  but  rather  can  be 

applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established  collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School 

Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.) 

C.  In  this  case,  the  Commission  has  analyzed  the  Morrison  factors  and 

concludes  they  establish  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent's 

misconduct  makes  him  unfit  to  teach  and  supports  the  conclusion  that  he  acted 

unprofessionally.  (Factual  Findings  1-68,  70-240,  242-249  &  250-257.)  Generally,  we 

note  that  all  of  his  misconduct  occurred  at  school  with  activities  directly  related  to 

teaching  and  the  school  environment.  Specifically,  as  to  the  Morrison  factors  we  find: 

|.  The  likelihood  the  conduct  may  adversely  affect  students  or 

fellow  teachers.  Respondent's  students  suffered  the  most.  They  were  not  learning  what 

they  needed  to  learn.  Respondent's  failure  to  engage  his  students  led  to  their  off-task 

behavior.  Respondent  mostly  taught  below  the  students’  grade  and  cognitive  levels, 

which  may  have  falsely  led  students  to  believe  that  history  is  easy  or  uninteresting. 

Respondent's  behavior  during  the  History  Department  meeting  and  with  PAR  coach 

Miller  Cohen  also  made  other  employees  feel  uncomfortable  and  therefore  adversely 

affected  them  as  well.  Respondent's  four  supervising  principals  had  to  spend  an 

97

inordinate  amount  of  time  supervising  and  providing  him  with  assistance  and 

guidance  that  a  teacher  with  his  level  of  experience  should  not  have  required. 

ll.  The  degree  of  such  adversity.  Students  suffered  the  greater 

amount  of  adversity.  The  degree  of  students’  adversity  was  substantial.  They 

essentially  wasted  a  semester  or  full  school  year  of  learning.  The  adversity  to 

colleagues  was  moderate.  The  History  Department  meeting  was  an  isolated  event  with 

Ms.  Harper  and  the  other  members  of  the  History  Department.  PAR  coach  Miller 

Cohen  felt  uncomfortable  enough  to  complain  about  Respondent  and  stop  coaching 

him,  but  she  also  engaged  in  some  inappropriate  actions  and  invited  some  of 

Respondent's  behaviors.  The  adversity  to  the  four  principals  was  significant. 

Respondent  consumed  their  time  with  supervision  and  repetitive  assistance  and 

guidance  that  he  rarely  followed. 

ill.  The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 

Respondent's  misconduct  Is  fairly  recent,  in  that  it  spanned  from  October  2015  and 

continued  consistently  through  March  2019  with  no  let  up. 

iv.  The  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved. 

Respondent's  credential  put  him  in  contact  with  middle  school  students  just  beginning 

their  introduction  to  senior  social  sciences.  He  was  unable  to  teach  history.  His  poor 

teaching  undercut  his  students’  ability  to  gain  a  solid  foothold  in  history,  which 

undoubtedly  impaired  their  performance  in  future  history  classes. 

v.  The  existence  of  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if 

  any,  surrounding  the  conduct.  Respondent  established  no  extenuating  facts.  In 

aggravation,  Respondent  demonstrated  a  poor  attitude  about  his  situation,  in  that  he 

failed  to  accept  responsibility  for  his  actions,  and  usually  blamed  others  for  his 

98

problems.  He  created  excuses  for  his  deficiencies  that  were  not  credible or  justified. 

Although  his  flaws  were  easily  correctable,  he  willfully  refused  to  correct  them  by 

complying  with  clear  and  reasonable  directives.  He  demonstrated  continuous 

misconduct  for  four  years. 

vi.  The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 

resulting  in  the  conduct.  The  Commission  finds  Respondent  engaged  in  the 

blameworthy  motivation  of  refusing  to  accept  input,  advice,  and  assistance  from  any 

other  source.  He  flagrantly  disregarded  four  principals.  He  had  two  years  of  PAR 

coaching  that  he  failed  to  utilize.  Even  when  Respondent  was  able  to  observe  Mr. 

White,  Respondent  told  Principal  Wiltz  that  he  learned  nothing  from  it  and  ultimately 

made  insulting  comments  to  her. 

vil.  The  likelihood  of  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  If 

Respondent  is  returned  to  the  classroom,  the  Commission  has  no  questions  that  he 

will  engage  in  the  exact  same  misconduct  as  before. 

vill.  The  extent  discipline  may  cause  adverse  impact  or  chilling 

effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  The 

Commission  does  not  see  how  discipline  will  have  such  an  effect  upon  properly 

exercised  constitutional  rights. 

Disposition 

10. 

 A.“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach.  ..,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the  appropriate 

sanction.”  (Ca/ifornia  Teachers  Ass‘n  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal.4th  327,  343- 

344.)  Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the  Commission  still 

99

has  broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  such  discipline  is  actually  warranted. 

(Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  222.) 

B.  After  teaching  for  18  years  at  the  District,  Respondent  still  is  not  able 

to  teach  history.  He  has  been  given  plentiful  assistance,  quidance,  and  resources,  as 

well  the  benefits  of  co-teaching  and  light  teaching  loads.  The  Commission  cannot 

devise  any  other  remedial  action  the  District  can  take  to  help  Respondent  improve. 

The  District  should  not  be  required  to  provide  Respondent  with  continuous  directives, 

assistance,  and  guidance,  that  he  will  only  disregard.  Respondent  takes  no  ownership 

or  responsibility  for  his  problerns  and  therefore  will  continue  to  engage  in  it.  His 

teaching  deficiencies  have  harmed  his  students  who  did  not  learn  from  him.  The 

dismissal  of  Respondent's  employment  with  the  District  is  therefore  warranted. 

(Factual  Findings  1-68,  70-240,  242-249  &  250-257,  Legal  Conclusions  1-9.) 

iff 

iff 

fff 

fff 

fff 

fff 

fit 

fit 

100

ORDER 

Respondent  Carlos  Polanco  is  dismissed  from  employment  with  the  Los  Angeles 

Unified  School  District. 

DATE: 

September  23,  2020 

DATE: 

September  23,  2020 

DATE:  September  23,  2020 

DocuSigned  by: 

Car 

vw  Monroe 

TES4 PASD24ASA2C. .. 

Dr.  CAROLYN  MONROE 

Commissioner 

DoacuSigned  by: 

a 

( Aortend  * 

ROBERT  EARL 

Commissioner 

DocuSigned  by: 

Eh 

Enesa1Errrso4-6... 

ERIC  SAWYER 

Commissioner 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

101

