BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
YUBA  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of 

Brian  Coleman,  Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2019060747 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  of  the  Yuba  City  Unified  School  District  (District)  on  November  4,  5,  and 

6,  2019,  in  Yuba  City,  California.  The  Commission  included  Sandra  Fink,  Sonja  Renhult, 

and  Timothy  Aspinwall,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

presiding. 

Lindsay  Moore  and  Ethan  Retan,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  District. 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis  and  Matthew  Chevedden,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Brian 

Coleman  (respondent),  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

This  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  when  the  Commission  concluded  its 

deliberations  on  November  6,  2019.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background  and  Procedural  History 

1, 

Respondent  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee.  He  holds  a  Single 

Subject  Teaching  Credential  and  is  authorized  to  teach  Introductory  Health  Science 

and  Physical  Education  (P.E.).  Since  2013,  respondent  has  been  assigned  to  teach  P.E. 

at  Central  Gaither  Elementary  School  (Gaither  Elementary).  Respondent  was  most 

recently  assigned  to  teach  P.E.  to  students  in  grades  kindergarten  through  eighth 

grade.  Respondent's  direct  supervisor  is  Principal  Mary  Reinhardt  (Principal  Reinhardt 

or  Ms.  Reinhardt). 

2. 

On  March  27,  2019,  Michael  Reed,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human 

Resources  (Assistant  Superintendent  Reed  or  Mr.  Reed),  sent  written  notice  to 

respondent  that  he  was  placed  on  paid  administrative  leave  from  his  employment  with 

the  District  pending  completion  of  an  investigation  into  an  incident  that  occurred  on 

March  26,  2019.  The  District's  allegations  regarding  the  incident  are  set  forth  in  Factual 

Finding  5,  below. 

3. 

On  May  20,  2019,  Mr.  Reed  signed  the  Statement  of  Charges 

recommending  termination  of  respondent's  employment  with  the  District  on  the  basis 

of  (1)  immoral  conduct;  (2)  dishonesty;  and/or  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service.  On  May 

28,  2019,  the  District  Board  of  Education  adopted  a  confidential  resolution  authorizing 

that  the  Statement  of  Charges  be  served  on  respondent,  that  respondent  be 

immediately  suspended  without  pay  from  his  duties  with  the  District,  and  that 

respondent  be  dismissed  from  his  employment  unless  he  demands  a  hearing.

4. 

On  May  31,  2019,  Mr.  Reed  sent  respondent  a  Notice  of  Immediate 

Suspension  and  Intention  to  Dismiss,  enclosing  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  the 

Board  of  Education's  confidential  resolution.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  request  for 

hearing  on  June  13,  2019. 

District's  Allegations  and  Respondent's  Written  Statement 

5. 

The  District's  factual  allegations  in  support  of  the  charges  of  immoral 

conduct,  dishonesty,  and  evident  unfitness  for  service,  are  set  forth  in  the  Statement  of 

Charges,  as  follows: 

During  P.E.  class  on  March  26,  2019,  District  student  A.D. 

began  roughly  pulling  [another]  student  AD’s  arm  during  a 

minor  altercation.  A.D.  is  in  second  grade. 

[Respondent]  approached  A.D.  to  get  her  to  stop.  When 

A.D.  did  not  immediately  do  so,  [respondent]  directed  A.D. 

to  go  to  the  office.  A.D.  refused,  and  wrapped  her  hands 

around  a  nearby  basketball  pole  in  protest. 

[Respondent]  tried  briefly  to  convince  A.D.  to  let  go  of  the 

pole.  When  A.D.  did  not  comply,  [respondent]  became 

angry.  [Respondent]  then  violently  ripped  A.D.’s  hands  apart 

and  began  forcibly  dragging  her  towards  the  office.  In 

doing  so,  [respondent]  used  grossly  excessive  force,  often 

lifting  A.D.  off  the  ground  by  her  arm.  As  [respondent] 

approached  the  office,  employees  inside  could  hear  A.D. 

screaming.

Upon  entering  the  office,  [respondent]  violently  lifted  A.D. 

off  the  ground  by  her  arm  and  tossed  her  into  a  chair.  A.D. 

was  crying.  [Respondent]  then  said  “just  sit  there...  yeah,” 

and  left  the  office  without  notifying  Principal  Reinhardt  or 

checking  on  A.D.'s  well-being. 

During  the  District's  investigation,  [respondent]  submitted  a 

written  statement  on  March  26,  2019.  [Respondent's] 

written  statement  dishonestly  minimized  his  conduct, 

claiming  that  he  “carefully  separated”  A.D.’s  hands  from  the 

basketball  pole,  and  “escorted”  her  to  the  office.  However, 

when  [respondent]  met  with  Principal  Reinhardt  later  that 

day,  he  acknowledged  that  he  should  not  have  touched 

A.D.,  and  that  his  actions  were  taken  out  of  frustration  with 

A.D.'s  defiance. 

During  1st/2nd  grade  PE  class  the  students  were  running 

back  and  forth  from  baseline  to  midcourt  line  with  2nd 

grade  on  1  court  and  1st  grade  on  the  other  court.  While 

[A.D.]  was  running  back  and  forth  she  was  pulling  another 

student  by  the  arm.  As  I  tried  to  redirect  her  she  yelled 

loudly  and  walked  to  the  basketball  pole  wrapping  her  arms 

around  the  pole  (back  to  the  pole).  After  many  attempts 

trying  to  get  her  back  on  the  court  I  instructed  her  to  go  to 

the  office.  She  replied  “NO!”  and  I  asked  her  a  second  time

6. 

On  March  26,  2019,  respondent  prepared  a  written  summary  of  the 

incident  at  the  request  of  Principal  Reinhardt,  which  states  as  follows: 

which  got  the  same  reply.  I  asked  her  a  third  time  and  got 

the  same  reply  as  she  held  onto  the  post.  I  then  carefully 

separated  her  hands  then  took  her  by  the  hand  and 

escorted  her  to  the  office.  She  continued  to  be  defiant  as  I 

walked  her  to  the  office.  I  asked  her  to  sit  in  the  office  until 

Ms.  Reinhardt  could  talk  to  her.  She  never  came  back  to 

class. 

District's  Evidence 

VIDEOS  OF  INCIDENT 

7. 

The  District  introduced  three  videos  of  the  March  26,  2019  incident, 

taken  from  three  security  cameras  showing  the  school  playground,  the  corridor 

leading  to  the  school  office,  and  the  interior  of  the  school  office.  Complainants  also 

provided  selected  still  photos  from  the  hallway  and  school  office  videos. 

8. 

The  video  of  the  school  playground  shows  approximately  50  children 

running  back  and  forth  on  an  asphalt  basketball  court,  and  A.D.  at  center  court  pulling 

on  another  student's  arm.  There  were  three  adults  on  the  basketball  court:  respondent; 

A.D.’s  second  grade  teacher,  Araceli  Ibarra  (Ms.  Ibarra);  and  a  sign  language 

interpreter,  Jeri  Jackson  (Ms.  Jackson).  Ms.  Jackson  walked  over  to  the  two  girls,  at 

which  time  A.D.  left  center  court  and  walked  to  the  basketball  pole  at  one  end  of  the 

court.  A.D.  then  walked  a  few  steps  back  toward  center  court.  At  the  same  time, 

respondent  is  seen  walking  toward  A.D.  from  the  far  side  of  the  court.  A.D.  then 

returned  to  the  basketball  pole,  and  stood  with  her  back  against  the  pole  and  her 

hands  around  it  behind  her.  Respondent  then  approached  A.D.,  and  leaned  down  with 

his  head  next  to  or  in  front  of  A.D.’s.  He  remained  in  that  position  for  approximately  30

seconds,  during  which  time  he  pointed  with  his  hand  in  a  direction  off  the  court.  Ms. 

Ibarra  walked  over  and  stood  near  respondent  for  a  few  moments.  Respondent  then 

stood  up,  pulled  A.D.  away  from  the  pole  with  his  right  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  his 

left  hand  on  her  upper  arm.  The  last  portion  of  this  video  shows  respondent  holding 

A.D.  by  the  hand  or  arm  and  pulling  her  out  of  the  camera's  view  in  the  direction  he 

had  been  pointing. 

9. 

The  video  of  the  corridor  shows  respondent  walking  quickly  and  pulling 

A.D.  by  her  left  hand  and  wrist  with  his  right  hand.  A.D.  is  seen  alongside  and  behind 

respondent,  sometimes  running,  sometimes  crouching,  sometimes  losing  her  footing. 

Respondent  is  seen  lifting  A.D.  off  the  ground  as  he  pulled  her  by  her  hand  and  wrist 

along  the  hallway  toward  the  office.  A.D.  was  trying  to  resist  as  respondent  pulled  and 

lifted  her  by  her  hand  and  wrist. 

10. 

The  office  video  shows  the  office  door  swing  open.  Respondent  entered 

pulling  A.D.  behind  him,  still  holding  her  by  the  left  hand  and  wrist  with  his  right  hand. 

As  respondent  entered  the  office,  he  pulled  A.D.  with  sufficient  force  that  her  ponytail 

flew  out  behind  her.  He  then  swung  A.D.  toward a  set  of  chairs  with  such  force  that  her 

feet  flew  out  behind  her  above  the  ground.  Respondent  then  put  A.D.  on  one  of  the 

chairs  and  walked  briefly  beyond  the  camera's  view,  then  came  into  view  again  and 

exited  the  office.  A.D.  remained  sitting  in  the  chair  with  her  head  down  and  arms 

folded  across  her  chest. 

PRINCIPAL  REINHARDT’S  TESTIMONY 

11. 

Ms.  Reinhardt  has  worked  for  the  District  for  approximately  31  years  in 

various  Capacities,  including  but  not  limited  to  classroom  teacher,  literacy  coach,

assistant  principal,  and  principal.  She  served  as  the  Principal  of  Gaither  Elementary  for 

approximately  three  years,  including  March  2019. 

12. 

On  March  26,  2019,  Ms.  Reinhardt  was  in  her  school  office  when  she 

heard  a  child  screaming.  The  child  sounded  scared  or  frightened.  It  was  not  a  “play” 

scream.  Ms.  Reinhardt  stood  up  at  her  desk  and  looked  out  the  window  from  her  office 

toward  the  playground.  She  saw  respondent  pulling  A.D.  across  the  grassy  area 

adjacent  to  the  basketball  court.  Ms.  Reinhardt  considered  walking  out  of  her  office, 

but  instead  watched  respondent  on  the  video  monitors  in  the  school  office. 

13. 

|  When  respondent  brought  A.D.  into  the  school  office,  he  said  something 

to  the  effect  of  “here  she  is”  then  left  the  office  without  stopping  to  talk  with  Ms. 

Reinhardt.  Respondent  appeared  to  be  frustrated  or  angry  when  he  came  into  the 

school  office. 

14. 

Ms.  Reinhardt  went  directly  to  A.D.,  who  was  crying  and  upset.  Ms. 

Reinhardt  thought  A.D.  might  be  physically  injured  as  a  result  of  respondent's  actions. 

Ms.  Reinhardt  asked  the  school  nurse  to  examine  A.D.  The  school  nurse  checked  A.D. 

and  confirmed  that  she  was  not  physically  injured. 

15. 

The  incident  occurred  at  approximately  12:30  p.m.  At  approximately  2:45 

p.m.,  immediately  after  classes  had  concluded  for  the  day,  Ms.  Reinhardt  went  to  speak 

with  respondent  in  his  classroom.  Respondent  said  he  brought  A.D.  to  the  office 

because  she  had  refused  to  comply  when  he  directed  her  three  times  on  the  basketball 

court  to  go  to  the  school  office.  To  Ms.  Reinhardt's  observation,  respondent  appeared 

to  be  frustrated  during  the  incident  with  A.D.,  and  also  during  his  conversation  with 

Ms.  Reinhardt  in  his  classroom  after  the  incident.

16. 

At  Ms.  Reinhardt’s  request,  resoondent  prepared  a  written  statement 

regarding  the  incident  with  A.D.,  and  gave  it  to  Ms.  Reinhardt  the  next  morning,  on 

March  27,  2019.  In  Ms.  Reinhardt’s  opinion,  respondent's  written  statement  (Factual 

Finding  6)  does  not  accurately  portray  the  incident  she  observed  on  the  video 

monitors. 

17. 

|  Based  on  Ms.  Reinhardt's  view  of  the  incident  on  the  videos,  there  was  no 

safety  risk  to  either  A.D.  or  the  other  students  that  would  justify  respondent's  use  of 

force  on  A.D.  Specifically,  there  was  no  risk  of  harm  to  A.D.  or  other  students  as  she 

stood  with  her  arms  around  the  basketball  pole. 

18. 

On  March  26,  2019,  after  viewing  the  videos,  Ms.  Reinhardt  spoke  with 

Assistant  Superintendent  Reed.  Mr.  Reed  asked  Ms.  Reinhardt  to  draft  a  letter 

outlining  the  incident  and  send  it  to  him.  Ms.  Reinhardt  prepared  a  letter  using  a  pre- 

set  format.  The  letter  is  in  memorandum  form,  addressed  to  respondent,  dated  March 

27,  2019,  and  includes  “Letter  of  Reprimand”  in  the  subject  line.  Ms.  Reinhardt  sent  this 

document  to  Mr.  Reed  pursuant  to  his  request.  At  no  time  did  Ms.  Reinhardt  intend  to 

send  the  letter  to  respondent,  and  at  no  time  did  she  believe  reprimand  was  the 

appropriate  level  of  discipline.  Ms.  Reinhardt  believes  termination  is  the  appropriate 

level  of  discipline. 

19. 

Ms.  Reinhardt’s  March  27,  2019  letter  that  she  sent  to  Mr.  Reed  includes 

her  summary  of  the  conversation  she  had  with  respondent  on  the  afternoon  of  March 

26,  2019,  following  the  incident  with  A.D.  In  that  conversation,  Ms.  Reinhardt  informed 

respondent  that  he  should  not  have  put  his  hands  on  the  student,  and  that  there  were 

other  options  such  as  asking  the  other  two  supervising  adults  for  assistance  or  leaving 

A.D.  alone  for  a  while.  Respondent  agreed  with  Ms.  Reinhardt  and  stated  “I  should 

have  not  touched  the  student.”

20. 

Up  until  March  26,  2019,  Ms.  Reinhardt  has  had  generally  positive 

experiences  with  respondent  as  a  teacher,  and  her  observation  is  that  he  usually  has  a 

positive  impact  on  students.  Respondent  received  generally  favorable  evaluations.  He 

was  rated  as  “meets  or  exceeds”  District  standards  in  a  2017-2018  Alternative 

Evaluation  by  a  peer  coach.  In  a  2014-2015  Personnel  Evaluation  conducted  by  Interim 

Principal  Valerie  Bradley,  resoondent  was  rated  as  “meets  or  exceeds”  District 

standards,  and  it  was  noted  that  respondent  “establishes  a  climate  of  fairness  and 

respect  in  his  P.E.  classes.”  In  a  2014  evaluation  conducted  by  former  Principal  Everett, 

respondent  was  also  rated  as  “meets  or  exceeds”  District  standards. 

21. 

Respondent's  conduct  with  A.D.  is  inconsistent  with  maintaining  a  safe 

environment  for  students.  Respondent's  prior  positive  evaluations  do  not  change  Ms. 

Reinhardt’s  view  that  resoondent’s  conduct  with  A.D.  is  unacceptable,  and  that 

termination  of  his  employment  is  the  appropriate  discipline. 

TONYA  TREAT’S  TESTIMONY 

22. 

Tonya  Treat  is  employed  as  an  administrative  secretary  at  Gaither 

Elementary.  She  has  worked  in  that  position  for  approximately  three  and  a  half  years, 

and  was  on  duty  on  March  26,  2019. 

23. 

Ms.  Treat  observed  respondent  through  the  video  monitors  in  the  school 

office  as  he  pulled  A.D.  toward  the  office.  Her  attention  was  drawn  to  the  video 

monitors  when  she  heard  a  child  screaming  outside.  When  respondent  entered  the 

office  pulling  A.D.,  she  heard  respondent  say  “you  just  stay  there,  yeah.”

ASSISTANT  SUPERINTENDENT  REED’S  TESTIMONY 

24. 

Mr.  Reed  is  employed  as  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human 

Resources  for  Yuba  City  Unified.  He  has  worked  in  that  position  for  approximately  15 

months.  He  has  worked  in  the  field  of  education  for  approximately  26  years. 

25. 

The  District's  most  important  responsibilities  are  to  protect  the  safety  of 

students  and  to  provide  an  environment  that  advances  their  education.  Teachers  share 

these  responsibilities  to  protect  and  educate  students. 

26. 

Mr.  Reed  is  familiar  with  the  District's  policies  regarding  teacher  conduct. 

District  Policy  4119.21  sets  forth  expectations  for  employee  conduct  and  examples  of 

inappropriate  conduct.  Expectations  include  that  employees  should  “exercise  good 

judgment  when  interacting  with  students  and  other  members  of  the  school 

community.”  Inappropriate  conduct  includes  “physically  abusing,  sexually  abusing, 

neglecting,  or  otherwise  willfully  harming  or  injuring  a  child.” 

27. 

District  Policy  5144  states  that  the  Governing  Board  “desires  to  provide  a 

safe,  supportive,  and  positive  school  environment  conducive  to  student  learning...  .” 

The  policy  further  states  as  follows: 

At  all  times,  the  safety  of  students  and  staff  and  the 

maintenance  of  an  orderly  school  environment  shall  be 

priorities  in  determining  appropriate  discipline.  When 

misconduct  occurs,  staff  may  attempt  to  identify  the  cause 

of  the  student's  behavior  and  implement  appropriate 

discipline.  When  choosing  between  different  disciplinary 

strategies,  staff  shall  consider  the  effect  of  each  option  on 

the  student's  health  and  opportunities  to  learn. 

10

28. 

|  Mr.  Reed  also  pointed  to  specific  provisions  of  the  District's  enumeration 

of  “Essential  Functions  [of  a]  Certificated  Teacher.”  The  functions  include  the  following: 

[W]...  [9] 

49001.) 

Corporal  punishment  shall  not  be  used  as  a  disciplinary 

measure  against  any  student.  Corporal  punishment  includes 

the  willful  infliction  of,  or  willfully  causing  the  infliction  of, 

physical  pain  on  a  student.  (Education  Code  [section] 

[A]n  employee's  use  of  force  that  is  reasonable  and 

necessary  to  protect  himself/herself,  students,  staff,  or  other 

persons,  to  prevent  damage  to  property,  or  to  obtain 

possession  of  weapons  or  other  dangerous  objects  within 

the  control  of  the  student  is  not  corporal  punishment. 

(Education  Code  [section]  49001.) 

Provide  an  environment  conducive  to  good  instruction  and 

motivation  in  which  there  is  an  atmosphere  of  self- 

acceptance  and  self-discipline  in  the  areas  of  personal 

development,  character,  and  integrity. 

[W]...  [9] 

district  policy. 

Establish  and  maintain  standards  of  student  behavior  which 

are  consistent,  considerate,  fair,  and  in  keeping  with  the 

11

29. 

In  addition,  Mr.  Reed  pointed  to  specific  provisions  of  the  District's  Code 

of  Ethics  of  the  Education  Profession.  Specifically,  requirements  and  prohibitions 

include  that  a  teacher: 

Shall  not  unreasonably  restrain  the  student  from 

independent  action  in  the  pursuit  of  learning. 

[W]...  [9] 

Shall  make  reasonable  effort  to  protect  the  students  from 

conditions  harmful  to  learning  or  to  health  and  safety. 

Shall  not  intentionally  expose  the  student  to 

embarrassment  or  disparagement. 

30. 

Mr.  Reed’s  opinion  is  that  a  teacher  should  respond  to  student 

behavioral  problems  in  a  manner  that  is  thoughtful,  reasonable,  least  restrictive,  and 

safe  to  all  concerned.  If  the  student  is  defiant,  the  teacher  should  first  initiate  a  verbal 

interaction  to  help  the  child  understand  the  teacher's  expectations.  If  this  is 

unsuccessful  after  multiple  attempts,  the  teacher  can  bring  in  a  second  person  to 

assist.  If  the  student's  behavior  is  not  disruptive,  the  verbal  intervention  can  go  on  for 

quite  some  time.  If  there  is  no  danger  to  the  student  or  others,  then  there  is  no  need 

to  use  force  against  the  student. 

31. 

|  Mr.  Reed  viewed  the  videos  of  incident  between  respondent  and  A.D.  To 

Mr.  Reed's  observation,  A.D.  did  not  present  an  immediate  danger  to  herself  or  other 

children  as  she  stood  near  the  basketball  pole.  He  found  respondent's  written 

statement  of  the  March  26,  2019  incident  (Factual  Finding  6)  to  be  unrealistic  and  self- 

justifying.  Specifically,  it  does  not  appear  to  Mr.  Reed  that  respondent  “carefully 

12

separated”  A.D.’s  hands  from  the  basketball  pole.  Additionally,  respondent  in  no  way 

“escorted”  A.D.  to  the  office.  Respondent's  statement  that  A.D.  “continued  to  be 

defiant”  sounds  to  Mr.  Reed  like  an  excuse  for  respondent's  conduct.  Also, 

respondent's  written  statement  that  he  “asked  her  to  sit  in  the  office  until  [Ms.] 

Reinhardt  could  talk  to  her”  is  not  how  it  appeared  on  the  video. 

32. 

Mr.  Reed  recommended  that  respondent  be  dismissed.  The  two  essential 

concerns  for  Mr.  Reed  in  deciding  what  level  of  discipline  to  recommend  are:  (1)  the 

level  of  aggression  demonstrated  by  respondent  in  the  videos;  and  (2)  respondent's 

self-justifying  responses  in  describing  the  incident.  Mr.  Reed  does  not  take  lightly  the 

termination  of  a  teacher  who  made  a  decision to  join  the  profession.  Mr.  Reed, 

nonetheless,  has  no  doubt  that  termination  is  appropriate  because  of  the  priority  that 

must  be  given  to  protecting  student  safety.  Mr.  Reed  noted  that  respondent  does  not 

have  any  prior  incidents  in  his  personnel  file.  This,  however,  is  not  a  significant  factor  in 

Mr.  Reed's  assessment,  given  respondent's  aggressiveness  toward  A.D. 

SUPERINTENDENT  DOREEN  OSUMI'S  TESTIMONY 

33. 

Ms.  Osumi  is  employed  as  the  Superintendent  of  Yuba  City  Unified 

School  District,  and  has  held  that  position  for  approximately  three  years.  As 

Superintendent,  Ms.  Osumi  oversees  day-to-day  operations,  implements  the  School 

Board's  goals  and  policies,  and  makes  recommendations  to  the  Board  regarding 

teacher  discipline.  The  Board  prioritizes  student  education  and  welfare.  These  priorities 

are  set  forth  in  the  District's  policies.  (Factual  Findings  26  through  29.) 

34. 

Ms.  Osumi  talked  with  Mr.  Reed  about  the  March  26,  2019  incident 

between  respondent  and  A.D  a  day  or  two  after  it  occurred.  Ms.  Osumi  also  reviewed 

the  videos  of  the  incident.  She  was  shocked  by  what  she  saw.  The  primary  points  of 

13

concern  in  the  video  are:  (1)  respondent's  initial  removal  of  A.D.  from  the  basketball 

pole  when  A.D.  did  not  present  an  immediate  danger  to  herself  or  anyone  else;  (2)  the 

manner  in  which  respondent  pulled  A.D  through  the  corridor,  lifting  her  feet  off  the 

ground;  and  (3)  the  manner  in  which  respondent  pulled  A.D  into  the  office  and  placed 

her  in  the  chair. 

35. 

Ms.  Osumi  read  respondent's  written  statement  (Factual  Finding  6),  and 

considered  it  in  determining  what  discipline  to  recommend.  It  is  concerning  to  her  that 

respondent's  written  statement  seems  to  blame  A.D.  for  being  “defiant”  and  minimizes 

his  own  conduct  with  A.D.  Ms.  Osumi  was  very  concerned  about  respondent's 

aggressive  behavior  toward  A.D. 

36. 

In  deciding  what  level  of  discipline  to  recommend,  Ms.  Osumi  considered 

respondent's  conduct  during  the  incident  with  A.D.,  and  the  fact  that  his  conduct 

violated  District  policies.  She  was  also  concerned  that  respondent's  conduct  could 

adversely  impact  students  and  staff  by  setting  the  wrong  example  of  acceptable 

discipline  of  students.  Because  of  respondent's  aggressive  behavior  with  A.D.,  the  fact 

that  respondent  does  not  have  a  record  of  discipline  and  that  he  has  positive 

evaluations  does  not  change  Ms.  Osumi's  opinion  that  termination  is  the  appropriate 

level  of  discipline. 

Respondent's  Evidence 

RESPONDENT'S  TESTIMONY 

37. 

Respondent  has  taught  P.E.  for  15  years.  During  2005  through  2010,  he 

taught  in  the  Plumas  Lake  Elementary  School  District.  During  2011  through  2013,  he 

taught  in  the  Marysville  Joint  Unified  School  District.  Since  2013,  respondent  has 

taught  at  Gaither  Elementary.  Respondent  introduced  into  evidence  a  2012  Classroom 

14

Observation  Form,  and  a  2013  Evaluation  Report  from  Marysville  Joint  Unified  School 

District.  Both  documents  indicate  that  respondent  “meets  or  exceeds  standards”  in  all 

categories.  The  2012  observation  form  indicates  that  respondent  “elicits  and  gives 

respect  to  all  students...  .” 

38. 

Respondent  believes  he  has  a  good  rapport  with  students.  He  introduced 

into  evidence  four  undated  letters,  and  one  letter  dated  December  5,  2003,  all 

addressed  to  respondent  from  former  students.  The  letters  express  gratitude  and 

appreciation  to  respondent  for  his  contributions  to  their  education. 

39. 

Respondent  described  the  March  26,  2019  incident  with  A.D.  The 

students  were  engaging  in  warm-up  exercises.  Because  of  recent  rain  and  muddy  areas 

on  the  grass,  the  students  were  doing  their  warm-ups  on  the  asphalt  basketball  court. 

During  the  warm-ups,  A.D.  ran  into  the  middle  of  the  basketball  court  and  began 

pulling  on  another  student's  arm.  After  A.D.  had  walked  to  the  basketball  pole, 

respondent  tried  to  talk  her  into  taking  a  short  break  and  sitting  on  a  bench  near  the 

basketball  court.  A.D.  yelled  in  his  face,  saying  “No!”  He  asked  her  again,  and  again  she 

yelled  in  his  face  “No!”  Respondent  then  told  her  that  he  would  have  to  send  her  to 

the  school  office.  A.D.  responded  by  yelling  “No,  I'm  not  going  to  the  office!” 

Respondent  asked  her  again,  and  she  again  yelled  “No!”  Respondent  then  separated 

A.D.'s  hands  from  around  the  basketball  pole,  using  just  enough  force  to  separate  her 

hands.  He  then  led  her  to  the  school  office. 

40. 

A.D.  resisted  during  their  walk  to  the  office.  She  lifted  her  feet  off  the 

ground  to  such  an  extent  that  her  knees  would  have  touched  the  ground  if  respondent 

did  not  lift  her.  As  they  continued  toward  the  office,  A.D.  resisted  more  by  lifting  her 

feet  and  becoming  “dead  weight.”  When  he  walked  into  the  office  with  A.D.,  she 

continued  lifting  her  feet,  which  caused  A.D.  to  swing  as  he  entered  the  office  with  her 

15

and  placed  her  in  a  chair.  Respondent  then  let  Ms.  Reinhardt  know  that  A.D.  was  there. 

He  does  not  recall  what  he  said  to  Ms.  Reinhardt. 

41. 

|  Respondent  believes  A.D.  would  have  presented a  safety  risk  if  she  had 

been  allowed  to  stand  at  the  basketball  pole.  There  were  approximately  50  students 

running  back  and  forth  on  the  basketball  court,  and  one  of  them  could  have  run  into 

her.  Respondent  was  also  concerned  that  the  ground  around  the  basketball  court  was 

muddy.  If  the  grass  had  been  dry,  respondent  would  have  asked  A.D.  to  walk  back  and 

forth  on  the  grass  until  she  felt  calmer.  At  no  time  during  the  incident  did  respondent 

feel  angry. 

42. 

Respondent  now  understands  and  believes  that  he  “should  not  have 

touched  the  student.”  Respondent  said  this  to  Ms.  Reinhardt  when  she  spoke  with  him 

in  the  afternoon  of  March  26,  2019,  after  the  incident.  Respondent  would  have  called  a 

supervisor  before  he  put  his  hands  on  A.D.,  but  he  did  not  have a  radio. 

43. 

Since  the  April  26,  2019  incident,  respondent  has  reflected  on  the  matter 

and  undertaken  things  to  improve  himself  as  a  teacher.  Specifically,  he  is  enrolled  in  an 

online  course  titled  Curbing  Disruptive  Behavior.  He  is  approximately  halfway  through 

the  course.  He  is  not  sure  how  many  hours  there  are  in  the  course.  So  far,  he  has 

learned  techniques  to  manage  and  redirect  disruptive  students.  If  he  is  faced  with  a 

similar  situation  in  the  future,  he  would  call  his  supervisor  to  intervene  or  ask  other 

nearby  responsible  adults  to  assist.  Also,  he  would  consider  whether  it  was  safe  to  “just 

walk  away  and  let  the  situation  de-fuse.” 

ARACELI  IBARRA’S  TESTIMONY  AND  SIGNED  STATEMENT 

44. 

Ms.  Ibarra  is  employed  by  the  District  as  a  second  grade  teacher  at 

Gaither  Elementary.  Ms.  Ibarra  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  2003.  She  has 

16

worked  for  10  years  at  Gaither  Elementary  teaching  second  and  fourth  grade.  A.D.  is 

one  of  her  students.  A.D.  requires  more  attention  than  other  students. 

45. 

Ms.  Ibarra  has  known  respondent  since  2013.  She  and  respondent  live 

together  and  are  engaged  to  be  married.  Ms.  Ibarra  conceded  that  her  relationship 

with  respondent  could  influence  her  testimony,  but  emphasized  she  is  an  honest 

person.  She  and  respondent  have  talked  about  A.D.  on  previous  occasions  at  home. 

46. 

Ms.  Ibarra  has  had  opportunities  to  observe  respondent  teaching  P.E.  His 

teaching  style  is  firm  and  structured.  He  is  always  watchful  for  student  safety. 

47. 

On  March  26,  2019,  Ms.  Ibarra  was  on  the  basketball  court  and  saw  A.D. 

pulling  on  another  girl's  arm.  Jeri  Jackson,  a  sign  language  interpreter,  was  also  on  the 

basketball  court  and  intervened.  Ms.  Jackson  told  A.D.  to  go  to  a  bench  next  to  the 

basketball  court.  A.D.  answered  Ms.  Jackson  by  screaming  that  she  did  not  want  to  go, 

and  then  walked  over  to  the  basketball  pole. 

48. 

Ms.  Ibarra  saw  respondent  talking  to  A.D.  at  the  basketball  pole.  A.D. 

refused  to  go  to  the  office,  and  screamed  in  defiance.  She  saw  respondent  remove 

A.D.  from  the  basketball  pole,  and  does  not  believe  he  used  excessive  force  to  do  so. 

She  did  not  see  respondent  separate  A.D.’s  hands. 

49. 

She  did  not  see  any  interaction  between  respondent  and  A.D.  after  he 

removed  her  from  the  pole,  other  than  that  he  “grabbed  her  hand  and  escorted  her  to 

the  office.”  Respondent  did  not  appear  to  be  angry  during  his  interaction  with  A.D. 

17

JERI  JACKSON'S  TESTIMONY 

50. 

Ms.  Jackson  is  a  sign  language  interpreter.  She  was  employed  at  Gaither 

Elementary  at  the  time  of  the  March  26,  2019  incident  between  respondent  and  A.D. 

She  is  now  employed  by  the  District  at  another  school. 

51. 

Ms.  Jackson  has  seen  respondent  teaching  classes,  as  she  worked  with 

him  for  three  years.  To  her  observation,  he  is  a  good  P.E.  teacher.  She  has  never  seen 

him  act  in  anger. 

52. 

On  March  26,  2019,  Ms.  Jackson  was  on  the  basketball  court  helping 

supervise  the  students.  She  saw  A.D.  pulling  on  another  student,  and  told  her  to  keep 

her  hands  to  herself.  A.D.  responded  by  becoming  upset  and  screaming  back  at  Ms. 

Jackson.  A.D.  also  screamed  back  at  respondent  and  grabbed  the  basketball  pole  when 

he  told  her  to  go  to  the  office. 

53. 

Respondent  removed  A.D.'s  hands  from  the  basketball  pole.  He  did  not 

use  excessive  force  when  doing  so.  He  then  “helped”  A.D.  toward  the  office  past  a  big 

wet  muddy  area.  A.D.  was  attempting  to  drop  herself  into  the  mud  as  respondent 

walked  her  to  the  office. 

54. 

A.D.  possibly  presented  a  risk  to  herself  or  others  when  she  stood  by  the 

basketball  pole.  Another  student  could  have  run  into  her. 

CINDIE  BOCK’S  TESTIMONY 

55. 

Ms.  Bock  is  employed  by  the  District  as  a  school  nurse.  During  the  2018- 

2019  school  year  her  responsibilities  included  providing  school  nurse  duties  at  Gaither 

Elementary,  in  addition  to  other  schools. 

18

56. 

Ms.  Bock  knew  respondent  in  his  role  as  a  teacher  at  Gaither  Elementary. 

To  her  observation,  respondent  always  acted  appropriately  and  had  a  great  rapport 

with  students. 

57. 

Ms.  Bock  reviewed  the  videos  of  the  March  26,  2019  incident. 

Respondent's  conduct  did  not  impress  her  as  inappropriate,  opining  “He was  just 

leading  her.”  Ms.  Bock  has  “seen  much  worse.”  She  might  handle  the  situation 

similarly,  but  does  not  know  whether  she  would  lift  A.D.  off  the  ground. 

CARA  DURAN'S  TESTIMONY 

58. 

|  Ms.  Duran  is  employed  by  the  District  as  a  teacher  at  Gaither  Elementary, 

where  she  has  worked  for  the  past  13  years.  She  knows  respondent  from  his  teaching 

at  Gaither  Elementary.  She  has  often  seen  him  teach,  and  has  collaborated  with  him  in 

teaching.  In  her  experience,  respondent  is  an  excellent  teacher,  well  respected  by  the 

students,  and  great  with  behavior  management.  Ms.  Duran  did  not  observe  the  March 

26,  2019  incident  between  respondent  and  A.D. 

SUSAN  CATLEDGE’S  TESTIMONY 

59. 

Ms.  Catledge  has  been  employed  as  a  teacher  by  the  District  for 

approximately  30  years.  She  teaches  at  Gaither  Elementary,  and  was a first  grade 

teacher  in  the  2018-2019  school  year.  She  has  known  respondent  for  six  years,  since 

he  began  working  at  Gaither  Elementary.  She  also  knows  A.D. 

60. 

Ms.  Catledge  viewed  the  videos  of  the  March  26,  2019  incident.  She 

recognized  herself  in  the  video  as  she  walked  across  the  corridor  area  from  the  library. 

She  stopped  and  turned  to  look  at  the  students  on  the  basketball  court.  She  did  not 

see  respondent  and  A.D.  in  the  corridor. 

19

61. 

Ms.  Catledge  also  recognized  herself  in  the  video  of  the  school  office,  as 

she  walked  in.  When  Ms.  Catledge  entered  the  office  she  saw  A.D.  sitting  on  a  chair 

pouting  but  not  making  any  noises.  Ms.  Catledge  also  saw  Ms.  Treat  and  Ms.  Reinhardt 

talking.  One  of  them  asked  her  “Did  you  see  that?”  Ms.  Catledge  had  not  seen 

anything,  as  she  had  been  in  the  library. 

62. 

Ms.  Catledge’s  overall  opinion  of  respondent  is  that  he  is  an  excellent 

teacher.  He  capably  manages a  lot  of  children,  some  of  whom  have  behavioral 

problems.  To  her  observation,  he  does  “an  awesome  Job.” 

Misty  NEVIS'S  TESTIMONY 

63. 

Ms.  Nevis  is  a  sign  language  interpreter.  In  that  capacity,  she  has  worked 

with  respondent  at  Gaither  Elementary.  She  also  knows  respondent,  as  he  taught  her 

children  at  Gaither  Elementary.  To  her  observation,  respondent's  teaching  style  is  stern 

but  fun.  Respondent  has  high  expectations  for  students.  Her  son  has  issues  with 

authority  and  did  not  always  like  respondent,  but  respondent's  class  was  good  for  him. 

Ms.  Nevis  did  not  see  the  March  26,  2019  incident  between  respondent  and  A.D. 

TAMMY  KIGER’S  (FORMERLY  YANEZ)  TESTIMONY 

64. 

Ms.  Kiger  has  two  sons.  Respondent  served  as  their  P.E.  teacher  and 

coach  in  basketball,  football,  and  track,  as  recently  as  2018.  She  has  observed 

respondent  at  events  such  as  track  meets.  She  thinks  he  is  an  “awesome”  teacher.  She 

did  not  see  the  March  26,  2019  incident  between  respondent  and  A.D. 

Discussion 

65. 

Respondent  admitted  to  Ms.  Reinhardt  and  in  his  testimony  that  he 

“should  have  not  touched”  A.D.  (Factual  Findings  19  and  42.)  As  Ms.  Reinhardt  told 

20

respondent  during  their  meeting  following  the  March  26,  2019  incident,  there  were 

other  options  available  to  respondent.  He  could  have  requested  assistance  from  one 

of  the  two  other  supervising  adults.  This  option  was  particularly  viable  given  that 

Araceli  Ibarra,  one  of  the  supervising  adults,  was  A.D.'s  classroom  teacher. 

Alternatively,  he  could  have  allowed  A.D.  to  stand  alone  until  she  was  calmer.  Given 

these  options,  the  fact  that  respondent  did  not  have  a  radio  (Factual  Finding  42)  is 

more  of  an  excuse  than  a  valid  reason  for  his  decision  to  forcibly  remove  A.D.  from  the 

basketball  pole  and  pull  her  to  the  office  by  her  hand  and  wrist. 

66. 

Even  if  it  were  the  case  (which  is  not)  that  respondent  had  no  other 

viable  option  but  to  take  A.D.  to  the  office,  the  evidence  clearly  shows  that  he 

exercised  excessive  and  therefore  impermissible  force  in  doing  so.  The  video  and  still 

photos  show  respondent  pulling  A.D.  by  her  hand  and  wrist  along  the  corridor  and 

into  the  office  show  that  he  pulled  her  with  such  force  and  velocity  that  he  lifted  her 

feet  from  the  ground  with  her  legs  (knees  unbent)  behind  her.  (Exhibit  18,  pages  200 

and  205  through  207.) 

67. 

Respondent's  treatment  of  A.D.  violated  the  District’s  policies  and  Code 

of  Ethics,  which  taken  as  a  whole,  emphasize  that  student  safety  must  be  given  priority. 

Respondent's  conduct  was  not  safe,  and  could  have  injured  A.D.  Moreover, 

respondent's  conduct  set  a  poor  example  of  student  discipline  for  any  students, 

teachers,  or  staff  who  observed  the  incident. 

68. 

Respondent's  written  statement  (Factual  Finding  6)  evidences  an  effort  to 

minimize  the  force  he  used  against  A.D.  Most  prominently,  he  wrote  that  he  “carefully 

separated”  A.D.’s  hands  from  the  basketball  pole  then  “escorted  her  to  the  office.”  This 

choice  of  verbs  and  adjectives  does  not  accurately  describe  what  is  depicted  in  the 

videos.  The  videos  show  that  respondent  pulled  A.D.  from  the  basketball  pole  with  his 

21

right  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  his  left  hand  on  her  upper  arm.  The  video  is  not  clear 

how  much  force  he  used,  but  it  is  clear  that  he  did  not  carefully  separate  A.D.'s  hands. 

The  evidence  is  also  clear  that  respondent  did  not  “escort”  A.D.  in  the  ordinary  sense 

of  the  word.  Rather,  as  discussed  above,  he  pulled  A.D.  by  the  hand  and  wrist  with 

sufficient  force  and  velocity  that  her  feet  were  lifted  from  the  ground. 

69. 

Respondent's  characterization  of  his  conduct  in  his  written  statement  Is 

clearly  an  attempt  to  show  that  he  did  not  use  excessive  force  against  A.D.  This  is  also 

apparent  in  his  testimony  at  hearing,  during  which  he  stated  that  A.D.  lifted  her  own 

feet  off  the  ground  becoming  “dead  weight.”  While  it  may  be  true  that  A.D.  lifted  her 

feet  at  certain  points,  it  is  very  clear  that  respondent  pulled  A.D.  with  sufficient  force  to 

lift  her  feet  off  the  ground,  both  in  the  corridor  and  in  the  school  office.  Because  the 

child  was  not  a  danger  to  herself  or  others,  respondent's  use  of  physical  force  was 

unnecessary  and  against  District  policy. 

70. 

Respondent's  characterization  of  his  conduct  with  A.D.  was  not  blatantly 

dishonest.  He  did  not  deny  that  the  incident  occurred,  nor  did  he  fabricate  additional 

details.  Instead,  he  described  the  incident,  and  his  actions,  in  a  manner  that 

characterized  his  conduct  in  a  favorable  light.  This  being  said,  respondent's  continuing 

effort  to  cast  his  conduct  in  the  most  favorable  light  is  concerning  because  It  indicates 

a  failure  to  accept  full  responsibility,  and  a  consequent  lack  of  rehabilitation.  As  the 

California  Supreme  Court  stated  in  Se/de  v.  Committee  of  Bar  Examiners  (1989)  49 

Cal.3d  933,  940,  “Fully  acknowledging  the  wrongfulness  of  [one’s]  actions  is  an 

essential  step  towards  rehabilitation.” 

71. 

Respondent  presented  evidence  in  support  of  his  claim  that  he  has 

learned  from  the  March  26,  2019  incident,  and  that  he  is  fit  to  serve  as  a  teacher.  First, 

respondent  testified  that  he  has  reflected  on  the  incident  and  undertaken  steps  to 

22

improve  himself  as  a  teacher.  Specifically,  he  is  enrolled  in  an  online  course  titled 

Curbing  Disruptive  Behavior,  which  he  has  partially  completed.  (Factual  Finding  43.) 

Second,  he  has  reflected  on  the  incident  with  A.D.,  and  if  faced  with  a  similar  situation 

in  the  future  he  would  call  his  supervisor  or  ask  another  nearby  adult  for  assistance. 

(Jbid.)  Third,  respondent  presented  performance  evaluations,  letters  of  support,  and 

witness  testimony  regarding  his  record  of  consistently  good  and  even  “awesome” 

performance  as  a  teacher.  This  evidence  regarding  respondent's  past  performance, 

and  his  present  efforts  to  improve  himself  as  a  teacher,  is  less  significant  in  evaluating 

the  appropriate  level  of  discipline  than  his  exercise  of  excessive  force  against  A.D.  as 

depicted  on  videos,  and  his  subsequent  efforts  to  minimize  the  wrongfulness  of  his 

conduct. 

Fitness  to  Teach 

72. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235 

(Morrison),  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from 

the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses 

a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who 

might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.”  The  court  listed  the  following  factors  as 

relevant  when  determining  whether  a  teacher's  conduct  indicates  that  he  or  she  is  fit 

to  teach:  “[1]  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or 

fellow  teachers,  [2]  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated,  [3]  the  proximity  or 

remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct,  [4]  the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the 

party  involved,  [5]  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding 

the  conduct,  [6]  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in 

the  conduct,  [7]  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  [8]  the 

extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon 

23

the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.”  (Ja.  at  pp.  229-230.) 

As  set  forth  below,  when  respondent's  conduct  is  considered  in  light  of  the  Morrison 

factors,  the  District  established  that  respondent  Is  unfit  to  teach. 

73. 

Adverse  Effect  of  Respondent's  Conduct.  Respondent  used  excessive 

force  against  A.D.  by  pulling  her  from  the  basketball  pole,  then  pulling  her  to  the 

office  by  her  hand  and  wrist  with  such  force  that  he  lifted  her  feet  off  the  ground  while 

she  was  screaming  and  resisting.  Respondent  handled  A.D.  with  such  force  that  Ms. 

Reinhardt  asked  the  school  nurse  to  examine  her  for  possible  injuries.  In  addition, 

there  is  a  substantial  likelihood  that  other  students,  teachers,  or  staff  who  witnessed 

the  incident  were  negatively  influenced  or  upset  by  respondent's  excessive  use  of 

force  against  A.D. 

74. 

A  teacher  is  often  described  as  “’...  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and 

actions  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  children  coming  under  [his]  care  and 

protection.”  (Palo  Verde  etc.  Sch.  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  970.) 

Respondent  violated  the  trust  the  school  and  the  District  placed  in  him  when  he  used 

excessive  force  against  A.D.  in  the  presence  of  students,  teachers,  and  staff. 

75. 

Degree  of  Adversity  Anticipated.  Respondent's  use  of  excessive  force 
  

against  A.D.  sent  a  signal  to  any  students,  teachers,  or  staff  who  observed  his  conduct 

that  it  is  acceptable  for  a  teacher  to  handle  a  student  in  this  manner.  It 

is  not 

acceptable;  it 

is  very  wrong.  For  these  reasons,  there  is  a  substantial  likelihood 

respondent's  conduct  had a  significant  adverse  effect  on  students  and  teachers  who 

observed  his  conduct. 

76. 

Proximity  or  Remoteness  in  Time  of  Respondent's  Conduct.  Respondent 

engaged  in  misconduct  on  March  26,  2019.  The  District  placed  respondent  on  paid 

24

administrative  leave  on  March  27,  2019.  The  District  served  respondent  with  a  Notice 

of  Immediate  Suspension  and  the  Statement  of  Charges  on  May  31,  2019.  The  District 

moved  quickly  at  each  step.  Respondent's  misconduct  is  not  remote  in  time. 

77. 

Respondent's  Teaching  Certificate.  Respondent  teaches  students  in 

grades  kindergarten  through  eighth  grade.  These  are  impressionable  years. 

Respondent,  as  a  teacher,  is  expected  to  display  appropriate  adult  behavior.  Instead, 

respondent  used  excessive  force  against  A.D.  in  a  situation  in  which  she  was  not 

endangering  herself  or  others. 

78. 

Extenuating  or  Aggravating  Circumstances.  There  is  no  justification  or 

excuse  for  respondent's  excessive  use  of  force  against  A.D.  There  are  no  aggravating 

circumstances  beyond  the  misconduct  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

79. 

 Praiseworthiness  or  Blameworthiness  of  Respondent's  Motives.  There  is 

no  credible  evidence  that  respondent  had  praiseworthy  motives  when  he  used 

excessive  force  against  A.D.  Specifically,  A.D.  did  not  present  an  imminent  risk  of  harm 

to  herself  or  others  when  standing  by  the  basketball  pole.  It  was  therefore  unnecessary 

and  therefore  impermissible  for  respondent  to  use  physical  force  to  remove  her,  and 

to  then  forcefully  pull  her  to  the  school  office. 

80. 

—_  Likelihood  of  Recurrence.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  substantial 

rehabilitation.  Though  he  acknowledged  he  should  not  have  touched  A.D.,  he 

continued  to  minimize  his  misconduct  even  during  his  testimony.  By  failing  to  fully 

acknowledge  his  misconduct,  respondent  failed  to  demonstrate  he  has  engaged  in 

sufficient  rehabilitation  to  establish  he  will  not  engage  In  similar  misconduct  in  the 

future.  (Seide  v.  Committee  of  Bar  Examiners,  supra,  49  Cal.3d  933,  940.) 

25

81. 

Chilling  Effect  of  Discipline.  There  is  no  evidence  that  dismissal  of 

respondent  will  have  an  adverse  or  chilling  effect  upon  respondent's  constitutional 

rights  or  the  constitutional  rights  of  any  other  teachers. 

82. 

When  all  the  Morrison  factors  are  considered,  the  District  established 

that  respondent  Is  unfit  to  teach  children. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A  school  district  seeking  to  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

from  its  employment  bears  the  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035; 

Bevii  v.  Brisco  (1989)  211  Cal.App.3d  986.)  The  term  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

means  “more  likely  than  not.”  (Sandoval  v.  Bank  of Am.  (2002)  94  Cal.App.4th  1378, 

1388.) 

2. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “immoral”  conduct.  In 

San  Diego  Unitied  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011) 

194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466,  the  court  explained  that: 

A  teacher  may  ...  be  dismissed  for  “[i]Jmmoral  or 

unprofessional  conduct.”  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(1).)  “The  term 

“immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is 

hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to 

good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual 

matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 

indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness; 

26

or  as  willful,  flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral 

indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable  members  of  the 

community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good 

order  and  the  public  welfare.’” 

Wa 

(Board  of  Education  v. 

Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811,  4  Cal.Rptr.  286.) 

Moreover,  the  definition  of  immoral  or  unprofessional 

conduct  must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  unique 

position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed 

“responsibilities  and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which 

do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.”  (Board  of  Trustees 

v.  Stubbletield,  supra,  16  Cal.App.3d  at  p.  824,  94  Cal.Rptr. 

318.) 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  7  through  36,  and  65  through  67, 

respondent  used  excessive  force  against  A.D.  when  he,  then  pulled  her  to  the  office  by 

the  hand  and  wrist  with  such  force  and  velocity  that  he  lifted  her  into  the  air,  both  in 

the  corridor  and  in  the  office.  In  doing  so,  respondent  showed  a  moral  indifference 

and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare.  His  conduct 

was  inconsistent  with  the  reasonable  expectations  society  places  upon  teachers  to 

model  appropriate  adult  conduct  to  the  students  they  teach,  and  to  protect  the  safety 

of  students  and  advance  their  educational  welfare.  Respondent's  conduct  therefore 

establishes  cause  to  dismiss  on  the  basis  of  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

4. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “dishonesty.”  As  set  forth 

in  Factual  Findings  68  through  70,  respondent  did  not  engage  in  dishonesty  in  his 

2/7

written  statement  (Factual  Finding  6)  describing  the  March  26,  2019  incident. 

Consequently,  the  District  did  not  establish  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  for  dishonesty 

under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4). 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “evident  unfitness  for 

service.”  In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.  App.4th  1429,  1444  (Woodland,  the  Third  District  Court  of 

Appeal  defined  the  term  “evident  unfitness  for  service,”  as  used  in  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6),  to  mean  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable 

for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  The 

court  found  that  the  term  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable 

merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the 

employing  school  district.”  (J6/d.)  The  court  held  that  the  Morrison  factors  “must  be 

analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter,  whether  the  cited  conduct  indicates 

unfitness  for  service.”  (ad.  p.  1445.)  As  the  court  in  Woodland  explained,  “[i]f  the 

Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  ‘unfitness’  is 

‘evident’;  i.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.” 

(Ibid) 

6. 

Respondent's  conduct  in  using  excessive  force  against  A.D.,  his  effort  to 

minimize  the  seriousness  of  his  conduct  both  in  his  written  statement  (Factual  Finding 

6),  and  in  his  testimony  at  hearing,  demonstrate  that  he  is  unsuitable  for  teaching  due 

to  a  fixed  character  trait,  not  remediable  merely  on  notice  that  his  conduct  fails  to 

meet  the  District's  expectations.  Consequently,  respondent's  conduct  establishes  cause 

to  dismiss  him  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a)(6). 

28

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  72  through  82,  when  all  the  Morrison 

factors  are  considered,  the  District  established  that  resoondent  is  unfit  to  teach 

children.  Consequently,  the  District's  dismissal  of  respondent  under  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivisions  (a)(1)  and  (a)(6),  is  upheld. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Brian  Coleman  is  DISMISSED  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

of  the  Yuba  City  Unified  School  District  based  on  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal 

Conclusions  1  through 7,  jointly  and  individually. 

DATE:  December  5, 

2019 

DATE:  December  5, 

2019 

DATE:  December  6, 

2019 

DocuSigned  by: 

[ Saudre  MM.  Fink 

07D1A4EA649240F ... 

SANDRA  FINK,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional 

Competence 

ce=  Reale 

3A7287FFSBEB43A... 

SONJA  RENHULT,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional 

Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

26BAECCBE5EF4 78... 

TIMOTHY  J.  ASPINWALL,  Chair 

Commission  on  Professional 

Competence

29 

