BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
BUENA  PARK  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

STACY  MCCAY,  Respondent 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee 

OAH  No.  2019050667 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  on  September  23-26,  2019  in  Buena  Park,  California, 

before  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission).  The  Commission 

consisted  of  Tracy  Do,  Sara  L.  Smith,  and  Nana  Chin,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ 

with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California. 

The  Buena  Park  School  District  (Buena  Park/District)  was  represented  by  Joshua 

E.  Morrison  and  Sara  C.  Young  with  the  law  firm  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Rudd  & 

ROMO. 

Stacy  McCay  (Respondent)  was  present  throughout  the  proceedings  and  was 

represented  by  Arthur  N.  Four  of  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan. 

Prior  to  the  presentation  of  evidence,  the  parties  stipulated  to  admission  of  the 

exhibits  as  outlined  in  their  respective  Final  Exhibit  lists  with  exception  of  Bates

Stamped  page  BPSD000156  of  Exhibit  20.  The  Stipulation  was  marked  as  Exhibit  30 

and  the  exhibit  lists  referenced  in  the  Stipulation  were  marked  collectively  as  Exhibit 

30A, 

OuIblic. 

In  order  to  protect  the  privacy  of  Respondent  and  to  prevent  the  disclosure  of 

confidential  information,  the  ALJ  issued  a  Protective  Order  placing  Bates-stamped 

page  BPSDOO0048  of  Exhibit  11  and  Exhibits  503,  506,  509  and  511  under  seal  after  its 

use  in  preparation  of  the  Proposed  Decision.  This  document  shall  remain  under  seal 

and  shall  not  be  opened,  except  as  provided  by  the  Protective  Order.  A  reviewing 

court,  parties  to  this  matter,  their  attorneys,  and  a  government  agency  decision  maker 

or  designee  under  Government  Code  section  11517  may  review  the  document  subject 

to  the  Protective  Order  provided  that  such  document  is  protected  from  release  to  the 

The  record  was  held  open  until  October  10,  2079,  in  order  to  allow  parties  to 

submit  Articles  10,  11,  12,  13  and  15  of  the  2015-2018  Agreement  between  the 

Governing  Board  of  the  Buena  Park  School  District  and  the  Buena  Park  Teachers 

Association  (BPTA  Contract)  that  was  in  place  in  2016.  The  Articles  were  timely 

received  and  collectively  marked  and  admitted  as  Exhibit  35. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  October 

10,  2019. 

The  Commission  considered  the  entire  record  in  executive  session.  After  due 

consideration  of  the  entire  record  herein,  the  Commission  makes  the  following  Factual 

Findings,  Legal  Conclusions,  and  Order.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

Elementary}. 

Background 

1. 

Respondent  was,  at  all  times  relevant  herein,  a  permanent  certificated 

employee  of  the  District  assigned  to  Gordon  H.  Beatty  Elernentary  School  (Beatty 

2, 

On  April  22,  2019,  Ramon  Mirarmmontes,  Ed.D.,  the  Superintendent  for  the 

District  had  Respondent  served  with  a  Notice  of  Dismissal  Unless  a  Hearing  is  Timely 

Requested  (Notice  of  Intent  to  Disrniss).  Attached  to  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss 

was  the  Statement  of  Charges,  the  Board  of  Education  (Board}’s  Resolution  re:  Intent 

to  Dismiss;  Request  for  Hearing  form  and  selected  statutes  and  regulations. 

3. 

Respondent  timely  served  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  this  matter  ensued. 

4. 

Respondent  began  her  employment  with  the  District  working  as  a 

substitute  teacher  in  1996.  After  being  hired  as  a  full-time  teacher,  she  has  worked  at 

Beatty  Elementary  as  a  fourth  grade  teacher. 

2016-2017  School  Year  Absence 

5, 

On  July  21,  2016,  Respondent  informed  Seri  Hwang,  the  newly  assigned 

orincipal  at  Beatty  Elementary,  that  she  would  be  attending  the  Rio  de  Janeiro 

Olympics  in  Brazil,  and  therefore  she  would  not  be  reporting  to  work  until  August  22, 

2016.  Principal  Hwang  notified  respondent  that  she  would  have  to  check  with  the 

District  office  to  see  if  leave  could  be  approved.

6, 

After  consulting  the  District  office,  Principal  Hwang  contacted 

Respondent  by  phone  on  July  25,  2016,  and  informed  her  that  she  did  not  have 

approval  to  go  on  the  trip  during  student  instructional  time.  Principal  Hwang 

documented  the  conversation  in  a  letter  that  she  emailed  respondent.  The  letter, 

which  was  incorrectly  dated  as  July  22,  2016,  is  somewhat  unclear  but  does  convey 

that  Respondent's  request  to  be  absent  for  the  first  two  weeks  of  school  had  not  been 

approved. 

7. 

On  July  28,  2016,  Respondent  responded  in  writing.  In  the  letter, 

Respondent  claims  that  she  had  been  planning  to  go  to  the  Olympics  in  Rio  de  Janeiro 

ever  since  she  saw  the  city  showcased  during  the  Closing  Ceremonies  at  the  Olympics 

in  London.  Respondent  claims  that  all  her  immediate  supervisors  had  been  aware  of 

her  olans  to  attend  the  Olympics  and  no  one  had  informed  her  that  she  would  need  to 

get  written  approval  for  the  trip.  Respondent  further  states  that  she  had  always 

understood  the  change  in  the  schoo!  calendar  would  not  affect  her  plans  and  that  she 

had  made  many  nonrefundable  purchases  based  on  that  belief.  Respondent  asserted 

that  she  “strongly  believe[d]  that  [her]  absence  should  be  approved  based  on  the 

decision  by  the  district  to  honor  travel  plans  made  before  the  change  of  the 

instructional  calendar.”  (Exhibit  18.) 

8. 

Principal  Hwang  responded  to  Respondent  in  writing  on  July  29,  2016. 

Principal  Hwang  advised  Respondent  that  prior  notice  to  administrators  did  not 

constitute  written  approval.  Principal  Hwang  also  noted  that  as  respondent's  trip  to 

Rio  de  Janeiro  was  “specifically  recreational  in  nature,  it  cannot  be  approved  as 

Personal  Necessity  or  Sick  Leave  according  to  BPTA  Contract  language”  and 

recommended  Respondent  submit  a  request  for  unpaid  leave  of  absence  to  the 

Governing  Board  if  she  intended  on  moving  forward  with  the  trip.  (Exhibit  19.3

9, 

On  August  1,  2076,  the  District  received  an  undated  letter  from 

Respondent  addressed  to  Barbie  Montelongo,  the  Director  of  Human  Resources.  In  the 

letter,  Respondent  claims  that  she  had  already  had  plans  to  go  to  the  Olympics  in  Rio 

de  Janeiro  when  the  school  calendar  changed  and  that  the  teachers  had  been  told 

during  a  staff  meeting  that  they  could  use  their  personal  necessity  days  for  vacations 

that  had  already  been  planned.  “This  was  part  of  the  bargaining  agreement.”  (Exhibit 

4.)  Respondent  further  claimed  that  as  she  hac  spent  money  on  the  trip  well  before 

the  calendar  change  and  that  she  would  appreciate  the  District  honoring  the 

agreement  and  permitting  her  to  use  personal  necessity  days  to  attend  the  Olympics. 

If  not,  she  was  “requesting  leave  for  the  time  not  covered  by  other  absence  reasons." 

(Exhibit  4) 

10. 

Though  the  District  did  not  approve  Respondent's  absence,  Respondent, 

went  on  the  trip  to  Brazil,  and  missed  the  first  two  weeks  of  school.  To  her  credit, 

Respondent  did  attempt  to  minimize  the  disruption  her  absence  would  have  on  her 

students  by  ensuring  that  a  substitute  teacher  she  trusted  was  assiqned  to  her 

classroom  in  her  absence. 

11. 

According  to  Principal  Hwang,  the  first  few  weeks  of  school  is  significant 

as  that  is  the  time  when  students  meet  and  establish  a  relationship  with  their  teachers, 

and  for  the  teacher  to  set  classroom  procedures  and  guidelines  for  the  upcoming 

school  year. 

Respondent's  Contentions 

12. 

At  hearing,  Respondent  acknowledged  that  she  had  missed  the  first  two 

weeks  of  the  2016-2017  school  year  but  contended  that  she  had  been  granted

permission  to  start  late  after  the  changes  to  the  instructional  calendar  were  announced 

in  2013,  as  she  fell  within  the  exception  agreed  to  by  the  District. 

CHANGE  TO  THE  DISTRICT'S  INSTRUCTIONAL  CALENDAR 

13. 

At  the  end  of  the  2072-2013  school  year,  the  District  negotiated  a 

change  to  the  instructional  calendar  with  the  BPTA,  moving  the  school  start  date  back 

approximately  two  weeks.  In  order  to  minimize  any  negative  impact  on  teachers,  the 

District  informally  agreed  to  try  to  accommodate  those  who  had  already  planned  and 

paid  for  a  vacation  during  the  two  weeks  in  2013.  The  requests  were  to  be  reviewed 

and  approved  by  the  District  on  a  case-by-case  basis. 

14.0 

A, 

Greg  Magnuson  was  the  superintendent  for  the  District  from  2008 

until  he  retired  in  July  2018.  Superintendent  Magnuson  testified  that  the  District’s 

verbal  agreement  to  try  to  accommodate  the  teachers  had  only  been  intended  to  be 

for  the  2013-2014  school  year.  It  was  never  contemplated  that  the  accommodations 

would  continue  three  years  after  the  calendar  change. 

B. 

Superintendent  Magnuson  explained  that  the  reason  for  limiting 

the  accommodations  was  that  the  start  of  the  school  year  is  key  to  establishing 

relationships  with  students  to  get  the  school  year  off  to  a  good  start.  It  was  never 

contemplated  that  accommodations  would  continue  to  be  made  due  to  this  change 

for  teachers  in  2016. 

15. 

Superintendent  Magnuson  first  became  aware  of  Respondent's  plans  to 

attend  the  Olympics  in  Brazil  in  late  July  of  2016,  either  by  being  notified  by  Principal 

Hwang  or  through  communications  with  Director  Montelongo.  Superintendent 

Magnuson  discussed  Respondent's  request  with  Principal  Hwang  and  provided  her 

with  guidance  on  the  BPTA  Contract  provisions  regarding  leaves. 

6

NOTIFICATION  TO  STAFF  OF  CALENDAR  CHANGE 

16. 

During  Respondent's  deposition  on  August  22,  2019,  Respondent  stated 

that  she  learned  of  the  new  start  date  during  a  staff  meeting.  According  to 

Respondent,  Nancy  Rios,  who  was  the  principal  at  Beatty  Elementary  at  the  time,  “said 

if  we  had  pians,  we  had  to  let  our  principal  know,  and  we  were  allowed  to  use 

personal-necessity  days  if  it  was  before  the  old  calendar.”  (Exhibit  27,  page  18.) 

17. 

Respondent  presented  no  other  witnesses  who  had  a  similar  recollection 

of  the  meeting  at  the  hearing.  According  to  Daniele  Fuson,  Respondent's  co-worker 

and  fellow  4th  grade  teacher  at  Beatty  Elementary,  the  information  communicated  to 

teachers  was  that  if  teachers  had  plans  or  had  purchased  tickets  prior  to  the  calendar 

change,  to  talk  to  their  administrator  to  "figure  out  what  is  the  best  plan  of  action.  To 

go,  to  not  go.  Whatever  is  best  for  the  students.” 

18.0 

A. 

Karen  Musurlian,  a  history  teacher  at  Buena  Park  Junior  High 

School  and  the  president  of  the  BPTA,  testified  that  Respondent  had  contacted  her 

shortly  after  the  calendar  change  had  been  announced. 

B. 

According  to  Ms.  Musurlian,  teachers  at  her  junior  high  school, 

were  also  notified  of  the  change  to  the  school  calendar  during  staff  meetings.  The 

teachers  were  informed  that  those  with  vacation  plans  that  could  not  be  changed 

would  have  their  plans  honored  as  the  District  was  giving  such  late  notice.  All  that  was 

required  was  that  the  impacted  teachers  to  notify  their  principals.  Ms.  Musurlian  was 

unable  to  recall  if  the  teachers  hac  been  notified  of  this  accommodation  by  the 

orincioal  or  District  personnel  at  a  staff  meeting  but  did  not  believe  the  proposed 

accommodations  were  presented  at  a  District  wide  meeting  or  that  there  was  any 

official  discussion.

C. 

As  it  was  established  that  the  discussions  Ms.  Musurlian  was  privy 

to  took  place  at  the  junior  high  school  and  not  the  elementary  school,  her  testimony 

regarding  the  meetings  at  the  junior  high  was  disregarded. 

MEETING  WITH  PRINCIPAL  RIOS 

19. 

Following  the  staff  meeting,  Respondent  approached  Principal  Rios, ' 

upset  by  how  the  new  calendar  was  going  to  disrupt  her  long-term  plans  to  attend  the 

2016  Olympics  in  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

20. 

Respondent's  testimony  at  hearing  regarding  the  meeting  with  Principal 

Rios  was  consistent  with  her  other  statements  to  the  District  and  deposition  testimony 

in  that  she  insisted  that  Principal  Rios  gave  her  verbal  permission  to  attend  the 

Olympics  during  the  meeting  and  start  late  during  the  2016-2017  school  year. 

Respondent  further  testified  during  her  deposition  that  she  had  told  a  number  of  the 

employees  at  the  school,  including  Ms.  Fuson  and  Mindi  Whiteley,  that  she  had 

received  permission  from  Principal  Rios  to  go.  (Exhibit  27,  pages  22-23.) 

21. 

At  hearing,  when  asked  about  the  expenses  she  had  incurred  related  to 

her  trip  to  Brazil,  Respondent's  responses  were  extremely  disjointed  and  consisted  of  a 

number  of  long  pauses  and  contradictions.  Respondent  first  testified  that  she  had 

made  purchases  related  to  the  trip  prior  to  the  announcement  of  the  change  in  the 

  

'  Confusingly,  Respondent  would  later  deny  that  this  meeting  occurred  as  she 

had  not  been  present  the  last  two  months  of  the  school  year  but  would  continue  to 

testify  that  she  had  received  permission  from  Principal  Rios  during  the  private 

meeting.

school’s  calendar,  and  that  those  purchases  included  “tickets,  hotel  accommodations, 

airline  --.”  Respondent  then  claimed  that  she  did  not  remember  which  purchases  she 

rade  specifically  or  when  she  purchased  her  airline  ticket.  After  further  questioning, 

Respondent  testified  that  she  had  not  purchased  her  airline  ticket  prior  to  the 

announcement,  claiming  that  her  purchases  were  made  after  she  had  received 

permission  from  Principal  Rios. 

22. 

&B. 

Principal  Rios,  who  had  retired  at  the  end  of  the  2012-2013  school 

year,  testified  at  hearing.  According  to  Principal  Rios,  the  change  to  the  school 

calendar  was  a  “giant  shift”  and,  as  a  result,  it  was  on  the  agenda  for  ail  the  staff 

meetings  that  were  conducted  in  May  and  June  of  that  year. 

B. 

After  one  of  the  staff  meetings,  Respondent  approached  her 

distraught  over  the  change.  Respondent  requested  her  permission  to  start  the  school 

year  late  in  2016  so  that  she  could  attend  the  Olympics  in  2016.  According  to  Principal 

Rios,  she  reminded  Respondent  that  she  was  retiring  at  the  end  of  the  school  year  and 

that  she  did  not  have  authority  to  grant  her  permission.  She  instructed  Respondent  to 

direct  her  request  to  Superintendent  Magnuson,  as  he  was  the  only  individual  who  hac 

authority  to  grant  Respondent  permission  to  start  late. 

C. 

Principal  Rios  expressed  that  she  did  not  know  why  Respondent 

would  represent  that  she  gave  her  such  permission  as  principals  do  not  have  that  kind 

of  authority  and  they  would  have  to  get  permission  from  their  supervisor. 

Request  for  Paid  Leave 

23. 

Respondent  submitted  a  request  to  be  paid  leave  for  the  days  she  had 

been  absent  and  in  Brazil.  Respondent  designated  August  8,  9,  and  10  as  Bereavement 

leave;  August  11  and  12  as  Personal  Necessity;  and  August  15,  16,  and  17  as 

9

lliness/Sick  leave.  The  three  categories  of  leave  are  generally  governed  by  Articles  10, 

11,  12  and  13  of  the  BPTA  contract. 

24. 

A, 

Article  10  of  the  BPTA  Contract  governing  sick  leave  specifies  that 

employees  of  the  school  district  are  entitled  to  take  leave  “for  illness  or  injury 

including  periods  of  disability  or  incapacitation  for  preqnancy  or  childbirth.”  (Exhibit  8, 

p.  35.)  Witnesses  generally  testified  that  sick  leave  can  also  be  used  by  a  teacher  for 

medical  appointments  and  that  teachers  are  not  required  to  notify  administration 

beforehand  that  they  intend  to  use  sick  leave.  Article  11  indicates  that,  under  norrnal 

circumstances,  employees  are  not  required  to  verify  sick  jeave  unless  the  employee  has 

been  absent  for  five  consecutive  days  of  sickness.  (Exhibit  34,  p.  40.3 

B. 

According  to  respondent,  she  clairned  three  days  as  sick  leave  as 

she  received  physical  therapy  from  an  unidentified  person  for  her  back  pain. 

C. 

Based  on  the  forgoing,  Respondent's  use  of  sick  leave  in  this 

manner  was  not  improper. 

25. 

A. 

Article  12  of  the  Agreement  generally  provides  that  “[plersonal 

necessity  leave  may  be  used  at  the  employee's  option  except  for...  recreational 

purposes.”  (Exhibit  35,  p.  41.)  The  contract,  however,  allows  teachers  with  over  30  days 

of  sick  leave  to  use  one  cay  of  personal  necessity  leave  without  restriction  and  then  an 

additional  day  for  each  additional  20  days  of  sick  leave. 

B. 

During  Respondent's  deposition,  Respondent  testified  that  one 

orimary  purpose  of  her  trip  to  Brazil  was  recreational,  the  other  was  bereavement. 

(Exhibit  27,  p.  28.) 

10

C. 

At  the  outset  of  the  2016-2017  school  year,  parties  stipulated  that 

Respondent  had  47.1  days  of  sick  leave.  Accordingly,  Respondent  would  have  been 

entitled  to  use  one  day  of  personal  necessity  leave  without  restriction. 

D, 

Respondent's  testimony  at  hearing,  however,  regarding  her  use  of 

personal  necessity  leave  days,  however,  were  not  geared  towards  her  rights  under  the 

BPTA  Contract.  Instead,  Respondent  asserts  that  she  requested  personal  necessity 

leave  days  because  she  relied  on  Principal  Rios’s  assurances  that  she  could,  in  fact, 

claim  leave  days  for  her  trip  to  Brazil.  Her  testimony  is  not  credited.  Even  assuming 

Respondent  truly  believed  that  Principal  Rios  has  given  her  permission,  Respondent 

had  been  notified  by  her  current  principal,  Principal  Hwang,  that  she  did  not  have 

permission  to  claim  leave  days  for  her  trip. 

26. 

A. 

Article  13  of  the  BPTA  Contract  provides  ernployees  up  to  five 

“working  days”  at  full  salary  compensation  “in  the  event  of  the  death  of  any  member 

of  fan  ernployee’s]  immediate  family.”  (Exhibit  24,  p.  43.)  The  Agreement  does  not 

specify  any  time  frame  as  how  long  after  the  death  bereavement  can  be  taken. 

B. 

Superintendent  Magnuson  testified  that  bereavement  was 

intended  to  be  used  close  in  time  to  the  death  of  the  family  member  and  was  not 

intended  to  be  “banked”  for  future  use. 

C. 

His  testimony  is  corroborated  by  testimony  from  Ms.  Musurlian. 

According  to  Ms.  Musurlian,  there  are  no  strict  procedures  laid  out  in  the  BPTA 

Contract,  however,  bereavement  time  requested  more  than  a  year  after  the  death 

would  not  be  appropriate. 

D, 

At  hearing,  Respondent  testified  that  she  claimed  the  days  as 

bereavement  as  she  wanted  to  honor  Respondent's  grandfather,  who  passed  away  in 

14

March  2013.  When  confronted  with  evidence  that  she  had  taken  bereavement  close  in 

time  to  when  her  grandfather  passed  away,  Respondent  insisted  that  she  had  been 

unaware  that  she  had  taken  bereavement  until  she  was  presented  evidence  of  that  at 

hearing. 

E. 

Based  on  the  forgoing,  Respondent's  request  to  use  bereavement 

leave  in  order  to  honor  her  grandfather's  passing  was  improper. 

Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance 

27. 

After  Respondent's  return,  Superintendent  Magnuson  issued  Respondent 

a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance  on  September  22, 

2016  (2016  Notice). 

28. 

The  2016  Notice  was  issued  following  an  investigation  by  Superintendent 

Magnuson  wherein  he  concluded  that  Respondent's  decision  to  the  miss  the  first  two 

weeks  of  the  2016-2017  school  year  was  without  approval  and  “extremely 

unprofessional  and  dishonest.”  (Exhibit  6,  BPSD  000008.)  The  Notice  provided 

Respondent  with  a  Plan  of  Assistance  that  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  comply  with  all 

directives  given  to  her  by  her  supervisors:  (2}  cormply  with  all  applicable  rules  and 

procedures  when  requesting  leave;  and  (3)  conduct  herself  in  a  professional  and 

honest  manner  at  all  times. 

29. 

Respondent  submitted  a  response  to  the  2016  Notice.  In  it,  Respondent 

does  not  accept  any  responsibility  for  her  conduct.  First,  Respondent  claims  that  she 

had  been  advised  by  unnamed  people  on  the  bargaining  committee  and  Principal  Rios 

that  she  “could  use  personal  necessity  days  for  the  time  affecting  [s/c]  by  changing  our 

school  schedule.”  (Exhibit  3.)  Respondent  also  asserts  that  Principal  Rios  “was 

disseminating  information  that  wasn’t  true”  and  blames  Annie  Ole,  the  principal  at 

12

Beatty  Elementary  after  Principal  Rios,  for  telling  her  to  check  the  contract  instead  of 

directing  her  to  request  leave  or  to  contact  Human  Resources.  (Exhibit  3) 

30. 

Superintendent  Magnuson  estimated  that,  on  average,  during  his  14-year 

tenure  in  Human  Resources  at  the  District,  he  would  issue  less  than  one  Notice  of 

Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance  a  year.  It 

is  one  of  the  most 

serious  forms  of  discipline  he  could  issue. 

Analysis 

31. 

Respondent's  assertion  that  she  reasonably  relied  on  permission  she  had 

been  granted  from  Principal  Rios  to  attend  the  Olympics  in  2016  and  start  school  late 

was  not  credited.  As  an  initial  matter,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  that  Principal  Rios 

had  granted  her  permission  to  attend  the  2016  Olympics.  Unlike  Respondent’s 

testimony,  Principal  Rios’s  testimony  was  clear  and  concise  and  did  not  have  any 

internal  inconsistencies.  Further,  there  was  no  evidence  presented  at  the  hearing  to 

suggest  that  Principal  Rios  would  benefit  from  being  untruthtul  about  her  meeting 

with  Respondent  or  that  she  otherwise  held  any  animus  toward  Respondent.  In  fact, 

both  claimed  to  have  had  a  “good  relationship.” 

32. 

Further,  it  is  not  credible  that  Respondent  believed  Principal  Rios  had  the 

authority  at  the  end  of  the  2012-2013  school  year  to  grant  her  permission  to  start 

school  late  in  the  beginning  of  the  2016-2017  school  year,  three  years  after  her 

retirement.  Nor  was  it  credible  that  Respondent,  having  obtained  such  permission, 

failed  to  memorialize  her  permission  in  writing.  It  is  also  telling  that  though 

Respondent  testified  in  her  deposition  that  she  had  told  other  employees,  including 

Ms.  Fuson  and  Ms.  Whiteley  that  Principal  Rios  had  given  her  permission,  no 

testimony,  was  presented  from  either  witness  that  would  corroborate  that  testimony. 

13

33. 

The  evidence  further  established  that  Respondent  spoke  with  Principal 

Oie  about  having  received  Principal  Rios’s  permission,  following  Principal  Rias’s 

retirement.  According  to  Respondent's  deposition  testimony,  “Itold  her  of  the 

permission  I  got  from  [Principal  Rios]  to  go  to  the  Olympics”  and  was  told  by  Principal 

Oie  "that  [had  to  go  check  the  contract.”  (Exhibit  27,  p.  30.) 

34. 

=  Article  15  of  the  BPTA  Contract  states:  “fa]ny  special  request  regarding 

absence  other  than  lliness  and  not  specifically  stated  in  the  rules  and  regulations  must 

have  School  Board  approval.  The  request  shall  be  submitted  through  the 

Superintendent,  thirty  (30)  days  prior  to  the  date  of  anticipated  leave,  except  in  cases 

of  emergency.”  (Exhibit  35,  p.  45) 

35. 

According  to  Ms.  Musurlian,  leave  requests  are  generally  handled  very 

informally  at  the  District  and  that,  an  employee  would  typically  make  leave  request 

through  their  principal  but  would  ultimately  have  to  obtain  Board  approval.  In  this 

case,  Respondent  had  been  explicitly  directed  towards  the  BPTA  Contract  by  her 

principal.  Despite  such  direction,  however,  Respondent  failed  to  timely  request  Board 

approval. 

36. 

According  to  Superintendent  Magnuson,  dishonest  or  fraudulent 

behavior  is  very  problematic.  The  importance  of  honesty  is  underscored  in  Board 

policies,  administrative  regulations  and  is  even  a  part  of  the  California  Standards  for 

the  Teaching  Profession.  As  a  practical  matter,  teachers,  who  operate  in  a  largely 

autonomous  manner,  are  representatives  of  the  District  and  the  District  expects 

teachers  to  be  honest  with  students  and  their  parents,  colleagues  and  peers  and 

administrators. 

14

Claim  of  Workplace  Injury 

37. 

Onthe  morning  of  October  22,  2018,  Respondent  reported  to  Tina  Corsa, 

the  school  secretary,  and  Principal  Hwang  that  she  had  sustained  an  injury  on  a  rubber 

mat  as  she  was  waiking  to  the  office. 

38. 

Principal  Hwang  followed  her  standard  procedure  and  asked  Respondent 

if  she  needed  to  see  the  doctor  and  also  requested  that  she  fill  out  the  portion  of  the 

injury  report  requesting  information  regarding  where  the  injury  occurred,  the  nature  of 

the  injury  and  a  description  of  how  the  injury  occurred. 

39. 

Respondent  described  the  accident  in  the  report  as  follows,  “I  was 

walking  with  a  cane  and  put  the  cane  down  to  push  off  while  walking.  The 

handicapped  pad  was  not  attached  to  the  ground  so  my  cane  went  out  from  under 

my,  rade  my  back  hurt.”  (Exhibit  9) 

40. 

After  filling  out  the  injury  report  describing  when,  where  and  how  she 

got  hurt,  Respondent  declined  medical  treatment  and  returned  to  her  classroom.  At 

lunchtime,  Respondent  went  back  to  the  office  and  met  with  Tyler  Morgan,  the 

assistant  principal  (AP}  at  Beatty  Elementary.  Respondent  reported  to  AP  Morgan  that 

she  was  in  a  lot  of  pain  and  could  no  longer  teach  that  day.  Respondent,  however, 

stated  that  she  did  not  want  to  use  her  personal  sick  leave.  AP  Morgan  contacted 

Director  Montelongo  for  instruction  on  how  to  proceed.  Director  Montelongo  relayed 

to  Respondent  that  if  she  went  home  without  medical  treatment,  she  would  have  to 

use  her  personal  sick  leave.  If  she  wanted  the  District  to  pay  for  her  time,  she  would 

have  to  go  to  Concentra,  the  hospital  used  by  the  District  for  workplace  injuries. 

44. 

Respondent  chose  to  go  to  Concentra.  After  being  seen  at  Concentra, 

Respondent  was  told  to  remain  off  of  work  for  the  rest  of  the  day  and  to  then  resume 

15

working  with  restrictions.  Respondent  took  two  additional  days  off  during  the  week 

after  the  incident  due  to  ner  ongoing  symptoms,  using  her  personal  sick  leave. 

42, 

As  Respondent  received  treatment  at  Concentra  for  an  injury  she 

allegedly  suffered  at  work,  a  worker's  compensation  claim  was  filed  on  her  behalf.  The 

company  that  administers  the  District's  workers’  compensation  plan,  Keenan  & 

Associates  (Keenan),  contracted  with  Natalie  Kiemek,  a  self-employed  private 

investigator,  to  conduct  a  fact-finding  investigation  into  Respondent's  claim. 

Investigator  Kliemek  was  farniliar  with  Respondent  as  she  had  previously  obtained 

statements  from  Respondent  in  connection  with  one  of  Respondent's  prior  claims. 

43. 

As  part  of  her  investigation,  Investigator  Klemek  interviewed  Respondent 

at  Beatty  Elernentary  on  November  15,  2018.  Respondent's  staternent  was  recorded 

with  her  permission  and  subsequently  transcribed. 

A. 

During  the  interview,  Respondent  reported  that  the  October  22 

injury  occurred  early  in  the  morning  at  approximately  7:30  a.m.  as  she  had  been 

heading  towards  the  office.  Respondent  volunteered  that  she  was  wearing  "Nike  flex 

runs  2013's”  when  the  injury  occurred  and  using  a  cane  for  support.  (Exhibit  11, 

BPSDO000077.)  After  passing  the  first  doorway  after  her  classroom,  she  put  the  cane 

on  the  border  of  the  mat  in  front  of  the  second  doorway.  According  to  Respondent,  “.. 

.  when  I  went  to  put  a  weight  on  the  cane  the  border  slipped  out  from  underneath  me 

jerking  my  whole  body  in  a  way  that  you  don't  want  to  be  jerked  when  you're  already 

using  a  cane.  (Exhibit  17,  BPSDO0000078,)  The  cane  then  “lust  shpped  out.  It  sid  with 

the  border.”  (Exhibit  11,  BPSD0000079.)  Respondent  reported  that,  on  her  way  back 

from  the  office,  she  took  a  picture  of  the  mat  where  she  had  been  injured. 

16

B. 

According  to  Investigator  Klemek,  Respondent  was  cordial  during 

the  interview  and  appeared  to  be  doing  her  best  to  remember  the  events. 

C. 

Investigator  Klemek  also  reviewed  video  footage  from  six  camera 

locations  at  the  school  site  of  when  and  where  Respondent  claimed  the  injury 

occurred.  When  reviewing  the  footage  against  Respondent's  statement,  Investigator 

Klemek  noted  that  as  the  event  described  by  Respondent  did  not  occur  as  she  claimed 

it  did. 

D. 

At  the  conclusion  of  her  investigation,  Investigator  Klemek 

submitted  a  report  with  her  findings,  which  forwarded  by  Regency  to  Keenan,  and  was 

admitted  into  evidence  as  Exhibit  10.  Though  Investigator  Klemek  acknowledges 

Regency  made  some  stylistic  changes  to  her  report,  the  substance  of  it  remained  the 

same. 

Video  Surveillance 

44. 

Beatty  Elementary  has  a  Closed  Circuit  TV  (CCTV)  security  system  on  its 

campus.  The  cameras  are  generally  situated  to  record  the  entrances  and  exits  of  the 

school.  Any  kind  of  movement,  including  an  insect  flying  into  the  area,  will  prompt  the 

camera  focused  on  the  area  to  start  recording.  If  there  are  gaps  in  the  video 

surveillance,  it  means  that  there  was  no  movement  in  the  area. 

45. 

A  zip  drive,  which  was  submitted  into  evidence  as  Exhibit  20°,  contained 

seven  video  clips  captured  by  the  surveillance  cameras  during  the  period  Respondent 

had  been  allegedly  injured.  Each  clip  was  Bate  stamped  with  its  own  page  number. 

  

*  The  zip  drive  also  contained  one  video  clip  identified  as  Exhibit  15. 

17

A. 

The  video  clip  Bate-stamped  BPSD000156  starts  at  approximately 

6:55  a.m.  In  the  upper  right  hand  corner,  there  is  a  view  of  several  parked  cars  and  a 

door  which  was  identified  as  the  door  to  Respondent's  classroom.  More  centrally, 

there  Is  a  clear  view  of  two  doors,  each  as  a  mat  with  a  rubber  border  in  front. 

Respondent  is  first  seen  in  the  clip  at  approximately  7:11  a.m.  Respondent  is  in  sandals 

and  using  a  cane.  Respondent  is  seen  approaching  the  door  that  is  farther  away  from 

the  camera  and  walks  smoothly  on  the  mat  in  front  of  it  (first  mat).  Respondent  then 

lifts  her  cane  up  as  she  reaches  into  her  pocket  for  a  cellular  phone.  Holding  the 

phone  in  one  hand,  Respondent  steps  briefly  on  the  mat  that  is  in  front  of  the  door 

closer  to  the  camera  (second  mat).?  Her  cane  is  elevated  and  never  touches  the  second 

mat. 

B. 

The  next  clip,  BPSD000157  begins  at  approximately  7:23  a.m. 

Respondent  is  again  seen  stepping  on  the  second  mat.  Respondent  then  pauses,  looks 

down  and  is  then  seen  separating  the  rubber  border  from  the  second  mat,  with  her  left 

foot  and  then  her  right  foot.  Respondent  then  proceeds  to  continues  walking  away. 

The clip  Jumps  a  few  second  from  7:24  a.m.  and  12  seconds  to  7:25  a.m.  At  7:25  a.m. 

and  10  seconds,  Respondent  is  seen  exiting  the  door  to  what  was  identified  as  her 

classroom  and  returning  towards  the  camera.  Respondent  crosses  the  first  mat  with 

her  cane  elevated  and  reaches  for  an  unidentified  item  in  her  pocket.  Shen  then  stops 

in  front  of  the  second  mat  and  appears  to  be  searching  for  something  in  her  pockets. 

She  turns  away  from  the  camera  and  then,  grabbing  her  cellular  phone,  turns  back 

towards  the  camera  and  appears  to  take  multiple  pictures.  Respondent  returns  the 

  

>  When  providing  her  statement  to  Investigator  Klemek,  Respondent  had 

identified  the  second  mat  as  the  broken  mat  on  which  she  had  injured  herself. 

18

phone  to  her  pocket  and  continues  forward  to  the  lower  left  and  out  of  view  of  the 

surveillance  camera. 

Analysis 

46. 

Athearing,  Respondent's  statement  was  somewhat  inconsistent  with  the 

statement  she  provided  in  the  injury  report  and  to  Investigator  Klemek,  in  that 

Respondent  merely  claimed  that  the  mat  had  caused  her  body  to  “jerk.”  When  asked 

about  the  inconsistencies  between  her  statement  and  the  video  surveillance, 

Respondent  became  defensive,  initially  answering  by  simply  repeating  counsel's 

questions  in  a  manner  suggesting  she  did  not  understand  the  questions.  Later,  in  an 

attempt  to  explain  the  inconsistencies  between  her  statement  and  the  video  clip, 

Respondent  claimed  that  when  the  injury  occurred,  she  had  been  using  the  cane  like  a 

crutch  and  when  the  mat  caused  her  body to jerk,  it  caused  the  cane  in  her  hand  to 

jerk.” 

47. 

The  video  clips  presented  at  hearing  show  that  despite  Respondent's 

claim  that  she  had  injured  herself  when  she  placed  her  cane  down  on  the  second  mat, 

this  did  not,  in  fact,  happen.  The  clip  clearly  shows  Respondent  that  her  cane  never 

came  down  as  she  passed  over  the  second  mat*  and  that  Respondent  was  not  using 

the  cane  like  a  “crutch”  but  was,  in  fact,  freely  lifting  her  cane.  Another  clip  shows 

Respondent  returning  to  the  area  and  kicking  the  rubber  border  away  from  the  mat, 

arguably  creating  a  dangerous  condition  for  students  at  the  school.  Based  on  the 

  

“It  is  also  noted  that,  contrary  to  her  statement  to  Investigator  Klemek, 

Respondent  was  wearing  sandals  and  not  “Nike  flex  runs  2013's." 

19

forgoing,  it  was  established  that  Respondent  was  dishonest  in  filing  her  October  22, 

2018  injury  report  and  in  her  statements  to  Investigator  Klemek. 

Workers’  Compensation  Claims 

48. 

While  employed  at  Beatty  Elementary,  Respondent  has  filed  over  30 

injury  reports.  A  portion  of  those  injuries  resulted  in  Respondent  receiving  medical 

treatment.  When  Respondent  took  time  off  to  receive  medical  treatment  for  workplace 

injuries,  sne  was  not  required  to  use  personal  sick  ieave.  Instead,  a  worker's 

compensation  claim  was  filed  and  Respondent  was  compensated  by  the  District  under 

“industrial  accident”  leave. 

49, 

Respondent  insisted  during  the  hearing  that  she  was  unfamiliar  with  the 

workers’  compensation  process  and  had  not  realized  that  by  going  to  Concentra 

following  the  October  22,  2018  incident,  a  worker's  compensation  claim  would  be 

opened.  This  statement,  however,  is  contrary  to  the  statement  she  provided  to 

Investigator  Klemek  where  she  stated,  "...  I  don't  know.  I  took  a  couple  of  days.  .. 

which  I  shouldn't  have  to  pay  out  of  my  sick  time  because  this  a  work  cornp  injury  but 

nooooo,”  {Exhibit  11,  BPSD000085,} 

Impact 

50. 

Sometime  following  Respondent's  report  of  injury,  Principal  Hwang  had 

an  opportunity  to  review  the  surveillance  footage  of  the  alleged  injury  and  found 

Respondent's  incident  report  to  be  dishonest.  In  her  opinion,  honesty  and  integrity  are 

“extremely  important"  traits  in  a  teacher. 

51. 

According  to  Principal  Hwang,  families  entrust  their  children  to  the 

school  for  six  to  six-1/2  hours  a  day,  on  average.  Parents  trust  that  their  children  are 

20

Kept  safe,  that  the  school  is  honest  in 

its  communications  with  them  about  what  Is 

occurring  in  the  classroorn,  and  that  educators  are  role  models  for  students.  To 

Principal  Hwang,  tt 

is  crucial  that  teachers  set  a  positive  exarnple  for  students. 

52. 

After  viewing  the  surveillance  footage,  Principal  Hwang  testified  that  it 

would  be  hard  for  her  to  count  on  Respondent  to  exhibit  honesty  and  integrity  in 

working  with  other  teachers  and  in  the  classroom  because  of  her  dishonesty  with 

regard  to  her  alleged  injury. 

Statement  of  Charges 

53. 

On  March  22,  2019,  Dr.  Miramontes  had  a  proposed  Notice of  Intent  to 

Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  prepared  to  present  to  the  District's  Board.  On  April 

8,  2019,  the  Board  unanimously  resolved  to  immediately  suspend  Respondent  without 

pay  and  directed  Dr.  Miramontes  to  have  a  copy  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  served 

on  Respondent. 

54. 

Dr.  Miramontes’s  recommendation  to  immediate  suspend  and  dismiss 

Respondent  was  based  on  her  dishonest  conduct  in  filing  a  fraudulent  workers’ 

compensation  claim  against  the  District  and  in  the  false  statements  she  provided  to 

justify  her  decision  to  not  report  for  work  at  the  beginning  of  the  2016-2017  school 

year.  According  to  Dr.  Mirarnontes,  teachers  and  educators  are  pillars  in  the 

community  and  they  are  entrusted  with  the  care  of  children  and  as  a  result,  they  are 

expected  to  be  honest  and  trustworthy.  Honesty  is  one  of  the  District’s  ethical  core 

values,  Honesty  is  also  emphasized  in  Board  policy  and  in  the  California  Standards  for 

the  Teaching  Professional  Standards. 

55. 

According  to  Dr.  Miramontes,  he  made  the  recommendation,  in  part,  due 

to  the  2016  Notice  regarding  her  dishonest  and  unprofessional  conduct.  Though 

21

Respondent  was  provided  with  a  plan  of  assistance  which,  in  part,  directed  her  to 

conduct  herself  in  "a  professional  and  honest  manner  at  ail  times,”  Respondent  failed 

to  comply  with  the  directive  when  she  was  again  dishonest  regarding  her  alleged 

October  22,  2078  injury.  (Exnibit  6,  BPDSOO0009.} 

Character  Witnesses 

56. 

Ms.  Fuson,  Respondent's  co-worker  at  Beatty  Elementary  for 

approximately  23  years  testified  on  Respondent’s  behalf.  According  to  Ms.  Fuson,  she 

has  spent  time  with  Respondent  both  in  and  out  of  school  She  considers  Respondent 

to  be  honest.  Ms.  Fuson  understands  that  Respondent  was  dismissed  for  being  hurt  at 

the  school  and  for  issues  related  to  the  calendar  change  in  2013. 

57. 

Ms.  Whiteley  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  1996.  She  became 

a  certificated  teacher  in  1996  and  has  taught  first,  fifth  and  sixth  grades  at  Beatty 

Elementary.  Ms.  Whiteley  has  worked  with  Respondent  for  20  years  and  knows  her  on 

both  a  professional  and  personal  level.  According  to  Ms.  Whiteley,  Respondent  ts  a 

very  helpful,  honest  and  caring  person  who  does  a  lot  for  Beatty  Elementary  and  the 

community,  Ms.  Whiteley  believes  Respondent  cares  about  her  students  and  puts  a  jot 

of  effort  into  being  a  good  teacher. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

The  Commission has  jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  under 

Education  Code  section  44944. 

22

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

2. 

in  this  case,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  the  allegations  of  the 

Charges  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1985)  164  Cal  App.3d  1035,  1038-1039}  Preponderance  of  the  evidence 

means  that  “the  evidence  on  [the  District's]  side  outweighs,  preponderates  over,  Is 

more  than,  the  evidence  on  the  other  side.”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms  Co.  (1990)  226 

Cal.  App.3d  314,  325.) 

Statutory  Grounds  for  Dismissal 

3, 

The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  if  one  or  more  of  the  causes  enumerated  in  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a),  or  Education  Code  section  44939  is  establisned.  The 

definitions  of  some  of  those  causes  have  been  further  elucidated  by  the  courts  and  by 

the  legislature. 

A 

The  Statement  of  Charges  filed  in  this  matter  seeks  to  dismiss 

Respondent  from  employment  with  the  district  on  the  grounds  of  immoral  conduct, 

unprofessional  conduct,  dishonesty,  unsatisfactory  performance,  evident  unfitness  for 

service,  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

reasonabie  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 

State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing 

ner, 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

5. 

“Immoral  conduct”  has  been  defined  to  include  conduct  inconsistent  with 

rectitude,  or  indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness,  or  as  willful, 

23

flagrant,  or  shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of 

respectable  members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good 

order  and  the  public  welfare.  (Soard  of  Ed.  of San  Francisco  Unified  School  Dist  v. 

Welland  (1960)  179  CaLApp.2d  808,  811.) 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

6. 

“Unprofessional  conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  (a){1),  is 

conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  that  is  unbecoming  a 

member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board  of  Ed.  of City  of  Los  Angeles  v.  Swan 

(1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  553  overruled  on  other  grounds  by  Sekiaris  v.  Board of Ed.  (1972) 

6  Cal.3d  575.)  The  conduct  in  question,  to  arnount  to  unprofessional  conduct,  must 

demonstrate  unfitness  to  teach.  (Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1983)  149  Cal  App.3d  1167,  1174) 

DISHONESTY 

7. 

Dishonesty  indicates  a  lack  of  honesty;  a  disposition  to  lie,  cheat,  or  steal 

(www.dictionary.com):  or  to  deceive.  (Midway  District  of  Kern  County  v.  Griffeath 

(1946)  29  Cal.2d  13,  18.)  “Dishonesty  necessarily  includes  the  element  of  bad  faith.  As 

defined  in  the  dictionaries  and  in  judicial  decisions,  it  means  fraud,  deception,  betrayal, 

faithlessness.  [Citations.]  As  phrased  by  the  court  in  A/sup  v.  State  91  Tex.  Cr.  224, 

‘dishonesty  denotes  an  absence  of  integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud; 

deceive  and  betray.”  (Hogg  v.  Real  Estate  Commissioner  (1942)  54  Cal  App.2d  772, 

717.3  "{Tt  means  fraud,  deception,  betrayal,  faithiessness;  an  absence  of  integrity;  a 

disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud;  deceive  and  betray.”  (bid)  “Dishonest  conduct 

ray  range  from  the  smailest  fib  to  the  most  flagrant  lie.  Not  every  impropriety  will 

constitute  immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct,  and  not  every  falsehood  will  constitute 

24

‘dishonesty’  as  a  ground  for  discipline.”  (Fontana  Unitied  School  Dist.  v.  Burman 

(Fontana)  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220,  fn.  12) 

UNSATISFACTORY  PERFORMANCE 

8. 

“Unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  defined  in  Education  Code  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(4),  but  the  term  is  not  intended  to  encompass  any  of  the  other 

causes  for  dismissal  specified  in  section  44932.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44938,  subd.  (c),) 

“Unsatisfactory  performance”  generally  denotes  a  failure  to  meet  reasonable  teaching 

standards.  School  districts  establish  requirements  for  all  teachers  concerning 

fundamental  duties  such  as  attendance,  adherence  to  adopted  curriculum  and 

methodology,  presentation  of  classroom  instruction,  engagement  of  students,  and 

professional  development.  These  requirements  serve  as  the  standards  by  which 

teaching  performance  is  measured.  (See  Perez  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1983)  149  Cal  App.3d  1167,  1174) 

EVIDENT  LINFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

9, 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  is  established  by  conduct  demonstrating 

that  the  teacher  is  "clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  or  suitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by 

reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.”  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School 

Est.  vy.  Commission  on  Protessional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal Apo  4th  1429,  1444 

(Woodlana).)  “Evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 

presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one's  conduct  fails  to 

meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  /d@} 

25

PERSISTENT  VIOLATION 

10. 

The  plain  meaning  of  this  cause  for  dismissal  under  Education  Code 

section  44939,  subdivision  (b),  applies.  (See  Soard  of  Education  of City  of  Los  Angeles 

v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546,  556  [teacher  who  declined  to  accept  teaching 

assignments  subject  to  dismissal]} 

11. 

To  establish  cause  for  discipline  based  on  the  violation  of  school  rules, 

there  must  be  a  “showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate."  (San 

Dieguito  Union  High  School  Bist.  v.  Commussion  on  Protessional  Competence  (1985) 

174  Cal  Apo.3d  1176,  1196)  The  violation  must  be  persistent  or  “motivated  by  an 

attitude  of  continuous  insubordination.”  (Governing  &d.  of  the  Oakdale  Union  School 

Gist.  v.  Searnan  (1972)  28  Cal  App.3d  77,  81-82.)  Isolated  events  or  incidents  involving 

an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are  generally  not  considered  persistent. 

(Bourland  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal App.3d  317.) 

Grounds  for  Dismissal 

12. 

Cause  does  not  exist  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  unsatisfactory 

performance  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(5)}.  This 

ground  for  dismissal  was  not  established. 

13. 

Cause  exists  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  pursuant  for  immoral 

conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44932,  subdivision  {a)(1}  and  44939 

based  on  Factual  Findings  5-10,  12-17,  19-22,  27-29,  31-32,  and  37-49  and  Legal 

Conclusion  5. 

26

14. 

Cause  exists  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  unprofessional  conduct 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a}(2)  based  on  Factual 

Findings  5-17,  19-23,  25-29,  31-35,  37-47,  and  Legal  Conclusion  6. 

15. 

Cause  exists  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  dishonesty  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4)  based  on  Factual  Findings  7,  12,  16- 

17,  20-22,  29,  31-32,  37-40,  and  42-47  and  Legal  Conclusion  7. 

16. 

Cause  exists  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for 

service  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a6)  based  on  Factual 

Findings  5-10,  12-17,  19-22,  27-29,  31-32,  and  37-49  and  Legal  Conclusion  9. 

17. 

Cause  exists  for  the  dismissal  of  Respondent  for  a  persistent  violation  or 

refusal  to  obey  school  rules  or  regulations  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44932, 

subdivision  (a8)  based  on  Factual  Findings  5-10,  12-17,  19-22,  23,  25-29,  31-32,  and 

37-49  and  Legal  Conclusions  10  and  11. 

The  Morrison  Factors 

18. 

Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44944  create  the  statutory 

framework  for  this  proceeding.  The  statutes  give  discretion  to  both  the  District  and  the 

Commission.  The  District  has  the  right  to  determine  when  to  seek  disciplinary  action 

against  a  teacher  and  what  discipline  to  seek.  The  Commission,  however,  is  not  bound 

by  the  District's  choice.  It  has  broad  discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  Its  role  is  not 

limited  to  determining  whether  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  it  must  also 

decide  whether  that  conduct  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach  when  measured  against 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (Morrisom(1969)  1  Cal.3d 

214,  229-30.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (Fontana  (1988)  45  Cal3d  208, 

of

219-22.)  In  exercising  its  discretion  in  this  matter,  the  Commission  determines  whether 

dismissal  is  warranted  by  the  facts  established  at  the  hearing. 

19. 

In  Morrison,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  factors  that  may  be  examined 

to  determine  fitness  include  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely 

affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated;  and,  the 

proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Other  factors  may  include  the  type  of 

certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances;  the 

praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  the 

likelihood  that  the  conduct  in  question  will  recur;  and,  the  extent  that  discipline  will 

cause  an  adverse  or  chilling  impact  on  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved, 

or  other  teachers. 

degree  thereof 

20. 

A. 

Adverse  consequences  on  students  and  teachers,  and  the 

1. 

There  were  potentially  adverse  consequences  for  students  in 

Respondent's  class  during  the  2016-2017  school  year  based  on  Respondent's  conduct. 

Both  Superintendent  Magnuson  and  Principal  Hwang  spoke  of  the  importance  of  the 

beginning  of  the  school  year  to  establishing  a  good  teacher  student  relationship  and 

setting  goals  for  the  future.  Due  to  the  fact  Respondent  was  not,  in  fact,  present  at  the 

beginning  of  the  school  year,  she  potentially  deprived  students. 

2. 

There  were  also  adverse  consequences  to  students  in  Respondent 

2018-2019  class  in  that  as  a  result  of  her  false  report  of  injury,  the  students  were  left 

with  a  last  minute  substitute  for  the  rest  of  the  school  cay. 

B. 

Proximity  in  ume:  Respondent's  conduct  is  relatively  recent,  having 

occurred  in  the  period  between  2016  until  2018. 

28

C. 

Type  of  certificate  held  by  the  teacher:  During  the  relevant  time 

period,  Respondent  taught  fourth  grade  at  Beatty  Elementary. 

D. 

Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances.  There  are  no 

extenuating  circumstances.  There  are,  however  a  number  of  aggravating 

circumstances. 

1, 

Following  her  unauthorized  absence  in  2016,  Respondent 

requested  paid  leave  which  she  had  been  expressly  told  she  was  not  entitled  to 

claim.  Respondent  also  lied  to  District  administrators  before  and  after  about  having 

received  permission  to  be  absent  at  the  start  of  the  2016-2017  school  year  in  order 

to  justify  her  trip  to  Brazil. 

2. 

With  respect  to  her  claim  for  injury,  after  reporting  her  injury  to 

administration,  Respondent  returned  to  the  area  to  deliberately  tamper  with  the 

mat  and  take  photographs. 

3. 

Finally,  Respondent's  continued  deception  under  oath 

constitutes  an  aggravating  circumstance  which  supports  a  finding  that  Respondent 

is  unfit  to  teach. 

ner, 

E. 

Likelihood  the  conduct  in  question  will  recur:  Respondent's 

conduct  at  issue  is  likely  to  recur.  She  has  not  acknowledged  responsibility  for  any 

of  her  conduct,  and  instead  blames  others  for  not  having  done  enough  to  assist 

F, 

Chilting  Effect  on  Constitutional  Rights:  No  constitutional  rights,  of 

either  Respondent  or  other  teachers,  are  implicated  if  Respondent  is  terminated  for 

her  conduct  described  in  this  decision. 

29

21. 

Even  where,  as  here,  a  school  district  has  established  cause  for  dismissal, 

the  Commission  has  broad  discretion  to  determine  whether  dismissal  is  warranted. 

(Fontana,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  op.  220-222.)  “The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in 

determining  what  constitutes  unfitness  to  teach...,  and  whether  dismissal  or 

suspension  is  the  appropriate  sanction.  [Citing  Fontana]  [A]  disciplinary  discharge 

often  involves  complex  facts  and  may  require  a  sensitive  evaluation  of  the  nature  and 

seriousness  of  the  misconduct  and  whether  it  warrants  the  grave  sanction  of  dismissal.’ 

iCitation].”  (Calfornia  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  California  (1999)  20  Cal  4th  327,  343- 

344} 

22. 

Dismissal  is  warranted  in  this  case. 

A. 

Though  Respondent's  initial  act  of  attending  the  2016  Olympics 

and  missing  the  first  two  weeks  of  the  school  year  without  obtaining  approval  was  an 

isolated  act  of  insubordination  which  alone  would  not  have  been  grounds  for 

dismissal,  her  misconduct  was  compounded  by  her  dishonesty  regarding  whether  she 

had  received  permission  from  Beatty  Elementary  former  principal,  Nancy  Rios,  prior 

and  after  her  trip.  Upon  being  reprimanded  for  her  unprofessional  conduct, 

Respondent  compounded  her  misconduct  by  failing  to  accept  any  responsibility  for 

her  behavior  and  continued  perpetuate  her  dishonesty  in  accusing  Principal  Rios  of 

disseminating  information  that  was  not  true. 

B. 

After  being  directed  in  the  2016  Notice  to  comport  herself  in  an 

honest  and  professional  manner,  Respondent  falsely  claimed  she  had  been  injured  on 

October  22,  2018,  leaving  school  early.  When  her  statement  was  taken  by  the  worker's 

compensation  investigator,  she  continued  to  be  dishonest,  giving  a  false  account. 

30

C. 

Respondent  continued  dishonesty  during  her  sworn  deposition 

and  in  her  testimony  at  this  administrative  proceeding  further  demonstrates  that  she  is 

unfit  to  serve  as  a  teacher. 

ORDER 

The  dismissal  of  respondent  Stacy  McCay  from  employment  with  the  Buena 

Park  School  District  is  sustained. 

IT  IS  SO  ORDERED. 

DATE:  January  17,  2020 

DATE: 

January  17,  2020 

DATE:  January  17,  2020 

DocuSigned  by: 

tia ODC8A2080012428 

TRACY  DO 

Commission  Member 

DocuSigned  by: 

Sava  |.  Smite 

O45 4083227004408... 

SARA  L.  SMITH 

Commission  Member 

Docusigned  by: 

[Hae  Chin 

SEG6E31F40B8411... 

NANA  CHIN 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

31

