BEFORE  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FOR  THE  COLTON  JOINT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

IN  THE  MATTER  OF  THE  DISMISSAL  OF: 

JOHN  HOANG,  RESPONDENT 

OAH  NO.  2019031000 

DECISION 

On  July  30  and  31,  2019,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Colton,  California.  The  Commission  consisted  of  the 

following  members:  Adam  L.  Berg,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings;  Deborah  Bowers,  Adelanto  Elementary  School  District;  and  Kimberly  Binning- 

Chevlin,  Murrieta  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  and  Brooke  E.  Jimenez,  with  Atkinson,  Adelson,  Loya,  Rudd 

&  Romo  (AALRR),  represented  complainant,  Ingrid  Munsterman,  Assistant 

Superintendent,  Human  Resources  Division,  Colton  Joint  Unified  School  District 

(district). 

Carlos  R.  Perez  and  Alejandra  Gonzalez-Bedoy,  Law  Offices  of  Carlos  R.  Perez, 

represent  respondent,  John  Hoang. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  July  31,  2019.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

1, 

Respondent  is 

a  certificated  elementary  school  teacher  employed  by  the 

district  as  a  fourth  grade  teacher  at  Alice  Birney  Elementary  School  (Alice  Birney). 

2. 

On  January  23,  2019,  complainant  signed  and  sent  to  respondent  a 

Notice  of  Proposed  Recommendation  for  Suspension  Without  Pay  and  Dismissal  and 

Statement  of  Charges  (Statement  of  Charges). 

3, 

Respondent  was  given  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  matter  at  a  Ske//y' 

meeting  on  January  28,  2019.  Respondent  did  not  elect  to  attend  the  meeting. 

4. 

On  February  21,  2019,  complainant  presented  the  Statement  of  Charges 

to  the  district's  governing  board.  The  board  approved  the  recommendation  to 

suspend  respondent  without  pay  pending  his  dismissal.  Complainant  notified 

  

"In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 

Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering 

disciplinary  action  against  a  public  employee  must  accord  the  employee  certain  “pre- 

removal  safeguards,”  including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a 

copy  of  the  charges  and  materials  upon  which  the  action  is  based,  and  the  right  to 

respond,  either  orally  or  in  writing,  to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The 

Supreme  Court's  directive  gave  rise  to  an  administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Skelly 

hearing,  in  which  an  employee  has  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon 

which  the  proposed  discipline  is  based.

respondent  of  the  board's  decision  and  provided  respondent  with  30  days  to  request  a 

hearing. 

dismissal. 

5. 

On  February  26,  2019,  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing  on  his 

6. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  the  following  causes  for  dismissal: 

immoral  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1));  dishonesty  (/a@.  at  subd.  (a)(4));  and 

conviction  of  a  felony  or  of  any  crime  involving  moral  turpitude  (/a.  at  subd.  (a)(9)).” 

7. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  listed  the  following  “specific  acts  and 

omissions”  substantiating  the  causes  for  discipline:  On  November  2,  2018,  respondent 

pled  guilty  to  a  misdemeanor  violation  of  Penal  Code  section  182,  subdivision  (a)(1), 

conspiracy  to  commit  grand  theft,  which  complainant  alleged  was  a  crime  involving 

moral  turpitude.  Complainant  alleged  respondent  admitted  guilt  to  engaging  in  a 

criminal  conspiracy  with  Carol  Chau  Nguyen  by  attempting  to  employ  a  deceitful 

scheme  to  abuse  the  Pechanga  Resort  and  Casino  (Pechnaga)  Player’s  Club  system  and 

defraud  the  casino  of  $3,600. 

8. 

Additionally,  complainant  alleged  that  on  November  7,  2018,  respondent 

made  the  following  false  statements  to  the  district's  Director  of  Human  Resources:  1) 

  

*  The  Statement  of  Charges  also  alleged  immoral  conduct  as  grounds  for 

immediate  suspension  under  Education  Code  section  44939.  Although  respondent's 

suspension  was  subsequently  reversed  by  an  administrative  law  judge,  that  decision 

“shall  not  be  considered  by  the  commission  in  determining  the  validity  of  the  grounds 

for  dismissal,  and  shall  not  have  any  bearing  on  the  commission's  determination 

regarding  the  grounds  for  dismissal.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44939.)

respondent  initially  claimed  that  he  did  not  know  and/or  never  met  Ms.  Nguyen;  2) 

respondent  then  stated  that  he  only  had  lunch  with  Ms.  Nguyen  and  the  two  did  not 

have  a  romantic  relationship;  3)  respondent  claimed  that  Ms.  Nguyen  unilaterally 

placed  points  and/or  money  on  his  Player's  Club  card  without  respondent's  knowledge 

or  request;  and  4)  respondent  represented  that  the  criminal  matter  concluded  with 

him  only  needing  to  pay  a  $150  fine. 

9, 

On  June  21,  2019,  the  district  served  respondent  with  an  Amended 

Statement  of  Charges.  The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  added  the  following 

causes  for  dismissal:  unprofessional  conduct  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(2)),  evident 

unfitness  for  service  (/d.  at  subd.  (a)(6)),  and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey 

the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  district's 

governing  board  (/d.  at  subd.  (a)(8)).  Under  the  heading  “prior  relevant  employment 

history”  the  district  alleged  that  on  November  27,  2012,  the  district  issued  respondent 

a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  (NUC)  pursuant  to  Section?  44938,  which  listed 

the  grounds  for  the  notice  and  specific  directives  to  adhere  to  board  policies.  The 

district  also  alleged  that  on  June  5,  2014,  it  issued  respondent  a  second  Notice  of 

Unprofessional  Conduct  and  Unsatisfactory  Performance.  The  Amended  Statement  of 

Charges  alleged  that  respondent's  conviction  and  dishonesty  with  a  district  official 

violated  the  district's  regulations  and  the  directives  contained  in  the  two  NUCs. 

  

>  All  future  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise 

specified.

Pre-hearing  Motions 

MOTION  TO  DISQUALIFY  COMMISSION  MEMBER 

10. 

On  May  10,  2019,  the  District  designated  Deborah  Bowers,  an  employee 

of  the  Adelanto  Elementary  School  District  (AESD),  as  a  member  to  serve  on  the 

Commission  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(3).  On 

May  13,  2019,  respondent  filed  an  objection  to  the  District's  designation  of  Ms.  Bowers 

on  the  basis  that  Ms.  Bowers  was  not  qualified  within  the  meaning  of  Section  44944, 

subdivision  (c)(4),  due  to  a  conflict  of  interest.  On  May  21,  2019,  the  objection  was 

overruled  and  the  request  to  disqualify  Ms.  Bowers  was  denied  because  respondent 

failed  to  establish  that  Ms.  Bowers  was  not  qualified  within  the  meaning  of  Education 

Code  section  44944  subdivision  (c)(5)(A).* 

On  May  22,  2019,  respondent  filed  a  second  objection  to  the  District's 

designation  of  Ms.  Bowers  as  a  commission  member.  By  order  dated,  respondent's 

objection  was  again  overruled  on  the  same  grounds.  On  June  9,  2019,  respondent  filed 

a  motion  to  strike  Ms.  Bowers  from  the  Commission.  Respondent  alleged  that  the  firm 

representing  the  district  in  this  case,  AALRR,  represented  Ms.  Bowers’s  employer, 

AESD,  in  an  unrelated  claim  before  the  Public  Enployment  Relations  Board  (PERB).  In 

that  case,  a  teacher  filed  a  complaint  against  AESD  based  on  actions  by  Ms.  Bowers, 

who  was  the  teacher's  school  principal  and  supervisor.  During  the  hearing  before  the 

  

4  That  provision  provides  that  the  that  the  designated  member  must  not  be 

related  to  respondent,  must  not  be  employed  by  the  district,  and  must  hold  a  currently 

valid  credential  and  have  at  least  three  years’  experience  within  the  past  10  years  in 

the  discipline  of  respondent.

PERB,  AALRR  called  Ms.  Bowers  as  a  witness.  Respondent  contended  that  there  was  an 

extended  attorney-client  privilege  between  AALRR,  and  consequently,  Ms.  Bowers 

would  be  more  inclined  to  trust  the  representations  by  AALRR  in  this  matter. 

Respondent  argued  that  for  Ms.  Bowers  to  serve  on  the  Commission,  at  the  very  least, 

creates  an  appearance  of  conflict. 

11. 

Prior  to  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  Commission  decided  respondent's 

motion  in  accordance  with  Government  Code  section  11512,  subdivision  (c).°  That 

provision  provides  in  relevant  part: 

An  administrative  law  judge  or  agency  member  shall 

voluntarily  disqualify  himself  or  herself  and  withdraw  from 

any  case  in  which  there  are  grounds  for  disqualification, 

including  disqualification  under  Section  11425.40.  ...  Any 

party  may  request  the  disqualification  of  any  administrative 

  

>  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (b)(1)(B),  provides,  in  part,  that 

teacher  dismissal  hearings  are  to  be  initiated  and  conducted  “in  accordance  with 

Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  I  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the 

Government  Code  [administrative  adjudication  provisions  of  the  Administrative 

Procedure  Act  (APA)]  and  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  shall  have  all 

of  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  pursuant  to  that  chapter.”  Under  the  APA,  a 

Commission  member  is  an  “agency  member”  within  the  meaning  of  Government  Code 

section  11500,  subdivision  (e),  and  a  “presiding  officer”  within  the  meaning  of 

Government  Code  section  11405.80.  A  presiding  officer  is  subject  to  disqualification 

for  “bias,  prejudice,  or  interest  in  the  proceeding.”  (Gov.  Code,  8§  11425.10,  subd. 

(a)(5);  11425.40,  subd.  (a).)

law  judge  or  agency  member  by  filing  an  affidavit,  prior  to 

the  taking  of  evidence  at  a  hearing,  stating  with  particularity 

the  grounds  upon  which  it 

is  claimed  that  the  administrative 

law  judge  or  agency  member  is  disqualified.  Where  the 

request  concerns  an  agency  member,  the  issue  shall  be 

determined  by  the  other  members  of  the  agency.... 

Ms.  Bowers  made  the  following  disclosure  to  the  Commission:  Ms.  Bowers  Is  a 

school  principal.  One  of  the  teachers  Ms.  Bowers  supervised  filed  a  complaint  with 

PERB  against  Ms.  Bowers’s  employer,  AESD.  The  complaint  involved  Ms.  Bowers  in  the 

capacity  as  the  employee's  supervisor.  Attorneys  from  AALRR  represented  AESD  in  the 

matter.  Ms.  Bowers’s  interaction  with  these  attorneys  was  extremely  limited.  Although 

an  attorney  interviewed  Ms.  Bowers,  Ms.  Bowers  did  not  think  she  could  even 

remember  who  the  attorney  was  or  what  she  looked  like.  The  complaint  against  AESD 

was  dismissed  by  PERB.  The  complaining  teacher  continues  to  work  at  Ms.  Bowers’s 

school  site.  Ms.  Bowers  described  her  as  an  “excellent”  teacher  and  the  two  now  enjoy 

a  strong  working  relationship.  Ms.  Bowers  believed  she  could  be  fair  and  impartial  in 

this  matter  and  would  not  be  influenced  by  the  fact  that  the  firm  representing  the 

district  in  this  matter  also  represented  her  employer,  AESD. 

The  remaining  member  of  the  Commission  and  administrative  law  judge 

considered  Ms.  Bowers's  disclosure  and  arguments  by  respondent.  They  unanimously 

determined  that  grounds  did  not  exist  to  disqualify  Ms.  Bowers  as  a  presiding  officer 

and  denied  respondent's  motion.

MOTION  TO  EXCLUDE  EVIDENCE 

12. 

Prior  to  the  hearing,  both  parties  filed  motions  /n  /imine  seeking  to 

exclude  evidence.  Many  of  the  issues  were  decided  in  a  July  23,  2019,  order.  One  issue 

that  was  not  resolved  was  based  on  respondent's  motion  to  exclude  any  evidence  to 

events  occurring  more  than  four  years  before  service  of  the  Statement  of  Charges  in 

accordance  with  Section  44944.  Specifically,  resoondent  sought  to  bar  the  introduction 

or  consideration  of  the  two  NUPs,  which  occurred  more  than  four  years  before  the 

service  of  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

The  district  initially  argued  that  the  introduction  of  the  NUCs  was  required  to 

satisfy  the  statutory  notice  requirements  contained  in  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(2), 

which  is 

a  prerequisite  for  dismissing  an  employee  for  unprofessional  conduct.  In 

addition,  the  district  argued  the  NUCs  served  as  evidence  in  support  of  the  charge  of 

persistent  violation  or  refusal  to  obey  regulations  under  Section  44932,  subdivision 

(a)(8).  Finally,  the  district  argued  that  the  NUCs  were  regularly  maintained  in 

respondent's  personnel  file,  served  to  show  “directives,  progressive  discipline,  and 

evidence  related  to  the  Morrison  factors”  and  were  admissible  under  Section  44944. 

Telephonic  oral  arguments  on  respondent’s  motion  were  heard  on  July  23, 

2019.  In  the  order  scheduling  oral  arguments,  the  parties  were  asked  to  address  to 

applicability  of  Section  44934,  subdivision  (d),  which  prohibits  amending  charges  less 

than  90  days  before  the  hearing  except  upon  a  showing  of  good  cause. 

The  district  argued  that  during  a  prehearing  conference  on  June  10,  2019,  the 

district  gave  notice  of  its  intention  to  amend  the  charges.  The  district  contended  that 

the  administrative  law  judge  conducting  the  prehearing  conference  requested  that  the 

district  delay  amending  the  charges  while  settlement  discussions  were  occurring.  A

second  prehearing  conference  was  held  on  June  20,  2019.  At  this  time,  the  district 

again  indicated  its  intention  to  amend  the  charges  to  include  reference  to  the  two 

NUCs.  Respondent  offered  no  objection  to  the  amendments  and  the  administrative 

law  judge  ordered  that  any  amended  Statement  of  Charges  must  be  filed  by  June  24, 

2019.°  This,  the  district  argued,  was  the  administrative  law  judge's  permission  for  the 

district  to  file  the  amended  charges. 

Respondent,  in  rebuttal,  opposed  the  amendments  to  the  Statement  of 

Charges.  However,  he  did  not  oppose  the  admission  of  the  two  NUCs  so  long  as  the 

nature  of  the  underlying  misconduct  was  redacted  and  not  considered  by  the 

Commission.’ 

A  decision  on  whether  to  accept  the  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  was 

deferred  until  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  in  order  for  the  district  to  preserve  the 

ability  to  make  arguments  and  present  evidence  in  support  of  the  additional  three 

causes  for  dismissal  and  make  any  arguments  on  the  record  to  establish  good  cause 

for  filing  the  amendments  within  90  days  prior  to  the  hearing. 

  

°  A  Prehearing  Conference  Order  was  not  issued  until  June  24,  2019,  requiring 

that  an  amended  Statement  of  Charges  was  to  be  filed  by  that  date. 

’  At  the  hearing,  respondent  objected  to  admission  of  several  un-redacted 

portions  of  a  NUC.  Although  respondent's  objection  was  overruled,  for  reasons 

discussed  below,  the  NUCs  were  not  considered  by  the  Commission  in  reaching  a 

decision  in  this  matter.

Good  Cause  Did  Not  Exist  to  Amend  the  Statement  of  Charges 

13. 

Section  44934,  subdivision  (d),  provides: 

If  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  has  given 

notice  to  a  certificated  employee  of  its  intention  to  dismiss 

or  suspend  him  or  her,  based  upon  written  charges  filed  or 

formulated  pursuant  to  this  section,  the  charges  may  be 

amended  less  than  90  days  before  the  hearing  on  the 

charges  only  upon  a  showing  of  good  cause.  If  a  motion  to 

amend  charges  is  granted  by  the  administrative  law  judge, 

the  employee  shall  be  given  a  meaningful  opportunity  to 

respond  to  the  amended  charges. 

The  district  initially  argued  that  the  administrative  law  judge  conducting  the 

prehearing  conference  authorized  the  district  to  amend  the  Statement  of  Charges  and 

respondent  offered  no  objection.  While  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  in  the 

prehearing  conference  order  did  not  address  the  requirements  of  Section  44934, 

subdivision  (d),  the  prehearing  conference  order  cannot  supersede  statutory 

requirements,  which  requires  a  motion  to  amend  charges  and  a  showing  of  good 

cause.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  issue  of  “good  cause”  was  raised  during  the 

prehearing  conference.  The  order  only  provided  a  deadline  for  the  district  to  file  an 

amended  Statement  of  Charges;  this  was  not  an  implicit  finding  of  “good  cause”  as 

suggested  by  the  district.® 

  

5  It  is  noted  that  the  prehearing  conference  order  occurred  within  90  days  of  the 

commencement  of  the  hearing,  so  the  district  was  not  prejudiced  by  relying  on  the 

10

At  the  hearing,  the  district  argued  that  the  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  did 

not  run  afoul  of  Section  44934,  subdivision  (d),  because  the  “charges”  referenced  in 

that  provision  were  never  amended.  The  district  contended  that  the  “charges”  in  this 

case  were  the  allegations  that  respondent  pled  guilty  to  a  criminal  offense  and  was 

dishonest  with  a  campus  administrator.  The  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  added 

three  additional  “causes  for  discipline”  but  these  did  not  constitute  “charges.”  Instead, 

complainant  contends  the  amendments  should  be  permitted  to  conform  to  proof, 

which  is  permitted  in  civil  proceedings. 

14.  —  The  district's  arguments  were  unpersuasive.  In  civil  litigation, 

amendments  are  allowed  with  great  liberality  and  no  abuse  of  discretion  is  shown 

unless,  by  permitting  the  amendment,  new  and  substantially  different  issues  are 

introduced  in  the  case  or  the  rights  of  the  adverse  party  prejudiced.  (Garcia  v.  Roberts 

(2009)  173  Cal.App.4th  900,  909.)  In  contrast,  Section  44934,  subdivision  (d),  requires 

“good  cause”  to  amend  the  charges  within  90  days  of  the  hearing,  which  reflects  a 

legislative  intent  to  ensure  that  a  district  provides  certificated  employees  sufficient 

opportunity  to  provide  a  defense  to  the  charges. 

While  it  is  true  that  Section  44932  references  “causes  for  dismissal”  rather  than 

“charges,”  Section  44934,  subdivision  (d),  reflects  the  Legislature’s  unambiguous  intent 

to  limit  any  amendments  to  the  charging  document  within  the  90-day  window  except 

for  good  cause.  In  addition,  in  amending  the  Statement  of  Charges,  the  district  did  not 

  

order.  The  district  was  provided  the  opportunity  at  the  hearing  to  argue  good  cause 

for  filing  the  amendment,  and  the  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  was  provisionally 

accepted  until  a  final  decision  was  made  by  the  administrative  law  judge  at  the 

conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

11

just  add  three  additional  causes  for  discipline  to  conform  to  proof,  but  also  made  the 

factual  allegation  that  respondent  previously  received  two  NUCs.  These  NUCs 

contained  allegations  of  prior  misconduct  and  directives  to  remedy  his  performance. 

As  a  “charge”  the  district  alleged  respondent  failed  to  follow  district  directives  and 

regulations  contained  in  the  NUCs,  which  constituted  willful  and/or  persistent  refusal 

to  follow  regulations.  Thus,  the  amendments  constituted  additional  allegations. 

Accordingly,  because  the  Amended  Statement  of  Charges  was  served  on 

respondent  on  June  21,  2019,  which  was  within  90  days  of  the  hearing,  the  district  was 

required  to  establish  good  cause  to  amend.  In  this  case,  good  cause  was  not 

established  as  there  was  no  reason  the  district  could  not  have  amended  the  Statement 

of  Charges  prior  to  the  90-day  window,  as  the  district  was  always  in  possession  of  the 

two  NUCs  that  were  subject  of  the  amendments.  Nor  was  there  good  cause  to  excuse 

the  district's  failure  to  include  all  possible  causes  for  discipline  in  the  original 

Statement  of  Charges.  As  such,  only  the  original  Statement  of  Charges  was  considered 

by  the  Commission  in  reaching  a  decision  in  this  matter. 

Respondent's  Criminal  Conviction 

15. 

On  November  2,  2018,  in  the  Superior  Court  of  California,  County  of 

Riverside,  in  the  case  of  People  v.  Carolchau  Nguyen  and  John  Bao  Hoang,  Case  No. 

SWF1700568,  respondent  pled  guilty  and  was  convicted  of  a  misdemeanor  violation  of 

Penal  Code  section  182  subdivision  (a)(1),  conspiracy.  The  court  placed  respondent  on 

summary  probation  for  36  months;  ordered  him  to  serve  two  days  in  custody  with 

credit  for  two  days’  served;  ordered  him  to  have  no  contact  with  Pechanga  Casino;  and 

ordered  him  to  pay  fines,  fees,  and  restitution. 

12

The  single  count  felony  criminal  complaint  alleged  that  from  January  2015 

through  February  2016,  respondent  and  Ms.  Nguyen,  conspired  together  to  commit 

the  crime  of  grand  theft,  in  violation  of  Penal  Code  section  487,  subdivision  (a).  As  the 

overt  act  for  committing  the  conspiracy,  the  complaint  alleged  respondent  and  Ms. 

Nguyen  “fraudulently  rated  reward  and  promotional  status  leading  to  victim's  loss  of 

over  $3,600  with  transactions  of  retail  goods,  gasoline  and  food.” 

Respondent,  who  was  represented  by  counsel,  signed  a  misdemeanor  plea  form 

on  November  2,  2018.  In  that  form,  respondent  acknowledged  the  following:  “I  agree 

that  I  did  the  things  that  are  stated  in  the  charges  that  I  am  admitting.” 

The  District's  Investigation 

16. 

Ingrid  Munsterman,  who  testified  at  the  hearing,  has  worked  for  the 

district  for  the  past  39  years.  She  has  been  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human 

Resources  for  the  past  13  years,  prior  to  which  she  was  the  Director  of  Human 

Resources,  a  principal,  and  a  teacher.  Ernesto  Calles,  who  testified  at  the  hearing,  was 

until  recently  the  district’s  Director  of  Human  Resources  for  four  years.  He  has  also 

held  positions  with  the  district  as  a  principal,  assistant  principal,  and  teacher. 

17. 

On  October  20,  2018,  Ms.  Munsterman  received  an  electronic  notification 

from  the  California  Department  of  Justice  that  respondent  had  been  arrested  on  a 

felony  charge  of  conspiracy.  The  district  immediately  placed  respondent  on  paid 

administrative  leave  pending  its  investigation.  Mr.  Calles  notified  respondent  that  he 

was  being  placed  on  administrative  leave;  however,  he  did  not  discuss  with  respondent 

the  reasons  for  the  decision  or  respondent's  arrest. 

18. 

On  November  7,  2018,  Mr.  Calles  held  a  meeting  with  respondent.  Also 

present  at  the  meeting  were  Robert  Lemoine,  respondent's  union  representative,  and 

13

Azelin  Davis,  a  district  Human  Resources  Technician  who  took  notes  of  the  meeting. 

Prior  to  the  meeting,  Mr.  Lemoine  emailed  Mr.  Calles  a  copy  of  respondent's 

misdemeanor  plea  memorandum.  This  was  the  only  conviction  document  that  Mr. 

Calles  had  received  at  the  time  of  the  meeting. 

Mr.  Calles  testified  that  his  first  question  to  respondent  was  about  the  arrest 

notification  and  he  asked  respondent  what  happened.  Respondent  replied  that  he  was 

pulled  over  for  a  traffic  violation  and  was  arrested.  Respondent  said  there  was  a 

warrant  that  he  did  not  know  about  because  it  had  been  sent  to  the  wrong  address. 

Respondent  said  “they  took  [respondent]  in  and  [respondent]  paid  a  $150  fine  and 

that  was  it.”  Mr.  Calles  then  asked  respondent,  “Tell  me  about  Pechanga.”  Respondent 

replied,  “I  play  there.”  Respondent  did  not  say  anything  else.  Mr.  Calles  then  asked, 

“Do  you  know  anyone  who  works  at  Pechanga?”  Respondent  replied,  “I  don't  know 

anyone  who  works  at  Pechanga.”  Respondent  did  not  say  anything  else.  Mr.  Calles 

then  asked  respondent  who  was  Carol  Nguyen.  Respondent  answered,  “Oh,  she  is  a 

floor  supervisor  at  the  casino.”  Respondent  then  volunteered  that  he  bought  Ms. 

Nguyen  lunch  before,  but  he  also  bought  lunch  for  other  employees  as  a  courtesy. 

Respondent  then  stated  that  Ms.  Nguyen  put  credit  or  money  on  his  player’s  card  that 

he  did  not  know  about.  Mr.  Calles  then  asked  if  there  was  anything  else  respondent 

wanted  to  share.  Respondent  answered  there  was  nothing  else  and  the  meeting 

concluded. 

Mr.  Calles  testified  that  the  meeting  was  extremely  brief  and  would  have  been 

shorter  had  Mr.  Calles  not  continued  to  try  and  elicit  additional  information  from 

respondent.  Mr.  Calles  could  not  recall  if  respondent  said  anything  about  the  guilty 

plea.  He  did  recall  asking  respondent  about  the  fine  and  whether  it  was  part  of  his  plea 

from  a  felony  to  misdemeanor.  Respondent  said  that  it  was  not.  Mr.  Calles  did  not 

14

review  with  respondent  any  specifics  regarding  his  guilty  plea  or  discuss  with  him  the 

conviction  record.  Mr.  Calles  testified  that  he  felt  resoondent  was  dishonest  at  the 

meeting  because  he  did  not  tell  the  whole  story.  Mr.  Calles  felt  resoondent  would 

share  pieces  of  information,  but  ultimately  it  did  not  match  the  information  that  Mr. 

Calles  had  received,  namely  that  respondent  had  pled  guilty  to  conspiring  to  defraud 

the  casino.  For  example,  Mr.  Calles  believed  respondent  was  dishonest  because  when 

Mr.  Calles  questioned  him  about  Pechanga  Casino,  respondent  only  said  he  played 

there  and  did  not  mention  the  conviction.  He  believed  respondent  was  dishonest  when 

he  said  he  did  not  know  anyone  who  worked  at  Pechanga  but,  admitted  that  he  knew 

Ms.  Nguyen  only  after  Mr.  Calles  asked  respondent  about  her.  Mr.  Calles  testified  that 

he  asked  respondent  open-ended  questions  in  hopes  that  respondent  would  be 

forthcoming.  However,  Mr.  Calles’s  impression  of  the  meeting  was  that  it  was  more  a 

“cat  and  mouse”  game  where  respondent  wanted  to  see  how  much  Mr.  Calles  actually 

knew. 

Ms.  Davis,  who  testified  at  the  hearing,  took  notes  of  the  meeting,  which  were 

received  as  evidence.  Ms.  Davis  and  Mr.  Calles  both  testified  that  the  notes  were  not  a 

verbatim  account  of  the  meeting.  Ms.  Davis  testified  that  she  was  instructed  to  record 

the  “main  points.”  Mr.  Calles  testified  that  the  notes  were  accurate  but  not  a  complete 

account  of  what  was  discussed.  He  said  there  was  more  conversation  than  what  was 

contained  in  the  summary.  Ms.  Davis  provided  Mr.  Calles  the  notes  for  his  review  the 

same  day  of  the  meeting.  Mr.  Calles  testified  that  he  did  not  see  any  problem  with  the 

notes  and  reiterated  that  they  were  accurate  but  not  a  word-for-word  account  of  what 

was  said  at  the  meeting.  Mr.  Calles  did  not  take  any  additional  notes  or  prepare  any 

other  record  concerning  his  conversation.  His  testimony  was  based  on  his  independent 

recollection  of  the  events.  The  notes  indicated  that  the  meeting  lasted  17  minutes.  The 

notes  are  reproduced  in  their  entirety  as  follows: 

15

Issues: 

I.  Pechanga 

a.  John  admits  that  he  bought  lunch  for  the  security 

guard,  but  allegedly  did  nothing  illegal. 

|.  He  is  part  of  a  rewards  program. 

b.  Because  John  bought  food  [for]  the  supervisor,  the 

casino  claims  she  purposely  put  more  reward 

points  on  his  card. 

i.  Ernesto  Asked  when  John  realized  he  had  way 

more  points  than  normal. 

1.  John  replied  it  was  a  while  after  lunch. 

c.  Ernesto  asked  about  the  $150  fine  and  if  it  was  a 

plea  bargain. 

him. 

i.  John  clarified  that  the  $150  fine  was  just  given  to 

d.  Robert  added  that  the  supervisor[']s  case  was 

settled  before  John[']s. 

i.  Court  sent  a  notice  to  appear  for  John  in  2017 

went  to  the  wrong  apartment.  That  is  why  he  was 

arrested. 

16

e.  Ernesto  asked  if  John  bought  the  supervisor  lunch 

because  she  is  helpful  to  John. 

|.  John  clarified  that  he  buys  lunch  for  other 

employees  as  well,  not  just  that  supervisor. 

19. 

Mr.  Calles  testified  that  after  his  meeting  with  respondent,  he  had  a 

heightened  concern  about  respondent's  honesty.  Mr.  Calles  met  with  Ms.  Munsterman 

and  shared  his  concerns  that  resoondent  had  been  dishonest  in  the  interview.  Ms. 

Munsterman  met  with  the  district's  superintendent.  In  discussing  the  matter  with  the 

superintendent,  the  district  decided  that  dismissal  was  appropriate  based  on  the 

criminal  conviction  and  the  belief  that  resoondent  was  dishonest  in  his  interview  with 

Mr.  Calles.  In  addition,  respondent  had  received  two  previous  NUCs,  which  indicated  to 

Ms.  Munsterman  an  inability  to  comply  with  the  prior  directives.  Ms.  Munsterman 

testified  that  the  superintendent  had  highlighted  that  teachers  are  held  to  a  higher 

standard  and  respondent's  actions  implicate  his  ability  to  be  a  positive  role-model  for 

his  students.  Mr.  Calles  noted  that  at  no  time  did  respondent  ever  tell  him  or  the 

district  that  he  was  innocent  of  the  charges  or  that  he  did  not  commit  the  crime  for 

which  he  pled  guilty. 

20. 

Neither  Ms.  Munsterman  nor  Mr.  Calles  were  aware  of  any  complaints  by 

parents  regarding  respondent's  arrest  and  conviction.  They  were  not  aware  if  any 

parents  or  students  were  made  aware  of  the  arrest,  or  if  there  was  any  printed  or  social 

media  publicity  regarding  the  conviction. 

Testimony  of  Jessica  Gomez 

21. 

Jessica  Gomez  has  been  the  principal  at  Alice  Birney  for  the  past  11  years 

and  is  respondent's  supervisor.  In  addition  to  his  duties  as  a  fourth  grade  teacher, 

17

respondent  was  the  lead  teacher  for  afterschool  programs.  Ms.  Gomez  evaluated 

respondent's  performance  twice.  Her  last  evaluation  was  during  the  2014/2015  school 

year.  His  last  evaluation  was  satisfactory  in  all  categories.?  Ms.  Gomez  was  not  involved 

in  the  decision  to  dismiss  respondent  and  was  not  aware  of  the  pending  discipline.  The 

district  notified  her  in  October  2018  that  respondent  was  being  placed  on 

administrative  leave,  but  she  was  not  told  the  reason  for  that  decision.  After 

respondent  was  placed  on  leave,  three  other  teachers  at  Alice  Birney  expressed 

concern  to  Ms.  Gomez  that  they  were  unable  to  reach  respondent.  Their  concern  was 

that  they  attempted  to  contact  him  but  he  was  not  responding.  One  teacher  reported 

that  there  were  rumors  about  respondent  but  did  not  say  what  those  rumors  were. 

Respondent's  students  did  ask  Ms.  Gomez  where  respondent  was  and  when  he 

would  return.  In  addition,  parents  had  asked  respondent's  substitute  teacher  why 

respondent  was  gone  and  when  he  would  return.  The  substitute  did  not  have  an 

answer  and  informed  the  parents  that  she  would  speak  to  Ms.  Gomez. 

As  an  administrator,  Ms.  Gomez  expressed  concern  that  respondent  pled  guilty 

to  a  theft-related  criminal  charge.  She  explained  that  teachers  have  responsibility  for 

handling  money  and  personal  equipment.  She  had  concern  about  respondent's  ability 

to  make  moral  decisions.  The  allegations  of  dishonesty  were  concerning  because  it 

made  her  wonder  if  there  were  other  times  when  respondent  had  not  been  honest 

  

’  Respondent  submitted  a  performance  evaluation  from  the  2015/2016  school 

year  indicating  that  respondent  was  “satisfactory”  in  all  categories  and  was 

“appropriate  and  effective”  during  Ms.  Gomez's  classroom  observation. 

18

with  her  or  whether  he  would  be  honest  in  the  future.  Ms.  Gomez  believed  it  was 

important  for  teachers  to  be  honest  and  trustworthy  and  comply  with  the  law. 

Ms.  Gomez  testified  that  in  the  last  four  years  she  had  no  other  reason  to 

question  respondent's  honesty.  Respondent  was  designated  as  an  administrator 

designee,  which  meant  that  he  acted  as  the  campus  administrator  when  Ms.  Gomez 

and  the  assistant  principal  were  off-site.  In  light  of  the  charges,  Ms.  Gomez  would  no 

longer  make  respondent  an  administrator  designee.  She  expressed  that  it  is  a  position 

of  trust  and  she  Is  not  100  percent  confident  that  respondent  would  be  truthful  and 

honest.  Ms.  Gomez  testified  that  no  parents  or  students  ever  indicated  to  her 

knowledge  of  respondent's  arrest  or  conviction. 

Testimony  of  Carol  Chau  Nguyen 

22. 

Ms.  Nguyen’s  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  She  has  worked  as  a 

real  estate  agent  since  December  2017.  From  July  2011  through  2015  she  worked  as  a 

floor  supervisor  at  Pechanga  Casino.  Her  responsibilities  included  monitoring  the  floor 

games.  She  was  also  involved  with  the  Player's  Club,  a  system  that  the  casino 

maintained  to  award  frequent  players.  When  a  member  of  the  Player’s  Club  came  to 

the  casino,  the  person  would  present  a  card  or  identification  to  Ms.  Nguyen.  Ms. 

Nguyen  would  then  record  information  about  how  long  the  person  played,  how  much 

the  player  bought  in,  how  much  the  player  bet,  and  how  much  was  won  or  lost.  Based 

on  this  information,  the  casino  would  award  the  individual  points  that  could  be 

redeemed  at  the  casino’s  restaurants,  gift-shop,  or  gas  station.  The  points  had  a  dollar 

value  but  could  only  be  redeemed  at  the  casino.  Ms.  Nguyen  was  not  involved  in 

determining  how  many  points  a  player  would  receive;  her  only  role  was  to  input 

information  about  the  player’s  gambling  time  and  bets.  However,  she  knew  that  if  a 

19

player  only  bet  the  minimum,  he  or  she  would  not  receive  many  points.  Players  who 

bet  larger  amounts  and  played  longer  received  more  points. 

Ms.  Nguyen  met  respondent  at  the  casino.  She  could  not  recall  when  exactly 

she  met  respondent  but  estimated  it  was  the  last  two  years  she  worked  at  the  casino. 

Respondent  was  a  regular.  Sometimes  she  would  see  him  weekly,  but  there  would  be 

periods  where  he  would  not  come  in  for  several  weeks.  For  example,  respondent  told 

her  that  he  had  knee  surgery.  She  and  respondent  sometimes  communicated  by 

phone  outside  of  her  work.  On  one  occasion,  he  knew  that  she  was  sick  and  called  to 

ask  how  she  was  feeling.  She  estimated  that  they  spoke  over  the  phone  less  than  10 

times.  She  met  respondent  a  couple  times  face-to-face  outside  of  the  casino.  Once, 

she  was  getting  gas  at  the  casino’s  gas  station  after  work  and  respondent  was  also 

there.  Another  time,  respondent  knew  that  she  was  getting  off  work  and  said  he  would 

meet  her  at  the  gas  station.  Respondent  purchased  gas  for  Ms.  Nguyen. 

Ms.  Nguyen  would  log  respondent  into  the  points  system.  She  admitted  that 

she  would  log  respondent  in  for  more  time  than  he  actually  played.  She  explained  that 

in  general,  a  player  could  lose  several  thousand  dollars  and  still  not  receive  enough 

complimentary  points  to  get  a  meal.  Ms.  Nguyen  would  increase  the  time  for 

respondent  and  other  regular  players  so  they  could  get  something  to  eat.  Ms.  Nguyen 

did  not  know  how  many  times  she  did  this  for  respondent,  but  estimated  it  was  fewer 

than  10.  Most  of  the  time  respondent  would  use  his  points  to  purchase  food.  After 

getting  a  meal  for  himself,  respondent  would  use  the  value  of  the  points  left  over  to 

purchase  food  for  Ms.  Nguyen  and  other  employees,  such  as  the  dealer.  Ms.  Nguyen 

testified  that  respondent  gave  her  food  that  he  had  purchased  with  the  points. 

Respondent  also  gave  Ms.  Nguyen  some  gifts  from  the  gift  shop.  This  included  three 

rings,  two  necklaces,  and  a  watch.  All  the  gifts  were  on  a  single  occasion  around  the 

20

Chinese  New  Year.  She  estimated  the  value  of  the  necklace  was  $75,  but  noted  that 

the  prices  at  the  gift  shop  were  much  higher  than  actual  market  value.  Respondent 

also  paid  for  her  gas  twice. 

23. 

Ms.  Nguyen  testified  that  she  told  respondent  that  she  had  put  extra 

time  on  his  account.  In  response,  respondent  said  that  he  did  not  want  Ms.  Nguyen  to 

get  into  trouble.  Ms.  Nguyen  did  not  think  that  she  was  doing  anything  wrong 

because  the  amount  of  points  was  minimal.  Ms.  Nguyen’s  manager  knew  what  she  was 

doing  and  did  not  think  it  was  a  big  deal.  However,  another  employee  reported 

respondent  to  the  tribe  because  she  believed  Ms.  Nguyen  was  showing  favoritism  to 

respondent.  Ms.  Nguyen  was  fired  from her  job.  Ms.  Nguyen  went  to  a  hearing  before 

the  tribe  in  order  to  retain  her  casino  license  and  job,  but  she  lost  her  appeal. 

Approximately  a  year  later  Ms.  Nguyen  was  notified  that  she  had  to  go  to  court.  She 

went  to  court  twice,  pled  guilty,  and  was  placed  on  probation.  Ms.  Nguyen  was  aware 

that  respondent  was  also  charged.  However,  she  expressed  that  respondent  did 

nothing  wrong  and  had  never  asked  for  any  special  treatment  or  extra  points.  She 

never  created  a  plan  with  respondent,  and  there  was  never  any  discussion  that 

respondent  would  give  Ms.  Nguyen  anything  in  return.  Ms.  Nguyen  did  not  believe 

there  was  any  quid  pro  quo  for  her  adding  more  time  to  his  account.  She  did  not 

believe  there  was  any  loss  to  the  casino  anywhere  near  $3,600  as  alleged  in  the 

criminal  complaint.  She  just  viewed  his  actions  as  being  nice.  Ms.  Nguyen  has  not 

spoken  to  respondent  since  she  worked  at  Pechanga. 

Respondent's  Testimony 

24. 

Respondent's  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  respondent  has  taught 

for  the  district  for  13  years  at  two  different  school  sites.  He  has  spent  the  last  six  years 

at  Alice  Birney  teaching  fourth  grade.  He  began  teaching  on  an  emergency  credential 

21

after  graduating  from  college.  He  then  obtained  his  Masters  of  Education  and 

eligibility  to  obtain  an  administrator  credential.  He  has  been  designated  as  an 

administrator  designee,  allowing  him  to  serve  as  acting  administrator  in  the  absence  of 

the  principal  and  assistant  principal.  He  is  also  in  charge  of  the  Saturday  Academy,  a 

program  that  allows  students  with  multiple  absences  to  make-up  the  lost  time. 

Respondent  was  arrested  in  October  2018.  His  fiancée  at  the  time,  as  a 

condition  of  marriage,  wanted  respondent  to  self-exclude  himself  from  casinos.  This 

meant  that  respondent  would  go  to  a  casino  and  inform  security  that  he  wanted  to  be 

barred  from  entering.  Respondent  went  to  a  casino  in  Palm  Springs  for  this  purpose. 

When  the  guard  ran  his  identification,  the  guard  took  him  into  custody.  The  police 

came  and  arrested  him  on  an  outstanding  warrant  for  conspiracy.  He  spent  the  night 

in  jail  until  he  could  be  bonded  out.  The  arrest  was  a  complete  surprise  to  respondent. 

He  had  never  been  arrested  and  the  experience  of  being  in  jail  was  awful. 

Respondent  explained  that  he  never  received  the  original  order  to  appear  in 

court  because  the  apartment  number  had  been  omitted  on  the  summons. 

Consequently,  a  bench  warrant  was  issued.  After  the  district  placed  him  on 

administrative  leave,  resoondent  went  to  court  so  that  his  case  could  be  advanced.  He 

wanted  to  get  back  to  work.  At  his  second  court  appearance,  he  was  represented  by  a 

public  defender.  Respondent  was  charged  with  a  felony.  He  was  scared  of  ever  having 

to  return to jail,  he  did  not  want  to  go  to  trial,  and  wanted  to  get  back  to  work. 

Consequently,  he  accepted  the  plea  to  a  misdemeanor  and  probation.  He  was  not 

advised  of  the  consequences  of  his  plea  or  that  it  could  affect  his  employment.  At  the 

time  the  plea  sounded  good.  Although  he  signed  a  plea  agreement  indicating  that 

there  was  a  factual  basis  for  his  plea  this  was  not  true. 

22

25. 

In  2014  and  2015  respondent  frequented  the  Pechanga  Casino. 

Respondent  knew  Ms.  Nguyen  as  “CC,”  who  was  a  floor  supervisor.  He  was  aware  that 

the  floor  supervisor  rated  players,  and  based  on  the  ratings,  players  would  receive 

rewards  that  could  be  used  for  food,  gifts,  or  gasoline.  When  respondent  received 

points  he  would  have  to  use  all  the  points  or  they  would  be  lost.  Rather  than  have 

points  go  to  waste,  he  bought  food  for  employees,  including  Ms.  Nguyen.  He  would 

not  sit  and  eat  with  the  employees  as  they  were  required  to  eat  in  their  own 

breakroom.  Instead,  he  would  purchase  food  and  give  it  to  them.  Respondent  gave 

Ms.  Nguyen  some  items  he  purchased  from  the  gift  store  with  his  reward  points.  This 

was  a  one-time  occurrence  for  Chinese  New  Year.  He  explained  that  for  him,  Chinese 

New  Year  is  similar  to  Christmas,  where  he  gives  presents  to  elders  as  a  way  of 

showing  appreciation.  He  typically  spends  up  to  $2,000  every  year  buying  gifts  for 

friends  and  family.  He  believes  he  gave  Ms.  Nguyen  two  or  three  rings,  a  necklace,  and 

a  watch.  These  items  cost  approximately  $150,  which  he  purchased  with  reward  points. 

The  gifts  were  meant  to  be  a  surprise  for  Chinese  New  Year.  Ms.  Nguyen  did  not 

expect  the  gifts,  but  she  was  the  only  employee  who  he  purchased  gifts  for. 

Respondent  did  run  into  respondent  on  an  occasion  and  purchased  approximately  $40 

worth  of  gasoline  for  her  using  his  complimentary  rewards. 

Respondent  was  unaware  of  how  the  points  were  awarded  to  him.  He  would 

give  his  player's  card  to  the  supervisor  when  he  went  to  a  table.  He  only  asked  how 

many  points  he  had  when  he  wanted  to  buy  something.  Respondent  was  never  told 

that  Ms.  Nguyen  was  doing  anything  improper.  If  he  had,  he  would  have  not  wanted 

her  to  do  it  so  she  would  not  get  in  trouble. 

26. 

After  respondent  received  the  sentencing  memorandum,  he  brought  it  to 

the  union  president,  Mr.  Lemoine.  Mr.  Lemoine  emailed  the  sentencing  memorandum 

23

to  Mr.  Calles  and  then  called  him  on  speakerphone  with  respondent  present.  Mr.  Calles 

made  a  joke  that  respondent  should  stay  away  from  casinos  but  said  the  conviction 

should  not  be  a  problem  as  long  as  it  did  not  involve  kids  or  drugs. 

At  the  meeting  on  November  7,  2018,  Mr.  Calles  asked  respondent  what 

happened.  Respondent  explained  that  he  had  gone  to  a  casino  for  a  self-exclusion, 

which  respondent  explained  to  Mr.  Calles.  Respondent  told  Mr.  Calles  that  he  was 

arrested  at  the  casino  and  spent  11  hours in  jail  before  bonding  out.  Mr.  Calles  asked 

respondent  if  he  knew  anyone  at  Pechanga.  Respondent  answered  “no”  because 

“knowing  someone  is  on  a  personal  level”  and  he  knew  Ms.  Nguyen  only  as  “CC”  from 

the  casino.  Mr.  Calles  asked  respondent  specifically  about  Ms.  Nguyen,  and 

respondent  said  he  did  not  have  a  romantic  relationship  with  her  but  knew  her  as  the 

floor  supervisor  who  rates  players  at  Pechanga  Casino.  Mr.  Calles  asked  respondent  if 

he  bought  Ms.  Nguyen  lunch  and  he  answered  that  he  bought  other  employees  lunch 

and  not  just  her.  Mr.  Calles  thought  that  respondent  took  her  out  to  lunch  and 

respondent  explained  that  he  never  met  her  outside  of  the  casino,  and  he  did  not  have 

any  kind  of  romantic  relationship  with  Ms.  Nguyen.  Respondent  testified  that  he  never 

socialized  with  Ms.  Nguyen  whatsoever.  Mr.  Calles  never  asked  respondent  about  a 

romantic  relationship  specifically.  Mr.  Calles  asked  respondent  how  much  he  had  to 

pay.  Respondent  said  he  had  to  pay  $150  based  on  what  was  on  the  sentencing 

memorandum.  Mr.  Calles  asked  if  it  was  part  of  the  plea  bargain.  Respondent  said  “no” 

because  the  $150  was  ordered  as  part  of  the  sentencing  memorandum.  Respondent 

thought  the  question  involving  the  plea  bargain  itself  and  the  amount  of  the  fine  was 

never  negotiated. 

The  meeting  was  short.  Mr.  Calles  had  the  sentencing  memorandum  with  him  at 

the  meeting.  Mr.  Calles  never  asked  respondent  about  any  specifics  involving  the  plea 

24

or  underlying  conduct.  Mr.  Calles  did  not  recall  if  Mr.  Calles  asked  about  buying  any 

gifts  for  Ms.  Nguyen.  Respondent  felt  he  was  forthcoming  with  Mr.  Calles.  Respondent 

did  not  attend  the  Ske//y  meeting  because  he  thought  it  was  optional. 

27. 

Respondent  currently  gambles  very  little.  He  has  been  in  education  for  19 

years  and  loves  working  with  kids  and  helping  them. 

28. 

On  cross-examination,  respondent  testified  that  he  signed  and  initialed 

the  plea  agreement,  which  indicated  that  “he  agreed  that  he  did  the  things  he  was 

charged  with.”  However,  this  was  not  a  true  statement.  Respondent  signed  the 

document  because  he  wanted  to  return  to  work.  He  did  not  really  understand  the 

document  at  the  time.  He  was  facing  a  felony  charge  with possible jail  time. 

Respondent  provided  the  sentencing  memorandum  to  Mr.  Lemoine  to  provide  to  the 

district.  Respondent  did  not  tell  anyone  at  the  district  that  the  plea  agreement  he 

signed  contained  a  false  statement  that  he  admitted  to  doing  the  things  he  was 

charged  with. 

29. 

Respondent  knew  that  when  he  gave  Ms.  Nguyen  his  player’s  card  she 

was  rating  his  play.  He  was  aware  that  this  involved  keeping  track  of  the  amount  of 

time  he  was  playing.  Respondent  initially  testified  that  he  did  not  recall  if  Ms.  Nguyen 

ever  told  him  that  she  was  adding  additional  time  to  his  play  rating.  He  never  had  any 

other  knowledge  that  Ms.  Nguyen  had  added  additional  time  to  his  play  rating.  Ms. 

Nguyen’s  testimony  at  the  hearing  was  the  first  time  that  he  heard  that  she  had  added 

additional  time.  Respondent  did  not  recall  ever  expressing  to  Ms.  Nguyen  that  he  had 

concerns  about  her  getting  in  trouble  for  the  way  she  rated  his  play;  it  never  crossed 

his  mind  that  she  would  get  in  trouble. 

25

30. 

Respondent  had  been  gambling  at  Pechanga  Casino  before  meeting  Ms. 

Nguyen.  He  never  noticed  a  difference  in  the  points  he  was  receiving  after  meeting 

Ms.  Nguyen.  He  explained  that  he  was  wagering  and  losing  more.  There  was  nothing 

about  the  amount  of  points  he  was  receiving  that  he  believed  was  out  of  the  ordinary. 

Respondent  testified  that  contrary  to  Ms.  Nguyen’s  testimony  at  the  hearing,  he  never 

had  a  conversation  with  her  about  her  crediting  him  with  more  time.  Respondent 

purchased  lunch  for  other  employees  even  before  he  met  Ms.  Nguyen.  Respondent 

denied  there  was  every  any  quid  pro  quo  with  Ms.  Nguyen  for  her  to  increase  his  time, 

and  in  return,  he  would  provide  her  with  remuneration. 

31. 

Respondent  does  not  believe  he  violated  any  ethical  standards  of  the 

teaching  profession  as  it  relates  to  his  conviction  because  he  did  not  conspire  to 

commit  grand  theft.  Respondent  believed  that  during  the  meeting  with  Mr.  Calles  he 

told  Mr.  Calles  everything  he  remembered  at  that  time.  Respondent  does  not  think  he 

ever  asserted  his  actual  innocence  to  Mr.  Calles  or  anyone  else  at  the  district. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Burden  and  Standard  of  Proof 

1, 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  disciplinary  proceeding  is  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.)  “Preponderance  of  the  evidence”  means 

evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  If  the  evidence  Is  so 

evenly  balanced  that  one  Is  unable  to  say  that  the  evidence  on  either  side  of  an  Issue 

preponderates,  the  finding  on  that  issue  must  be  against  the  party  who  had  the 

burden  of  proving  it.  (People  v.  Mabini  (2000)  92  Cal.App.4th  654,  663.) 

26

Applicable  Law 

2. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  dismissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  8§  44932,  44934,  &  44944) 

3. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against  the  dismissal;  the  Commission 

may  not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative 

sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c)(1)-(3).) 

4. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  the  following: 

immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  and  conviction  of  a  felony  or  of  any  crime  involving 

moral  turpitude.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subds.  (a)(1),  (a)(4),  &  (a)(9).) 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44009,  subdivision  (c),  provides: 

A  plea  or  verdict  of  guilty,  or  finding  of  guilt  by  a  court  in  a 

trial  without  a  jury,  or  a  conviction  following  a  plea  of  nolo 

contendere  is  deemed  to  be  a  conviction  within  the 

meaning  of  Sections  44836  and  45123,  irrespective  of  a 

subsequent  order  for  probation  suspending  the  imposition 

of  a  sentence  or  an  order  under  Section  1203.4  of  the  Penal 

Code  allowing  the  withdrawal  of  the  plea  of  guilty  and 

entering  a  plea  of  not  guilty,  or  setting  aside  the  verdict  of 

guilty,  or  dismissing  the  accusations  or  information.  The 

record  of  conviction  shall  be  sufficient  proof  of  conviction 

of  a  crime  involving  moral  turpitude  for  the  purposes  of 

Section  44907  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive, 

relating  to  the  dismissal  of  permanent  employees. 

2/7

Evaluation 

CONVICTION  OF  A  CRIME  INVOLVING  MORAL  TURPITUDE 

6. 

Respondent  pled  guilty  to  a  misdemeanor  violation  of  Penal  Code 

section  182,  subdivision  (a)(1).  Respondent's  plea  of  guilty  is  conclusive  evidence  of  a 

conviction  for  purposes  of  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)).  (Ed.  Code,  §  44009,  subd. 

(c).)  Respondent  attempted  to  impeach  the  conviction  and  argued  that  he  was 

innocent  and  not  aware  that  his  guilty  plea  could  have  consequences  for  his 

employment.  Despite  respondent's  testimony  regarding  the  facts  and  circumstances 

underlying  the  conviction,  respondent  pled  guilty  to  the  charges.  Irrespective  of  the 

reason  that  he  entered  the  plea,  respondent  is  not  permitted  to  attack  or  impeach  the 

conviction  in  this  administrative  proceeding;  the  conviction  stands  as  conclusive 

evidence  of  respondent's  guilt  of  the  offense  charged.  (Arneson  v.  Fox  (1980)  28  Cal.3d 

440,  449.) 

7. 

Whether  the  conviction  involved  moral  turpitude  is  solely  determined  by 

the  elements  of  the  crime,  not  by  extrinsic  evidence.  (Peop/e  v  Castro  (1985)  38  Cal.3d 

301,  316-317).  Respondent  pled  guilty  to  a  misdemeanor  criminal  count  of  conspiracy. 

Under  Penal  Code  section  182,  subdivision  (a)(1),  a  conspiracy  occurs  when  two  or 

more  persons  conspire  to  commit  any  crime.  A  conviction  of  conspiracy  requires  proof 

that  the  defendant  and  another  person  had  the  specific  intent  to  agree  or  conspire  to 

commit  an  offense,  as  well  as  the  specific  intent  to  commit  the  elements  of  that 

offense,  together  with  proof  of  the  commission  of  an  overt  act...  in  furtherance  of  the 

conspiracy.”  (People  v.  Smith,  337  P.3d  1159,  1168  (Cal.  2014)  [internal  quotation 

marks  omitted]).  In  this  case,  respondent  pled  guilty  to  conspiracy  to  commit  grand 

theft.  “Grand  theft  reflects  dishonesty  and  Is  a  crime  involving  moral  turpitude.” 

28

(People  v.  Wheeler  (1992)  4  Cal.4th  284,  289.)  Thus,  respondent's  conviction  is  a  crime 

of  moral  turpitude  within  the  meaning  of  Section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(9). 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT  AND  DISHONESTY 

8. 

Respondent  argued  that  his  conviction  does  not  conclusively  establish 

that  he  engaged  in  immoral  conduct.  He  contended  that  the  district  failed  to  present 

factual  evidence  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct.  Instead,  he  relied  on 

his  own  and  Ms.  Nguyen’s  testimony  that  there  was  no  conspiracy  to  commit  a  crime 

or  any  immoral  conduct  on  part  of  respondent. 

Respondent's  argument  is  misplaced.  A  particular  act  or  omission  may 

constitute  more  than  one  cause  for  dismissal  under  Section  44932.  (7arquin  v. 

Commission  on  Prof.  Comp.  (1978)  84  Cal.App.3d  251,  260.)  Here,  immoral  conduct 

(Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1))  and  dishonesty  (/a!  at  subd.  (a)(6))  are  established  by 

virtue  of  the  conviction  of  a  crime  involving  moral  turpitude  (/d.  at  (a)(9)).  Put  another 

way,  one  cannot  be  convicted  for  conspiracy  to  commit  grand  theft,  a  crime  involving 

moral  turpitude,  without  having  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  and  dishonesty. 

(Wheeler,  supra.) 

9, 

The  district  also  alleged  that  respondent  was  dishonest  with  Mr.  Calles 

regarding  the  circumstances  of  the  offense.  The  Statement  of  Charges  specifies  the 

following  statements  in  support  of  the  allegation:  1)  respondent  initially  claimed  that 

he  did  not  know  and/or  never  met  Ms.  Nguyen;  2)  respondent  then  stated  that  he  only 

had  lunch  with  Ms.  Nguyen  and  the  two  did  not  have  a  romantic  relationship;  3) 

respondent  claimed  that  Ms.  Nguyen  unilaterally  placed  points  and/or  money  on  his 

Player’s  Club  card  without  respondent's  knowledge  or  request;  and  4)  respondent 

29

represented  that  the  criminal  matter  concluded  with  him  only  needing  to  pay  a  $150 

fine. 

10. 

A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  respondent  was 

dishonest  in  his  meeting  with  Mr.  Calles.  Regarding  whether  respondent  knew  or  met 

Ms.  Nguyen,  respondent  initially  told  Mr.  Calles  that  he  did  not  know  anyone  at 

Pechanga  Casino.  This  statement  was  false.  When  Mr.  Calles  next  asked  respondent 

who  Ms.  Nguyen  was,  respondent  answered  that  she  was  a  floor  supervisor  at  the 

casino.  Respondent  testified  that  he  initially  denied  knowing  anyone  at  the  casino 

because  he  did  not  know  anyone  “on  a  personal  level.”  This  explanation  was  not 

persuasive  considering  that  respondent,  only  a  week  before,  pled  guilty  to  a  criminal 

conspiracy  involving  Ms.  Nguyen.  Furthermore,  even  if  he  did  not  consider  her  a  friend 

“on  a  personal  level,”  the  relationship  was  close  enough  that  he  bought  her  gifts,  food, 

and  gasoline.  Despite  his  initial  answer  denying  knowing  anyone  at  the  casino,  it  was 

not  established  that  respondent  attempted  to  deceive  Mr.  Calles.  After  Mr.  Calles 

specifically  asked  about  Ms.  Nguyen,  respondent  elaborated  on  his  association  with 

her.  Respondent  knew  that  Mr.  Calles  was  aware  of  the  conviction  as  respondent  had 

provided  Mr.  Calles  the  sentencing  order  through  Mr.  Lemoine.  It  would  not  be 

unreasonable  for  respondent  to  have  read  more  into  the  question  than  what  was 

being  asked.  Indeed,  in  his  next  answer,  he  volunteered  to  Mr.  Calles  that  he  was  not 

in  a  romantic  relationship  with  Ms.  Nguyen.  This  suggests  that  respondent  did  in  fact 

view  Mr.  Calles’s  question  about  knowing  anyone  at  Pechanga  as  relating  to 

something  more  than  simply  an  acquaintance. 

11. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  alleged  that  respondent  represented  that  the 

criminal  matter  concluded  with  him  only  needing  to  pay  a  $150  fine.  This  was  not  Mr. 

Calles’s  testimony.  Mr.  Calles  testified  that  he  asked  respondent  if  the  fine  was  part  of 

30

his  plea  from  a  felony  to  a  misdemeanor,  to  which  respondent  answered  it  was  not. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  understood  the  question  to  relate  to  the  plea  bargain 

itself,  which  made  no  reference  to  a  fine.  Instead,  the  court  assessed  the  fine  at 

sentencing.  Respondent's  testimony  on  this  point  was  credible,  and  it  was  not 

established  that  his  answer  to  Mr.  Calles  was  dishonest. 

12. 

The  district  alleged  that  respondent  was  dishonest  to  Mr.  Calles  in  his 

assertion  that  Ms.  Nguyen  put  points  on  his  player's  card  without  his  knowledge.  The 

district  argued  that  this  was  dishonest  in  light  of  his  guilty  plea,  in  which  he  admitted 

to  the  factual  basis  of  the  conspiracy  with  Ms.  Nguyen.  Respondent  maintained  at  the 

hearing  that  he  had  no  knowledge  that  Ms.  Nguyen  had  credited  him  with  playing 

more  time  than  he  actually  played  and  denied  ever  conspiring  with  her  to  defraud  the 

casino. 

The  fact  that  respondent  pleaded  guilty  to  a  crime  but  maintained  his 

innocence  does  not  amount  to  dishonesty.  The  consistent  refusal  to  retract  claims  of 

innocence  in  order  to  show  remorse  can  also  reinforce,  rather  than  undercut,  a 

showing  of  good  character.  (Ha//  v.  Committee  of  Bar  Examiners  (1979)  25  Cal.3d  730.) 

Whether  the  failure  to  retract  claims  of  innocence  will  reinforce  or  undercut  a 

respondent's  claim  of  good  character  depends  on  the  facts  of  each  case.  Although 

respondent  cannot  collaterally  attack  the  conviction  itself,  the  fact  that  he  maintains 

his  innocence  does  not  automatically  equate  to  dishonesty. 

Here,  both  respondent  and  Ms.  Nguyen  denied  conspiring  to  commit  a  crime. 

Other  than  the  fact  that  both  pled  guilty  to  conspiracy,  there  was  no  other  extrinsic 

evidence  challenging  either  resoondent’s  or  Ms.  Nguyen’s  testimony  on  this  regard. 

Their  testimony  differed  only  as  to  whether  Ms.  Nguyen  told  respondent  that  she  was 

adding  extra  time  to  this  account.  Ms.  Nguyen  testified  that  she  told  respondent  and 

31

he  expressed  concern  that  she  might  get  into  trouble.  Respondent  denied  any 

knowledge  whatsoever,  and  testified  that  he  believed  he  received  the  extra  points 

because  he  was  playing  more  and  losing  more.  Ms.  Nguyen’s  testimony  was  more 

credible  than  respondent's  on  this  point.  Ms.  Nguyen  testified  that  she  did  not  believe 

the  rewards  system  adequately  compensated  players  who  lost  large  amounts  of 

money.  Consequently,  she  added  time  to  respondent’s  account  so  that  he  would 

obtain  more  credits.  Although  she  did  not  believe  that  she  was  doing  anything  wrong, 

and  denied  complicity  with  respondent,  it  is  more  believable  that  she  would  inform 

respondent  what  she  was  doing  rather  than  keeping  it  a  secret  from  him.  It  is  also 

reasonable  that  respondent  would  then  express  a  desire  that  she  not  get  into  trouble 

for  her  actions. 

Notwithstanding  the  negative  credibility  finding  as  to  respondent's  testimony 

that  he  had  no  knowledge  that  Ms.  Nguyen  was  adding  extra  time  to  his  account,  this 

was  insufficient  for  the  Commission  to  find  respondent  was  dishonest  with  Mr.  Calles. 

Of  particular  concern  Is  the  fact  that  Mr.  Calles’s  testimony  about  the  meeting,  for  the 

most  part,  was  not  reflected  in  the  contemporaneous  notes  recorded  by  Ms.  Davis.  The 

district's  contention  that  the  notes  were  not  intended  to  capture  everything  that  was 

said  is  specious  considering  most  of  the  allegations  about  respondent's  dishonest 

answers  are  not  contained  in  the  notes.  Considering  the  likelihood  of  future  litigation, 

the  purpose  of  having  a  note-taker  at  such  meetings  is  to  accurately  and  completely 

record  what  transpired.  Either  Mr.  Calles’s  recollection  of  exactly  what  was  said  was  not 

correct,  or  the  notes  were  woefully  incomplete.  Either  way,  there  was  sufficient  doubt 

as  to  both  for  the  Commission  to  find  that  respondent  was  dishonest  at  the  meeting. 

32

RELATIONSHIP  TO  FITNESS  TO  TEACH 

13. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235,  the 

Supreme  Court  held  that  “an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession 

only  upon  a  showing  that  his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of 

harm  to  either  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his 

actions  as  a  teacher.”  The  court  delineated  the  following  criteria  to  determine  whether 

a  teacher's  conduct  indicates  that  he  or  she  is  not  fit  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that 

the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of 

such  adversity  anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4) 

the  type  of  teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 

circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct  in  question;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or 

blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  of  the 

recurrence  of  the  conduct  in  question;  and  (8)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action 

may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of 

the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  (/d!  at  pp.  229-230.)  “These  factors  are  relevant 

to  the  extent  that  they  assist  the  board  in  determining  ...  the  teacher's  fitness  to 

teach,  i.e.,  in  determining  whether  the  teacher's  future  classroom  performance  and 

overall  impact  on  his  students  are  likely  to  meet  the  [school  district's]  standards.”  (/d! 

at  pp.  229-230.)  There  must  exist  a  “factual  nexus  between  [the  teacher's  misconduct] 

and  unfitness  to  teach.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1982)  135  Cal.App.3d  278,  288.)  The  statutory  definition  of 

immoral  conduct  “must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  unique  position  of 

public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed  ‘responsibilities  and  limitations  on 

freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.”  (San  Diego  Unified 

School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194  Cal.App.4th  1454, 

1466)  [citation  omitted]. 

33

14. 

Not  all  of  the  Morrison  factors  must  be  considered,  only  the  most 

pertinent  ones.  (West  Valley-Mission  Community  College  District  v.  Conception  (1993) 

16  Cal.  App.4th  1766,  1777.)  Additionally,  the  Morrison  factors  may  be  applied  to  all  the 

charges  in  the  aggregate.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,1456-1457.)  In  Board  of  Education 

v.  Jack  M.  (1970)  19  Cal.3d  691,  the  Supreme  Court  detailed  the  process  to  be 

considered  in  determining  fitness  to  teach.  In  addition  to  the  Morrison  factors,  the 

court  provided  additional  factors  that  may  be  considered  to  determine  whether  there 

is  anexus  between  the  conduct  and  a  teacher’s  fitness  to  teach:  (1)  likelihood  of 

recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 

circumstances,  if  any;  (3)  the  effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity;  (4)  impairment  of 

teachers’  and  students’  relationships;  (5)  disruption  of  educational  process;  (6)  motive; 

(7)  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  conduct.  (/d  at  fn.  5.) 

15. 

In  considering  the  relevant  Morrison  factors  in  conjunction  with  the 

sustained  allegations  the  following  conclusions  are  reached. 

Likelihood  conduct  adversely  affected  students  and  teachers:  There  was  no 

evidence  that  any  parents,  students,  or  other  teachers  were  aware  of  respondent's 

conviction  or  that  there  was  any  notoriety  associated  with  the  conviction.  However,  the 

district  appropriately  placed  respondent  on  administrative  leave  after  receiving 

notification  of  his  felony  arrest,  which  took  him  out  of  the  classroom  until  his 

suspension  was  reversed.  Ms.  Gomez  testified  that  some  parents  questioned 

respondent's  whereabouts  and  when  he  would  return  to  the  classroom.  Although 

there  was  no  evidence  on  the  effect  of  respondent’s  absence  on  his  students,  it  can  be 

presumed  that  the  long-term  absence  of  their  teacher  and  replacement  with  a 

substitute  would  not  be  a  positive  influence  on  the  learning  environment. 

34

The  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated:  This  case  does  not  represent  the 

most  extreme  form  of  teacher  misconduct,  but  is  nonetheless,  moderately  serious. 

While  there  was  no  evidence  that  news  of  respondent's  conviction  has  reached  fellow 

teachers  or  students,  that  is  not  to  say  that  the  possibility  that  this  information  would 

come  to  light  in  the  future  is  remote.  Criminal  records  are  easily  accessible  online  and 

more  than  a  hypothetical  possibility  that  a  parent  or  another  teacher  would  look-up 

respondent.  Even  if  respondent  ultimately  obtains  an  expungement,  he  is  scheduled  to 

remain  on  criminal  probation  until  November  2021.  Respondent's  conviction  for 

conspiracy  to  commit  grand  theft  involved  moral  turpitude.  Students,  especially 

elementary  students  are  impressionable.  Their  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  the 

conviction  would  certainly  be  adverse  to  an  appropriate  and  productive  learning 

environment. 

recent. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct:  The  conviction 

occurred  in  November  2018,  during  the  previous  school  year.  Respondent  is  scheduled 

to  remain  on  criminal  probation  until  November  2021.  The  events  were  therefore  very 

Extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances:  Respondent  maintained  that  he 

was  innocent  of  the  conduct  that  resulted  in  his  commission.  While  both  Ms.  Nguyen 

and  respondent  testified  that  they  never  conspired  to  defraud  the  casino,  their 

testimonies  varied  as  to  respondent's  knowledge  that  Ms.  Nguyen  was  adding  time  — 

and  thus  redeemable  points  —  to  his  player’s  account.  As  previously  discussed,  Ms. 

Nguyen’s  testimony  that  respondent  was  aware  of  this  fact  was  more  credible. 

Rehabilitation  is  a  “state  of  mind”  and  the  law  looks  with  favor  upon  rewarding  with 

the  opportunity  to  serve,  one  who  has  achieved  “reformation  and  regeneration.” 

(Pacheco  v.  State  Bar (1987)  43  Cal.3d  1041,  1058.)  Fully  acknowledging  the 

35

wrongfulness  of  past  actions  is  an  essential  step  towards  rehabilitation.  (Sede  v. 

Committee  of  Bar  Examiners  (1989)  49  Cal.3d  933,  940.)  While  a  candid  admission  of 

misconduct  and  full  acknowledgment  of  wrongdoing  Is  a  necessary  step  in  the 

rehabilitation  process,  it  is  only  a  first  step;  a  truer  indication  of  rehabilitation  is 

presented  if  an  individual  demonstrates  by  sustained  conduct  over  an  extended  period 

of  time  that  he  or  she  is  once  again  fit  to  teach.  (Jn  re  Trebilcock  (1981)  30  Cal.3d  312, 

315-316.) 

While  it  is  not  expected  that  respondent  would  be  falsely  penitent  (Ha//  supra), 

it 

is  expected  that  he  would  engage  in  meaningful  introspection  about  the  events  that 

occurred.  Thus,  the  Commission  did  not  believe  that  respondent  was  entirely  candid  in 

these  proceedings,  which  is  an  aggravating  factor.  In  similar  fashion,  while  it  was  not 

established  that  respondent  was  overtly  dishonest  with  Mr.  Calles  during  their 

meeting,  he  was  not  forthcoming.  The  district  had  an  obligation  to  its  students  and 

employees  to  explore  the  appropriateness  of  returning  respondent  to  the  classroom  in 

light  of  his  conviction.  Although  Mr.  Calles's  questions  were  open-ended,  it  would  be 

expected  that  respondent  would  convey  to  him  a  complete  account  of  what 

transpired.  Instead,  it  appears  that  respondent  provided  very  minimal  details  in  terms 

of  explanation. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the 

conduct:  Respondent's  conduct  was  not  praiseworthy.  While  respondent  might  not 

have  believed  that  he  was  engaging  in  criminal  conduct,  he  at  the  very  least  was  aware 

that  Ms.  Nguyen  was  doing  something  for  his  benefit  that  could  expose  her  to  trouble 

with  her  employer. 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  conduct  in  question:  It  is  unlikely 

that  respondent  will  again  engage  In  similar  misconduct. 

36

16. 

|  Most  of  the  factors  in  the  case  of  Jack  M,,  supra,  parallel  those  factors 

listed  in  Morrison,  supra.  However,  two  factors  -  impairment  of  the  teacher/student 

relationship  and  disruption  of  educational  process  -  are  relevant.  Respondent's 

conduct  impaired  the  student/teacher  relationship  and  disrupted  the  educational 

process  to  the  extent  that  he  was  absent  from  the  classroom  for  an  extended  period  of 

time,  which  forced  the  district  to  obtain  a  long-term  substitute.  Ms.  Gomez  testified 

that  she  has  lost  trust  in  respondent,  specifically  as  it  relates  to  his  honesty.  Where  a 

principal  loses  confidence  in  a  teacher's  role  modeling  ability  toward  students,  this 

constitutes  evidence  of  an  adverse  impact  upon  the  teacher's  perceived 

professionalism. 

17.  |  Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  for  the  district  for  13  years.  However, 

based  on  the  conviction  of  a  crime  involving  moral  turpitude,  the  Morrison  factors, 

and  factors  relevant  from  Jack  M,,  a  nexus  between  respondent's  conduct  and  his 

fitness  to  teach  at  the  district  was  well-established.  Respondent  provided  no  other 

evidence  of  good  character  or  teaching  ability  other  than  a  “satisfactory”  performance 

evaluation  and  Ms.  Gomez's  testimony  that  he  was  an  administrator  designee  and  she 

had  no  issues  with  respondent  in  the  preceding  four  years.  Accordingly,  on  this  record, 

the  district’s  request  to  dismiss  respondent  must  be  upheld  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44932,  subdivisions  (a)(1),  (a)(4),  and  (a)(9). 

37

ORDER 

Respondent  John  Hoang’s  appeal  from  his  dismissal  of  employment  by  the 

Colton  Joint  Unified  School  District  is  denied.  The  district's  request  to  dismiss 

respondent  is  upheld. 

DATE:  October  2,  2019 

DocuSigned  by: 

AG  K 

19DED247706C4FB... 

ADAM  L.  BERG 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

DAT E:  October  1  5  20  1  9 

(Debora  by: 

orale  Bowers 

0622DC2882B5472... 

DEBORAH  BOWERS 

Commission  Member 

DATE:  October  2,  2019 

(\  DocuSigned  by: 

Q9AEEAB6D18F84DC... 

KIMBERLY  BINNING-CHEVLIN 

Commission  Member 

38

