BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal Against: 

JONATHAN HUBBARD, Respondent 

OAH No. 2019120095 

DECISION 

This matter came on for hearing before the Commission on Professional 

Competence (Commission) in Sacramento, California, on July 9, September 14, through 

September 18, and October 9, 2020. The Commission was comprised of Andrea 

Rodriguez, Lily Walker, and Administrative Law Judge Dena Coggins.

Ryan Harrison and Steven Ngo, Attorneys at Law, represented the Sacramento 

City Unified School District (District).

Michael McCallum, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Jonathan Hubbard 

(respondent), who was present at the hearing. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The Commission met to 

deliberate. The matter was submitted for decision on December 10, 2020, following 

the Commission’s deliberations. 

MOTIONS TO DISMISS, OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, TO STRIKE 

A.

On January 23, 2020, respondent moved to dismiss the charges against 

him asserting the District is seeking to dismiss him based upon charges that are the 

result of respondent’s mental health issue (

). Respondent argues that 

dismissing him on the basis of conduct caused by his disability is akin to dismissing 

him for his disability, and as such, would constitute a violation of both federal and 

state law, specifically the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Fair Employment and 

Housing Act. 

As will be discussed in the Decision below, respondent failed to establish that 

his 

 caused his conduct at issue. Accordingly, the District is not seeking 

to dismiss respondent based upon charges that are the result of his mental health 

issue. Therefore, the motion to dismiss is denied. 

B. 

On January 23, 2020, respondent moved to dismiss the charges against 

him, or, in the alternative, to strike certain charges, asserting the charges upon which 

the District is seeking to dismiss him were not previously included in respondent’s 

personnel file, and thus cannot form the basis of discipline against him per 

 (1979 23 Cal.3d 703) (

), and a provision of the Collective Bargaining 

Agreement between the District and the Teachers’ Union. 

 held that a school administrator must be permitted to review and 

comment on derogatory written material compiled and maintained by a school district 

even though the material was not properly in his personnel file and that an 

employment decision could not be based on such information unless the employee 

was notified of the derogatory information and was afforded an opportunity to 

comment on it. (

 at p. 707.) 

None of the authorities cited by respondent preclude discipline based on 

information that is not contained in respondent’s personnel file. Education Code 

section 44031 and article 10.2 of the Bargaining Contract (Contract) simply require that 

an employee be permitted to review and comment on derogatory information before 

the information is placed in the employee’s personnel file. Article 10.2.2 of the 

Contract further provides that if information is placed in the employee’s personnel file 

before the employee is given an opportunity to review the information, such 

information cannot be used as a basis for discipline. 

 expands on these 

requirements by holding that even if information is not contained in a personnel file 

the employee must be given an opportunity to review and comment on it before an 

employment decision can be made based on the information. In this case, respondent 

is fully aware of the conduct that is the basis for the proposed discipline (dismissal) 

because he has defended it in the validation meeting, Skelly meetings, and letter to 

the Commission on Teacher Credentialing. Moreover, respondent is being afforded an 

opportunity to review and comment on all of the information that forms the basis for 

the proposed discipline pursuant to this dismissal proceeding, which is all that is 

required by the authorities cited by respondent. The motion to dismiss the charges 

against him, or, in the alternative, to strike certain charges, as to this issue is denied. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent has been employed by the District as a credentialed art 

teacher at McClatchy High School (McClatchy), in Sacramento, California, beginning in 

the 2014/2015 school year. Respondent has a single subject art credential, which

authorizes him to teach art in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in 

classes organized primarily for adults. He also has a multiple subject teaching 

credential, which authorizes him to teach all subjects in a self-contained class and, as a 

self-contained classroom teacher, to team teach or to regroup students across 

classrooms, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized 

primarily for adults. In addition, this credential authorizes the holder to teach core 

classes consisting of two or more subjects to the same group of students in grades 

five through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects he or she is teaching to a 

single group of students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent 

of his or her work day. 

2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. 

In 2018, respondent engaged in conduct involving then-current and 

former students, which he believes was caused by his 

. There is no dispute that the 

conduct occurred. The issue that must be resolved is whether that conduct was the 

result of respondent’s 

. 

Statement of Charges 

4. 

On July 1, 2020, Cancy McArn, the Chief Human Resources Officer for the 

District, signed and subsequently filed the Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Placement on 

Immediate Unpaid Suspension Pending Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings; and 

Third Amended Statement of Charges against respondent. The Board alleged 

respondent violated multiple sections of the Education Code, including immoral 

conduct, evident unfitness for service, dishonesty, and persistent violation of or refusal 

to obey laws of the State or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 

the public schools by the State Board or by the governing board of the school district 

employing him. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds. (a)(1), (4), (6), and (8), 44939.) Specifically, 

the Third Amended Statement of Charges alleges respondent sent unsolicited sexually 

explicit messages and content to current and former students on Instagram, had 

inappropriate conversations with students, posted inappropriate photos and photo 

comments on Instagram that were visible to current and former students, verbally 

disparaged his ex-wife during class instruction, and made dishonest statements to the 

District to conceal or otherwise absolve his culpability for his conduct. 

5. 

The District served the Third Amended Statement of Charges on 

respondent on July 2, 2020. Respondent timely returned a demand for hearing and 

notice of defense. A hearing before the Commission followed. 

Mental Health History 

6. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8. 

 

Instagram 

9. 

The District was unaware of respondent’s 

 until January 2019, when it 

learned from respondent’s mother that he had a mental health issue. 

10. 

Instagram is a software application (app) photo and video sharing social 

networking service offered to the public. The app allows users to upload photos and 

videos that are posted on the user’s account and can be shared publicly or to pre-

approved users. Individuals that are able to view content on an Instagram user’s 

account are called followers. Generally, followers can view content posted by an 

Instagram user and make comments on photos or videos posted by the user. An 

Instagram direct message is a private message sent between Instagram users. 

Instagram users can also communicate privately amongst themselves by way of direct 

messaging or by “reacting” to content posted by other users. 

Conduct at Issue 

STUDENT TESTIMONIES

11.

I

 M

 testified at the hearing. She was a high school student 

at McClatchy between 2014 and 2018. Respondent was her teacher in the 2016/2017 

(junior year) and 2017/2018 (senior year) school years. She was 17 years old in 

December 2018. 

12. Ms. M

 had an Instagram account while a junior and senior at 

McClatchy. Respondent also had an Instagram account, which his students (then-

current and former) followed. Ms. M

 followed respondent’s Instagram account, 

but she did not recall whether she did so before or after she graduated high school. 

13.  Ms. M

 was a member of student government during her senior 

year; respondent was her student government teacher. Respondent did not 

communicate with student government students regarding school-related activities

through his Instagram account when she followed his account between 2016 and June 

2018. 

14.

Sometime between the Summer and Fall 2018, after her graduation from 

McClatchy, Ms. M

 saw a photo respondent posted of himself holding a 

marijuana cigarette while in boxer shorts with no other clothes. The photo had text 

added to it that said “hit me up,” which she understood to be an invitation for others 

to communicate with respondent. During the same time period, she also saw a video 

post by respondent on his Instagram with a marijuana cigarette in his mouth. She 

considered these photos to be “shocking” and “odd.”

15.  Ms. M

 also saw a comment made by respondent on an unknown 

woman’s photo on September 17, 2018, that said, “betchu look amazing first thing in 

the morning, no makeup. no frills. no clothes.” Ms. M

 found the comment 

“shocking.” Also, around September 26, 2018, she saw respondent post another 

comment on an unknown woman’s photo who was in a bikini stating, “lets [

] go 

rough it somewhere in the wild[.]” Ms. M

 described the comment as weird and 

inappropriate. Around the same time period, Ms. M

 saw respondent’s comment 

on a photo of an unknown woman, stating “I would spread you on a cracker with a 

touch of marmalade and caviar and swallow you with a glass of dom P to wash it all 

down . . . .” Regarding respondent’s photo comment, Ms. M

 said it was “not 

something I want to read from my teacher.” The only way Ms. M

 could have 

seen the photo comments was if respondent shared the comment posts on his feed 

for his followers to see. 

16. 

In December 2018, respondent sent Ms. M

 an Instagram direct 

message. Respondent wrote “no one can do what i [

] can to you. nobody.” The 

comment made her feel “uncomfortable.” Ms. M

 responded, “No thanks I’m 

17[.]” Respondent responded, “bullshit” . . . “lie. Come to santa cruz or maybe im in 

Santa Barbara or on some college campus.” He further wrote, “gotta ditch 

 tho[,] 

verrry d8stespectful [

][,] he might end up in a bad way, [let me know] when you 

want 2 come thru.” Ms. M

 had a boyfriend at the time, who was a senior at 

M

 and in one of respondent’s classes.

17.  Ms. M

 recalled respondent talking about his personal life more 

than she observed with other teachers. She knew that he was on bad terms with his 

estranged wife and they had child custody issues. 

18. 

K

 B

 testified at the hearing. She attended McClatchy from 

2014 to 2018. She was not one of respondent’s students but she went to his classroom 

to “hang out” every day during her junior and senior years of high school. She and 

respondent began following each other on Instagram at the end of her senior year. In 

June 2018, Ms. B

 remembered observing barely clothed women, marijuana, 

girls in sexual positions, and bondage photos on respondent’s Instagram account. She 

did not expect to see this sort of content on a teacher’s Instagram page, which she 

described as “gross.” 

19.  On December 26, 2018, respondent sent Ms. B

 a direct 

message. Respondent asked respondent, “How come youre [

] so damn fine?” He 

then stated, “like, fuck, youre [

] HELLA fine . . . jus being honest sorry . . . you should 

slide up in this all black truck tho [

].” Ms. B

 responded, “1.) my names not 

k

 it’s K

 2.) youre [

] a teacher[,] 3.) youre [

] married.” He then stated, 

“1.) my bad 2.) hi K

 3.) Not a teacher anymore 4.) Not married 5.) Sup [

] w[ith] it, 

want to drink some topshelf with me?” When she responded that she does not drink 

and that she is underage, respondent wrote, “ok. Lets [

] smoke . . . we can binge 

watch some Game of Thrones[,] you can drink some tea or eat some mushrooms[, 

w]hatever works.” Respondent then asked Ms. B

, “can i come swoop you? 

want to hit tahoe? Or we can just catch a movie[.] youre [

] super beautiful cant [

]

lie[.]” She responded, “That wouldn’t work out[.]”  

20.  Ms. B

 described being surprised, put-off, and confused by the 

direct messages from respondent, and believed respondent to be “really old” at the 

time. Respondent also sent a high school photo of himself to her. Although Ms. 

B

 had graduated from McClatchy at the time she received the messages, 

she was 19 years old and not of legal drinking age. 

21.  While a senior at McClatchy, Ms. B

 remembered walking 

down the hallway with friends when respondent approached her and stood “close” to 

her. He told her he liked her makeup and that it was “really pretty” on her. She felt 

uncomfortable because of how close he stood to her. It made her feel “small and 

grossed out.” She felt respondent was “invading [her] personal space.” 

22. 

D

 W

 testified at the hearing. She was a student at McClatchy, 

and graduated in 2019. She was in respondent’s ceramics class during the 2017/2018 

school year, her junior year, and in student government with respondent as her 

teacher during the 2018/2019 school year, her senior year.

23. 

She recalled respondent talking about his personal life in class, including 

calling his wife a “bitch” in front of the class on at least two occasions. She was “in 

shock” when respondent made these comments. 

24. 

During her senior year, she saw the photo respondent posted on 

Instagram of himself holding a marijuana cigarette; the same photo Ms. M

 saw 

on Instagram. Ms. W

 had been following respondent’s Instagram account since 

her junior year, and respondent followed Ms. W

 Instagram account. She also saw 

the pictures respondent posted on Instagram of himself in boxer shorts while smoking 

marijuana and of respondent with a marijuana cigarette in his mouth. She saw the 

same comments as Ms. B

 that respondent made on photos of unknown 

women in the Fall 2018. 

25. 

Z

 P

 testified at the hearing. She was a high school student at 

McClatchy during the 2016/2017 school year, her junior year; and the 2017/2018 

school year, her senior year. She graduated in June 2018. Respondent taught her art 

design computer class during her senior year. Ms. P

 followed respondent’s 

Instagram account her senior year, and he followed her back. She thought he was a 

“cool” teacher at the time. She described thinking of him back then as a friend, 

outgoing and positive. He talked to her about her interest in motocross and he 

encouraged her to continue pursuing a motocross career. During her senior year, 

respondent told Ms. P

 he wanted to buy her a dirt bike, which costs between $6,000 

and $8,000. Also, during the last two weeks of her senior year, respondent invited Ms. 

P

 on a beach vacation to Santa Cruz; the conversation occurred after class at 

respondent’s desk. 

26. 

During the summer following her high school graduation in 2018, 

respondent sent Ms. P

 direct messages on Instagram. In those messages, he wrote 

that he missed her and asked her to come smoke with him. He also said “come kick it” 

and “I can swoop.” He called her “beautiful” and “fine as fuck.” He also sent her a 

photo of himself. He sent Ms. P

 a “kissy face” emoji after she posted a picture of 

herself at the gym. In November 2018, respondent sent other messages to Ms. P

 

telling her that he was in London and planned to get a place in Santa Cruz in 

December. 

the Fall 2018.  

27. 

T

 W  testified at the hearing. She graduated from McClatchy in 

2017; respondent was her art teacher during the 2016/2017 school year, her senior 

year. She followed him on Instagram during her senior year, and continued to follow 

him after she graduated. She saw sexual content on respondent’s Instagram account in 

28. 

In November 2018, respondent sent Ms. W  a direct message, telling 

her she was “beautiful.” The message made her feel uncomfortable. She asked him to 

stop messaging her. He responded by calling her a “punk” and told her to stop 

following his Instagram account. He also said, “u should really hang out tho [

].” Ms. 

W  contacted law enforcement regarding the messages from respondent. 

TESTIMONY OF PARENTS

29. 

K

 M

 testified at the hearing. She is the mother of B

 

J

, a former student of respondent at McClatchy. Respondent sent Ms. J

 

an Instagram direct message on December 21, 2018, asking her if she wanted to “kick 

it this Sunday” to “catch a movie or something.” He asked her to text message him and 

told her “[i]f you tell D

 we’re hanging out or anyone else for that matter it’s a no 

go.” He wrote, “you know youre [

] gorgeous right?” He also sent her hyperlinks to 

two songs, titled “Fucking” and “Front, Back and Side to Side.” The lyrics of Fucking are 

the following, in part:

[G]irl, you know what I think you should do right now? 

You should just take off all your clothes, every article of 

clothing 

Except for the, leave the pumps on girl, I like that . . . 

(We should be fuckin) 

On da bed on da couch now . . .  

Let the boys make love, let me fuck ya from da back 

Hair pullin’, hot wax, they won’t do it like dat . . . 

30. 

B

 J

 was a student at McClatchy between 2015 and 2019, 

she graduated in June 2019. Ms. J

 prepared a declaration that was admitted in 

evidence at the hearing that detailed her interaction with respondent on Instagram. 

She resides out of the state, so was unable to attend the hearing. She was in student 

government with respondent during the 2017/2018 school year and 2018/2019 school 

year.

31.  Ms. J

 informed her mother, Ms. M

, of what had occurred on 

Instagram between herself and respondent. Also, Ms. J

 notified several teachers 

at school and filed an incident report at McClatchy detailing the Instagram 

conversation with respondent. Ms. J

 was 17 years old at the time respondent 

sent the messages and songs to her. Ms. M

 was emotional and visibly angry and 

upset when she testified about the songs respondent sent to her minor daughter. 

32.  Ms. J

’s father, S

 J

 W

, testified at the hearing. 

He was aware of the Instagram messages respondent sent to his daughter. He 

described feeling infuriated, enraged, disappointed, and upset. He felt heartbroken 

that this incident occurred by a teacher he trusted to care for his daughter. His trust in 

the school was betrayed and his daughter was victimized. 

TESTIMONIES OF PHYSICIANS 

33. 

Luz Contreras Arroyo, M.D., testified at the hearing. She has been a family 

medicine physician and psychiatrist at One Community Health, in Sacramento, 

California, since January 2020. She was a resident at University of California, Davis, 

between 2014 and 2019, after completing medical school. During her residency, she 

worked in a psychiatric hospital, in-patient psychiatric medicine, and in the emergency 

room. She has seen patients with 

. 

34. 

Dr. Arroyo treated respondent between August 2017 and August 2018, 

and communicated with him by telephone in November 2018 and April 2019. She had 

been a resident for four years at the time she started treating respondent. Dr. Arroyo 

provided medication management and therapy to respondent during his 

appointments with her.

35.

It is a part of Dr. Arroyo’s regular practice to document treatment plans 

for her patients. Her visit notes summarize patient statements, her own observations, 

diagnoses, assessments, mental status examinations, medical history, and medication 

information, among other information.

36. 

In August 2017, she diagnosed respondent with 

37.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38. 

Respondent continued to see Dr. Arroyo, but cancelled or did not show 

up to eight subsequent appointments scheduled between June 2018 and October 

2018. Respondent met with Dr. Arroyo once in March 2018, three times in April 2018, 

once in May 2018 and once in June 2018. She conducted mental status examinations 

at all six appointments, and did not note any concerns that he was experiencing

 

39.  On August 17, 2018, respondent attended an appointment with Dr. 

Arroyo. Dr. Arroyo performed a mental status examination and assessment on 

respondent. Respondent did not have 

 symptoms that day, nor at 

any other appointment with her. Dr. Arroyo noted in her assessment notes: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Dr. Arroyo did not recall respondent telling her 

he was going to go to Burning Man, a music festival, the following month and did not 

recall him saying he did not take his medication at times. She would have been 

concerned had he told her he was going to Burning Man because of the potential 

presence of illicit drugs there. 

41. 

Dr. Arroyo did not see respondent in person following this appointment. 

He did not follow up with her about tapering his medication or inform her that he had 

ingested an ecstasy pill when he went to Burning Man in September 2018. In 

November 2018, respondent requested Dr. Arroyo write a letter on his behalf to the 

court for his child custody case. He needed the letter for a court hearing the following 

day. Dr. Arroyo wrote a letter to the court after speaking with him by telephone, but 

had not seen him since August 2018. During the call, respondent did not appear to be 

manic. There was no sign of fast pressured speech, a symptom of mania. In the letter, 

Dr. Arroyo explained that she was respondent’s treating psychiatrist and noted that he 

had stable mental health and had been compliant with his medications. 

42. 

Dr. Arroyo next spoke with respondent in April 2019, during a telephone 

appointment. 

 

 

 

employees. 

District’s Human Resources Department 

47. 

Christina Villegas testified at the hearing. She is the Human Resources 

Director for the District; she has been in her position for seven years. She supports the 

District’s administrators with performance and grievance matters with District 

48. 

Between August 2018 and October 2018, despite working 30 days, no 

one from McClatchy raised concerns about respondent’s behavior. 

49. 

The 2018/2019 school year started August 30, 2018. In September 2018, 

respondent did not work three days; he worked all other work days during the month. 

In October 2018, respondent did not work 12 days of the 20 work days. Respondent 

did not report back to work after October 22, 2018. In total, between August 2018 and 

October 2018, respondent worked 30 days. 

50.  On January 8, 2019, Ms. Villegas wrote respondent a letter concerning his 

failure to report to work. At the time, the District was unaware of respondent’s 

. 

The District was not made aware respondent had a mental health condition until 

January 17, 2019, when respondent’s mother sent an email informing the District that 

he was in jail. 

51.

In December 2018, a student newspaper article, entitled “Questions 

Raised about McClatchy Teacher’s Absence and Social Media Use” was published. The 

article made allegations about respondent’s behavior on social media. It was at this 

time that the Human Resources Department became aware of potential misconduct by 

respondent involving students. The Human Resources Department had not received 

any previous reports of concern relating to respondent before October 2018. 

52. 

A verification meeting between respondent and the District’s Human 

Resources personnel occurred on May 21, 2019, wherein respondent was presented 

with the District’s concerns and he was allowed to comment on the alleged conduct. 

At the verification meeting, respondent received Ms. J

’s December 2018

incident report provided to the school and copies of his Instagram photo comments 

and direct messages to Ms. J

. Respondent admitted to the interaction with Ms. 

J

. At the meeting, respondent did not inform anyone he was self-titrating from 

his 

 medication or that he had been drinking alcohol and had taken ecstasy at the 

start of the school year. The district later became informed of additional inappropriate 

Instagram messages and conversations with then-current and former students and 

respondent. 

53. 

District Board Policy 4119.11 prohibits sexual harassment of students. 

Specifically, “any district employee who permits, engages in or participates in sexual 

harassment of . . . [a] student shall be in violation of this policy and is subject to 

disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal.” 

54. 

In August 2019, respondent was notified six days in advance that the 

District planned to hold a closed session to discuss complaints or charges against 

respondent. He was informed how he could be heard on the matter. On September 12, 

2019, the District notified respondent of the filing of written charges against him with 

the District’s Board of Education and set a predisciplinary Skelly meeting for two weeks 

later. Respondent did not reply to the statement of charges that were provided to him. 

On September 24, 2019, respondent requested a hearing to contest the allegations 

against him; this hearing ensued. 

55.  Ms. Villegas maintained some of respondent’s personnel file in her 

personnel services office, as she is responsible for maintaining disciplinary records. In 

September 2019 and December 2019, Ms. Villegas provided the disciplinary 

documents maintained in her office to respondent so he could defend himself against 

the charges in the Statement of Charges filed against him. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

56. 

Respondent testified at the hearing. Respondent is 38 years old and has 

two minor children. He is currently separated from his estranged wife. Respondent 

graduated from the University of California, Berkeley in 2009. After graduating from 

college, respondent received his teaching credentials and became a substitute teacher 

in Hayward, California, from 2009 to 2010. He taught at a charter school in 2011 and 

2012, before being hired as an art teacher at McClatchy during the 2014/2015 school

year.

57.  While at McClatchy, respondent taught ceramics, 2D art, then piloted a 

graphic design program. He was the Students Activities Director (SAD) beginning the 

2015/2016 school year through the Fall 2018. As the SAD, respondent functioned as 

the main hub for students and teachers in planning and implementing student 

activities, communicated with parents, and handled paperwork. Respondent also 

taught student government, was responsible for rallies, spirit week, fundraising, club 

activities, and music festivals, among other things. Prior to the issues raised in this 

matter, respondent had never been disciplined by the District. 

58. 

Respondent 

 

. During his first 

, 

respondent described it as a “blur of ridiculousness.” He was in Los Angeles 

auditioning for a reality show and ran out of gas in south central Los Angeles. He 

encountered a man that gave him crack cocaine, which respondent used. Respondent 

later jumped out of a two-story window and broke his leg. He crawled to a nearby gas 

station then was taken to a psychiatric hospital by law enforcement. Respondent took 

the following year off of college, as it took him months to stabilize. His ability to 

remember things that happened 

 is limited. 

 

Respondent experimented with drugs and alcohol in college, including marijuana, 

ecstasy, cocaine, and alcohol. 

 

 In June 2018, respondent took trips to Montana, Oregon, and Idaho. 

Respondent 

recalled “feeling really good” and “excited about life.” He missed appointments with 

Dr. Arroyo during Summer 2018, because of his trips and because Dr. Arroyo cancelled 

some appointments. After his appointment with Dr. Arroyo on August 17, 2018, 

respondent began to titrate down from the medication. Respondent then went to 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

59. 

60. 

61. 

Burning Man where he took ecstasy; 

 

 Respondent 

taught school for two days, went to Burning Man over the weekend, then went back to 

school. 

62. 

In Fall 2018, respondent entered a leadership program conducted by the 

Sacramento County Office of Education. Respondent believes he was succumbing to 

his illness and missed the mandatory classes before leaving the program entirely. In 

October 2018, respondent went to Europe to meet up with a woman he met at 

Burning Man. At the time he went, he was feeling grandiose. He purchased plane 

tickets, rented a car, and secured a short term room by himself. Respondent does not 

recall if he stopped taking his medication while he was in Europe. 

63. 

In late Fall 2018, respondent’s estranged wife obtained a restraining 

order against him based upon aggressive inappropriate text messages he sent to her. 

Respondent continued to send inappropriate messages to her. Respondent failed to 

appear at a court hearing to address his violation of the restraining order. Respondent 

was arrested in January 2019, for felony stalking. Respondent entered into a mental 

health court program after pleading no contest to the felony stalking charge in April 

2019. He was required to abstain from alcohol and drugs, attend therapy and 

counseling, and make court appearances for one year. Respondent completed the 

program and, in May 2020, the charge was reduced to a misdemeanor. 

64. 

According to respondent, he used Instagram to communicate with 

students relating to his role as the SAD. He allowed students who graduated 

McClatchy to follow his personal Instagram account and allowed his student 

government students to also follow him so that he could communicate with them. He 

did not maintain a separate Instagram account for school-related activities. 

65. 

Respondent does not dispute that he sent the Instagram direct messages 

and made the comments on Instagram that are at issue in this matter, although he 

does not remember his Instagram activity at that time. Respondent admitted to having 

a long history of vacationing in Santa Cruz and testified it is a place he goes when he 

wants to go to the beach. Respondent remembered telling Ms. P

 that if she was a 

couple hundred dollars short in getting dirt bike, he would help her. He believed this 

was just one of many conversations he had in passing with her. He was trying to direct 

her energies in a positive direction because she missed class often and had issues with 

her home life, but was passionate about motocross racing. He did not remember 

inviting her to go to a beach house in Santa Cruz with him. Regarding the comments 

he made to Ms. B

 about her makeup and her looks, respondent said that as 

a teacher his job was to engage and promote the well-being of his students. He knew 

her hobby was putting on makeup, so he may have commented on her makeup. He 

did not recall invading Ms. B

 space when he made the comment. 

66.  He testified that it was possible that he called his wife a derogatory name 

in front of students during the 2017/2018 school year. He was going through a rough 

time with the divorce. He further testified “this saddening situation that [he has] been 

put under” is not indicative of his behavior as a person.

67. 

Between August 2018 and December 2018, respondent admitted to 

consuming alcohol and marijuana. At hearing, respondent was unsure how well he was 

complying with his medication regimen during that time. He drinks once per month, 

usually only one to two drinks. However, respondent believes that reducing his 

medication at the recommendation of Dr. Arroyo was the primary reason for his 

 

in Fall 2018, not the ecstasy he took at Burning Man. 

68.  On November 26, 2018, respondent requested a letter from Dr. Arroyo 

regarding his mental stability to present to the Superior Court on the following day for 

his custody case. On the following day, respondent attended the court hearing and 

also sent a direct message to Ms. W  saying that she was beautiful. 

69. 

Respondent understands that he will be on medication for 

 for 

the remainder of his life. He is also aware drug use can exacerbate or lead to 

 

. Respondent has been abstaining from drugs since he was released from jail 

and began the mental health program. 

70. 

Regarding the messages and songs he sent to Ms. J

, respondent 

does not remember sending the messages or the incident. He feels “ashamed” and 

never thought he would be in this situation. Respondent sent the same song to 

celebrities’ Instagram accounts in December 2018. 

71. 

James A. Margolis, M.D., testified at the hearing. Dr. Margolis completed

medical school and residency training, and is board certified in general psychiatry, 

psychiatry, and quality assurance and utilization review. He is semi-retired, but works 

at two community mental health clinics two days per week. In his private practice, his 

patients are primarily children, adolescents, and young adults. He has had patients 

with 

 in his practice, approximately 10 percent of his patients. 

72. 

Dr. Margolis treated respondent on four occasions between May 2019 

and February 2020. After July 2019, Dr. Margolis became a consultant in preparation 

for this hearing. 

73. 

 

 

 

 

74. 

75. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

76. 

 

 

 

 

77. 

Elizabeth Pataki, respondent’s mother, testified at the hearing. She was a 

registered nurse before retiring. She previously worked with Dr. Margolis, although Dr. 

Margolis denied working with her during his testimony. Respondent has been living 

with his mother since April 2019, when he was released from jail. When respondent is 

not 

, Ms. Pataki described respondent as thoughtful, caring, 

kind, humorous, gracious, gentle, and warm. 

78. 

Respondent lived with his parents from 2017 through Fall 2018. During 

the summer of 2018, Ms. Pataki observed respondent talking more, being unfocused, 

spending more money than usual, and going out more with his friends. She 

remembered respondent going to Burning Man in September 2018, because he said 

he needed to get away and had an artistic interest in the event. When respondent 

returned from Burning Man, Ms. Pataki observed respondent to be more intense, 

emotional, having mood swings, and being excitable. She believed he presented as 

lacking logic in his thinking.

79.  Ms. Pataki became concerned about respondent based on her 

observations of respondent’s behavior beginning in summer 2018 through Fall 2018. 

She remembered respondent traveling to Europe in October 2018, and upon his return 

he was grandiose and illogical and it was stressful living with him. She asked 

respondent to move out of her home because he refused to see a psychiatrist in mid-

November 2018. 

80. 

In April 2019, upon his release from jail, Ms. Pataki observed respondent 

to be coherent, calm, pleasant, and lucid. He has continued to live with her since that 

time. She has not seen signs of 

 in respondent since he was released from jail. 

81. 

Cole Dutcher testified at the hearing. He has been respondent’s friend 

since childhood. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

82.  Mr. Dutcher saw respondent during Fall 2018. He met with respondent in 

September 2018, when respondent returned from Burning Man. When they met, 

respondent was sweating, thinking hard, emphatic about music, art and education, and 

it seemed respondent was having difficulty being present in the moment.

83.  When respondent returned from Europe, eight of respondent’s friends, 

including Mr. Dutcher, got together in December 2018, to let respondent know they 

were concerned about his behavior and his intent to discontinue his medication. Also, 

they were concerned that respondent had a more frequent presence on social media, 

including photos of models and women. They wanted to have an intervention with him 

to “stop him from going off the tracks.” At the intervention, respondent was “very 

persuasive” and reassured his friends that he was “good” when they raised concerns 

about him. 

84. 

Since April 2019, Mr. Dutcher has seen respondent weekly, but has not 

had any concerns 

. 

85. 

Ryan Stemmler testified at the hearing. Mr. Stemmler has been a “good 

friend” of respondent since eighth grade. He saw respondent in 2005, 

 

. He noticed respondent was acting out of character, had 

shifting priorities, strange interactions, and was spending money. He did not notice 

respondent exhibiting inappropriate sexual behaviors. When respondent is not 

, 

Mr. Stemmler described him as generous, kind, thoughtful, and charming. 

86.  Mr. Stemmler was in contact with respondent once per month in the 

summer and fall of 2018. In August 2018, Mr. Stemmler noticed respondent had 

shifting priorities, was focused on being a rapper, and phrased things in a concerning 

way. Prior to going to Burning Man, Mr. Stemmler found respondent to be excitable 

and defensive. Before respondent went to Europe, he saw Mr. Stemmler; Mr. Stemmler 

believed respondent was exhibiting 

 symptoms. 

87.  Mr. Stemmler attended the intervention with respondent and Mr. 

Dutcher. Mr. Stemmler was aware of respondent’s substance use and alcohol use since 

high school, including mushrooms, ecstasy, marijuana, and cocaine. 

Discussion 

88. 

A teacher is an educator that is in a position of trust with students, 

parents, administrators, and the teaching community. Teachers are entrusted to 

maintain appropriate boundaries and relationships with their impressionable students. 

A teacher must always maintain the highest level of ethics, judgment, and 

professionalism in their position as a role model to their students. 

89. 

In 2018, respondent sent inappropriate direct messages and had 

inappropriate conversations with his current and former students, inviting them to 

out-of-town vacations, sending sexually explicit songs, offering to make at least one 

expensive purchase for a student, inviting them to meet up, offering them alcohol and 

drugs, and being inappropriately flirtatious with them. Those students bravely, 

persuasively, and credibly testified about the shock and discomfort they felt about 

respondent’s behavior. 

90. 

Respondent did not dispute his Instagram activity, but he did not recall 

inviting students to come with him to Santa Cruz or violating the personal space of 

Ms. B

. Nevertheless, given his fondness of Santa Cruz and the students’ 

credible testimonies, it is more likely than not that he invited those students to Santa 

Cruz with him. 

91. 

Respondent defended his misconduct by shifting blame to his 

 as the 

cause of his conduct. Specifically, respondent asserted that he was in the throes of 

 

 in the Fall 2018, that left him helpless and unable to control 

his actions. According to respondent, he was experiencing 

 in the spring 

and summer of 2018. 

92.  However, the evidence did not establish that he was experiencing 

 during the time of his misconduct because the 

Commission could not rule out that the alleged 

 

were not attributable to the psychological effects of a substance, such as alcohol, 

marijuana, and/or ecstasy. Additionally, Dr. Arroyo was the only qualified medical 

provider who performed mental status examinations, therapy, and assessments of 

respondent between 2017 and 2018. At no time did she have concerns that 

respondent was experiencing symptoms of 

. In fact, because respondent had 

been stable on his 

 medication since 2009, in August 2018, she recommended he 

titrate his medication from 100 milligrams to 50 milligrams daily. During her treatment 

of respondent, she continued to advise him to limit his consumption of alcohol and 

drugs in order to avoid a substance-induced 

; he did not comply with 

her advice. The witnesses who testified that respondent was experiencing 

 in the 

Fall 2018, were individuals who were not qualified to make such an assessment and 

who had not seen respondent consistently during the period at issue. Although 

respondent testified that he was experiencing 

 symptoms during 

the relevant period, respondent testified on numerous occasions that he did not know 

when he was experiencing 

 and he could not remember things that occurred 

during those episodes. Therefore, his testimony based on memories that allegedly 

occurred during a 

 episode does not have the reliability necessary to 

find that they occurred. 

93. 

Beginning in the summer 2018, respondent stopped taking his 

medication sporadically and ingested ecstasy, smoked marijuana and consumed 

alcohol through the remainder of the year. He did not contest his awareness that 

marijuana and alcohol could negatively affect his 

, as he increased his medication 

to “counteract” their effects on his mental stability. He failed to inform Dr. Arroyo of 

his noncompliance with her recommendation and cancelled numerous appointments 

with her.

94.

Although both parties provided experts to opine whether respondent’s 

conduct was the result of his 

, none of those experts examined respondent during 

the period of his misconduct, so their opinions regarding whether he was or was not 

 at the time of his misconduct was not as persuasive as Dr. Arroyo’s opinions. 

Therefore, the Commission gave great weight to Dr. Arroyo’s opinion that respondent 

was not 

 during the relevant period. Additionally, during the alleged periods of 

, in fall 2018, respondent’s ability to attend court hearings, request 

documentation for court, plan an elaborate European vacation, and attend Burning 

97. 

Before a decision can be made as to whether respondent’s conduct was 

immoral (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)), dishonest (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4)), 

constituted evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)), and/or was a 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the State or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board or 

by the governing board of the school district employing him (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(8)), the Commission must determine whether respondent’s conduct demonstrated 

he was unfit to teach using the 

 criteria. (

 (1977) 

19 Cal.3d 691, 696.) The 

criteria are: (1) the likelihood the conduct may have 

adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of 

teaching certificate held by the party involved; (5) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the likelihood of the recurrence of 

the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved 

or other teachers. (

, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 

LIKELIHOOD CONDUCT MAY HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED STUDENTS OR 

TEACHERS 

98. 

Respondent’s former students who testified described his behavior in 

messaging them and posting photos and photo comments on Instagram as 

inappropriate, shocking, uncomfortable, and gross. The school community was fully 

aware of respondent’s Instagram activity by reading a student newspaper article and 

through students’ discussions. Respondent’s behavior resulted in distrust of authority, 

as was made clear by Ms. J

’s parents. His messages to students were appalling

and damage the community’s perception of the safety of schools and teachers. 

Students’ faith in teachers and the administration is undoubtedly affected by 

respondent’s conduct. His conduct reflects poorly on the District and teachers as a 

whole. 

THE DEGREE OF THE ADVERSE EFFECT 

99.

Respondent’s inappropriate conduct aimed at young, impressionable, 

vulnerable minor female students will undoubtedly cause a severe adverse effect on 

them. He used his position of trust to gain access to them and crossed known 

boundaries with those students with no concern about how his conduct would affect 

them. Respondent’s behavior caused his former students to be forced to testify at the 

hearing regarding his inappropriate behavior towards them. That experience will have 

a lasting adverse effect on them. District and school administrators aware of 

respondent’s conduct toward numerous female students may result in them 

questioning their own ability to protect students and ensure their safety if respondent 

is permitted to return to school. Respondent’s behavior will also have a significant 

adverse effect on the teaching community, as students and parents will question the 

amount of trust and faith they should have in educators. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT

100.  The conduct at issue took place only two years ago, in 2018. The conduct 

at issue is not remote in time. 

TYPE OF TEACHING CREDENTIAL 

101.  Respondent is a multi-subject and single-subject credentialed teacher 

with about seven years of teaching experience. 

EXTENUATING AND AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

102. Respondent is a credentialed teacher. He was trusted to be a liaison

between teachers and students as the SAD. As the SAD, he had frequent contact with 

students, not only for academics, but relating to all on-campus and off-campus 

activities. He used his position of trust to gain access to students through his 

Instagram account. Respondent should have known better than to send inappropriate 

messages to his students and post inappropriate photos and comments on his 

Instagram account. 

103.  Additionally, respondent’s conduct of using ecstasy at Burning Man 

during the school year and returning to work the following school week is deeply 

concerning and shows respondent’s continued lack of judgment as a teacher. Likewise, 

his offer to purchase expensive gifts for at least one student and comment on 

another’s looks also shows his lack of judgment, professionalism, and inability to 

recognize boundaries between teacher and student. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

104.

The likelihood of recurrence is high. Respondent failed to comply with 

the medication regimen ordered by Dr. Arroyo; both when she recommended he 

titrate to 50 milligrams and to take his medication daily. He did not provide the panel 

any assurances that he would comply with his doctor’s future orders relating to his 

medication. He did not provide a prevention plan for reducing the risk of having a 

 and did not appear to appreciate the increased risk of a 

 

when using alcohol and marijuana. Respondent’s lack of insight into his own conduct 

and failure to take responsibility for his actions increases the likelihood of recurrence 

of his misconduct.

Discipline 

5.

Here, the Commission has only two choices: to dismiss or not to dismiss. 

(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a).) “The commission shall not have the power to dispose of 

[a] charge of dismissal by imposing probation or other alternative sanctions. The 

imposition of suspension . . . shall be available only in a suspension proceeding 

authorized pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44932 or Section 44933.” (

, 45 Cal.3d at p. 216.) 

6. 

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, the District proved, by a 

preponderance of the evidence, that respondent violated sections 44932, subdivisions 

(a)(1), (6), and (8), and the conduct supports dismissal of respondent. 

