BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
AND A COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR 
THE LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

NICHOLAS JOHNSON, 

a Permanent Certificated Employee, Respondent 

OAH No. 2019090670 

DECISION 

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter 

on March 2 and 5 through 12, 2020, at the Office of Administrative Hearings in Los 

Angeles, California, and on December 8 through 10 and 14 through 18, 2020, by 

videoconference. The Commission consists of Francine Buschel-Gomez, Jonathan 

Turner Smith, and Matthew Goldsby, Administrative Law Judge with the Office of 

Administrative Hearings and Commission Chairperson. 

Kelly Kim, Assistant General Counsel II with the Los Angeles Unified School 

District (District), and Lee Patajo, Assistant General Counsel II with the District, 

appeared and represented the District. 

Daniel J. Kolodziej, Attorney at Law, appeared and represented respondent

Nicholas Johnson who was present throughout the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was held open to 

January 20, 2021, for the parties to file concurrent closing briefs, which were timely 

filed and marked for identification. The record was closed and the matter was 

submitted for decision on January 20, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

On September 4, 2019, Jose R. Cantu, Ed.D., acting in his official capacity 

as Assistant Chief Human Resources Officer for the District, served respondent with a 

written notice of the District’s intention to dismiss respondent and to place him on 

immediate unpaid suspension. The notice included the written statement of charges 

against respondent. 

Hearing. 

2. 

On September 10, 2019, respondent timely submitted a Request for 

3. 

On September 18, 2019, the District filed with the Office of 

Administrative Hearings a request to set the case for hearing. The District filed notice 

of hearing as required by law. 

4. 

Linda Del Cueto, acting in her official capacity as Chief Human Resources 

Officer, submitted the Second Amended Accusation against respondent on behalf of 

the District. 

/// 

/// 

2

Background and Employment History 

5.

Respondent grew up in Berkeley, California, the child of a professor of 

Classics at the University of California and an English teacher. After pursuing studies of 

geochemistry and filmmaking, respondent described catching “the teaching bug” while 

teaching freshman English classes as a graduate teaching assistant. In 1997, McNeese 

State University awarded respondent a Master of Arts degree in English and a Master 

of Fine Arts in Creative Writing. 

6. 

In 1999, respondent applied for a teaching position with the District at 

Hamilton High School, in Los Angeles, California. The District employed respondent as 

a teacher and the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) issued 

respondent a single subject credential in 2002, which remains current and active. 

7. 

Respondent is currently a permanent employee of the District as a 

secondary teacher at Hamilton High School. An essential function of respondent’s 

position is to design “activities to engage students in cognitively challenging work 

aligned to standards.” (Ex. 11.) 

8. 

The California Standards for the Teaching Profession (CSTP) 2009 itemize 

teaching standards in six categories: (1) engaging and supporting all students in 

learning, (2) creating and maintaining an effective environment for student learning, 

(3) understanding and organizing subject matter for student learning, (4) planning 

instruction and designing learning experiences for all students, (5) assessing students 

for learning, and (6) developing as a professional educator. (Ex. 12.)

9. 

The District has adopted the 

 

(Framework) establishing teaching standards for its teachers in planning and 

preparation, classroom environment, delivery of instruction, additional professional 

3

responsibilities, and professional growth. (Ex. 69.) To meet standards in planning and 

preparation, the District expects teachers to design “coherent instruction” by way of 

“Standards-Based Learning Activities” among other things. (Ex. 68.) To meet standards 

in classroom environment, the District expects teachers to manage student behavior. 

To meet standards in delivery of instruction, the District expects teachers to 

communicate the purpose of each lesson and to use “discussion techniques and 

student participation.” (Ex. 68.) 

10. 

For each year of his employment at Hamilton High School, respondent 

taught high school English, including one or two honors classes per year. Beginning in 

2015, respondent taught a course in Mexican-American literature, which became his 

favorite subject to teach. 

11. 

For the 2017-2018 school year, the District did not assign respondent any 

honor sections or any section of the Mexican-American literature class. Respondent 

was assigned to teach English courses to music academy students who were more 

focused on performing arts than English. Each class had approximately 40 to 42 

students. 

the class. 

Classroom Observation - September 11, 2017 

12.  On September 11, 2017, respondent taught the fifth period English 10A 

class. Respondent prepared a written agenda, including a journal topic, a reading 

assignment, and questions respondent wrote on the board for students to copy and 

answer. (Ex. 222.) Respondent posted the lesson plan on the sideboard along the right 

wall as students entered the classroom and he reviewed it aloud at the beginning of 

4

13.

At 11:28 a.m., Assistant Principal Daniel Blank (AP Blank) entered the 

classroom to observe respondent’s performance. He was joined and assisted by 

Alexandra Wagner, a coordinator with the Certificated Performance Evaluation Support 

(CPES) unit of the District. They observed respondent for 72 minutes of the 90-minute 

class. During the observation, respondent wrote a journal prompt on the board and 

instructed the students to write a response in their journals. While students wrote in 

their journals, respondent passed out copies of 

 by Junot Diaz and instructed 

the class to read it to themselves after the journal exercise. Respondent wrote six 

questions on the board and instructed the class to discuss and answer the questions 

with a partner after they completed reading the story. He then led a group discussion 

of the story and the student answers. 

14.

AP Blank observed deficiencies in planning and preparation, delivery of 

instruction, and classroom environment. AP Blank criticized respondent for not 

planning for what students should do if they finished activities early, resulting in a loss 

of instructional time for some students. AP Blank did not observe respondent clearly 

communicate the instructional purpose of learning activities and why they were 

important. While observed, respondent failed to incorporate reading strategies to help 

students actively engage with the text. AP Blank did not observe respondent provide 

enough structure to the partner assignment, resulting in the majority of the class not 

working together in discussion groups. AP Blank noted that respondent did not 

consistently monitor and address the students’ off-task behaviors. 

15. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on October 3, 2017. Respondent stated that he would 

respond in writing, but never did. 

5

16.

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) use an LCD projector to project information or tasks to 

prevent erasing the blackboard multiple times; (b) plan additional standards-based 

tasks that students can complete if they finish early; (c) clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose of all lessons and activities so that students understand why they 

are doing something and how it connects to larger ideas in the content area; (d) when 

having students read, increase student engagement by employing a specific reading 

strategy with a clearly defined purpose; (e) when assigning partner or group 

discussions, develop a structure or protocol to facilitate their discussions; (f) 

consistently monitor and respond to students' off-task or disengaged behaviors when 

circulating around the room; and (g) make use of the Peer and Assistance Review 

(PAR) Consulting Teacher assigned to respondent with lesson planning and delivering 

rigorous instructions. 

17. 

AP Blank furnished respondent excerpts from Charlotte Danielson's 

strategies described in the reading material. 

 and advised respondent to read and implement the 

18.

AP Blank issued no directives as a result of the observation.

Classroom Observation - November 1, 2017 

19.  On November 1, 2017, respondent taught a Period 6 English 10A class. At 

1:40 p.m., AP Blank and Ms. Wagner entered the classroom to observe respondent’s 

performance for 48 minutes of the 90-minute class. During the observation, 

respondent lectured on Shakespeare’s use of two terms and wrote notes on the board. 

Respondent projected segments of 

 to demonstrate the 

6

difference between prose and verse. Students were selected to come to the board and 

count the number of syllables in three or four lines of the text to introduce the 

concept of iambic pentameter. At the end of the observed time, respondent had 

students read aloud in assigned roles. 

20. 

AP Blank again observed deficiencies in planning and preparation, 

delivery of instruction, and classroom environment. AP Blank criticized respondent for 

not being aware of where he left off reading Shakespeare’s 

, 

and for wasting time writing on the whiteboard instead of typing material in advance 

and providing a copy to each student.

21. 

AP Blank criticized respondent for not having students share their 

responses or make connections between the prompt and the rest of the activities. 

During the observation, respondent did not incorporate a variety of instructional 

strategies “in order to cognitively engage students and promote their active learning 

of the differences between prose and verse, resulting in increased student 

disengagement.” (Ex. 25, p. A381.) 

22. 

AP Blank noted that respondent did not effectively monitor and address 

the students’ off-task and disengaged behaviors, failing to circulate around the 

classroom and walking by students who were on their phones or asleep. AP Blank 

observed respondent paying disproportionate attention to students on one side of the 

room. AP Blank also observed five students with their heads down and their books 

closed and at least one of the students was asleep for over 20 minutes. 

23. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on October 3, 2017. Respondent stated that he would 

respond in writing, but never did. 

7

24.

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) consider pacing based on the needs of each group of 

students; (b) use an LCD projector to project information or tasks to prevent having to 

erase the blackboard multiple times throughout the day; (c) allow time for students to 

share their journal prompts and explain how the problems connect to their past or 

future learning; (d) plan and deliver cognitively engaging lessons that include a variety 

of strategies to increase student learning; (e) submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank 

on the first day of every week; (f) check for understanding of new terms and key 

concepts before moving on to a new activity; (g) consistently monitor and respond to 

students’ off-task or disengaged behaviors; and (h) make use of the assigned PAR 

Consulting Teacher with lesson planning and delivering rigorous instruction. 

25. 

AP Blank furnished respondent a schedule of peer assistance and review 

for courses related to teaching performance. 

26. 

AP Blank directed respondent to plan and deliver lessons “that include 

strategies to cognitively engage students” and to “monitor and respond to students 

off task and disengaged behaviors.” (Ex. 25, p. A383.) The conference memo contained 

the following warning: “Failure to follow an administrative directive may lead to 

disciplinary action, such as but not limited to a Notice of Unsatisfactory Act/Service, 

Notice of Suspension, and/or dismissal from the Los Angeles Unified School District.” 

(Ex. 25.) 

Classroom Observation - December 8, 2017 

27.  On December 8, 2017, the day before final examinations, respondent 

taught a Period 6 English 10A class. At 2:15 p.m., AP Blank and Ms. Wagner entered 

the classroom to observe for 30 minutes of the 90-minute class. During the 

8

observation, students again read aloud from 

, and respondent 

intermittently paused to ask questions and talk about key points. 

28. 

AP Blank observed deficiencies in planning and preparation, delivery of 

instruction, and classroom environment. AP Blank criticized respondent for not pacing 

his long-term plans appropriately after hearing a student complain, “We have been on 

this book for years.” (Ex. 26, p. A385.) AP Blank did not observe respondent set a clear 

purpose for reading and make connections to past lessons or big ideas in the content 

area. During the observation, respondent did not incorporate a variety of instructional 

strategies to cognitively engage students and increase student participation in class 

discussions. Only a few students actively participated during the duration, and 

respondent did not provide opportunities for the students to engage in structured 

conversations with one another. AP Blank observed respondent lecturing and not 

instructing students to take notes. 

29. 

AP Blank observed that most of respondent’s questions did not require 

the students to explain their thinking or use evidence from the text to support their 

claims. Respondent only occasionally asked the students for an example from the text 

they were reading. 

30. 

AP Blank noted that respondent attempted to redirect students’ off-task 

behaviors but saw that many still appeared to be disengaged during the assignment. 

31. 

AP Blank noted that respondent did not have a clear procedure for 

students when they left the classroom. During the observation, one student left the 

classroom when summoned by another student and a second student returned from 

using the restroom after having been gone for a long time. 

9

32. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on January 17, 2018. Respondent stated that he would 

respond in writing, but he did not.

33.

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

plan and deliver “cognitively engaging lessons” that include a variety of strategies to 

increase student participation and analysis of the text; (c) incorporate “questions that 

are higher-level” and require the students to explain their thinking or cite evidence 

from the text; (d) establish, implement, and monitor clear procedures for students 

leaving the classroom; (e) find ways to make texts relevant to the students’ 

experiences; (f) make use of the assigned PAR Consulting Teacher with lesson planning 

and delivering rigorous lessons; and (g) attend two free professional development 

classes from the schedule given to respondent at the previous conference. (Ex. 26, p. 

A387.) 

34. 

AP Blank furnished respondent an article entitled 

 to read and implement in his delivery of cognitively engaging lessons. 

35. 

AP Blank directed respondent again to plan and deliver lessons “that 

include strategies to cognitively engage students” and to continue to submit weekly 

lesson plans. (Ex. 26, p. A387.) The conference memo contained the following warning: 

“Failure to follow an administrative directive may lead to disciplinary action, such as 

but not limited to a Notice of Unsatisfactory Act/Service, Notice of Suspension, and/or 

dismissal from the Los Angeles Unified School District.” (Ex. 26.) 

10 

Classroom Observation – February 27, 2018 

36.

On February 27, 2018, respondent taught a Period 1 English 10B class. 

From the start of the period at 7:56 a.m., AP Blank and Ms. Wagner observed 

respondent for 40 minutes of the 90-minute class. During the observation, respondent 

gave the students a journal prompt, which was discussed after the writing concluded. 

Respondent then explained the concept of synesthesia using the text 

. Four students read aloud from the text and respondent 

intermittently asked the class questions about it. Respondent then drew a chart with 

columns labeled “emotion, sound, colors, and taste” and provided a model for how to 

complete the chart. After responding to some questions, respondent instructed the 

students to complete the chart. 

37. 

AP Blank observed deficiencies in planning and preparation, delivery of 

instruction, and additional professional responsibilities. Although respondent had 

previously shown AP Blank a system to keep track of his pacing, respondent was not 

aware of where he left off and discovered that his agenda mistakenly presumed the 

students had already read the subject material. Respondent had to modify his agenda 

to take into account the mistake.

38.

AP Blank observed that respondent did not appropriately pace his 

activities, by allocating 17 minutes for students to copy projected information and to 

write a response to a journal prompt. AP Blank observed that respondent did not 

clearly communicate the instructional purpose of the assigned activity nor how to 

connect it to past learning. 

39.

AP Blank noted that respondent was not using the school’s tardy log or 

implementing a different system to accurately document the arrival times of tardy 

11 

students. At Hamilton High School, students were expected to report to each class on 

time. (Ex. 395.) On the observed date, at least six students entered the classroom after 

the bell rang and went directly to their seat.

40. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on March 13, 2018. Respondent again stated that he 

would respond in writing, but again never responded. 

41. 

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

“consistently use a system to keep track” of his lessons to ensure that respondent 

knows in advance what he should teach each day in each period; (c) pace all learning 

activities appropriately; (d) clearly communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons 

and activities; (e) establish a clear system for monitoring tardy students; and (f) attend 

free professional development sessions from the course schedule previously given to 

respondent. (Ex. 27, p. A392.) 

42. 

AP Blank again furnished respondent a schedule of peer assistance and 

review for courses related to teaching performance along with a copy of the school’s 

tardy log and other reading material. 

43.

AP Blank directed respondent to “clearly communicate the instructional

purpose of all activities” and to implement the school’s tardy log. (Ex. 27, p. A392.) The 

conference memo again warned respondent that the failure to follow the directives 

may lead to disciplinary action.

12 

Classroom Observations – April 6, 2018 

44.

On April 6, 2018, respondent taught a Period 3 English 10B class. At 8:40

a.m., AP Blank and Ms. Wagner entered the classroom to observe respondent’s 

performance for 46 minutes of the 90-minute class. During the observation, students 

completed a writing assignment creating titles for two projected photographs of New 

York City in the 1980’s. Students then wrote stories based on the titles created by 

other students, using a narrative format taught earlier in the week. Respondent then 

reminded the class that they were to convert the stories into a “stage play format.” He 

then distributed and projected the play 

 to demonstrate the play’s 

format. Students read from the play while respondent intermittently asked questions. 

45.

AP Blank observed deficiencies in delivery of instruction. Respondent did 

not thoroughly explain the different elements of “stage play format” to ensure the 

students understood their purpose and why they would need to use them when 

writing their own scenes. He further noted that respondent did not provide closure to 

the activities at the end of the period or maximize the use of instructional time. 

Respondent alternated between whole group discussion and individual work time 

without any opportunities for student-to-student interaction or sharing of ideas. 

46. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on April 17, 2018. Respondent declined to comment 

during the conference. 

47. 

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

ensure sufficient time to explain and reinforce key ideas; (c) close each lesson in order 

to review the learning objective, assess student understanding, and provide time for 

13 

students to reflect on their learning; and (d) provide structured opportunities for 

students to talk to one another about the content to increase the amount of students 

who share ideas. (Ex. 28, p. A396.) 

48. 

AP Blank directed respondent to “provide structured opportunities for 

student-to-student interaction.” (Ex. 28, p. A396.)

2017/2018 - Below Standard Evaluation 

49.  On May 3, 2018, respondent received a Teacher Evaluation Plan for the 

2017-2018 school year. The evaluation was based on the six classroom observations 

and conferences described above at Factual Findings 12 through 48. The evaluator 

commented: “During the Formal Observation this year, your practice was consistently 

in the range of ‘Developing Practice’. Though you demonstrated some growth in a 

range of areas we discussed this year, the growth was inconsistent across the various 

observations.” (Ex. 35, p. A440.) 

50. 

As the Designated Evaluator, AP Blank gave respondent an overall Below 

Standard Evaluation based on 12 specified deficiencies similar to the deficiencies 

noted in the conference memoranda described at Factual Findings 12 through 48. 

51. 

The Below Standard Evaluation recited recommendations and assistance 

as previously provided in the conference memoranda described at Factual Findings 12 

through 48. 

Classroom Observation – May 18, 2018 

52.  On May 18, 2018, respondent taught a Period 3 English 10B class. 

Respondent prepared a written agenda with the objective of exploring the characters 

of the play 

. The agenda included a journal topic, a reading 

14 

assignment, and the plan to continue watching a televised production of the play. (Ex. 

238, p. B303.) 

environment. 

53. 

At 8:20 a.m., AP Blank and Ms. Wagner entered the classroom to observe 

respondent’s performance. They observed respondent for 34 minutes of the 90-minute 

class. AP Blank observed deficiencies in delivery of instruction and classroom 

54. 

AP Blank observed limited evidence that respondent had prepared 

standards-based activities for students who finished a summary assignment early. AP 

Blank saw some students sitting without a task to do or engaging in nonacademic 

activities, including sending text messages. AP Blank noted that respondent failed to 

use “a variety of discussion techniques or participation protocols” to engage more 

students, relying entirely on eight volunteer students to participate. (Ex. 29, pp. A399-

400.) AP Blank felt that respondent missed the opportunity to extend the level of rigor, 

failing to require students to cite evidence from the material or explain their 

reasoning. 

55. 

AP Blank saw inconsistent procedures for students to leave the 

classroom. Two students requested and were granted permission to leave, but did not 

take a hall pass, whereas another student left the classroom and took a hall pass.

56.

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on May 31, 2018. Respondent declined to comment 

during the conference.

57. 

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

plan standards-based activities to maximize the use of instructional time; (c) use 

15 

discussion techniques to encourage equitable participation of all students; and (d) 

establish consistent procedures for students leaving the classroom. (Ex. 29, pp. A400-

401.) 

rigorous lessons. 

58. 

AP Blank furnished respondent with the 

to help him plan standards-based and 

Classroom Observation – September 14, 2018 

59.  On September 14, 2018, respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory 

Service (NOUS) with an 8-day suspension. The District issued the NOUS and 

suspension on the grounds of unsatisfactory performance, willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without cause, and persistent violation of and refusal to obey

school rules and policies. (Exs. 15-16.) The action was based on the observations 

described at Factual Findings 12 through 48 and 53 through 58, plus other allegations 

not at issue here. 

60. 

Earlier on the same day, respondent taught an American Literature and 

Composition class. Before the class started at 7:56 a.m., respondent knew that he 

would be issued the NOUS and suspension later in the day, which caused him to feel 

“sick, nauseous, and depressed” and was “a huge distraction.” As he entered the 

classroom, respondent was not expecting AP Blank and Ms. Wagner to be present for 

another observation. 

61. 

AP Blank and Ms. Wagner observed respondent for 54 minutes of the 90-

minute class, from the beginning of class at 7:56 a.m. until 8:50 a.m. AP Blank observed 

deficiencies in planning and preparation, delivery of instruction, and classroom 

environment. 

16 

62. 

AP Blank watched respondent spend “the first four or so minutes of the 

class period” copying his agenda and journal prompt on the front board, during which 

time students waited quietly or engaged in nonacademic conversations or used their 

cell phones. (Ex. 30, p. A403.) Respondent did not post a learning objective, or any 

applicable standards described in the written materials furnished to respondent at the 

previous conference. Respondent demonstrated no system for keeping track of his 

various assigned periods, assigning students to read material they told respondent 

they had already read. 

63. 

Respondent failed to employ any discussion or participation techniques 

to engage more students in the discussion. AP Blank observed that respondent missed 

an opportunity to add rigor to the lesson by failing to require students to cite 

evidence from the text of 

 to support what they wrote in the graphic 

organizer. 

64. 

Three days before this class, AP Blank provided respondent with a sample 

Tardy Student Log. (Ex. 267.) Respondent posted a tardy log on a clipboard by the 

door but failed to require students to sign it when they arrived late. The evidence 

indicates that six students signed the tardy log on the date of the observation (Ex. 

266), but AP Blank saw other students walk in and sit down without any reminder or 

instruction from respondent.

65. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on October 1, 2018. Respondent made no comment 

during the conference.

66. 

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

17 

prepare the whiteboard in advance or project the agenda and learning objective to 

avoid using instructional time to write it out; (c) develop a system to keep track of 

where respondent leaves off each class; (d) employ strategies to encourage student 

participation in discussions; (e) provide more opportunities for students to cite 

evidence to support their ideas; and (f) use the PAR teacher for help in planning and 

delivering instruction. (Ex. 30, p. A405.) 

67. 

AP Blank directed respondent to “clearly communicate the instruction 

purpose of all activities,” provide structured opportunities for student-to-student 

interactions and submit a detailed weekly overview of his lessons. 

Classroom Observation – October 17, 2018 

68.  On October 17, 2018, respondent taught an honors class in American 

Literature and Composition. AP Blank and Ms. Wagner observed the class for 68 

minutes. During the observation, respondent alternated between having students read 

aloud the novel,

, and facilitating short discussions about 

the text. He used a sample of the text to explain magic realism and queried students 

about the application of the concept to other selections of the text. Before the 

observers left the classroom, respondent directed the students to form groups to 

engage in a literature circles activity. AP Blank observed deficiencies in planning and 

preparation as well as delivery of instruction. 

69.

AP Blank noted that respondent posted a learning objective on the board 

that did not clearly describe what standards-based concepts respondent wanted the 

students to learn. AP Blank noted that respondent did not clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose of learning about magic realism or “explain the purpose of 

reading aloud . . . to help the students understand the significance of being able to 

18 

identify examples of magic realism in the text.” (Ex. 31, p. A409.) AP Blank considered 

the warm-up a “low-level” activity that did not effectively help students understand 

magic realism. When respondent directed students to talk to one another about the 

passages they identified as examples of magic realism, AP Blank viewed the 

instructions to be without a “clearly defined structure” resulting “eight or so” students 

who did not speak to one another. (Ex. 31, pp. A409-410.) 

70. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on November 5, 2018. Respondent made no comment 

during the conference. 

71. 

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

clearly communicate the instructional purpose and learning objective of each lesson at 

the start of the period; (c) maximize the use of instructional time by planning and 

implementing rigorous activities from bell to bell, including the warm-up activity; (d) 

provide ample structure for student-to-student interaction; (e) observe an English 

teacher at University High School during the fall semester, including time to debrief 

with AP Blank after the observation; and (f) use the PAR teacher for help in planning 

and delivering rigorous instruction. (Ex. 31, p. A410.)

72. 

AP Blank again directed respondent to “clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose of all activities,” provide structured opportunities for student-to-

student interactions, and submit a detailed weekly overview of his lessons. (Ex. 31, p. 

A411.) 

19 

Classroom Observation – February 4, 2019 

73.

On February 4, 2019, respondent taught a Contemporary Composition 

class. AP Blank and Ms. Wagner observed the class for 56 minutes, entering 

approximately 30 minutes after the start of class. During the observation, respondent 

reviewed 

, a story previously read in the class that used flashbacks as a 

literary technique. Respondent instructed students to reorganize the story by 

identifying different segments, cutting them out, and putting them into chronological 

order. After a brief discussion on the structure of 

, respondent distributed 

copies of the story 

 to see how the same author uses different kinds of 

structure. 

of instruction. 

74.

AP Blank observed deficiencies in planning and preparation, and delivery 

75. 

AP Blank observed that respondent had not verified that he would have 

enough scissors on hand for the assignment and many students sat idle while waiting 

for a volunteer student to retrieve scissors from another location. Respondent did not 

adhere to the time-limits on his agenda for the warm-up activity which left insufficient 

time to review questions about 

. 

76.

In AP Blank’s opinion, respondent did not clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose of the assignments to help the students understand the reason 

for doing them. AP Blank also considered respondent’s discussion techniques to be 

ineffective at promoting student engagement and participation in discussions. 

77. 

During the observation, a paraprofessional was in the classroom, but 

respondent did not use the paraprofessional to provide direct support to students. AP 

Blank observed the paraprofessional seated at respondent’s desk in the back of the 

20 

room without interacting with the students and without any direction from 

respondent. 

78. 

AP Blank documented his observations in a conference memo and 

reviewed them with respondent on February 20, 2019. Respondent stated that he 

would respond in writing but did not respond.

79. 

AP Blank gave respondent the following assistance and guidance to 

improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to AP Blank; (b) 

prepare materials in advance to maximize instructional time; (c) closely monitor pacing 

to allow enough time to “dig deep into the content;” (d) clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose and learning objective of each lesson at the start of the period; 

(e) use a variety of strategies to promote equitable participation in discussions; (f) 

monitor and respond to students’ off-task behaviors; (g) establish and implement a 

cell phone policy in the classroom; (h) provide clear instruction to paraprofessionals 

assigned to the class; (i) read and implement the strategies described in 

, reading material furnished to respondent; and (j) use the PAR 

teacher for help in planning and delivering rigorous instruction. (Ex. 31, p. A410.) 

80. 

AP Blank again directed respondent to “clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose of all activities,” provide structured opportunities for student-to-

student interactions, and monitor students’ off-task behaviors. (Ex. 32, p. A417.)

///

/// 

 

21 

Classroom Observation - March 13, 2019 

81.

On March 13, 2019, respondent taught an Honors English 10B class. At 

the outset of the class, respondent projected the following agenda: 

Purpose(s)/Objective(s): To improve our mechanics, we will 

study and practice the correct uses of relative clauses; we 

will produce a compare/contrast essay that introduces two 

topics & thesis statement; organizes complex ideas, 

concepts, and information so that each new element builds 

on that which precedes it to create a unified whole. 

1. Warm-up: Mechanics>Grammar>Relative Clauses 

2. Analyze use of clauses in "Black and Yellow" 

3. Write Essay #11 

(Ex. 293.) 

82. 

At 8:19 a.m., Principal Brenda Pensamiento entered the classroom to 

observe. Also in attendance were AP Blank and a union representative. They observed 

the class for 39 minutes. During the observation, respondent focused on an essay 

entitled 

 and instructed students to identity and label modifiers in the 

text. Students volunteered to come up to the front board to mark the modifiers on the 

projected copy of the essay. Respondent then instructed students to write an essay on 

the differences between a cake and a pie. 

83. 

Principal Pensamiento observed deficiencies in delivery of instruction and 

classroom environment. She observed that respondent did not deliver “rigorous 

22 

instruction that cognitively engaged the students in challenging thinking.” (Ex. 33, p. 

A420.) She noted that respondent did not provide sufficient opportunities for students 

to explain their thinking or to apply the concept of using modifiers to prevent 

redundant writing.

84. 

Principal Pensamiento observed that respondent did not effectively pace 

his activities to maximize the use of instructional time, continuing a warm-up 

assignment for 32 minutes, and allocating too much time for students to 

independently identify the modifiers in the first paragraph of the essay. Principal 

Pensamiento did not hear respondent clearly communicate the instructional purpose 

of the essay assignment or state a clear connection between the modifier activity and 

the next essay writing assignment. 

85. 

Principal Pensamiento did not observe respondent consistently or 

effectively address cell phone use for nonacademic purposes. She observed one

student intermittently sending text messages on his device for three to four 

consecutive minutes. A few other students used their phones during the observation, 

but respondent only told some of them to stop. 

86. 

Principal Pensamiento documented her observations in a conference 

memo and reviewed them with respondent on April 2, 2019. Respondent stated that 

he would respond in writing, which he did as described in more detail below. 

87. 

Principal Pensamiento gave respondent the following assistance and 

guidance to improve his performance: (a) continue to submit weekly lesson plans to 

AP Blank; (b) deliver rigorous and standards-based instruction on a daily basis that 

engages students in challenging thinking; (c) monitor the pacing of all activities and 

limit warm-up activities to 10 to 15 minutes; (d) use a variety of strategies to promote 

23 

equitable participation in class discussions; (e) prohibit the use of cell phones unless 

for an instructional purpose required by the teacher; and (f) use the PAR teacher for 

help in planning and delivering rigorous instruction. (Ex. 33, p. A423.)

88. 

Principal Pensamiento directed respondent to “clearly communicate the 

instructional purpose of all activities,” provide structured opportunities for student-to-

student interactions, and monitor students’ off-task behaviors. (Ex. 33, p. A423.) 

89. 

In response, respondent delivered a four-page letter to Principal 

Pensamiento to describe in detail the purpose, objective, and scope of the entire 

spring semester writing unit. With respect to the class observed on March 13, 2019, 

respondent described his activities and teaching strategies and expressed that he felt 

“this lesson ran without a hitch, and the design [was] simple and effective.” (Ex. 297.) 

Respondent furnished Principal Pensamiento with copies of student work from the 

March 13, 2019 class. He concluded: “Everything I did in this and every lesson of my 

writing units, culminates in typed revisions of the best writing each student is capable 

of producing. I've used and refined this unit for 19 years, used it in all grades I've 

taught and seen countless students' composition soar over the course of three or four 

months. And I often receive thanks from former students for putting them through this 

writers' boot camp.” (Ex. 297, p. B670.)

2018/2019 - Below Standard Evaluation 

90.  On April 30, 2019, respondent received a Teacher Evaluation Plan for the 

2018-2019 school year. The evaluation was based on the four classroom observations 

and conferences described above at Factual Findings 60 through 89. Respondent rated 

mostly in the range of “developing practice” having demonstrated inconsistent growth 

from the initial observations. (Ex. 36, p. A454.) 

24 

91. 

As the Designated Evaluator, AP Blank gave respondent an overall Below 

Standard Evaluation based on 15 specified deficiencies similar to the deficiencies 

noted in the conference memoranda described at Factual Findings 60 through 89. 

92. 

The Below Standard Evaluation recited recommendations and assistance 

as previously provided in the conference memoranda described at Factual Findings 60 

through 89. 

through 89. 

93.  On the same date, respondent received a second NOUS with a 15-day 

suspension. The District issued the NOUS and suspension on the grounds of 

unsatisfactory performance, willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

cause, and persistent violation of and refusal to obey school rules and policies. (Exs. 

17-18.) The action was based on the observations described at Factual Findings 60 

94.  On May 13, 2019, respondent sent Principal Pensamiento a response to 

the below standard evaluation, asserting that he had demonstrated growth in all areas 

and that he deserved a better evaluation and no suspension. (Ex. 256.) Respondent 

itemized all the areas he believed he improved in his teaching performance. He 

requested reconsideration of the evaluation and withdrawal or reduction of the 

suspension.

Evidentiary Considerations 

95.  On May 13, 2019, the Board sent respondent a notice that an 

administrative review meeting was scheduled on May 23, 2019, at 3:30 p.m. to discuss 

his possible dismissal and immediate suspension. The stated purpose of the meeting 

was “to permit [respondent] to present any statements or documents on [his] behalf 

responding to the charges” and to provide respondent the “opportunity to be heard as 

25 

to why [he] should not be suspended without pay immediately and … dismissed from 

the District.” (Ex. 9.) Respondent did not attend the meeting, either personally or 

through a representative, and he did not provide a written response. (Ex. 10.)

96. 

This administrative hearing was scheduled in compliance with all 

jurisdictional requirements. (Factual Findings 1-4.) At the hearing, the District 

presented three witnesses, Principal Pensamiento, AP Blank and Ms. Wagner. Each 

witness was knowledgeable and competent in the teaching standards of the CSTP and 

Framework and had the opportunity to observe respondent’s application of those 

standards. No evidence was presented that any witness was biased or improperly 

motivated. 

97. 

Each of the District’s witnesses expressed the opinion that, during the 

observations, respondent failed to clearly communicate the instructional purpose of 

the observed lesson and to cognitively engage students. However, each witness 

acknowledged that his or her opinion was not based on any review of student 

academic assessments, student work, or student opinion of respondent’s teaching 

performance.

98. 

Each District witness also expressed the opinion that, during the 

observations, respondent failed to provide structured opportunities for student-to 

student interactions. However, these opinions were based on a total of approximately 

eight hours of observations over the course of two school years. Respondent 

estimated that he taught approximately five hours per day and that each school year 

was 180 days. Accordingly, the amount of observed time was less than one percent of 

respondent’s actual instructional time for the two years observed. Respondent credibly 

testified that, throughout both school years, he made reasonable attempts to engage 

student participation by using a “randomizer” application to ask students questions, 

26 

using a “revoicing technique,” circulating through the classroom, and regularly utilizing 

Socratic Seminars. 

99. 

The District’s witnesses expressed the opinion that, during the 

observations, respondent failed to address students’ off-task and disengaged 

behaviors, including cell phone usage for nonacademic activities. In 2011, the District 

adopted the policy “to prohibit the use of cellular phones, pagers, or any electronic 

signaling device by students on campus during normal school hours or school 

activities, excluding the students' lunchtime or nutrition breaks unless the school site 

council has adopted a stricter policy.” (Ex. 42.) Pursuant to the 2011 policy, any cell

phone used by a student during school hours or activities was to be “confiscated until 

redeemed by a parent/guardian/caregiver or as determined by the school 

principal/designee.” (Ex. 42, p. A483.) During each of the observed school years, 

respondent distributed to students a written classroom policy consistent with the 2011 

District policy, including the following rules: “Phones may 

 be used for in-class, 

academic purposes and 

 when I [respondent] expressly announce that they will be 

necessary. Phones used for non-academic purposes will be confiscated. Refusal to 

hand over your phone will lead to a phone call home.” (Ex. 285, emphasis in original.) 

However, confiscating cell phones posed liability issues that caused the District to 

“move away from the policy” of confiscating phones. Respondent testified that 

enforcing the confiscation policy caused students considerable stress and anxiety, and 

that detecting surreptitious phone use was made difficult by the large class size. 

Principal Pensamiento acknowledged that student cell phone use is a “persistent 

problem in all classrooms” and that the District is in the process of forming a 

committee to address the problem. By the date of the hearing, the District had 

adopted no other policy governing student use of cell phones. 

27 

100.  Respondent testified as his only witness and presented documentary 

evidence, including testimonials admitted as administrative hearsay to supplement and 

explain direct evidence. (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (c).) Colleagues recommend 

respondent’s continuing employment based on observations of his “dedication to 

students” and his “strong rapport with students.” (Exs. 301-302.) Parents describe 

respondent as a “favorite teacher” and “a positive influence” on their children. (Exs. 

313-314.) Students describe respondent as “one of the best teachers,” a “favorite” 

teacher and a teacher who prepared his students for college. (Exs. 322, 324, 326.) Many 

students describe in detail how they improved under respondent’s instruction and that 

they would “love to have [respondent] as a teacher again.” (Exs. 326, 331, 340.) The 

testimonials characterize respondent as empathetic, caring, sensitive, inspirational, 

professional, thoughtful, reflective, and compassionate, and attest to his popularity 

among students and his interest in their well-being. (Exs. 341, 343, 345, 349, 369, and 

380.) 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Standard and Burden of Proof 

1. 

The District may dismiss a permanent, certificated employee only for 

those causes identified by state law. The charges in the Second Amended Accusation 

allege five grounds for dismissal authorized by the Education Code: (1) unprofessional 

conduct, (2) unsatisfactory performance, (3) evident unfitness for service, (4) persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 

or by the governing board of the school district, and (5) willful refusal to perform 

28 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the District. 

2. 

The District must prove the allegations of the Second Amended 

Accusations by a preponderance of the evidence. (

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) 

3. 

Preponderance of the evidence means evidence with more convincing 

force than that opposed to it. (

 (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 322.) If the 

evidence is so evenly balanced that one is unable to say that the evidence on either 

side of an issue preponderates, the finding on that issue must be against the party 

with the burden of proving it. (

(2000) 92 Cal.App.4th 654, 663.)

Unprofessional Conduct 

4. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who demonstrates unprofessional 

conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2).) Unprofessional conduct is “that which 

violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming 

a member of a profession in good standing." (

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, 

overruled on other grounds.)

5.

After multiple observations, AP Blank issued the same directives to cure 

deficiencies he perceived in respondent’s implementation of the standards in the CSTP 

and Framework. However, the failure to meet a teaching standard is not a violation of 

a rule or ethical code of the teaching profession. The evidence does not support a 

finding that the recurring directives were attributed to deliberate disobedience. 

Respondent’s conduct indicated a bona fide and good faith belief that he was clearly 

communicating the instructional purpose of all activities, providing structured 

opportunities for student-to-student interactions, cognitively engaging students, and 

29 

submitting a detailed weekly overview of his lessons. Respondent was not effectively 

addressing students’ off-task behaviors, including cell phone usage, but his inefficiency 

in this regard was not “unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.” On 

the contrary, the weight of the evidence exhibited a teacher who was knowledgeable 

about the subject matter of his assigned classes and who made his best efforts to 

provide meaningful education to his students. 

6. 

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

cause exists to terminate respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for 

unprofessional conduct under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). 

Unsatisfactory Performance 

7. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who demonstrates unsatisfactory 

performance. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(5).) “Unsatisfactory performance” means, 

and refers only to, the unsatisfactory performance particularly specified as a cause for 

dismissal and does not include any other cause for dismissal specified in Education 

Code section 44932. (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (c).) 

8. 

Respondent has worked for the District for approximately 20 years 

without a record of discipline and is currently a permanent, certificated employee of 

the District. As described in 

(2006) 145 Cal.App.4th 1260, 1293: “Tenure has been stated to be a 

relation between the teacher and the school district, guaranteeing job security to the 

teacher, . . . The purpose of a statute giving tenure to teachers is to insure an efficient 

permanent staff of teachers whose members are not dependent on caprice for their 

positions as long as they conduct themselves properly and perform their duties 

efficiently and well.” 

30 

9. 

Although the District conducted multiple observations over two school 

years, each observation was for 30 to 60 minutes and never for the entire classroom 

period. It is unreasonable to expect any teacher to fulfill each standard in the 

Framework within a 30 to 60-minute snapshot of a class. The District is otherwise 

judging respondent’s performance on a total of approximately eight hours of 

instructional time and disregarding any student work. The District reasonably argues 

that the evidence of one student who scores an A and another student who scores an 

F does not necessarily mean the teacher performed satisfactorily in one case and 

poorly in the other. However, the District’s dissatisfaction with respondent’s 

performance relates to a perceived deficiency in “clearly communicating” the 

instructional purpose of a lesson. Examining student work of the observed class would 

be relevant to a determination as to whether the student understood the purpose of 

the lesson. 

10. 

The District’s dissatisfaction with respondent’s performance also relates 

to a perceived deficiency in providing structured opportunities for student-to-student 

interactions. A preponderance of the evidence established that respondent made 

reasonable attempts to engage student participation by using a randomizer 

application to ask students questions and using a “revoicing technique.” He also 

circulated through the classroom, and regularly utilized Socratic Seminars. Respondent 

acknowledged that many students never participated, but credibly testified that class 

participation was adversely affected by class sizes, which regularly exceeded 40 

students. On some of the observed dates, respondent’s performance was reasonably 

impaired by circumstances. One observation occurred the day before final 

examinations and another on the morning of an anticipated suspension. 

31 

11. 

The charge of unsatisfactory performance, on its own, is capricious and 

founded entirely on subjective standards. Courts have held that unsatisfactory 

performance should be measured by the standard of fitness to teach. “Absent this 

objective measure of performance, the livelihood of the teacher is dependent upon an 

abstract characterization of conduct which will shift and change from board to board, 

district by district and year by year. Such discretion is required to be bridled by the 

restraints of the standard of fitness to teach.” (

 (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

12.

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

cause exists to terminate respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for 

unsatisfactory conduct under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). 

Evident Unfitness for Service 

13. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who demonstrates evident 

unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6).) Evident unfitness for service 

means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason 

of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) Unlike 

unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service connotes “a fixed character trait, 

presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (

.) The Commission must 

look at the proven conduct in the aggregate. The 

 court found it was 

unnecessary to determine if every act demonstrated unfitness for service. Rather, it 

was proper to examine the totality of the offensive conduct. 

32 

14. 

Respondent’s fitness to teach must be examined under the factors in 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. There, the school district 

discovered that a teacher “engaged in a limited, non-criminal physical relationship 

[with a colleague] . . . of a homosexual nature.” The California Supreme Court held that 

a school district cannot abstractly characterize conduct as immoral or unprofessional, 

but must show that retaining a teacher poses a significant danger of harm to students, 

school employees, or others who may be affected by the teacher’s conduct. The 

misconduct must have some rational connection to the teacher’s ability to teach as 

follows: 

In determining whether the teacher’s conduct thus indicates 

unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as 

the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity 

anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party 

involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 

any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, 

the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 

and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.

(

, 

, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 

 

33 

15. 

Teachers who fail to meet the standards of the CSTP and Framework are 

likely to adversely affect students. The District has a compelling interest to protect 

students from ineffective teachers. Respondent demonstrated inadequacies to his 

supervisors and rated as “developing” in many observed categories. 

16.  However, the degree of adversity from respondent’s noted deficiencies 

was moderate, not severe. The below standard evaluations were proximate in time but 

based on limited and sporadic observations totaling less than one percent of the time 

respondent was delivering instruction during the two school years observed. No actual 

adverse impact was shown; on the contrary, respondent presented compelling 

mitigation evidence that he has generally had a positive impact on students. The 

District did not consider student assessments or student work in reaching its 

conclusions that respondent was not clearly communicating the instructional purpose 

or providing cognitively engaging lessons. 

17. 

Respondent holds an appropriate credential for the subject matter he 

was assigned to teach and has 20 years of experience without prior discipline. 

18. 

Respondent presented evidence of extenuating circumstances with 

respect to the observations conducted on the eve of final examinations and the 

morning of his first suspension. In aggravation, respondent failed to respond in writing 

to all but the last conference memo and he did not appear or respond to notice of 

administrative review. This inaction exhibits disregard to repeated directives. 

19. 

Dismissing respondent for failing to strictly employ all standards may 

have a chilling effect on other teachers, but any such chilling effect does not rationally 

relate to any constitutional rights of respondent or his colleagues. 

34 

20. 

A preponderance of the evidence does not establish unfitness to teach 

under the 

 criteria or show that a fixed and irremediable character trait 

caused respondent’s inability to perform to the satisfaction of the District. The 

directives issued by the District to “clearly communicate” and provide “structured 

opportunities” to students were vague and unspecific. Respondent credibly testified 

that he was making a good faith effort to comply with all assistance, guidance, and 

directives. The copious testimonials from former students supplement and explain 

respondent’s direct evidence. 

21. 

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

cause exists to terminate respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for 

evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

Persistent Violations of School Laws or Regulations 

22. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who engages in a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 

or by the governing board of the school district. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Such 

violations of the teacher must be “stubborn and continuing.” (

 (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 

1176, 1183.) The willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing board of education is insubordination. (

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, overruled on other grounds by 

 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575.) 

 

 

35 

23. 

In this case, respondent received below standard evaluations in two of 

the last 20 years of his employment for the District. However, the evidence does not 

demonstrate that his failure to perform to the satisfaction of his supervisors was 

stubborn and continuing behavior. A debate between a teacher and principal about 

teaching objectives does not indicate the type of continual insubordination that may 

seriously affect the discipline in a school. (

 (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317, 321.) 

24. 

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

cause exists to terminate respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for 

engaging in a persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws under 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments Without Cause 

25. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who willfully refuses to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the District. (Ed. Code, § 44939.) 

26. 

The District cites no case law applying or interpreting Education Code 

section 44939. Generally, the language of a statute is given its plain and ordinary 

meaning while considering each provision of the statute in context of the entire 

statutory scheme, avoiding any interpretation leading to absurd results. (

 (1993) 5 Cal.4th 382; 

 (2002) 98 

Cal.App.4th 633.)

27. 

Establishing willfulness does not require a showing of any intent to 

violate the law, bad faith, or actual knowledge of the provision which is violated. 

(

(1990) 50 Cal.3d 1088, 1093.) However, under a plain and 

36 

ordinary meaning of Education Code section 44939, the District must first show a 

refusal to perform. 

28.  Here, respondent performed all regular assignments. Although he did 

not perform up to the standards expected by his supervisors, there is no evidence that 

respondent refused to perform any regular assignment. The failure to perform to the 

satisfaction of an employer is distinct from a refusal to perform a regular assignment 

given by an employer. 

29. 

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

cause exists to terminate respondent’s employment as a permanent employee who 

willfully refused to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause under 

Education Code section 44939. 

Conclusion 

30. 

A Commission on Professional Competence has broad discretion in 

determining whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction. (

(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) A particular act or conduct 

of a teacher may constitute more than one cause for dismissal. (

 (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167.) 

31. 

The District has already imposed suspensions for the deficiencies noted

during 10 observations over the course of two school years. However, the District has 

failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists to dismiss 

respondent as a permanent employee under Education Code sections 44932, 

subdivision (a)(2), (5), (6), and (8), and 44939. 

37 

ORDER 

Respondent Nicholas Johnson shall not be dismissed as a permanent employee 

of the District pursuant to the charges presented in the Second Amended Accusation. 

The District shall pay compensation to respondent from the effective date of any

suspension without pay. 

DATE: 

 

DATE: 

DATE: 

FRANCINE BUSCHEL-GOMEZ 

Member, Commission on Professional 

Competence 

JONATHAN TURNER SMITH 

Member, Commission on Professional 

Competence 

MATTHEW GOLDSBY 

Chairperson, Commission on 

Professional Competence

38 

