BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
PALO  VERDE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

GEORGE  DAGNINO,  a  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent 

OAH  No.  2019070869 

DECISION 

On  November  18,  19,  and  20,  2019,  a  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  heard  this  matter  in  Blythe,  California.  The  Commission  consisted  of  the 

following  members:  Kimberly  J.  Belvedere,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings;  Jennifer  Munoz,  Redlands  Unified  School  District;  and  William 

Briscoe,  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

David  E.  Robinette  and  Mark  W.  Thompson,  Attorneys  at  Law  with  the  law  firm 

of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  APC,  represented  complainant,  Palo  Verde 

Unified  School  District  (PVUSD). 

John  Cadieux,  Attorney  at  Law  with  the  law  firm  of  Smith  Steiner  Vanderpool, 

APC,  represented  respondent,  George  Dagnino.

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  record  was  held  open  to 

permit  the  committee  to  review  exhibits,  deliberate,  and  reach  a  decision.  The  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  on  December  9,  20179. 

Did  respondent’s  conduct  on  January  16,  2019,  which  involved  an  angry 

outburst  directed  at  the  principal  of  Appleby  Elementary  School,  and  February  7,  2019, 

which  involved  instigating  an  incident  wherein  a  female  student  hid  the  jacket  of  a 

special  needs  student,  warrant  his  dismissal  based  on  unprofessional  conduct, 

dishonesty,  and  evident  unfitness  for  service? 

ISSUE 

SUMIVIARY 

Respondent’s  conduct  on  January  16,  2019,  and  February  7,  20179,  constituted 

unprofessional  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Respondent's  report  to  his 

superiors  regarding  his  conduct  on  February  7,  20179,  was  also  dishonest.  Accordingly, 

in  consideration  of  the  factors  set  forth  by  the  California  Supreme  Court  in  Morrison  v. 

State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  CaL3d  214,  235,  respondent's  dismissal  is  warranted. 

PROTECTIVE  AND  SEALING  ORDER 

The  names  of  the  minor  students  and  two  witnesses  referred  to  in  this  matter 

are  subject  to  a  protective  order.  Any  document  received  as  evidence  in  this  matter 

that  contains  the  name  of  any  minor  student  or  the  two  witnesses  identified  below, 

shall  be  redacted  before  any  disclosure  to  the  public.  No  court  reporter  or

transcription  service  shall  transcribe  these  names,  but  shall  instead  refer  to  the 

students  by  their  first  name  and  last  initial:  > 

F., om  N.,  Ag  G.,  a  S., 

>  J,  ia  G.,  J.R., 

S.,  and  ma  E.  The  last  names  of  these  students  were 

also  redacted  from  Exhibits  7,  and  18  through  21.  The  names  of  two  of  respondent's 

witnesses,  XK 

S.  and  Oa  E.,  are  also  subject  to  this  protective  order  to  protect 

the  identify  of  their  minor  children. 

Exhibit  24,  which  is  an  Individualized  Education  Plan  (IEP)  for  Uf 

E.,  contains 

personal  and  psychological  information  of  m7  E.  and  is  too  lengthy  to  be  redacted; 

accordingly,  Exhibit  24  is  subject  to  a  protective  order.  A  reviewing  court,  parties  to 

this  matter,  their  attorneys,  and  a  government  agency  decision  maker  or  designee, 

may  review  Exhibit  24  subject  to  this  order,  provided  that  the  document  is  protected 

from  release  to  the  public. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background 

valid. 

1, 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  PVUSD.  Respondent 

holds  a  physical  education  credential  (K-12)  and  educational  specialist  credential  (mild 

to  moderate  K-12).  At  all  times  relevant  to  these  proceedings,  both  credentials  were 

2. 

Prior  to  the  2018-2019  school  year,  respondent  had  been  working  as  a 

physical  education  teacher  at  a  high  school  within  the  district.  He  was  also  a  football 

coach  and  athletic  director.  During  the  2018-2019  school  year,  based  on  the  needs  of 

the  district  and  because  respondent  was  the  only  teacher  who  had a  special  education

credential  that  was  not  being  used,  respondent  was  assigned  to  Appleby  Elementary 

School  (Appleby)  to  a  special  education  class  containing  three  students. 

3. 

Respondent  was  offered  countless  training  opportunities  for  techniques 

in  special  education  as  well  as  computer  programs  used  during  Individualized 

Education  Program  (EP)  plan  meetings,  both  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  2078-2019 

school  year  and  during  the  2016-2019  school  year.  Respondent  was  provided  with 

resources,  such  as  other  teachers,  to  assist  him  with  any  questions  or  concerns  he 

might  have  had  in  developing  curriculum,  teaching  the  three  special  education 

students,  and  rnanaging  behaviors,  among  other  things.  Respondent  did  not  avail 

himself  of  those  many  opportunities. 

4, 

Beginning  in  September  2018,  Appleby’s  Principal,  Karina  De  La  Pefha, 

began  documenting  meetings  and  conversations  she,  and  others,  had  with  respondent 

concerning  ongoing  problems  with  respondent's  conduct.  The  documentation  began 

at  the  verbal  warning  level,  and  progressed  to  written  confirmation  of  verbal  warnings, 

to  multiple  written  reprimands,  and  ultimately  to  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct 

on  January  22,  2079. 

5, 

The  Notice  of  Unprofessional  Conduct  detalied  an  angry  outburst 

respondent  directed  at  Principal  De  La  Paha  on  January  16,  2019.  The  Notice  of 

Unprofessional  Conduct  contained  relevant  statutes,  regulations,  and  district  policies, 

and  also  referenced  prior  disciplinary  letters  that  had  been  served  on  November  16, 

2018  October  15,  2018;  September  18,  2018;  and  September  11,  2018.  The  letter 

warned  that  respondent's  behavior  and  conduct  had  been  previously  documented  as 

“deteriorating  for  several  months”  and  provided  a  pian  of  assistance.  The  plan  of 

assistance  directed  respondent  to,  among  other  things,  conduct  himself  in  an 

appropriate  and  professional  manner  at  all  times;  maintain  a  courteous  demeanor  in

his  performance  as  a  teacher;  follow  all  previous  directives  given  to  him;  and  follow  all 

rules  and  regulations  of  the  district. 

6. 

On  February  7,  2019,  respondent  instigated  an  incident  between 

students.  Specifically,  resoondent  told  several  female  elementary  school  students  to 

hide  the  jacket  of  one  of  his  special  education  students,  1 

E.  According  to 

ma  E.'s  IEP,  he  receives  special  education  services  under  the  category  of  emotional 

disturbance.  m7  E.'s  IEP  explained  that  ma  relies  on  “preferred  adults  to 

mediate  his  interactions  with  others,”  and  is  prone  to  angry  outbursts. 

im 

can  be 

verbally  aggressive  with  other  students  and  has  also  exhibited  physical  aggression 

towards  other  students  in  and  out  of  the  classroom.  When  m7  E.  saw  that  one  of 

the  female  students  had  complied  with  respondent's  directive  to  hide his  jacket,  he 

became  very  upset.  ma  E.  chased  after  the  female  student  who  had  taken  his 

jacket,  and  threw  a  basketball  at  her.  The  altercation  upset  the  female  student.  When 

questioned  about  the  incident,  respondent  provided  two  written  statements  that  were 

false  and/or  misleading. 

7. 

On  June  25,  2019,  in  closed  session  at  the  regularly  scheduled  meeting  of 

PVUSD  Board  of  Trustees  (PVUSD  Board),  district  administration  recommended 

respondent's  dismissal  based  on  respondent's  uncorrected  pattern  of  unprofessional 

conduct,  and  the  two  above-referenced  instances  for  unprofessional  conduct  (in 

violation  of  Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivision  (a)  and  44933);  dishonesty  (in 

violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(4));  and  evident  unfitness

for  service  (in  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6)).  A  majority 

of  the  PVUSD  board  voted  to  dismiss  respondent  from  his  employment. ' 

8. 

Respondent  was  given  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  matter  at  a  Ske//y 

meeting  on  June  4,  2019,  which  he  declined.* 

  

'  Respondent  called  Norman  Guith  as  a  witness.  Dr.  Guith  is 

a  member  of  the 

PVUSD  Board.  Dr.  Guith  was  not  present  at  the  meeting  when  the  PVUSD  voted  to 

terminate  respondent's  employment.  Respondent  purportedly  called  Dr.  Guith  to  ask 

him  how  he  might  have  voted  if  he  had  been  present.  However,  there  is  no  question 

that  the  PVUSD  Board's  official  vote  was  to  recommend  termination;  whether  the 

PVUSD  Board's  vote  would  have  been  different  had  Dr.  Guith  been  present  Is  not  a 

proper  consideration  and  not  relevant  to  these  proceedings. 

Respondent  also  entered  into  a  stipulation  with  the  district  concerning  the 

opinion  of  Sam  Burton,  another  PVUSD  Board  member,  who,  voted  against  the 

dismissal.  It  was  agreed  that,  had  Mr.  Burton  testified,  he  would  have  testified  that  he 

voted  against  recommending  termination  because  he  did  not  feel  the  allegations 

warranted  dismissal.  Mr.  Burton's  opinion,  however,  is  irrelevant  for  the  same  reason 

that  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Guith  was  irrelevant. 

*  In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 

Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering 

disciplinary  action  against  a  public  employee  must  accord  the  employee  certain  “pre- 

removal  safeguards,”  including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a 

copy  of  the  charges  and  materials  upon  which  the  action  is  based,  and  the  right  to 

respond,  either  orally  or  in  writing,  to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The

9. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  notice  of  defense  against  the  Statement  of 

Charges  approved  at  the  June  25,  2019,  board  meeting;  this  hearing  ensued. 

Relevant  History 

10. 

Karina  De  la  Pefia  has  been  the  principal  of  Appleby  for  four  years.  Her 

testimony,  and  relevant  exhibits  utilized  during  her  testimony,  are  summarized  as 

follows:  Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach  the  Bridges  Special  Education  Program 

(Bridges  Program)  at  Appleby  for  the  2018-2019  school  year.  The  Bridges  Program  Is  a 

special  education  class  for  emotionally  disturbed  students.  Students  in  the  program 

have  significant  behavioral  and  academic  challenges.  At  the  beginning  of  the  school 

year,  respondent  was  only  responsible  for  only  three  students.  Throughout  the  school 

year  two  more  students  were  added,  for  a  total  of  five  students. 

This  was  not  the  first  year  that  Appleby  had  the  Bridges  Program;  prior  to  the 

2018-2019  school  year,  Janelle  Carpenter  taught  the  program.  Prior  to  that,  Karen 

Martinez  taught  the  Bridges  Program.  However,  because  Ms.  Martinez  had  problems 

with  her  credential  and  Ms.  Carpenter  was  needed  for  a  special  day  program, 

respondent  was  the  only  teacher  in  the  district  who  could  teach  the  Bridges  Program. 

That  is  the  reason  he  was  given  the  assignment. 

Principal  De  La  Pefia  did  a  variety  of  things  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the 

2018-2019  school  year  to  help  respondent  prepare.  The  Bridges  Program  was  one  of  a 

kind;  thus,  she  knew  he  might  not  be  familiar  with  it.  She  sent  respondent  a  welcome 

  

Supreme  Court's  directive  gave  rise  to  an  administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Ske//y 

hearing,  in  which  an  employee  has  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon 

which  the  proposed  discipline  is  based.

letter.  She  gave  respondent  an  agenda  for  the  first  meeting  of  the  year  to  familiarize 

himself  with  what  would  be  discussed.  Principal  De  La  Pefia  also  met  individually  with 

all  teachers  prior  to  the  beginning  of  academic  instruction. 

Once  respondent  arrived  on  campus,  De  La  Pefa  made  sure  he  had  supports  in 

place.  She  discussed  her  expectations  with  him.  She  told  respondent  about  the  types 

of  behaviors  he  might  be  dealing  with  as  they  related  to  each  of  his  special  education 

students.  Principal  De  La  Peha  explained  that  respondent  did  not  need  to  concern 

himself  as  much  with  academics  as  he  did  with  controlling  the  behaviors,  but  that  he 

was  not  to  ignore  academics. 

Respondent  told  Principal  De  La  Pea  that  he  was  not  familiar  with  the  Special 

Education  Information  System  (SEIS),  a  computer  program  utilized  during  IEP 

meetings.  Respondent  also  told  Principal  De  La  Pefa  that  he  did  not  know  how  to 

conduct  IEPs.  Principal  De  La  Pefa  referred  respondent  to  Ms.  Carpenter  as  a  resource 

since  she  had  taught  the  Bridges  Program  immediately  prior  to  respondent.  Principal 

De  La  Pefia  urged  respondent  to  use  Ms.  Carpenter  as  a  resource,  and  even  had  Ms. 

Carpenter  help  respondent  run  the  first  IEP  meeting  he  attended. 

In  August  and  September,  respondent  was  provided  with  SEIS  training.  There 

were  also  many  meetings  to  attend  in  order  to  receive  instruction  on  what  he  needed; 

Principal  De  La  Pefa  recalled  that  respondent  did  not  attend  the  first  meeting  but 

attended  some  thereafter.  Principal  De  La  Pehla  wanted  respondent  to  be  set  up  for 

aUCCESS., 

Principal  De  La  Pefa  gave  respondent  a  seven-step  lesson  plan  which  is 

a  basic 

lesson  plan  every  teacher  used  and  which  has  been  in  education  for  the  last  30  years.

This  example  was  in  addition  to  having  respondent  work  with  Mrs.  Solato,  another 

teacher,  on  how  to  create  lesson  plans. 

One  of  the  requirements  is  that,  when  setting  up  an  IEP  for  one’s  students,  a 

special  education  teacher  is  supposed  to  coordinate  the  date  with  her  secretary  so  that 

Principal  De  La  Pefia  may  attend.  Respondent  was  having  difficulty  with  scheduling 

IEPs.  In  fact,  he  was  also  having  difficulty  delivering  instruction  that  was  grade 

appropriate.  Respondent  was  also  having  difficulty  preparing  for  IEPs.  He  would  not 

have  copies  ready  for  everyone,  and  was  not  following  the  proper  procedure. 

THE  SEPTEMBER  11,  2018,  MEETING 

Because  respondent  was  having  difficulties,  Principal  De  La  Pefa  met  with 

respondent  on  September  11,  2018.  Following  their  meeting,  she  memorialized  the 

content  of  their  discussion  in  an  e-mail.  The  points  discussed  in  the  meeting  were  that: 

respondent  schedule  an  IEP  meeting  when  a  student  is  suspended;  check  with  her 

secretary  prior  to  scheduling  an  IEP  meeting  so  that  Principal  De  La  Pefa  could  attend; 

schedule  an  JEP  meeting  within  30  days  of  a  parent  requesting  one;  notify  her  any  time 

he  and  a  student  leaves  campus?;  schedule  several  specific  IEP  meetings;  and  attend 

SEIS  training  when  it  becomes  available. 

  

>  This  issue  was  discussed  because  respondent  had  let  students  leave  campus 

unattended  on  several  occasions  and  she  felt  it  was  a  liability.

Respondent  was  further  directed  specifically  not  to  leave  campus  with  any 

students  during  instructional  time,  leave  his  classroom  or  students  unattended’,  set  up 

an  IEP  without  checking  with  her  first,  and  miss  further  deadlines. 

Respondent  was  further  directed  specifically  to  ask  for  support  when  needed, 

ask  if  he  was  not  sure  about  what  he  was  doing,  always  supervise  students,  and  always 

be  proactive. 

SEPTEMBER  18,  2018,  VERBAL  REPRIMAND 

On  September  18,  2018,  Principal  De  La  Pefa  prepared  a  verbal  reprimand  for 

respondent  because,  after  having  been  warned  not  to  do  so,  respondent  scheduled  an 

IEP  meeting  on  September  17,  2018,  without  checking  with  her  first  and  without 

discussing  the  content  of  it  with  her.  In  that  IEP  meeting,  respondent  had  offered  to 

transport  one  of  his  special  education  students  to  and  from  school,  which  was  not 

appropriate.  Respondent  also  recommended  “mainstreaming”  the  student;  however, 

such  a  recommendation  is  not  appropriate  without  supporting  data  to  show  that 

would  be  an  appropriate  change  in  the  student's  program.  Had  respondent  discussed 

that  with  her  prior  to  the  IEP,  she  could  have  informed  him  that  transporting  a  student 

or  mainstreaming  a  student  without  supporting  data  should  not  have  been  addressed. 

The  bigger  problem  in  the  IEP  meeting  was  that  respondent  said  in  the  meeting 

that  Principal  De  La  Pea  was  “outvoted”  and  IEPs  do  not  function  by  a  majority  vote. 

  

“  This  issue  arose  because  respondent  had  been  letting  his  special  education 

students  leave  the  classroom  during  instructional  time  to  play  basketball,  which  was 

not  part  of  academic  instruction  and  was  not  in  close  proximity  to  respondent's 

classroom. 

10

The  parent  was  becoming  upset  because  Principal  De  La  Pefa  was  not  supportive  of 

the  ideas,  and  Principal  De  La  Pefa  felt  “ambushed.”  Principal  De  La  Pefa  believed  it 

was  not  a  productive  way  to  conduct  an  IEP. 

Principal  De  La  Pefa  directed  respondent  as  follows:  not  to  transport  any 

students,  communicate  any  proposed  changes  in  a  student's  IEP  to  her  prior  to  the  IEP 

meeting,  and  present  data  that  respondent  collected  to  support  any  of  his  proposals 

for  an  IEP.  Respondent  was  also  warned  that  further  disciplinary  action  could  be  taken 

if  respondent  did  not  comply  with  the  directives. 

E-MAIL  EXCHANGE  SEPTEMBER  19  AND  20,  2018 

A  series  of  e-mail  communications  between  respondent  and  Principal  De  La 

Pena,  supplemented  by  her  testimony,  were  demonstrative  of  the  difficulties 

respondent  had  working  at  Appleby.  On  September  19,  2018,  just  prior  to  2:11  p.m., 

Principal  De  La  Pena  went  to  respondent's  classroom  and  neither  respondent  nor  his 

paraeducator  were  present.  Principal  De  La  Pefia  e-mailed  respondent  asking  where  he 

and  his  class  had  been.  Rather  than  respond  to  the  question,  respondent's  terse  e-mail 

in  response  read: 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  I  was  asked  about  staff 

meetings,  plcs?,  and  short  Wednesdays.  You  specifically  said 

I  need  not  worry  about  that  in  order  to  control  behaviors. 

  

>  It  was  never  explained  in  testimony  or  any  exhibits  what  type  of  meeting  a 

“plc”  is  or  what  the  acronym  “plc”  stands  for. 

11

After  yesterday's  meeting,  it  was  made  pretty  clear  that  this 

program  is  in  the  most  restrictive  environment.  We  had  a 

rough  day  given  the  restrictions  upon  us.  It  also  did  not 

help  that  after  we  had  a  nice  game  of  football  by  ourselves 

that  tt  was  announced  that  we  can’t  play  football  anyrnore. 

This  put  us  in  a  very  difficult  situation  in  class  to  work 

through,  but  we  cid.  After  school  was  out,  we  mace  sure 

the  boys  got  onto  the  bus.  ]  went  to  the  restroom  after 

having  to  hold  it  all  day,  given  the  restrictions  upon  us.  We 

went  to  the  classroom.  Mrs.  Rymer  asked  if  I  could  go  sign 

some  checks.  I  did. 

Since  we  nad  not  eaten  all  day,  given  the  restrictions  upon 

us,  |  offered  to  take  Mr.  Carmargo  to  lunch.  We  did  and 

returned.  Hf  there  is  a  set  schedule  that  [need  to  follow  on 

Wednesday  please  advice  [svc].  This  is  starting  to  turn  into  a 

harassing  work  environment. 

As  I  stated  in  the  meeting  yesterday,  lam  going  to  do  what 

you  asked.  Control  behavior  with  restricted  bathroom 

usage,  and  restricted  breaks.  I  will  wait  to  the  end  of  the 

day  to  use  the  bathroom  as  I  cannot  leave  my  stucents  at 

any  given  time.  Lwill  never  go  to  lunch  on  Wednesday  off 

campus  again  and  will  wait  until  the  end  of  the  work  day  to 

eat... 

After  reading  respondent's  e-mail,  Principal  De  La  Pefa  felt  she  needed  to 

respond  in  writing  because  respondent's  allegations  were  inaccurate  and  harassing 

12

towards  her.  Respondent  was  never  told  he  could  miss  staff  meetings  because  those 

occur  after  school  so  having  students  in  class  is  not  an  issue.  They  are  mandatory.  She 

also  never  told  respondent  they  could  not  play  football;  football  is  permitted  as 

instruction,  but  not  during  recess  because  of  problems  that  had  been  occurring  on  the 

playground.  Nobody  else  had  any  problems  with  that  except  for  respondent.  Similarly, 

respondent  was  never  told  he  could  not  use  the  bathroom:  he  was  simply  told  he 

needed  to  cover  his  classroom.  Thus,  as  long  as  the  paraeducator  or  another  teacher 

was  monitoring  his  students,  he  could  tend  to  his  needs.  Principal  De  La  Pena  also 

never  told  respondent  he  could  not  eat.  Per  contract,  all  teachers  are  permitted  to 

have  a  lunch  period.  Principal  De  La  Pefia  was  upset  because  respondent's  accusations 

in  the  e-mail  were  “ridiculous.”  She  was  simply  asking  him  about his  job  and  his 

response  was  not  appropriate. 

In  a  September  20,  20718,  e-mail  to  respondent,  Principal  De  La  Pefa  clarified  to 

respondent  that  staff  meetings  occur  every  Tuesday  at  a  specified  time  and  that  he  ts 

not  required  to  attend  those  meetings.  However,  PLC  meetings  occurred  every 

Wednesday  frorn  12:40  p.m.  to  1:40  p.m.  and  those  meetings  were  required.  Principal 

De  La  Pefia  also  explained  that  the  three  special  education  students  respondent  had 

were  permitted  to  attend  recess,  assemblies,  snack  breaks,  lunch  breaks,  and  any  other 

activity  as  long  as  they  were  supervised  because  of  their  behaviors.  This  was  not  a 

restriction;  itis  because  of  the  intensive  support  services  the  students  required. 

Principal  De  La  Pefia  also  explained  that  respondent  was  always  permitted  to  have  a 

lunch  and  breaks,  but  they  needed  to  be  staggered  with  his  paraeducator  so  the 

students  would  not  be  unsupervised.  Principal  De  La  Pefa  finally  explained  that  there 

had  been  many  problems  on  the  playground  with  football  so  the  playing  of  football 

was  suspended  for  everyone  during  recess;  but  if  respondent  wanted  to  take  his 

13

students  out  for  a  structured  football  lesson,  that  was  permitted.  Principal  De  La  Pefa 

also  agreed  to  attempt  to  provide  some  items  respondent  requested  for  his  classroom. 

SEPTEMBER  24,  2018°  LETTER  IN  RESPONSE  TO  RESPONDENT'S  E-MAILS 

Principal  De  La  Pefa  had  asked  respondent  for  a  schedule  of  when  he  would  be 

teaching  various  subjects  so  she  could  observe.  Respondent  had  told  her  it 

is 

“impossible  to  have  a  set  schedule.”  Principal  De  La  Pefa  was  frustrated  because  that 

is  what  teachers  do:  set  schedules.  She  gave  respondent  a  sample  of  the  schedule 

used  by  prior  Bridges  Program  teachers.  She  also  told  respondent  she  did  not  expect 

anything  different  of  him  that  she  did  not  expect  of  anyone  else  — all  teachers  had  to 

provide  their  instructional  schedule.  Respondent  then  insisted  that  Principal  De  La 

Pena  specifically  told  him  he  did  not  have  to  worry  about  academics.  Principal  De  La 

Pena  said  this  assertion  was  absurd.  She  never  told  him  he  could  ignore  academics. 

Finally,  respondent  requested  someone  “fully  trained  in  IEPs  handle  his  caseload.” 

Principal  De  La  Pefia  explained  that  this  is  impossible;  respondent  is  a  special 

education  teacher  and  has  been  a  teacher  for  a  long  time.  Requesting  someone  else  to 

do  his  work  was  “outrageous.”  It  was  like  he  simply  wanted  another  teacher  to  do  his 

job.  Respondent  was  also  spending  inordinate  amounts  of  time  playing  basketball  with 

the  students.  At  this  point,  Principal  De  La  Pefia  felt  respondent was  just  trying  to 

create  problems. 

  

©  Principal  De  La  Pefia  pointed  out  that  the  letter  is  dated  September  18,  2018, 

which  was  not  the  correct  date.  The  correct  date  is  September  24,  2018. 

14

Principal  De  La  Pea  wrote  a  letter  to  respondent  on  September  24,  2018, 

addressing  his  statements  in  the  above-referenced  e-mails,  and  also  addressing  new 

Statements  he  had  made  to  her  in  the  interim.  That  letter  reac: 

insofar  as  you  have  any  questions  arising  from  any  of  our 

previous  communications,  you  are  always  weicame  to 

follow  up  with  questions  if  you  require  further  information 

or  clarification. 

Most  recently,  you  responded  on  Friday  afternoon  that  "it  is 

impossible  to  have  a  set  schedule.”  I  can  assure  you  that  it 

is  not.  For  your  reference,  I  have  attached  a  schedule 

prepared  by  last  year’s  teachers  in  your  position.... 

With  regard  to  your  request  in  your  September  21,  2018,  e- 

rnail  that:  [f]  am  requesting  that  someone  that  is  fully 

trained  in  IEP  meetings,  SEIS,  facilitate  the  meetings 

scheduled  on  my  caseload. 

You  hold  an  Education  Specialist  credential,  which 

ostensibly  qualifies  you  to  provide  special  education 

instruction  and  support  commensurate  with  your  training 

and  experience.  Thus,  you  are  “fully  trained"  to  participate 

in  IEP  meetings  and  the  other  duties  as  specified  in  your  job 

description.  There  are  always  opportunities  for  additional 

training  and  professional  development  when  needed  to 

update  and  improve  the  knowledge  and  skills  of  our 

teaching  staff,  but  the  directives  you  have  been  given  thus 

15

far  with  regard  to  your  duties  are  consistent  with 

Knowledge  and  skills  possessed  by  any  Education  Specialist 

instruction  credential  with  similar  training  and  experience. 

Additionally,  at  your  request,  on  August  21,  201718,  you 

attended  an  IEP  meeting  to  observe  how  staff  at  Appleby 

Elementary  typically  conduct  their  IEP  meetings.  At  the 

conclusion  of  this  observation,  you  did  not  indicate  that 

there  were  any  concepts  or  protocols  that  you  did  not 

understand  or  think  that  you  would  have  difficulty 

following.  As  noted  in  Board  Policy  No.  4119.3,  all 

employees  “shall  fulfill  the  duties  and  responsibilities  set 

forth  in  their  job  description  and  shall  comply  with  Board 

policies,  administrative  regulations,  applicable  employee 

agreements,  and  local,  state,  and  federal  laws,”  and  my 

expectation  of  you  is  the  same. 

Further,  you  have  already  been  afforded  professional 

development  opportunities  with  regard  to  SEIS...  .  Shortly 

thereafter,  on  August  14,  2018,  Itald  you  that  you  could 

contact  Regina  Gonzalez,  our  district  trainer  for  SEIS,  to  set 

up  the  training  that  you  needed.  You  have  already  had  one 

or  more  meetings  with  Ms.  Gonzalez  at  some  point...  and 

itis  my  understanding  that  you  have  two  more  meetings 

scheduled  this  week  [according  to  your  September  21, 

2018,  e-mail... 

16

In  terms  of  some  of  your  more  peculiar  assertions,  for 

example,  stating  that  “my  position  is  irrelevant  to  the  IEP 

process,”  stating  that  I  said  your  students  could  never 

“interact  with  regular  education  students,”  and  describing 

yourself  as  “having  to  hold  it  all  day”  because  you  are 

forbidden  from  using  the  bathroom...  it  seems  as  though 

these  are  exaggerations  made  in  anger  or  frustration,  so  | 

will  not  dignify  them  with  a  response  and  simply  remind 

you  that  you  are  a  professional  teacher  with  18  years  of 

experience,  and  it  should  be  beneath  you  to  resort  to  such 

behavior  simply  because  you  disagree  with  a  directive  or 

are  still  acjusting  to  some  of  the  differences  in  your  new 

site  or  assignment....i  have  attached  a  copy  of  Board 

Policy  No.  4179.21  to  this  letter  for  your  reference;  however, 

these  are  reasonable  expectations  of  any  professional  adult 

in  any  workplace  and  so  I  trust  you  will  conduct  yourself 

accordingly  in  the  future.  ...  [emphasis  in  original]. 

OcTosper  15,  2018,  WRITTEN  REPRIMAND 

Respondent  scheduled  an  IEP  meeting  for  one  of  his  students  to  take  place  on 

September  21,  2018.  All  persons  expected  to  be  present  for  the  IEP  meeting  were 

present  (the  parent,  site  administration,  ERMHS  staff,  and  district  administration). 

Respondent  was  not  present.  The  IEP  meeting  was  supposed  to  be  for  a  student  that 

was  going  to  be  mainstreamed.  When  respondent  was  cailed  because  he  was  not 

present,  respondent  said  the  meeting  was  cancelled.  Respondent  toid  Principal  De  La 

Pefia  that  he  sent  her  an  e-mail,  but  the  e-mail  had  been  sent  after  the  meeting  had 

17

already  started.  Principal  De  La  Pefa  felt  horrible  because  the  parent  had  taken  the 

day  off  of  work,  and  everyone  had  been  inconvenienced  to  be  there.  Respondent’s 

conduct  also  embarrassed  her,  as  a  school  leader.  Respondent  was  written  up  for  his 

unprofessional  conduct.  The  written  reprimand  made  it  clear  that  respondent  was  not 

taking  responsibility  for  the  IEP  process  in  relation  to  his  students,  not  consulting  with 

staff  regarding  implernentation  of  the  IEPs  at  the  school,  and  not  collaborating  as 

required  with  parents,  teachers,  administration,  and  others.  The  written  reprimand 

directed  responded  to  do  all  the  above  going  forward,  or  it  could  lead  to  further 

disciplinary  action.  Respondent  signed  and  acknowledged  the  written  reprimand. 

Respondent  did  not  file  a  rebuttal  explaining  his  conduct. 

MOVEMBER  16,  2078,  WRITTEN  REPRIMAND 

On  November  15,  2018,  respondent's  paraeducator  sent  a  test  message  to 

Principal  De  La  Pena  and  asked  for  additional  time  for  he  and  respondent  to  go  to 

lunch.  Principal  De  La  Pehla  responded  that  she  could  not  approve  that.  Principal  De  La 

Pena  shortly  thereafter  saw  respondent  and  told  him,  at  12:08  p.m,  that  he  could  take 

his  40-minute  lunch  and  must  be  back  by  12:50  p.m.  so  he  could  report  to  Room  22 

and  cover  for  another  teacher.  Principal  De  La  Pefia  then  informed  the  teacher  in 

Room  22  that  respondent  would  cover  her  at  12:50  p.m.  Rather  than  abide  by  the 

directive,  ressondent  did  not  return  from  lunch  until  1:20  o.m.  When  questioned  why 

he  was  late,  respondent  said  he  thought  he  was  supposed  to  report  to  the  classroom 

at  1:00  o.m.,  which  made  no  sense,  since  he  was  already  late.  Respondent  said  he  was 

giving  his  paraeducator  a  ride  home.  Principal  De  La  Pena  issued  a  written  reprimand 

for  respondent's  conduct,  noting  it  was  insubordination,  and  informing  respondent 

that  this  was  yet  another  instance  of  a  continuing  pattern  of  misconduct.  The  written 

reprimand  directed  respondent  to  report  to  work  on  time,  and  remain  at  work  every 

18

day,  as  well  as  take  his  40-minute  lunch  as  per  contract.  The  written  reprimand  aiso 

notified  respondent  that  it  was  not  permitted  to  exceed  that  40-minute  lunch  period 

except  with  express  authorization  by  a  supervisor.  The  written  reprimand  warned  that 

failure  to  adhere  to  board  policies  could  lead  to  further  disciplinary  action. 

Respondent  signed  and  acknowledged  the  written  reprimand.  Respondent  did  not  file 

a  rebuttal  explaining  his  conduct. 

NOVEMBER/ DECEMBER  CPI  TRAINING 

Early  in  the  school  year,  a  calendar  request  was  sent  to  respondent  regarding 

Crisis  Prevention  Intervention  (CPD  training  that  was  to  occur  in  November  or 

December  2016.  This  class  covered  how  to  do  CPL  which  included  classroom  and 

“nands  on”  instruction.  Respondent  did  not  attend  the  training. 

The  “Angry  Outburst"  Incident 

11. 

An  TEP  meeting  for  one  of  respondent’s  students  had  been  scheduled  on 

January  16,  2019.  Respondent  was  made  aware  of  the  meeting,  the  purpose  of  which 

was  to  determine  whether  a  student  at  another  school  should  be  placed  in  the  special 

education  program  at  Appleby.  The  meeting  commenced  at  6:00  am.  Respondent  was 

not  present  all  other  interested  parties  were  present.  Principal  De  La  Pehla  made  a 

total  of  three  calls  on  the  intercom.  By  8:20,  respondent  still  had  not  shown  up  and  the 

bell  for  classes  had  rung.  At  some  point,  respondent  came  to  the  location  where  the 

meeting  was  being  held  and  started  yeiling  at  Principal  De  La  Pefa  in  front  of  students 

and  others  present.  Principal  De  La  Pena  said  she  was  “shocked.”  She  felt  threatened. 

Principal  De  La  Pefia  used  a  lower  tone  with  her  voice  to  try  and  calm  him  down. 

However,  respondent  was  “extremely  aggressive”  and  “slamming  his  hat  on  his  hands” 

as  he  yelled  at  her.  Respondent  also  made  “aggressive  gestures”  with  his  hands. 

19

Although  respondent  did  not  physically  or  verbally  threaten  Principal  De  La  Pefia,  she 

noted  that  "his  body  language  said  otherwise.”  Principal  De  La  Pela  was  concerned  for 

her  own  safety  and  the  safety  of  her  students.  After  respondent  verbally  confronted 

her,  he  continued  to  yell  at  her  as  they  entered  the  IEP  meeting.  Principal  De  La  Pefa 

said  “it  was  one  of  the  worst  moments  [she]  had  as  a  principal.”  However,  despite  her 

fear,  she  finished  her  job  at  the  IEP.  After  it  concluded,  Principal  De  La  Pea  had  to  go 

around  to  the  classrooms  and  reassure  students  that  everything  was  fine  because  the 

Students  appeared  “shocked.”  Teachers  asked  her  if  she  was  all  right.  Principal  De  La 

Pefia  aiso  said  there  was  at  least  one  parent  present  during  respondent's  verbal 

outburst  that  told  her  they  did  not  want  respondent  as  a  teacher. 

After  this  incident,  respondent  was  presented  with  a  Notice  of  Unprofessional 

Conduct,  wnich  cited  this  incident  and  all  applicable  board  policies,  and  warning 

respondent  to  correct  his  deficiencies  within  45  days. 

12. 

Mary  Roberson  was  most  recently  employed  by  the  district  as  the  Dean 

of  students.  She  retired  in  June  2019.  Ms.  Roberson’s  testimony  is  summarized  as 

follows:  She  spent  26  years  teaching  4  and  5'"  grade  before  spending  her  last  five 

years  as  Dean  of  Students.  Ms.  Roberson  also  spent  12  years  as  the  president  of  the 

PVUSD  teacher's  union.  Ms.  Roberson  was  familiar  with  respondent  as  a  teacher  and 

because  respondent  served  as  vice  president  of  the  union  the  same  year  that  she 

served  her  last  year  with  the  union. 

Ms.  Roberson  recalied  the  January  16,  20179,  incident  wherein  respondent 

verbally  accosted  Principal  De  La  Pea.  Sne  recalled  there  was  a  “very  important”  IEP 

meeting  happening  that  day. 

20

Ms.  Roberson  recalled  Principal  De  La  Pefha  being  concerned  because 

respondent  was  not  present  at  the  IEP  meeting.  Ms.  Roberson  initially  was  not  outside 

and  did  not  see  how  respondent's  verbal  confrontation  began.  Another  teacher  (Carol 

Wade,  who  teaches  third  grade),  came  in  and  told  her  about  the  interaction  and  that  it 

was  serious.  When  Ms.  Roberson  walked  outside,  she  saw  respondent  facing  Principal 

De  La  Pefia  with  his  chest  out,  fists  clenched,  and  yelling  at  her.  Respondent  was  very 

“intimidating”  and  it  “frightened”  her  because  she  did  not  know  what  respondent  was 

going  to  do  next.  During  respondent's  outburst,  there  were  children  present  that 

ranged  from  first  to  third  grade.  They  were  “wide  eyed  and  mouth  agape”  as 

respondent  yelled.  Ms.  Roberson  noted  that  students  should  never  see  a  school 

employee  “not  being  professional”  and  school  should  always  be  a  safe  place.  In  her 

opinion,  based  on  respondent's  conduct,  “that  hallway  was  not  a  safe  place  at  that 

time.” 

The  Jacket  Incident 

13.  >  J. 

is  currently  in  eighth  grade  at  Appleby  and  was  at  the  school 

during  the  2018-2019  school  year  when  respondent  was  teaching  special  education. 

Her  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  On  February  7,  2019,  she  and  other  students 

(Cm  N., 

S,  >  F.,  and AZ  G.)  were  outside  on  the  playground  area.  They 

were  “just  talking”  and 

im 

E.  was  playing  basketball.  ma  E.'s  jacket  was 

hanging  on  a  nearby  rail.  Respondent  was  watching  m7  E.  play.  Respondent  came 

up  to  the  group  and  told  them  to  hide  1 

E.'s  jacket.  Om  N.  took  the  jacket  and 

ran  off  with  it.  After  1 

E.  saw  Om  N.  run  off  with his  jacket,  he  chased  her  and 

threw  the  basketball  at  her. om  N.  grabbed  the  basketball  and  “they  started  going 

back  and  forth.”  1 

E.  appeared  to  be  throwing  the  basketball  in  anger,  and Om 

N.  was  just  playing.  ma  E.  eventually  got his  jacket  back  after Omi  dropped  it.  The 

21

altercation  occurred  when  “Ms.  Liz”  told  the  children  to  stop.  Respondent  never  said 

anything  to  anybody.  The  incident  occurred  right  before  the  bell  rang.  When  pressed 

on  cross-examination  regarding  what  respondent  told  them  to  do,  > 

J.  was 

adamant  that  respondent  told  them  to  hide the  jacket.  > 

J.  also  submitted  a 

written  statement  to  the  district  during  its  investigation  of  the  incident,  that  was 

consistent  with  her  testimony. 

14. 

Ariel  G.  is  currently  in  eighth  grade  at  Appleby  and  was  at  the  school 

during  the  2018-2019  school  year  when  respondent  was  teaching  special  education. 

Her  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  On  February  7,  2019,  she  was  outside  with  a 

few  of  her  female  friends  and  they were  just  “chilling.”  Respondent  told  one  of  them  to 

take  ma  E.'s  jacket  and  “hide  it.” Am  G.  said  she  was  “right  there”  when 

respondent  specifically  said  to  “hide”  the  jacket. Omi  N.  took  m7  E.'s  jacket  and 

started  running  with  it.  1 

E.  had  a  basketball  and  threw  it  at om  N.’s  back. 

Om  N.  became  upset  so  she  threw  ma  E.'s  jacket  down  and  ran  after  him. om 

N.  grabbed  the  ball  and  tried  to  hit  1 

with  it.  The  incident  lasted  a  few  minutes 

until  “Ms.  Liz”  stopped  it.  After  lunch, fe  |  N.  was  crying  about  the  incident. 

15. 

a  S.  is  currently  in  eighth  grade  at  Appleby  and  was  at  the  school 

during  the  2018-2019  school  year  when  respondent  was  teaching  special  education. 

Her  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  On  February  7,  2019,  ma  E.  was  playing 

basketball.  Respondent  “came  and  told  us  to  hide  1 

E.'s  jacket.” Om  N.  took 

ma  E.'s  jacket  and  ma  E.  started  chasing  her. Om  N.  did  not  want  to  give 

ma  E.  his  jacket  back.  ma  E.  “got  irritated.” 

0  S.  did  not  remember 

anyone  telling  either  ma  E.  or Cm”  N.  to  stop.  Respondent,  who  was  present,  did 

not  say  anything  during  the  incident. 

22

16. 

Principal  De  La  Pefia  received a  call  following  the  incident  that  Om  N. 

was  in  the  office.  She  could  not  believe  it  when  she  was  told  what  occurred  because 

what  respondent  did  was,  essentially,  playing  a  prank  on  a  student  with  special  needs. 

Principal  De  La  Pefa  spoke  with  the  above  students  and  had  them  write  statements 

regarding  what  occurred. 

17.  | When  respondent  was  confronted  about  the  interaction,  respondent  lied 

about  it  to  Principal  De  La  Pena.  Respondent's  initial  written  statement  merely  said 

“students  horseplaying:  the  students  were  horseplaying  initially  and  threw  the 

basketball  at  each  other.”  Principal  De  La  Pena  told  respondent  she  had  spoken  with 

all  five  students  and  then  respondent  essentially  admitted  what  occurred  but  said  he 

was  Joking  around.  But  then,  his  written  statement  was  different  —  it  did  not  admit 

what  occurred.  Respondent's  second  written  statement  again  said  that  students  were 

“horseplaying”  and,  rather  than  admit  that  he  told  the  girls  to  hide  1 

E.'s  jacket, 

respondent  wrote  that  he  was merely  joking  with  1 

E.  “what  if  we  hide  your 

jacket.”  Respondent  wrote  nothing  about om  N.  hiding  ma  E.'s  jacket  and  the 

throwing  of  the  basketball  at fe  |  N.  Respondent's  written  statement  feigned 

ignorance  in  that  respondent  wrote  he  was  later  informed  by  Ms.  Roberson  that  his 

students  were  no  longer  allowed  on  the  playground;  that  respondent  asked  why;  that 

Ms.  Roberson  told  him  because  of  the  “basketball  incident”;  and  respondent  asked 

what  basketball  incident. 

18.  |  Based  on  the  long  pattern  of  unprofessional  conduct;  the  January  16, 

2019,  incident;  the  February  7,  2019,  incident;  and  respondent's  dishonest  statement 

regarding  the  February  7,  2019,  incident,  respondent  was  placed  on  administrative 

leave  on  February  13,  2019. 

23

19. 

Principal  De  La  Pefa  testified  that  she  would  not  feel  safe  if  respondent 

were  returned  to  the  district;  respondent's  conduct was  just  “not  OK.”  Appleby  is  an 

elementary  school.  Some  of  the  children  are  no  taller  than  his  knee.  Respondent  just 

wanted  to  do  whatever  he  wanted  to  do  and  not  do  what  was  expected  of  everyone 

else.  Respondent's  conduct  was  absolutely  uncalled  for. 

Evidence  Presented  by  Respondent 

RESPONDENT S  TESTIMONY 

20. 

Respondent's  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  respondent  holds  an 

education  specialist  credential  (mild  to  moderate)  and  physical  education  credential. 

His  credentials  were  cleared  in  2003  or  2004. 

Respondent  was  hired  by  PVUSD  in  2001  (when  he  had  a  preliminary  credential) 

to  teach  at  Palo  Verde  High  School.  There,  he  was  a  resource  specialist.  The  majority  of 

students  on  respondent's  caseload  were  mainstreamed  into  regular  education  classes. 

The  students  were  typically  pulled  out  of  their  regular  classes  for  study  skills  to  get  1:1 

help  with  their  core  classes.  Respondent's  prior  position  as  a  resource  specialist  was 

different  than  his  assignment  as  a  special  education  teacher  at  Appleby.  The  Bridges 

Program  has  much  younger  students  and  did  not  allow  mainstreaming.’  As  a  resource 

specialist,  respondent's  “classroom”  was  more  like  a  learning  center.  There  was  a  small 

group  of  students.  The  study  skills  classes  he  taught  were  only  two  periods  per  day. 

The  students  did  not  present  any  behavioral  problems.  Respondent  did  have  to  run  IEP 

  

’  This  statement  was  contradicted  by  prior  testimony,  wherein  Principal  De  La 

Pena  specifically  testified  that  one  of  the  IEPs  respondent  was  responsible  for  was 

specifically  being  held  to  discuss  mainstreaming  a  student. 

24

meetings  and  prepare  IEP  reports.®  However,  they  were  not  using  SEIS  in  the  district 

when  respondent  was  a  resource  specialist.  Respondent  claimed  he  did  not  have  any 

issues  with  administrators  and  felt  that  his  resource  specialist  position  was  fun  and 

rewarding. 

In  2007  or  2008,  respondent  began  teaching  physical  education  at  the  same 

high  school.  Between  2001  and  2017,  respondent  coached  multiple  sports  at  various 

times,  including  basketball,  swimming,  and  baseball.  Respondent  was  also  the  head 

football  coach.  In  2010,  respondent  became  the  athletic  director.  In  that  capacity, 

respondent  was  responsible  for  all  sports,  student  eligibility,  scheduling  games, 

supervision,  divisional  meetings,  league  meetings,  transportation,  and  travel. 

Respondent's  classroom  was  the  gym.  Respondent  loved  teaching  physical  education, 

working  with  student  athletes,  and  being  able  to  “get  out  and  move.”  Respondent  did 

have  some  special  education  students  in  his  physical  education  classes. 

Respondent  was  a  member  of  the  teacher's  union  as  a  site  representative  for  a 

few  years,  and  served  as  the  vice  president  from  2016  to  2019. 

In  May  of  2018,  respondent  received  a  letter  notifying  him  that  he  was  being 

transferred  to  Appleby.  Respondent  agreed  that  the  district  had  the  right  to  assign  its 

employees  to  any  position  the  are  credentialed  to  teach.  However,  respondent  said  he 

had  not  taken  classes  in  special  education  instruction  since  2006  and  had  no  idea  how 

  

®  When  asked  to  estimate  how  many  IEPs  he  had  conducted  over  the  years, 

respondent  eventually  agreed  that  it  was  more  than  10.  Respondent  later  said  that  as  a 

general  education  teacher  he  was  “involved  in  a  few”  but  then  would  not  estimate  how 

many. 

25

to  set  up  a  classroom.  He  did  not  feel  competent  to  teach  the  Bridges  Program. 

Respondent  knew  he  would  have  to  teach  cores  subjects  and  he  did  not  hold 

credentials  in  those  subjects.? 

Respondent  received  a  new  teacher  orientation  at  Appleby  about  a  week  before 

school  started.  Other  than  that,  respondent  did  not  do  anything  on  his  own  during  the 

summer  to  prepare  to  teach  special  education,  other  than  to  look  at  “some  behavior 

stuff...  but  nothing  heavy.”  Respondent  met  with  Principal  De  La  Pefa  about  a  week 

before  school  started.  She  told  him  he  did  not  have  to  worry  about  attending  any 

meetings  and  did  not  need  to  worry  about  academics;  he  only  needed  to  focus  on 

controlling  behaviors.  Respondent  was  very  surprised  at  this. 

Respondent  wanted  to  have  the  freedom  to  send  the  students  to  an  English  or 

math  teacher,  and  then  bring  the  students  back  to  his  classroom  rather  than  teach  the 

core  subjects.  Respondent  wanted  to  run  the  Bridges  Program  like  he  ran  his  resource 

specialist  program  years  prior.  Respondent  alleged  that  nobody  gave  him  lesson  plans 

or  a  sample  curriculum.  Respondent  admitted  that  he  never  spoke  with  the  math  or 

English  teachers  regarding  pointers  or  lesson  plans  regarding  how  to  teach  those 

subjects. 

When  respondent  saw  the  classroom  where  he  would  be  teaching,  he  felt  it  was 

not  aesthetically  pleasing.  It  did  have  tables  and  whiteboards  but  he  wanted  more 

supplies  so  he  made a  list.  Respondent  also  wanted  a  mini  fridge  because  he  wanted 

to  have  drinks  and  food  available  for  students.  Respondent  said  that  it  was  made  clear 

  

’  An  Education  Specialist  Credential,  however,  is  sufficient  to  teach  core  subjects 

to  special  education  students. 

26

to  him  that  he  was  not  to  have  the  special  education  students  near  the  “regular  kids” 

and  that  “way  back  when”  he  taught  as  a  resource  specialist,  he  would  put  out  snacks 

and  drinks  to  calm  students  down. 

Respondent  asked  how  he  could  be  trained  in  SEIS  and  he  was  told  to  contact 

Mrs.  Gonzalez.  He  got  together  with  her  "once  or  twice.”  Respondent  felt  it  was 

“overwhelming”  but  that  Mrs.  Gonzalez  was  a  “good  trainer.”  Nonetheless,  he  felt  he 

needed  more  training.  Respondent  did  not  follow  up  with  Mrs.  Gonzales  for  additional 

training  and  did  not  state  what  steps  he  took  to  obtain  additional  training  he  felt  he 

needed. 

Respondent  observed  Mrs.  Carpenter  conduct  an  IEP  meeting  for  one  of  the 

students  on  his  caseload.  Respondent  admitted  he  knew  how  to  schedule  IEPs,  but  he 

didn’t  like  the  scheduling  and  the  way  it  was  done  at  Appleby.  He  did  not  like  having 

to  run  the  schedule  by  the  principal  and  have  to  get  times  to  schedule  IEPs  and  then 

call  the  parents  afterwards.  He  explained,  “that  is  not  how  I  did  business  15  years  ago.” 

Respondent  admitted  that  he  “played  basketball  most  of  the  day  to  contra! 

behavior”  because  he  was  told  not  to  worry  about  academics.  Respondent  felt  he  “had 

been  done  dirty”  but  was  going  to  do  the  “best  job"  he  could. 

Respondent  said  that  when  Principal  De  La  Pena  told  him  not  to  worry  about 

rneetings,  ne  felt  it  meant  all  meetings  —  PLC  and  staff  meetings.  Respondent  also 

claimed  that  his  paraeducator,  who  did  not  testify,  also  told  him  he  did  not  have  to 

worry  about  meetings. 

Respondent  recalled  discussing  the  CPI  training  that  was  offered  in  2018  or 

2079,  but  said  he  didn’t  “want  some  rinky  dink  CPI  training.”  Respondent  said  he 

looked  into  doing  training  on  his  own  because  “they  kept  putting  it  off.” 

at

Regarding  his  conduct  concerning  the  September  18,  2078,  IEP  meeting  that 

resulted  in  a  verbal  warning  (that  was  memorialized  in  writing),  respondent  said  that 

ne  did  try  to  contact  Principal  De  La  Pena  prior  to  the  meeting  to  discuss  what  he 

planned  on  proposing,  but  he  did  not  produce  evidence  of  this.  Respondent  also  said 

that  his  understanding  was  that  he  did  not  need  to  put  notes  in  SEIS  regarding  IEPs  or 

take  notes. 

Regarding  the  September  21,  2018,  IEP  meeting  that  respondent  did  not  appear 

for,  which  resulted  in  the  October  15,  2018,  written  reprimand,  respondent  said  he 

“actually  made  a  mistake  and  thought  the  IEP  was  at  9:00  a.m.  instead  of  8:00  a.m. 

Respondent  did  not  explain  why,  if  that  was  the  case,  he  told  Principal  De  La  Pefia  that 

the  IEP  had  been  cancelled. 

Regarding  the  September  24,  2018,  letter  Principal  De  La  Pena  gave  him 

referencing  a  number  of  issues,  respondent  admitted  he  did  teil  Principal  De  La  Pefa 

that  it  was  impossible  to  have  a  set  schedule.  Respondent  said  when  dealing  with 

behaviors  it  just  won't  work,  or  they  might  want  to  something  like  math  at  another 

time  than  what  is  on  the  schedule.  In  other  words,  they  might  need  a  break  —  “just  like 

with  coaching.” 

Regarding  respondent  disobeying  Principal  De  La  Pefa’s  direct  order  on 

November  16,  2018,  to  return  to  Room  22  at  12:50  p.m.  to  relieve  another  teacher, 

respondent  described  it  as  an  “honest  mistake.”  Respondent  said  he  thought  he  had 

only  been  gone  40  minutes  and  that  he  and  his  paraeducator  had  eaten  on  the  other 

side  of  town.  Respondent  said  it  took  therm  longer  too  because  the  power  was  out.  As 

he  provided  different  reasons  why  he  did  not  follow  the  directive,  respondent 

continuously  said  “rt  was  a  blur.”  Respondent  said  he  e-mailed  Principal  De  La  Pefa  an 

apology,  but  did  not  produce  evidence  of  that  apology. 

28

Regarding  the  January  16,  2019,  incident  wherein  he  was  not  at  the  scheduled 

IEP  meeting  necessitating  him  having  to  be  called  on  the  PA  system,  respondent 

admitted  only  raising  his  voice  “a  little  bit.”  He  felt  that  calling  him  over  the  PA  several 

times  was  excessive,  and  he  was  only  late  because  the  van  with  his  students  was  late. 

Respondent  denied  clenching  his  fists  or  sticking  his  chest  out,  as  Ms.  Roberson 

witnessed.  Respondent  said  he  probably  should  have  just  “ignored  it,” 

Wa 

“made  a 

complaint,”  or  walked  into  the  IEP  and  not  said  anything. 

Regarding  the  February  7,  2019,  incident,  respondent  denied  knowing  any  of 

the  female  students  who  wrote  statements  concerning  his  conduct  and  denied  telling 

anyone  to  hide  1 

E.'s  jacket.  Respondent  said  he  did  not  recall  talking  to  any  of 

the  students  and  did  not  recall  “all  that  jazz”  they  brought  up  concerning  the 

altercation.  Respondent  said  after  the  students  were  all  inside,  Ms.  Roberson  told  him 

his  students  could  not  go  outside  because  of  the  “incident  with  the  basketball.” 

Respondent  said  that  he  told  his  students  “see  there  we  go  again  now  we  can't  go  to 

PE.”  Respondent  said  he  “might”  have  seen  1 

E.  and  om  N.  playing,  but  it  was 

just  horseplay  to  him.  On  cross-examination,  respondent  said  that  mz  E.  has  a 

tendency  to  hide  basketballs.  So,  he  was  “kind  of  coaching  and  correcting”  and  said  to 

ma  E.,  “what  if  we  hide  your  jacket?”  Respondent  said  it  might  have  been  better  in 

retrospect  “coaching”  ma  E.  in  the  classroom  instead.  When  pressed  about  the 

incident  further,  respondent  said  “it  was  a  blur.” 

Respondent  concluded  by  saying  he  feels  it  is  a  “problem”  that  he  Is  being 

blamed  for  all  the  things  he  was  alleged  to  have  done  and  he  was  being  set  up  to  fail. 

Nonetheless,  he  likes  his  job;  he  could  have  done  things  better;  and  if  returned  to  his 

position,  he  will  perform  as  required. 

29

RESPONDENT'S  PRIOR  EVALUATIONS 

21. 

Respondent  submitted  several  prior  employment  evaluations  for  the 

2015-2016,  2016-2017,  and  2017-2018,  school  years.  These  evaluations  were  all  while 

respondent  worked  in  the  capacity  of  a  physical  education  teacher  and  athletic 

director,  and  not  in  the  context  of  a  special  education  teacher.  The  evaluations  all 

showed  that  respondent  met  standards. 

CHARACTER  AND  OTHER  WITNESSES 

22. 

The  testimony  of  Oa  E.,  the  father  of  ma  E., 

is  summarized  as 

follows:  ma  has  “always  had  a  lot  of  problems  and  suffers  from  an  emotional 

disorder.  L  |  E.  likes  to  test  new  teachers,  but  respondent  worked  well  with  him.  As 

a  father  he  was  “really  blown  away”  by  how  well  respondent  worked  with  his  son. 

Oa  E.  participated  in  IEP  meetings  and  always  felt  that  there  was  tension  in  the 

room  during  the  meetings.  He  felt  that,  other  than  respondent,  nobody  wanted  to 

listen  to  what  was  best  for  his  son.  Following  respondent's  removal  from  Appleby, 

ma  E.  was  expelled. 

23. 

The  testimony  of 

S.,  the  mother  of 

S.,  Is  summarized  as 

follows.  Her  son  was  In  respondent's  classroom  during  the  2018-2019  school  year. 

S.  had  problems  with  other  teachers  in  the  past  but  with  respondent  he  did 

fine.  Her  son’s  academics  and  behaviors  improved  in  respondent's  class.  Respondent 

really  seemed  to  care  about  her  son.  After  respondent's  removal  from  Appleby,  she 

put  her  son  on  independent  study.  XK 

S.  accused  Ms.  De  La  Pena  of  being 

dishonest. 

S.  presented  as  a  very  angry  and  hostile  woman  who  did  not  like 

the  district  or  district  officials. 

30

24.  —  Edward  Singh  is  the  Director  of  Special  Services  at  the  PVUSD.  He  has 

worked  for  the  PVUSD  for  23  years.  Mr.  Singh's  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows: 

Mr.  Singh  recalled  respondent  complaining  about  what  he  felt  were  restrictions  in  the 

special  education  program  (i.e.  not  having  as  much  playground  access,  drinking 

fountain  rules,  and  other  miscellaneous  items  not  relevant  to  these  proceedings). 

Respondent  also  complained  about  wanting  to  be  at  the  high  school  rather  than  an 

elementary/middle  school.  However,  the  special  education  students  that  respondent 

taught  were  elementary  and/or  middle  school  students  in  a  special  program  for  severe 

behavioral  problems.  Respondent  alluded  to  the  fact  that  he  did  not  feel  he  was 

trained  for  the  position,  but  he  held  a  special  education  credential  and  had  some 

experience  in  special  education.  Many  training  opportunities  were  made  available  to 

respondent,  but  he  either  failed  to  attend  or  came  in  late  (i.e.  Crisis  Prevention 

Intervention  (CPI)  training  which  covers  how  to  deal  with  problem  behaviors  and  the 

special  education  boot  camp'?  at  the  beginning  of  the  2018-2019  school  year  which 

covered  SEIS,  behavior  control  strategies,  IEP  writing,  and  compliance  monitoring). 

There  was  also  a  paraprofessional  in  respondent's  classroom  that  he  could  learn  from. 

At  some  point,  despite  not  attending  the  numerous  trainings,  respondent  told 

Mr.  Singh  he  felt  he  was  being  set  up  to  fail.  Mr.  Singh  believed  it  was  around  January 

2019.  Mr.  Singh  discussed  a  “laundry  list”  of  professional  development  opportunities 

with  respondent,  but  respondent  kept  saying  he  wanted  to  go  back  to  the  high  school. 

  

'0  A  flyer  presented  as  an  exhibit  showed  the  special  education  boot  camp  was 

offered  August  1  and  2,  2018,  before  the  beginning  of  the  school  year.  It  covered 

every  aspect  of  special  education. 

31

Every  time  Mr.  Singh  tried  to  discuss  training  opportunities  with  respondent, 

respondent  would  just  “circle  back”  to  wanting  to  go  to  the  high  school. 

Regarding  the  history  of  interactions  between  Principal  De  La  Pena  and 

respondent,  Mr.  Singh  did  not  feel  Principal  De  La  Pea  was  the  problem.  She  gave 

respondent  clear  directives  and  communicated  with  him  by  presenting  specific 

guidelines.  Respondent  would  not  follow  them.  In  Mr.  Singh's  opinion,  respondent’s 

communication  failures  were  one-sided. 

Regarding  the  January  16,  2019,  incident,  ne  just  recalled  respondent  coming  by 

the  location  where  the  IEP  meeting  was  to  be  held  and  yelling  at  them  that  he  was 

busy.  The  parent  who  was  in  the  IEP  meeting  became  concerned  that  the  “teacher  who 

was  yelling”  was  going  to  be  the  teacher.  After  that,  respondent  left.  Mr.  Singh  said  he 

never  told  respondent  to  leave;  respondent  was  supposed  to  be  at  the  meeting.  Once 

respondent  returned  and  the  IEP  meeting  was  held,  Principal  De  La  Pena  was 

“trembling.”  After  the  IEP  meeting,  Mr.  Singh  was  concerned  about  Principal  De  La 

Pefia  so  be  checked  on  her.  He  thought  he  might  need  to  send  her  home  for  the  day. 

However,  she  assured  him  she  was  all  right. 

25. 

Wendy  Lockhart  is  employed  by  the  California  Teacher's  Association.  Ms. 

Lockheart's  testimony  is  summarized  as  follows:  respondent  had  talked  to  the  union 

about  filing  a  grievance  regarding  his  transfer  to  special  education  after  his  old 

position  at  the  high  school  was  re-posted.  However,  she  looked  at  respondent's 

credentials  and  the  credentials  of  other  employees,  and  because  respondent  was  the 

only  employee  who  had  a  special  education  credential  that  was  not  being  utilized,  the 

grievance  likely  would  not  have  been  resolved  in  his  favor.  Ms.  Lockheart  said  she  was 

concerned  about  respondent's  transfer  to  special  education  because  he  had  not 

taught  special  education  in  10  years  and  “it  did  not  sound  like”  he  was  getting 

32

“appropriate  training  before  getting  the  assignment.”  After  respondent  began 

amassing  verbal  and  written  reprimands  for  his  conduct,  he  received  a  plan  of 

assistance.  Ms.  Lockheart  said  she  did  not  feel  the  plan  of  assistance  was  adequate, 

but  acknowledged  the  directives  regarding  his  conduct  were  proper.  On  cross- 

examination,  Ms.  Lockheart  acknowledged  that  the  plan  of  correction  did  provide  a 

proper  explanation  of  the  PVUSD's  expectations. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Standard  and  Burden  of  Proof 

1. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher  disciplinary  proceeding  Is 

a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Comnussion  on  Professional  Competence 

(1985)  164  Cal App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.)  The  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  district.  (Evid. 

Code  §§  115,  500) 

2. 

“Praeponderance  of  the  evidence  means  evidence  that  has  more 

convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  [Citations.]”  (Glage  v.  Hawes  Firearms 

Company  (1990)  226  Cal App.3d  314,  324-325.)  "The  sole  focus  of  the  legal  definition 

of  ‘preponderance’  in  the  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  the  evidence’  is  on  the  guafity  of 

the  evidence.  The  quantity of  the  evidence  presented  by  each  sice  is  irrelevant.”  Uva’, 

italics  emphasis  in  original.) 

Applicable  Law 

3, 

A  permanent  empioyee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a  disrnissal 

hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944 } 

33

4. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  a  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  may  only  vote  for  or  against  the  dismissal;  the  Commission 

ray  not  dispose  of  a  charge  seeking  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative 

sanction.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44944,  subds.  (c}(1}-(3}} 

DISHONESTY 

Code,  §  44932,  subd.  ({a}{4.} 

UNPROFESSIONAL  CONDUCT 

5. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  dishonesty.  (Ed. 

6, 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  unprofessional 

conduct.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  fay(2)  &  44933) 

7. 

“Unprofessional  conduct"  has  been  defined  as  “that  conduct  which 

breaches  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession,  or  conduct  which  is  unbecoming  a 

member  in  good  standing  of  a  profession.”  (Shea  v.  8a)  of  Medical  Examiners  (1978)  81 

Cal.  App.3d  564,  at  575;  Bal  of Education  v.  Swan  (1953)  47  Cal.2d  546,  553) 

Unprofessional  conduct  must  also  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  unique 

position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed  responsibilities  and 

limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.  (San 

Diege  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011)  194 

Cal  App.4th  1454,  1466.)  The  determinative  test  of  a  charge  of  immoral  or 

unprofessional  conduct  ts  fitness  to  teach,  which  is 

a  question  of  ultimate  fact.  (8d  of 

Education  v.  Jack  Mi.  (1977)  19  Cal.3d  691) 

34

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

8. 

A  permanent  certificated  teacher  may  be  dismissed  for  evident  unfitness 

for  service,  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a}{6.) 

9, 

Unfitness  for  service  means  “not  fit;  not  adapted  to  a  purpose, 

unsuitable;  incapable;  incompetent;  and  physically  or  mentally  unsound.”  (fa/o  Verde 

etc.  School  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal App.3d  967,  972.)  “Unprofessional  conduct”  and 

“evident  unfitness  for  service”  do  not  mean  precisely  the  same  thing.  Although 

conduct  constituting  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  will  often  constitute 

“unprofessional  conduct,”  the  converse  is  not  always  true.  Evident  unfitness  for  service 

requires  that  unfitness  for  service  be  attributable  to  defect  in  temperament,  which  is 

not  necessary  for  a  finding  of  unprofessional  conduct.  Nevertheless,  lower  courts  may 

not  disregard  the  criteria  for  unfitness  set  out  in  a  California  Supreme  Court  opinion,  in 

which  the  court  concluded  “unprofessional  conduct”  meant  conduct  showing  a  teacher 

was  unfit  to  teach.  These  criteria  must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a  threshold  matter, 

whether  the  cited  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  If  the  criteria  are  satisfied, 

the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident”;  1e.,  whether  the 

offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified 

School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal  App. 4th  1429, 

The  District  Established  the  Factual  Allegations  by  a  Preponderance  of 

1444-1445} 

the  Evidence 

10. 

The  district  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent  initiated  an  angry  outburst  against  Principal  De  La  Pehla  on  January  16, 

2019,  as  alleged  in  paragraph  one  of  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Respondent's  hostile 

35

expression  of  anger  towards  Principal  De  La  Pefa  was  witnessed  by  other  school 

officials  and  occurred  in  the  presence  of  elementary  school  children.  Respondent's 

conduct  on  this  occasion  was  extremely  unprofessional. 

11. 

The  district  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that,  on 

February  7,  2019,  respondent  told  a  group  of  girls,  > 

J., 

|  S.,  Am  G., Om 

N.,  and  >  F.,  to  hide 

im 

E.'s  jacket.  Respondent  knew  ma  S.,  who  was  in 

his  special  education  class,  received  special  education  services  for  emotional 

disturbance.  When  ma  E.  saw Omi  N.  running  with his  jacket,  he  became  angry 

and  started  chasing  her.  1 

E.  threw  a  basketball  at Om  N.  Ultimately, Omi  N. 

threw  the  ball  back  at  ma  E.  It  is  noted  that,  even  if 

im 

E.  had  not  been  a 

special  education  student,  there  is  absolutely  no  excuse  or  any  condition  under  which 

a  teacher  pitting  a  group  of  students  against  one  student  would  be  acceptable.  Several 

of  the  girls  testified,  and  all  of  the  girls  involved  wrote  statements  concerning  the 

incident.  The  testimony  and  written  statements  were  consistent  that  respondent 

instigated  the  incident;  thus,  the  testimony  of  the  girls  is  deemed  credible  over 

respondent's  claim  that  he  did  not  act  as  alleged. 

12. 

The  district  also  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent,  when  asked  about  the  February  7,  2019,  incident,  was  dishonest.  When 

asked  to  write  a  statement  regarding  what  occurred,  respondent's  first  written 

statement  was  one  sentence  and  merely  stated  that  “students  were  horseplaying  ...  .” 

When  told  that  was  not  adequate,  the  second  written  statement  he  was  asked  to 

provide  elaborated  somewhat.  However,  respondent  wrote  that  he  “joked”  with 

ma  E.  regarding  the  possibility  of  someone  taking his  jacket  —  which  makes  no 

sense  —  and  saw  nothing.  Later,  after  recess  was  over,  he  learned  from  another  teacher 

that  there  was  a  “basketball”  incident  and  asked  what  happened.  At  hearing, 

36

respondent  denied  telling  anyone  to  hide  L  |  E.'s  jacket.  Respondent's  version  of 

events  Is  simply  not  credible. 

A  district,  or  any  employer  for  that  matter,  relies  on  is  employees  to  be  honest 

and  truthful  regarding  any  and  all  incidents  that  occur  during  the  course  of  their 

employment.  Being  dishonest,  whether  by  intentional  lying  or  intentional  omission,  is 

unprofessional  under  any  circumstances  and  contrary  to  the  standards  expected  of  a 

teacher. 

Evaluation 

214. 

13.  |  When  factual  allegations  have  been  established,  a  teacher  may 

nonetheless  only  be  removed  from  employment  if  the  facts  established  show  that  he 

or  she  is  unfit  to  teach.  In  order  to  make  that  determination,  a  Commission  must 

consider  the  factors  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d 

14. 

In  Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  214  at  p.  235,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that 

“an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the  teaching  profession  only  upon  a  showing  that 

his  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant  danger  of  harm  to  either  students, 

school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by  his  actions  as  a  teacher.”  The 

court  delineated  the  following  criteria  to  determine  whether  a  teacher's  conduct 

indicates  that  he  or  she  is  not  fit  to  teach:  (1)  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have 

adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity 

anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  In  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of 

teaching  certificate  held  by  the  teacher;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 

circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct  in  question;  (6)  the  praiseworthiness  or 

blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct;  (7)  the  likelihood  of  the 

37

recurrence  of  the  conduct  in  question;  and  (8)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action 

may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  have  a  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of 

the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.  Ud,  at  pp.  229-230) 

15. 

In  Board  of  Education  v.  Jack  M.,,  supra,  the  Supreme  Court  detailed  the 

process  to  be  considered  in  determining  fitness  to  teach.  In  addition  to  the  Morrison 

factors,  the  court  provided  additional  factors  that  may  be  considered  to  determine  if 

there  is  a  nexus  between  the  conduct  and  a  teacher's  fitness  to  teach:  (1)  likelihood  of 

recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct;  (2)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 

circurnstances,  if  any;  (3}  the  effect  of  notoriety  and  publicity;  (4)  impairment  of 

teachers’  and  students’  relationships;  (5)  disruption  of  educational  process:  (6}  motive: 

(7)  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  conduct.  Ud,  at  fn.  5) 

16. 

In  reaching  a  conclusion  that  grounds  exist  to  dismiss  a  certificated 

employee  on  the  basis  of  evident  unfitness  for  service,  only  the  pertinent  Morrison 

factors  need  be  examined.  (Governing  Board  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal App.4th  369,  384} 

In  this  sense,  the  purpose  of  examining  the  Movrison  criteria  is  to  establish  a  nexus 

between  the  proven  conduct  and  fitness  to  teach.  However,  even  if  the  Morrison 

analysis  shows  a  nexus  between  the  conduct  and  fitness  to  teach,  it  must  also  be 

determined  that  the  alleged  conduct  shows  evident  unfitness  for  service.  (Morrison, 

supra,  at  p.  1445  [emphasis  added].)  “Evident  unfitness  for  service”  means  clearly  not 

fit  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies;  it 

connotes  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediabie  merely  on  receipt  of  notice 

that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  expectations  of  the  school  district.  (Woodland  Joint 

Unitied  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence,  supra,  2  Cal.  App  Ath 

at  p.  1444  [emphasis  added].) 

38

17. 

In  considering  the  relevant  Morrison  factors  in  conjunction  with  the 

sustained  allegations,  the  following  conclusions  are  reached. 

Adverse  effect.  There  was  ample  evidence  that  respondent's  conduct 

concerning  the  angry  outburst  and  incident  involving  instigating  students  to  hide 

1 

E.'s  jacket  had  an  adverse  effect  on  other  individuals.  There  were  elementary 

school  student's  present  during  respondent's  angry  outburst,  and  even  other 

instructors  were  upset.  Principal  De  La  Pefa  was  definitely  affected;  she  became 

emotional  at  hearing  when  recounting  what  occurred.  At  least  one  parent  did  not  want 

respondent  to  be  his  or  her  child's  teacher.  Ms.  Roberson  felt  the  hallway  where 

respondent  confronted  Principal  De  La  Pefa  was  not  a  safe  place  at  that  time. 

Regarding  the  Jacket  incident, fe  |  N.  was  very  upset  being  chased  by  ma  E.  and 

having  a  basketball  thrown  at  her,  and  certainly,  ma  E.  was  upset  by  having  his 

property  taken  by  another  student.  Respondent's  dishonesty  about  the  jacket  incident 

also  had  an  adverse  effect  on  this  district  by  not  properly  transmitting  facts  regarding 

what  occurred  so  the  district  could  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  incident. 

Type  of  behavior.  Respondent's  conduct,  as  alleged  in  the  two  incidents  and  in 

being  dishonest,  are  not  only  incompatible  with  duties  of  a  teacher,  but  are  also 

incompatible  with  what  would  be  expected  of  a  responsible  adult. 

Degree  of  adversity.  Respondent  consistently  showed  disrespect  and  disregard 

for  Principal  De  La  Pefia’s  authority,  culminating  in  the  angry  outburst  against  her  in 

front  of  elementary  school  students  and  school  employees.  Respondent  also 

intentionally  instigated  what  ended  up  being  a  physical  altercation  between  students. 

Proximity  or  remoteness  in  time.  All  of  respondent's  misconduct  occurred  in  the 

past  year  and  the  charges  were  brought  in  a  timely  manner. 

39

Extenuating  and  aggravating  circurnstances.  Respondent's  testimony  centered 

around  everyone  but  himself.  Oftentimes,  on  material  issues,  his  answers  were  “I  didn't 

do  that"  or  “it  was  all  a  blur"  or  he  did  not  get  proper  training.  Respondent 

complained  about  the  condition  of  the  classroom.  He  complained  about  not  being 

able  to  be  at  the  high  school.  He  complained  about  not  being  able  to  have  other 

teachers  teach  cores  subjects  to  his  students  when,  as  a  special  education  teacher,  that 

was  his  job.  Respondent  was  provided  a  multitude  of  training  opportunities  and  had 

resources  made  available  to  him  if  he  did  not  feel  comfortable  with  SEIS  or  any  other 

aspect  of  teaching  special  education.  He  failed,  however,  to  avail  himself  of  those 

opportunities  and  then  used  his  own  failure  as  an  excuse  to  justify  not  doing his  job 

properly.  Finally,  as  stated  previously,  there  is  never  an  excuse  to  verbally  accost 

anyone  in  the  workplace,  let  alone  your  supervisor.  Respondent’s  excuses  all  serve  as 

factors  in  aggravation;  there  were  no  mitigating  circumstances  noted. 

Likelihood  of  recurrence.  Respondent's  misconduct  escalated  throughout  the 

entire  school  year.  Beginning  almost  immediately  when  he  came  to  the  Appieby,  there 

were  problems.  Respondent  was  verbally  warned,  written  up,  counseled,  and 

eventually  provided  a  plan  for  improvement.  Yet,  he  continued  to  engage  in 

unprofessional  conduct.  How  or  why  his  misconduct  escalated  is  irrelevant;  respondent 

never  availed  himself  of  any  opportunity  to  improve  his  behavior  and,  as  of  the  date  of 

the  hearing,  fails  to  admit  any  wrongdoing.  Consequently,  the  likelinood  of  recurrence 

is  very  high. 

Conclusion 

18. 

Respondent,  no  doubt,  was  less  than  thrilled  when  he  was  transferred  to 

Appleby  to  teach  special  education,  and  removed  from  his  position  at  the  high  schoal 

as  physical  education  teacher  and  athletic  director.  That  is  not  an  excuse,  however,  for 

AQ

the  two  incidents  that  formed  the  basis  for  the  Statement  of  Charges.  The  district's 

transfer  of  respondent  to  Appleby  was  proper  and  consistent  with  the  credential  he 

held,  and  even  if  it  were  not,  there  are  proper  methods  by  which  one  may  challenge 

those  decisions.  Continually  engaging  in  unprofessional  conduct,  disregarding  verbal 

and  written  reprimands,  verbally  accosting  one’s  supervisor,  and  instigating  what 

ended  up  becoming  a  physical  confrontation  between  students  are  actions  wholly 

inconsistent  with  the  concept  of  fitness  to  teach.  The  continued  pattern  of  misconduct 

also  showed  that  respondent's  actions  were  not  isolated  or  out  of  character;  rather, 

they  constituted  the  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies  contemplated  in 

Woodland,  supra,  that  were  clearly  not  remediable  upon  receipt  of  notice  that 

respondent's  conduct  failed  to  meet  expectations  of  the  PVUSD. 

19. 

A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  respondent  violated 

Education  Code  sections  44932,  subdivisions  (a)(2),  (a)(4),  and  (a)(6);  and  44933. 

20. 

Based  on  the  analysis  of  the  Morrison  factors,  as  noted  above, 

respondent  is  evidently  unfit  for  service  and  his  appeal  is  denied." 

// 

// 

// 

  

'T 

It  is  noted  that,  even  if  unprofessional  conduct  had  not  been  alleged  and 

instead,  the  only  charges  had  been  dishonesty  and  evident  unfitness  for  service,  the 

Commission  would  have  reached  the  same  result. 

41

ORDER 

Respondent  George  Dagnino’s  appeal  from  his  dismissal  of  employment  by  the 

Palo  Verde  Unified  School  District  is  denied.  The  district's  request  to  dismiss 

respondent  is  upheict. 

.  January 

8,  2020 

DATE:  January  8,  2020 

OATE:  January  8,  2020 

not  DocuSigned  by: 

; 

“naan FENNIFER MUNOZ 

Coordinator  Special  Services 

Rediands  Unitied  School  District 

f sates  DocuSigned  by: 

-  William  Prscov 

~679598544DBD4FE. 

WIETEAM  BRISCOE 

Special  Education  Teacher 

{Moderate/Severe,  Retired} 

Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District 

~DocuSigned  by: 

* binky  Buuedere 

NL 

DS566BE/70E0E24D3 

KIMBERLY J.  BELVEDERE 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

4?

