BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

LOURDES  PRIETO  (EN  668202),  Respondent 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee 

OAH  No.  2019020481 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  the  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(Commission)  in  Los  Angeles  on  September  3, 

5,  6,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  and  17,  2019.  The 

Commission  consisted  of  Peter  Somberg,  Anne  Gordon,  and  Carmen  D.  Snuggs, 

Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of 

California,  who  presided. 

Michael  Voigt  and  Lee  T.  Patajo,  Assistant  General  Counsels,  Los  Angeles 

Unified  School  District,  Office  of  the  General  Counsel,  represented  complainant  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Ilissa  B.  Gold,  Attorney  at  Law,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  Respondent 

Lourdes  Prieto  (Respondent),  who  was  present  each  day  of  the  hearing.

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  As  stated  on  the  record,  the  ALJ 

ordered  that  student  names  would  not  appear  in  the  hearing  transcript  in  order  to 

protect  their  privacy.  Rather,  the  transcript  would  reference  each  student's  first  initial 

only. 

The  case  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing 

on  September  17,  2019.  The  Commission  thereafter  deliberated  in  executive  session. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

1, 

Respondent  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

2. 

On  August  23,  2017,  Respondent  was  issued  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Service  and  Notice  of  Suspension  related  to  her  performance  on  December  7,  2016, 

January  12,  2017,  March  2,  2017,  and  April  27,  2017,  discussed  in  Factual  Findings  38 

through  83,  and  90  through  93,  below.  On  May  24,  2018,  Respondent  was  issued  a 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  and  Notice  of  Suspension  related  to  her  performance 

on  May  18,  2017,  September  22,  2017,  October  26,  2017,  November  7,  2017,  January 

28,  2018,  and  February  22,  2018,  discussed  in  Factual  Findings  84  through  89,  and  94 

through  138,  below.

3. 

By  letter  dated  August  22,  2018,'  Respondent  was  notified  that  a  meeting 

was  scheduled  for  September  4,  2018,  before  the  District's  governing  board  to  discuss 

her  possible  dismissal  and  immediate  suspension  from  her  employment  with  the 

District.  The  letter  stated  that  Respondent  could  present  statements  and  documents  at 

the  meeting  in  response  to  the  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  and  Suspension 

issued  to  her  on  August  23,  2017,  and  May  24,  2018.  The  letter  stated  that,  at  the 

conclusion  of  the  August  22,  2018  meeting,  the  District's  governing  board  would 

decide  whether  or  not  to  move  forward  with  her  possible  dismissal  and  immediate 

suspension. 

4. 

Pursuant  to  Respondent's  request,  the  meeting  was  rescheduled  to 

September  4,  2018.  By  letter  dated  September  6,  2018,  Respondent  was  notified  that 

Frances  Baez,  the  Administrator  of  Instruction  for  Local  District  East,  recommended 

sustaining  the  discipline  of  dismissal  and  immediate  suspension.  Respondent  was 

further  notified  that  the  recommendation  of  dismissal  was  forwarded  to  the  Board  of 

Education  for  adoption. 

5. 

On  February  6,  2019,  the  District  served  Respondent  with  a  Notice  of 

Intention  to  Dismiss  and  Placement  on  Immediate  Suspension  (Notice  of  Intent),  which 

notified  Respondent  of  the  District's  intent  to  dismiss  her  within  30  days  unless  she 

made  a  written  request  for  a  hearing.  The  Notice  of  Intent  also  informed  Respondent 

  

"The  meeting  was  originally  scheduled  for  August  22,  2018,  but  was 

rescheduled  pursuant  to  Respondent's  request.

of  her  immediate  suspension  without  pay.*  Additionally,  the  Notice  of  Intent  included 

a  Statement  of  Charges  with  exhibits,  a  Request  for  Hearing  form,  and  copies  of 

relevant  Education  Code  sections. 

6. 

On  February  11,  2019,  Respondent  requested  a  hearing  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44941,  in  response  to  the  February  6,  2019  Notice  of  Intent. 

7. 

On  March  18,  2019,  the  District  filed  and  served  the  Accusation?  dated 

March  15,  2019,  which  is  the  operative  pleading  in  this  case. 

8. 

The  Accusation  recommended  Respondent's  dismissal  from  the  District 

for  the  following  legal  causes  under  Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44939:  (1) 

unprofessional  conduct;  (2)  unsatisfactory  performance;  (3)  persistent  violation  of  or 

refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for 

the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the 

governing  board  of  the  school  employing  Respondent;  and  (4)  willful  refusal  to 

perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  as  described  by  reasonable 

rules  and  regulations  of  the  employing  district. 

  

*  Respondent  filed  a  motion  for  immediate  reversal  of  suspension  which  was 

granted.  On  April  19,  2019,  in  the  matter  entitled  Jn  the  Matter  of  the  Motion  for 

Immediate  Reversal  of Suspension  Filed  by  Lourdes  Prieto,  a  Certificated  Employee, 

OAH  No.  2019030319,  the  District  was  ordered  to  pay  all  of  Respondent's  wages, 

benefits,  and  compensation  since  the  execution  of  her  suspension. 

>  The  charges  contained  in  the  Accusation  are  identical  to  the  written  charges 

contained  in  the  Statement  of  Charges.

9. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

Respondent's  Background 

10. 

Respondent  earned  her  bachelor’s  degrees  in  sociology,  liberal  arts,  and 

early  childhood  education  from  an  institution  not  established  by  the  record.  She  holds 

multi-subject  and  cross-cultural  language  and  academic  development  (CLAD) 

11. 

|  Respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  23  years,  and  has 

taught  adult  school,  first  and  second  grades,  and  kindergarten.  More  recently, 

Respondent  worked  at  Middleton  Primary  Center  (MPC)  and  Middleton  Elementary 

12.  |  The  charges  in  this  matter  relate  to  Respondent's  assignment  at  MPC 

during  the  2016-2017,  and  2017-2018  school  years,  where  she  taught  kindergarten. 

credentials. 

School  (MES). 

MPC 

13. 

|  MPC  is  an  elementary  school  located  in  Huntington  Park,  California.  Its 

300  students  are  aged  three  through  seven  years  old,  and  enrolled  in  preschool, 

extended  kindergarten,  transitional  kindergarten,  kindergarten,  and  first  grade  classes. 

District  Policies 

EVALUATION  REQUIREMENTS 

14. 

The  applicable  evaluation  requirements  for  District  certificated 

employees  are  contained  in  Article  X  of  the  2014-2017  Collective  Bargaining 

Agreement  (Agreement)  between  the  District  and  United  Teachers  Los  Angeles  (UTLA).

15. 

|  According  to  the  Agreement,  evaluations  shall  be  made  at  least  once 

every  other  year  for  permanent  employees,  and  the  employee  to  be  evaluated  during 

a  given  academic  year  must  be  given  notice  by  the  end  of  the  previous  academic  year, 

or  by  the  “Fall  norm  day  of  the  evaluation  year  or  the  last  work  day  of  the  5th  week  of 

school,  whichever  is  later.”  (Ex.  B,  p.  83.)  Pursuant  to  section  5.0,  paragraph  (a),  of  the 

Agreement,  employees  being  evaluated  shall  receive  one  formal  observation  during 

the  academic  year.  The  observation  must  be  followed  by  a  post-observation 

conference,  to  be  held  no  later  than  10  workdays  after  the  formal  evaluation,  between 

the  evaluator  and  the  employee,  to  discuss  the  employee's  performance  toward 

meeting  the  employee's  individual  objectives.*  The  ratings  for  the  formal  observation 

are  termed  “effective  practice,” 

Wo 

“developing  practice,”  and  “ineffective  practice.”  If 

problems  are  observed  during  a  formal  observation  or  any  other  type  of  observation, 

“the  evaluator  must  meet  with  the  employee,  make  specific  written  recommendations 

for  improvement,  and  offer  appropriate  counseling  and  guidance.”  (Ex.  B,  p.  85.)  In 

addition,  where  problems  are  identified  as  a  result  of  a  formal  observation  or  any 

other  observation,  within  four  work  days  “a  copy  of  the  records  relating  to 

observations,  conferences  and  assistance  offered  or  given,  shall  be  provided  to  the 

employee  for  the  employee's  information,  guidance,  and  as  a  warning  to  improve 

performance.”  (Jb/d/) 

  

“  Pursuant  to  Article  X,  section  4.0  of  the  Agreement,  the  employee  is  required 

to  establish  performance  objectives  and  performance  expectations  no  later  than  the 

last  workday  of  eighth  week  of  the  academic  year.  The  objectives  may  include 

instructional  objectives,  methods  of  assessing  student  progress  and  achievement,  use 

of  effective  teaching  techniques.

CALIFORNIA  STANDARDS  FOR  THE  TEACHING  PROFESSION 

16. 

The  District  has  adopted  the  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching 

Profession  (CSTP  or  Standards)  to  measure  teacher  performance.  The  CSTP  were 

developed  by  the  Department  of  Education,  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing, 

and  the  New  Teacher  Center,  and  are  composed  of  six  specific  standards:  Engaging 

and  Supporting  all  Students  in  Learning  (Standard  1),  Creating  and  Maintaining 

Effective  Environments  for  Student  Learning  (Standard  2),  Understanding  and 

Organizing  Subject  Matter  for  Student  Learning  (Standard  3),  Planning  Instruction  and 

Designing  Learning  Experiences  for  All  Students  (Standard  4),  Assessing  Students  for 

Learning  (Standard  5),  and  Developing  as  a  Professional  Educator  (Standard  6).  Each 

standard  includes  a  recitation  of  pertinent  factors  or  elements  unique  to  that  standard. 

THE  DISTRICT'S  CLASS  DESCRIPTION  —  ELEMENTARY  TEACHER 

17.  |  According  to  the District's  job  description  for  an  elementary  teacher, 

effective  December  2011,  an  elementary  teacher's  essential  functions  include:  1) 

teaching  self-contained  classes  in  kindergarten  through  grade  six  using  adopted 

textbooks  and  other  authorized  instructional  material;  2)  using  information  about 

individual  students’  academic  strengths,  needs,  and  progress  in  planning;  3)  designing 

activities  to  engage  students  in  cognitively  challenging  work  that  is  aligned  to 

standards;  4)  using  resources  that  promote  high  levels  of  learning  and  student 

engagement  in  the  classroom  environment;  5)  closely  monitoring  student  learning  in 

order  to  understand  how  students  are  progressing  toward  the  learning  objectives,  and 

timely  providing  students  with  instructive  and  timely  feedback  to  move  their  learning 

forward;  6)  establishing  a  classroom  environment  that  is  safe  and  supportive  where 

students  feel  free  to  contribute  their  ideas,  and  student  interactions  are  respectful  and 

polite  to  promote  a  positive  learning  environment  for  all  students;  7)  providing  clear 

7

behavior  expectations  for  students  and  monitoring  student  behavior  throughout  the 

class;  and  8)  reflecting  on  practice  and  student  work  to  determine  what  went  well  and 

what  changes  could  improve  instruction,  and  using  that  reflection  to  inform  future 

instruction. 

MPC’s  Policies 

18.  |  MPC’'s  policies  concerning  master  plan  curriculum  implementation 

require  MPC  teachers  to  teach  all  English  Language  Development  (ELD)°  lessons  daily 

in  alignment  with  master  ELD  and  ELA  standards  adopted  by  the  District.  With  respect 

to  discipline,  MPC  teachers  are  expected  to  post  classroom  standards,  rewards,  and 

consequences,  and  to  apply  the  discipline  consistently  and  fairly.  In  addition,  teachers 

should  use  Common  Core  State  Standards  (CCSS)  for  lesson  planning.  Lesson  plans 

should  be  left  on  a  teacher's  desk  or  teaching  station  for  review,  each  lesson  should 

have  an  objective,°  and  teachers  should  prepare  lesson  materials  beforehand  and  have 

their  supplies  readily  available  before  class.  MPC’s  policy  on  instructional  time  states 

that  teachers  should  maximize  instructional  time  by  keeping  classroom  interruptions 

to  a  minimum  in  order  to  improve  student  achievement.  (Ex.  28.) 

  

>  ELD  instruction  is 

a  specialized  one-hour  block  of  instruction  provided  to 

students  whose  first  language  Is  not  English,  to  improve  their  reading  and  writing 

skills. 

©  The  learning  objective  specifies  what  the  teacher  expects  the  students  to  learn 

by  the  end  of  the  lesson  and  is  used  to  focus  the  lesson.

Respondent's  Performance  History:  2014-2015  School  Year 

19. 

|  Diane  Sanchez  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  35  years  and  was 

the  principal  at  MPC  during  the  2014-2015  and  2015-2016  school  years.  She  earned  a 

Bachelor's  degree  and  Master  of  Science  in  teaching,  and  earned  reading  specialist 

and  administrative  credentials.  Ms.  Sanchez  has  been  employed  as  a  principal  for  nine 

years.  Before  becoming  a  principal,  she  was  an  assistant  principal,  and  she  has  taught 

kindergarten  and  first,  second,  and  third  grades. 

20. 

Ms.  Sanchez  explained  that  the  teaching  and  learning  framework  utilized 

by  the  District  while  she  was  a  principal  at  MPC  is  based  upon  the  CSTP.  She  provided 

training  on  both  the  CSTP  and  the  teaching  and  learning  framework  to  all  teachers  at 

MPC,  including  Respondent.  Ms.  Sanchez  further  explained  that  the District's  job 

description  sets  forth  the  functions  that  result  in  effective  teaching. 

21. 

During  the  2014-2015  and  2015-2016  school  years,  Ms.  Sanchez 

supervised  13  teachers,  including  Respondent.  As  a  part  of  her  duties  as  the  principal 

at  MPC,  Ms.  Sanchez  conducted  informal  observations  three  to  four  times  per  week  in 

order  to  ensure  student  safety  and  that  teachers  were  successfully  teaching  in 

alignment  with  the  CSTP.  She  explained  that  these  observations  were  not  disciplinary 

in  nature  and  were  conducted  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  teachers  continued  to  grow 

professionally.  Ms.  Sanchez  also  conducted  informal  observations  to  determine 

whether  teachers  were  implementing  previously  issued  suggestions  or  directives. 

Directives  were  to  be  implemented  immediately  after  they  are  issued. 

22. 

A. 

Ms.  Sanchez  conducted  formal  observations  of  Respondent's 

teaching  on  October  31,  2014,  and  April  22,  2015.  Ms.  Sanchez  explained  that  formal 

observations  were  pre-planned  with  teachers,  and  teachers  were  evaluated  according

to  initial  planning  sheets  submitted  by  teachers  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year. 

The  initial  planning  sheets  contained  data-based  objectives,  as  well  as  other  criteria. 

B. 

Following  the  first  formal  observation,  Respondent  was  rated  as 

developing  in  most  areas,  including  management  of  routines,  procedures,  and 

transitions,  communicating  the  purpose  of  lessons,  conducting  standards-based 

projects,  activities,  and  assignments,  and  providing  standards-based  learning  activities. 

During  the  second  observation,  Ms.  Sanchez  noted  that  Respondent  demonstrated 

growth  in  some  of  the  areas,  including  monitoring  student  performance  so  that  they 

could  reach  their  goals,  and  designing  lessons  that  provided  differentiated  instruction. 

However,  Ms.  Sanchez  found  that  Respondent  was  ineffective  in  providing  feedback  to 

students.  She  commented  that  Respondent  needed  to  develop  plans  on  how  to 

establish  classroom  routines  and  procedures,  and  monitor  and  respond  to  student 

behavior. 

C. 

Under  the  category  “Engages  In  ethical  conduct  and  complies  with 

school,  District  and  State  rules,  policies,  and  standards,”  Ms.  Sanchez  rated  Respondent 

as  “Developing.”  She  gave  Respondent  a  Final  Evaluation  Rating  of  “Meets  Standard 

Performance,”  and  testified  that  she  believed  Respondent  was  an  “ok”  teacher  but  she 

was  not  as  effective  as  she  could  have  been  if  she  employed  classroom  management 

techniques.  Ms.  Sanchez  asserted  that  it  was  her  goal  to  get  Respondent  to  focus  on 

classroom  management  and  that  she  expected  Respondent's  performance  to  improve, 

but  it  did  not. 

Respondent's  Performance  History:  2015-2016  School  Year 

23. 

Ms.  Sanchez  observed  Respondent's  teaching  on  October  13,  15,  and  28, 

2015,  December  16,  2015,  and  January  29,  2016.  On  March  14,  2016,  she  prepared  and 

10

mailed  to  Respondent  a  letter’  regarding  her  observations.  Ms.  Sanchez  testified  in 

accordance  with  her  March  14,  2016  letter,  which  noted  the  following  deficiencies: 

A. 

On  October  13,  2015,  Ms.  Sanchez  entered  Respondent's 

classroom  at  9:07  a.m.  and  observed  Respondent  for  approximately  20  minutes.  She 

noted  eight  classroom  management  Issues  including:  seven  separate  student 

interruptions  to  a  lesson;  when  Respondent  asked  the  students  to  clean  up,  a  student 

ran  around  the  room  and  Respondent  did  not  stop  the  student;  a  student  continued 

working  when  she  was  supposed  to  be  cleaning  up;  when  Respondent  asked  students 

to  go  to  their  tables  and  look  at  their  books,  five  students  continued  to  walk  or  run  in 

the  classroom;  when  Respondent  attempted  to  get  the  students  to  “freeze,”  the 

students  continued  walking  around  the  classroom;  and  one  student  played  with  items 

and  another  wrote  on  a  small  dry  erase  board  when  they  were  supposed  to  be  reciting 

a  poem  led  by  Respondent. 

B. 

On  October  15,  2015,  Ms.  Sanchez  entered  Respondent's 

classroom  at  11:47  a.m.  She  observed  one  student  spinning  around  on  his  knee  ina 

circle  and  not  listening  to  the  lesson,  and  two  other  students  sitting  under  a  table 

playing  with  blocks.  Respondent  did  not  say  or  do  anything  to  re-direct  these 

students.  Respondent  told  all  the  students  that  she  needed  them  to  be  in  their  seats 

by  the  time  she  counted  to  ten,  but  ten  students  continued  to  walk  around  the  room 

and  one  student  ran  with  a  pointer  in  her  hand.  Respondent  did  not  say  anything  to 

  

’  Ms.  Sanchez  attempted  to  meet  with  Respondent  on  March  9,  2016  and  again 

on  March  11,  2016,  but  Respondent  was  absent  from  school  on  those  dates. 

11

the  student  who  was  running  with  the  pointer.  Based  upon  her  observations,  Ms. 

Sanchez  determined  that  Respondent  did  not  effectively  manage  classroom  behavior. 

In  addition,  Ms.  Sanchez  found  that  Respondent  did  not  monitor  student 

learning  effectively.  Specifically,  when  Respondent  delivered  a  math  lesson,  she 

discussed  a  page  in  the  math  book  that  some  students  had  already  completed  and 

other  students  worked  on  a  different  page  altogether. 

C. 

On  October  28,  2015,  Ms.  Sanchez  entered  Respondent's 

classroom  at  9:05  a.m.  and  observed  Respondent  sitting  at  a  table  while  the  students 

were  sitting  at  their  desks.  After  one  student  finished  his  work,  he  sat  doing  nothing. 

Two  other  students  had  also  finished  their  work  but  did  not  know  what  to  do  next. 

Respondent  then  told  the  class  that  they  needed  to  raise  their  hands  if  they  were 

finished  with  their  work.  Respondent's  teacher's  assistant  then  gave  additional  work  to 

the  students  who  raised  their  hands.  Ms.  Sanchez  determined  that  Respondent  had 

failed  to  establish  routines  or  procedures  for  the  students  to  follow  when  they 

completed  assignments. 

D. 

On  December  16,  2015,  Ms.  Sanchez  entered  Respondent's 

classroom  at  9:30  a.m.  and  observed  Respondent  giving  a  directed  lesson®  to  the  class 

while  the  students  sat  on  the  carpet.  During  the  lesson,  a  student  was  opening  cabinet 

doors  in  the  front  of  the  classroom  but  Respondent  did  not  re-direct  the  student. 

  

®  Directed  lessons  involve  stating  clear  objectives,  modeling  and  explaining  the 

concept,  practicing  the  concept  with  the  students,  instructing  the  students  to  practice 

the  concept  independently,  and  assessing  for  evidence  the  students  mastered  the 

objective. 

12

When  the  same  student  crawled  under  a  table  at  9:48  a.m.,  Respondent  asked  the 

student  to  join  the  class  but  the  student  remained  where  he  was  and  began  throwing 

objects.  After  Respondent  told  the  student  he  should  not  be  throwing  things,  the 

student  came  out  from  under  the  table,  went  to  another  table,  and  began  to  draw  a 

picture.  Respondent  did  not  re-direct  the  student.  Ms.  Sanchez  determined  that 

Respondent  failed  to  effectively  monitor  or  respond  to  the  student's  behavior. 

E. 

On  January  29,  2016,  Ms.  Sanchez  entered  Respondent's  classroom 

at  10:40  a.m.  When  Respondent  directed  the  students  to  clean-up  and  go  sit  on  the 

carpet,  students  V.,  J.,  and  D.?  remained  at  their  tables  but  Respondent  did  not  say 

anything  to  the  students.  Respondent  changed  those  students’  name  cards  to  another 

color  as  a  consequence  of  their  behavior.  V.  and  D.,  however,  remained  at  the  table. 

Respondent  did  not  say  anything  or  issue  additional  consequences  to  either  student  in 

response.  When  Respondent  asked  J.  where  she  belonged,  J.  did  not  respond  and  did 

not  go  to  the  carpet.  Student  M.G.  then  began  screaming,  but  Respondent  did  not  say 

or  do  anything  in  response.  Students  J.  and  M.  played  tug  of  war  with  an  item. 

Respondent  told  the  students  to  let  go  of  it,  but  they  continued  playing  with  the  item 

for  approximately  one  minute  and  then  put  the  item  away.  Respondent  directed  the 

students  to  give  their  attention  to  her,  but  15  of  the  25  students  in  the  class  continued 

to  talk. 

Respondent  asked  Ms.  Sanchez  to  model  how  to  manage  the  students’ 

behavior.  Ms.  Sanchez  had  the  students  sit  on  the  carpet  and  remain  quiet  so  that 

Respondent  could  teach  a  math  lesson.  After  starting  the  lesson,  Respondent  again 

asked  Ms.  Sanchez  for  assistance,  and  Ms.  Sanchez  suggested  that  the  students  sit  in  a 

  

’  Students  are  identified  by  their  initial  or  first  name  to  protect  their  privacy. 

13

circle  on  the  carpet  so  that  they  could  see  the  colored  chips  Respondent  used  during 

the  lesson. 

behavior. 

Ms.  Sanchez  noted  that  at  12:04  p.m.,  Respondent  stated  “we  are  not 

kicking  our  friends,"'?  but  she  did  not  check  on  the  student  who  was  kicked  and  she 

did  not  issue  a  consequence  to  the  student  that  did  the  kicking.  Ms.  Sanchez 

determined  that  Respondent  did  not  effectively  monitor  and  respond  to  student 

24. 

Atno  time  during  the  observation  did  Respondent  use  the  behavior  log 

or  reinforcers  for  student  Miguel,  which  were  given  to  Respondent  by  Ms.  Sanchez  and 

the  school  psychologist  in  order  to  monitor  and  manage  Miguel’s  behavior. 

25. 

Ms.  Sanchez  described  the  quality  of  the  instruction  provided  by 

Respondent  during  the  observations  as  “disappointing.”  She  offered  her  opinion  that  a 

teacher  with  five  years  or  more  of  teaching  experience  should  have  classroom 

management  strategies  and  routines  in  place  to  deal  with  the  behavioral  issues 

observed  in  Respondent's  classroom.  Ms.  Sanchez  explained  that  because  Respondent 

did  not  effectively  manage  the  students’  off-task  behavior  and  disruptions, 

Respondent's  lessons  were  incomplete  and  ineffective.  Also,  as  the  students  were  not 

engaged  in  academics,  there  was  a  loss  of  instructional  time,  and  as  result,  the 

standards  Respondent  was  supposed  to  teach  may  not  have  been  covered.  Ms. 

Sanchez  further  explained  that  the  students’  level  of  writing,  their  recognition  of  high 

  

'©  The  record  is  unclear  as  to  whether  Respondent  observed  the  kicking 

incident,  but  Respondent's  statement  supports  a  finding  that  she  was  aware  that  a 

student  had  been  kicked. 

14

frequency  words,  and  their  guided  reading  level  were  most  likely  adversely  impacted 

because  of  Respondent's  inconsistent  classroom  management. 

26. 

Inthe  March  14,  2016  letter,  Ms.  Sanchez  offered  19  items  of  assistance 

and  guidance  to  Respondent  following  the  observations  listed  in  Factual  Finding  22, 

for  the  purpose  of  helping  Respondent  improve  her  teaching.  The  assistance  and 

guidance  included: 

A. 

A  reminder  to  set  goals  for  management  of  routines,  procedures 

and  transitions,  and  for  expectations  and  learning  achievement; 

B. 

A  reminder  to  implement  Participation  and  Discussion  protocols, 

which  were  provided  to  Respondent  during  Academic  English  Mastery  Program 

(AEMP)"!  training  in  October  2015; 

C. 

A  reminder  that  on  other  previous  occasions,  when  Ms.  Sanchez 

had  gone  to  Respondent's  classroom  when  Respondent  requested  assistance,  Ms. 

Sanchez  modeled  the  provision  of  consequences  for  the  students’  behavior; 

D. 

An  Intervention  Coordinator  to  work  with  a  specific  group  of  four 

students  from  October  30,  2015,  through  December  11,  2015; 

E. 

The  suggestion  to  develop  one  signal  to  use  to  have  the  students 

stop  and  listen  to  Respondent; 

  

'T  Students  that  participate  in  the  AEMP  program  do  not  speak  English  at  their 

corresponding  academic  levels. 

15

F. 

The  suggestion  to  adhere  to  established  classroom  rules  and 

CONSEequeNnces, 

G. 

The  suggestion  for  daily  review  of  class  expectations  with  students 

and  use  of  a  visual  chart  that  will  assist  students  to  know  what  Is  expected  of  them; 

H. 

The  recommendation  to  model  expected  behavior; 

I. 

The  provision  of  the  Peer  Assistance  Review  (PAR)'*  Brochure  and 

Agreement  form  on  February  3,  2016,  and  the  suggestion  to  request  PAR  services; 

J. 

A  District  Behavior  Specialist  to  come  to  Respondent's  classroom 

on  February  12,  2016,  to  provide  support  and  provide  suggestions  on  classroom 

management  and  behavior  support; 

K. 

Time  in  October  2015  for  Respondent  to  observe  her  colleagues, 

Mrs.  Aguilera  and  Mrs.  De  La  Mora,  who  taught  kindergarten  and  transitional 

kindergarten,  respectively,  and  for  them  to  observe  Respondent  and  offer  feedback; 

L. 

Ms.  Sanchez  accompanied  Respondent  to  Mrs.  Aguilera's 

classroom  and  observed  routines  and  procedures  for  transitions  and  classroom 

management; 

  

'2  The  PAR  program  is  a  confidential  program  provided  by  the  District  where  a 

Consulting  Teacher  with  at  least  eight  years  of  full-time,  satisfactory  performance  with 

the  District,  works  jointly  with  the  Participating  Teacher  to  provide  review,  assistance 

and  guidance  to  the  Participating  Teacher  in  order  to  improve  their  instructional  skills. 

16

M.  —  The  assistance  of  Selene  Gonzalez,  a  Foster  Care  Youth  Counselor, 

to  provide  support  to  one  of  Respondent's  students  who  was  also  Mrs.  Gonzalez’s 

client,  once  per  month  for  30  minutes,  beginning  September  2015,  for  the  purpose  of 

assisting  the  student  with  focusing  on  the  lessons;  and 

N. 

On  October  9,  2015,  the  school  psychologist  met  with  Respondent 

and  gave  her  a  reinforcer  menu,  visual  cue  card,  and  a  smiley  face  card  to  use  with  one 

of  Respondent's  students.  On  that  same  date,  Ms.  Sanchez  gave  Respondent  a 

recording  log  to  record  and  monitor  that  same  student's  behavior. 

27. 

According  to  Ms.  Sanchez,  Respondent  did  not  sign-up  for  PAR  services. 

Though  Respondent  was  receptive  to  the  behavior  specialist’s  ideas  such  as  a  student- 

teacher  contract,  goal  setting,  and  the  use  of  tokens,  Respondent  said  they  would 

require  “too  much  work”  to  implement.  After  Respondent  observed  Mrs.  Aguilera,  she 

expressed  that  Ms.  Aguilera’s  classroom  environment  was  “too  structured.” 

28. 

A. 

On  March  14,  2016,  Ms.  Sanchez  issued  four  directives  to 

Respondent.  She  directed  Respondent  to  develop  one  signal  to  give  to  the  students 

when  she  wanted  them  to  stop  and  listen  to  her,  so  that  her  classroom  would  be  well 

managed.  To  ensure  student  safety,  Ms.  Sanchez  also  directed  Respondent  to  prohibit 

students  from  running  in  the  classroom.  In  addition,  Ms.  Sanchez  directed  Respondent 

to  review  class  expectations  with  the  students  daily  while  using  a  visual  chart  to  assist 

the  students  in  knowing  what  they  were  expected  to  do.  She  also  directed  Respondent 

to  implement  the  AMEP  discussion  and  participation  protocol. 

B. 

The  March  14,  2016  letter  contained  a  notification  that 

Respondent's  failure  to  comply  with  the  directives,  or  to  demonstrate  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement,  could  lead  to  disciplinary  action  including  the  issuance  of  a 

17

Below  Standard  Evaluation,  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Acts  or  Service,  suspension 

without  pay,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Sanchez  further  informed  Respondent 

via  the  letter  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time,  she  would  issue  an 

Overall  Below  Standard  Performance  Evaluation  to  Respondent,  which  could  result  in 

the  discipline  mentioned  above. 

C. 

Although  Ms.  Sanchez  did  not  review  the  March  14,  2016  letter 

with  Respondent  in  person,  Ms.  Sanchez  stated  that  she  expected  Respondent  to  read 

it  and  if  Respondent  needed  clarification,  Ms.  Sanchez  would  make  herself  available  to 

provide  that  clarification. 

29. 

A, 

On  May  10,  2016,  Ms.  Sanchez  prepared  a  Final  Evaluation  report 

for  Respondent  for  the  2015-2016  school  year  based  upon  her  formal  observations  of 

Respondent's  performance  on  October  31,  2014,  and  April  22,  2015.  For  Standard  1, 

Planning  and  Preparation,  Ms.  Sanchez  rated  Respondent  as  “Effective”  in  designing 

coherent  instruction,  but  “Developing”  in  knowledge  of  content-related  pedagogy  and 

awareness  of  students’  skills,  knowledge,  and  language  proficiency.  Respondent  was 

rated  “Developing”  in  classroom  climate,  management  of  routines,  procedures,  and 

transitions,  and  monitoring  and  responding  to  student  behavior,  for  Standard  2,  The 

Classroom  Environment.  With  respect  to  Standard  3,  Delivery  of  Instruction,  Ms. 

Sanchez  rated  Respondent  as  “Developing”  in  the  areas  of  communicating  the  purpose 

of  the  lesson,  use  of  academic  language,  quality  and  purpose  of  questions,  discussion 

techniques  and  student  participation,  standards-based  projects,  activities  and 

assignments,  purposeful  and  productive  instructional  groups,  and  feedback  to 

students. 

B. 

Ms.  Sanchez  commented  that  Respondent's  teaching  was 

inconsistent  and  ranged  from  developing  to  effective,  and  that  Respondent 

18

demonstrated  inconsistent  growth  from  her  Informal  Growth  Plan  Visit  earlier  in  the 

school  year  to  the  date  of  the  formal  observation,  in  the  areas  of  planning,  classroom 

environment,  and  delivery  of  instruction. 

C. 

In  the  area  of  Contribution  to  Student  Outcomes,  Ms.  Sanchez 

commented  that  Respondent  made  progress  toward  meeting  her  goals  in  math  and 

that  all  of  Respondent's  students  knew  their  letters  and  sounds. 

D. 

In  the  area  of  Professional  Responsibilities,  Respondent  was 

effective  in  arriving  on  time  and  starting  class  on  schedule,  regularly  being  in 

attendance,  attending  all  school  meetings  and  staff  development  programs,  engaging 

families  in  the  instructional  program,  and  communicating  and  interacting 

professionally  with  students,  parents,  colleagues,  administrators  and  staff,  engaging  in 

ethical  conduct  and  complying  with  school,  District  and  State  rules,  policies,  and 

standards,  reviewing  and  evaluating  the  work  of  pupils,  maintaining  accurate  and 

timely  records,  and  assuming  the  reasonable  responsibility  for  the  proper  use  and 

control  of  District  property,  equipment,  material  and  supplies. 

E. 

Respondent's  Final  Evaluation  Rating  was  Below  Standard 

Performance.  Ms.  Sanchez  explained  that  she  issued  the  rating  because  Respondent 

failed  to  develop  a  classroom  management  plan  even  though  she  had  been  provided 

support  during  the  school  year;  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  the  expected 

sustained  improvement  in  delivering  instruction  to  the  students  although  she 

attempted  to  do  so;  she  was  ineffective  in  delivering  instruction  to  the  students;  and 

Respondent's  ineffective  instruction  resulted  in  harm  to  her  students.  Based  on  the 

evaluation,  Ms.  Sanchez  commented  that  Respondent  would  be  evaluated  during  the 

2016-2017  school  year. 

19

30. 

Ms.  Sanchez  included  a  one-page  attachment  to  Respondent's 

evaluation,  which  listed  specific  deficiencies,  recommendations,  and  assistance  to  be 

provided.  In  the  area  of  specific  deficiencies,  Mr.  Sanchez  stated  that  Respondent:  (1) 

failed  to  consistently  implement  routines  and  procedures  for  transitions  and  daily 

classroom  activities,  which  resulted  in  a  significant  loss  of  instructional  time;  and  (2) 

failed  to  consistently  implement  a  positive  system  of  classroom  behavior  management. 

31. 

Ms.  Sanchez  recommended  that  Respondent  (1)  implement  and 

consistently  use  routines  for  transitions  and  other  daily  activities;  (2)  implement  and 

consistently  use  a  system  of  positive  behavior  management  that  appeals  to  various 

modalities;  and  (3)  ensure  that  students  who  are  off-task  are  re-directed  via 

Respondent's  consistent  use  of  a  system  of  positive  behavior  management  in  order  to 

ensure  student  engagement  in  the  lessons  and  activities. 

32. 

Ms.  Sanchez  advised  Respondent  that  she  would  provide  her  with  the 

following  assistance:  (1)  another  copy  of  the  PAR  Brochure  and  Agreement  form  and 

advice  to  sign  up  for  support;  (2)  an  arrangement  for  a  District  Behavior  Specialist  to 

again  come  to  Respondent's  class;  (3)  an  arrangement  for  a  Intervention  Coordinator 

to  work  with  a  group  of  Respondent's  students  using  Second-Step  Lessons;  and  (4)  an 

opportunity  for  Respondent  to  follow  the  assistance  and  guidance  listed  in  the  March 

14,  2016  letter  described  in  Factual  Finding  26. 

33. 

|  Upon  questioning,  Ms.  Sanchez  acknowledged  that  she  taught 

kindergarten  for  one  year  only,  and  did  so  25  years  ago.  However,  she  contended  that 

she  reviews,  and  is  familiar  with,  instructional  standards  for  kindergarten,  that 

classroom  management  Is  applicable  to  all  grades,  and  that  she  has  used  classroom 

management  strategies  over  the  years  to  control  her  classroom  environment, 

including  Respondent's  classes.  She  further  acknowledged  that  Respondent  notified 

20

her  that  she  felt  dejected  and  frustrated  because  she  felt  her  colleagues  did  not 

support  her,  and  she  was  experiencing  personal  issues.  Ms.  Sanchez  acknowledged 

that  Respondent  was  willing  to  accept  strategies  and  improve,  and  she  attempted  to 

apply  new  strategies  for  classroom  management.  However,  Respondent's  attempt  at 

classroom  management  was  insufficient  because  she  was  unable  to  demonstrate 

improvement  in  that  area. 

22,  2018) 

Facts  Underlying  Charges:  Performance  (December  7,  2016  —  February 

34. 

—  Lorena  Avalos  has  been  the  principal  of  MPC  since  2016  and  has  been 

employed  by  the  District  for  27  years.  She  earned  a  Bachelor's  degree  in  psychology 

and  a  Master  of  Arts  degree  in  adult  education.  Ms.  Avalos  has  been a  principal  at  two 

different  schools,  taught  kindergarten,  first  grade,  and  second  and  third  grade 

combination  classes  for  10  years.  She  has  been  an  assistant  principal  and  bilingual 

coordinator.  Ms.  Avalos’  duties  as  a  principal  at  MPC  included  monitoring  and 

supervising  classroom  instruction  to  ensure  that  teachers’  lessons  were  aligned  to  the 

Standards  and  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  instruction. 

35. 

Ms.  Avalos’  testimony  established  that  the  District  provided  professional 

development  or  lesson  planning  time  for  teachers  every  Tuesday.  During  the  planning 

time,  teachers  who  taught  at  the  same  grade  level  collaborated  with  each  other  to 

plan  their  lessons,  and  developed  pacing  plans  for  the  Reader's  and  Writer's  Workshop 

lessons  and  ELA.  MPC  also  provided  professional  development  and  training  at  the 

beginning  of  the  school  year  where  the  District's  policies  and  procedures  were 

provided  and  discussed.  Teachers  could  also  attend  trainings  outside  of  MPC  after 

hours  or  on  Saturdays,  including  participating  in  the  PAR  program  as  well  as  training  in 

language  arts  and  ELD. 

21

36. 

Ms.  Avalos  explained  that  gaps  in  student  learning  (gaps)  occur  when 

students  fail  to  learn  a  concept  or  skill  during  the  allotted  instructional  time  or  at  the 

expected  pace.  As  a  result  of  learning  gaps,  a  student  is  unprepared,  disadvantaged, 

and  could  face  challenges  when  they  advance  to  the  next  grade  level. 

37. 

|  Ms.  Avalos’  practice  at  MPC  was  to  observe  one  teacher  per  day  to 

ensure  that  teachers  were  delivering  highly  effective  lessons  and  teaching  to  the 

Standards.  Following  the  observation,  she  gave  feedback  during  a  conference  meeting 

with  the  teacher,  which  included  providing  recommendations  and  suggestions  for 

improvement.  Ms.  Avalos  would  also  provide  support  to  teachers  who  demonstrated 

deficiencies  during  the  observation.  She  would  read  from  a  draft  conference 

memorandum  during  the  conference  meeting  and  take  notes  of  what  the  teacher 

Stated  in  response.  If  Ms.  Avalos  recommended  that  the  teacher  review  a  particular 

document  or  resource  as  a  part  of  the  assistance  and  guidance,  she  would  provide  the 

teacher  a  hardcopy  of  the  document  during  the  conference.  Her  practice  was  to 

prepare  a  final  draft  of  the  conference  memorandum  following  the  conference,  and 

place  it  in  the  teacher's  mailbox,  along  with  another  hardcopy  of  the  handout  that  was 

given  to  the  teacher  during  the  conference.  Ms.  Avalos  followed  this  practice  when 

observed  Respondent  during  the  2016-2017  and  2017-2018  school  years. 

DECEMBER  7,  2016  OBSERVATION 

38. 

On  January  18,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  January  12,  2017,  regarding  her  observation 

of  Respondent's  classroom  on  December  7,  2016  from  10:54  a.m.  to  11:54  a.m.,  during 

Respondent's  writing/ELD  lesson.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction, 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  plan  Standards-based  learning  activities 

for  her  class  because  she  did  not  post  or  review  the  Common  Core  State  Standard 

22

(CCSS)  with  her  students,  and  she  did  not  review  the  learning  objective  for  her  ELD 

lesson  at  the  start  of  the  lesson.  Also,  Respondent  failed  to  follow  her  lesson  plan  in 

that  she  started  the  ELD  lesson  at  11:10  a.m.  instead  of  at  10:50  a.m.  as  stated  in 

Respondent's  schedule.  As  a  result,  the  students  lost  one-third  of  the  allotted 

instructional  time. 

39. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  expressed  concern  that 

Respondent  did  not  provide  effective  instructional  activities  and  did  not  follow 

protocol  in  teaching  ELD  lessons.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  model  a  writing 

sample  or  provide  a  list  of  suggested  writing  topics  for  students  during  Writer's 

Workshop."  Instead,  she  wrote  an  isolated  list  of  words  on  the  board.  As  a  result, 

students  had  difficulty  with  their  writing.  When  Respondent  attempted  to  ask  students 

questions  to  guide  them,  she  asked  them  in  rapid  succession  and  did  not  give  the 

students  an  opportunity  to  respond.  Students  continuously  talked  to  each  other 

instead  of  working  on  the  assignment.  Respondent's  attempts  to  re-direct  the  class 

were  unsuccessful. 

40. 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  was  ineffective  in  transitioning 

students  from  their  desks  to  the  rug,  in  that  students  did  not  follow  her  directions  to 

stand  behind  their  chairs  and  wait  for  her  to  dismiss  them.  Instead  of  walking  quietly 

to  the  rug,  students  began  talking  and  ignored  Respondent's  directions.  Respondent 

dismissed  two  students  to  the  rug  even  though  they  were  sitting  down.  Two  students 

  

'S  Writer's  Workshop  lessons  impart  foundational  skills  and  writing  standards  to 

students. 

23

were  asleep  at  their  desks.  Respondent  woke  the  students  up  and  dismissed  them  to 

the  rug. 

41. 

Ms.  Avalos  expressed  concern  that  Respondent  failed  to  demonstrate 

knowledge  of  the  developmental  characteristics  of  the  age  group  of  her  class, 

evidenced  by  her  having  students  work  on  activities  in  a  Treasures '*  book  instead  of 

delivering  a  Standards-based  lesson  as  modeled  in  Start  Smart”?  sample  lessons. 

Specifically,  Respondent,  who  was  delivering  a  lesson  on  how  to  clarify  an  idea,  used  a 

puppet  to  model  the  skill.  Because  she  asked  a  series  of  unrelated  questions  and 

answered  them  herself  in  the  course  of  a  minute,  the  students  became  restless.  For 

example,  one  student  handed  Respondent  a  backpack  while  Respondent  was 

modeling  the  lesson.  When  another  student  began  making  “fart”  noises  with  his 

mouth  throughout  the  course  of  the  22-minute  lesson,  Respondent  did  not  attempt  to 

re-direct  him  until  four  minutes  had  passed.  Although  the  student  continued  to  make 

the  noises,  Respondent  did  not  issue  any  consequences  to  the  student.  Another 

student  got  up  from  the  rug  several  times  to  play  with  erasers  on  a  whiteboard  and 

Respondent  did  not  redirect  the  student.  When  students  were  supposed  to  be  working 

with  their  partners,  students  began  hitting  each  other,  playing  with  the  whiteboard, 

and  lying  down  on  the  rug.  When  Respondent  reminded  students  several  times  that 

  

'*  Treasures  is  the  District's  English  reading  /language  arts  (ELA)  program  and 

was  adopted  by  the  District  and  has  been  in  use  for  seven  years. 

'S  Start  Smart  lessons  are  District-provided  and  serve  as  a  foundation  for  the 

school  year  so  that  students  learn  how  to  hold  a  conversation.  The  lessons  are  aligned 

to  ELD  State  standards.  District  teachers  received  training  on  how  to  deliver  Start 

Smart  lessons. 

24

they  were  supposed  to  ask  each  other  questions,  the  students  continued  with  their  off- 

task  behavior.  In  addition,  during  the  lesson,  Respondent  failed  to  review  the  skill  of 

using  the  process  to  “Clarify”  what  their  partner  “Created.”  Instead,  Respondent  asked 

students  to  share  the  questions  asked  by  their  partners.  She  then  gave  a  different  set 

of  directions,  which  confused  the  students.  When  Respondent  realized  that  the 

students  were  confused,  Respondent  answered  the  questions  shared  by  the  students 

herself. 

42. 

Inthe  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  reinforce  her  Classroom  Rules.  Respondent  spent  12  minutes  monitoring 

student  off-task  behavior  during  Writer's  Workshop  without  issuing  any  consequences 

to  the  students  who  were  off-task.  Specifically,  students  continually  talked  to  each 

other  instead  of  working  on  the  assignment.  Four  students  got  out  of  their  seats  and 

approached  Respondent.  In  addition,  one  student  was  under  his  desk  and  one  student 

played  on  the  rug.  Another  student  wrote  on  himself  with  a  marker,  and  two  students 

stacked  crayons,  markers  and  pencils  on  top  of  each  other.  Respondent  attempted  to 

re-direct  the  students  but  was  unable  to  do  so.  Respondent  allowed  eight  students  to 

use  the  restroom  during  class  time  although  one  of  her  Classroom  Rules  stated  that 

students  were  to  use  the  restroom  and  get  a  drink  of  water  during  recess  and  lunch. 

43. 

Ms.  Avalos  also  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  prepare  instructional 

materials  in  advance  of  the  lesson,  in  that  she  spent  two  minutes  looking  for  the 

Treasures  book,  and  resorted  to  asking  her  students  where  the  book  was.  While 

Respondent  was  looking  for  the  book,  a  student  began  playing  with  his  sweater,  two 

students  were  lying  on  the  rug,  several  students  were  talking  and  laughing,  and  one 

student  played  with  the  whiteboard.  Respondent  also  failed  to  establish  protocol  for 

25

students  to  work  in  groups  in  that  she  did  not  model  how  the  group  was  to  take  turns, 

and  instead  gave  verbal  instructions. 

44. 

According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference  meeting,  Respondent 

stated  that  ELD  was  new  to  her  and  she had  just  finished  all  the  skill  lessons.  She 

contended  that  the  student  making  the  “farting”  noise  had  never  done  that  before, 

and  she  did  not  recall  seeing  students  hitting  each  other  or  under  the  table. 

Respondent  asserted  that  she  would  not  allow  students  to  hit  each  other.  She 

contended  that  she  experienced  a  timing  issue  during  the  observation,  and  that  she 

always  has  her  lessons  and  lesson  materials  prepared  and  ready.  Respondent  stated  to 

Ms.  Avalos  that  because  of  her  students’  age,  she  only  disciplines  “big  things,”  and  has 

been  consistent  in  enforcing  her  Classroom  Rules.  She  agreed  that  she  should  use 

other  techniques  to  redirect  students.  In  addition,  in  her  written  response  to  the 

conference  memorandum,  Respondent  contended  that  she  was  not  on  schedule 

because  the  class  was  going  to  rehearse  for  a  Christmas  performance,  she  was  going 

to  teach  the  ELD  lesson  after  lunch,  and  she  did  not  have  her  book  ready  because  she 

was  going  to  prepare  her  materials  during  lunch  time.  She  asserted  that  she  provided 

a  modeled  writing  sample  and  that  it  was  behind  her  easel.  Respondent  also  asserted 

that  if  she  quickly  asked  questions  during  the  observation,  she  did  so  in  order  to  get 

the  class  started  on  their  assignment.  She  contended  that  she  later  moved  student  U.'s 

clip  to  yellow  and  told  him  his  behavior  was  unacceptable.  Respondent  indicated  that 

she  did  not  recall  student  N.  getting  up  or  students  continuing  in  off-task  behavior. 

45. 

On  December  7,  2016,  despite  having  received  assistance,  guidance,  and 

directives  in  the  March  14,  2016  letter  prepared  by  Ms.  Sanchez,  Respondent:  (1)  failed 

to  develop  and  consistently  use  one  signal  to  get  students  to  stop  and  listen  to  her;  (2) 

allowed  students  to  run  in  the  classroom;  (3)  failed  to  review  class  expectations  daily 

26

by  using  a  visual  chart  to  assist  students  with  knowing  what  they  are  expected  to  do; 

and  (4)  failed  to  implement  the  AEMP  discussion  and  participation  protocol  with 

students. 

46. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

post  and  review  the  CCSS  at  the  beginning  of  each  lesson,  share  the  learning  objective 

with  the  students,  and  make  the  connection  between  the  objective,  the  standard  and 

the  activity;  (2)  follow  lesson  plans  on  a  daily  basis  to  ensure  coverage  of  the  necessary 

content;  (3)  consider  the  age  of  the  students,  always  provide  a  teacher-modeled 

writing  example  during  Writer’s  Workshop,  and  create  a  list  of  topics  for  students  to 

choose  from;  (4)  establish  a  procedure  for  students  to  transition  to  the  rug,  model  the 

procedure,  have  the  students  regularly  practice  the  procedure.  As  a  guide  to 

implementing  effective  classroom  procedures,  Ms.  Avalos  provided  Respondent  with  a 

handout  entitled  Protocol—How  to  Teach  Procedures;  (5)  regularly  plan  standards- 

based  lessons  and  refer  to  District  ELD  to  properly  implement  all  program  skills;  (6) 

consistently  enforce  classroom  rules.  Give  students  a  warning  for  off-task  behavior  and 

if  the  behavior  continues,  ensure  movement  of  their  clio  on  the  behavior  chart.  '°  Ms. 

Avalos  provided  Respondent  with  a  handout  entitled  Effective  Behavioral  Expectations 

to  review;  (7)  prepare  instructional  material  ahead  of  time  to  reduce  the  loss  of 

instructional  time  and  minimize  off-task  behavior;  (8)  consistently  model,  practice,  and 

  

'®  Respondent's  behavior  chart  consisted  of  the  colors  green  for  good  behavior, 

yellow  for  moderate  behavior,  and  red  for  worsening  behavior.  All  of  the  students  had 

clips,  which  were  placed  on  green,  which  was  at  the  top  of  the  chart,  at  the  beginning 

of  the  day.  A  student's  clip  was  moved  up  or  down,  depending  on  the  student's 

behavior. 

2/7

regularly  monitor  students  as  they  use  partnering  techniques;  (9)  continued  access  to 

Respondent's  PAR  teacher  for  assistance  with  developing  and  implementing  rigorous 

lesson  plans,  using  various  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  Respondent  to 

meet  the  students’  needs,  including  lesson-pacing,  using  rich  academic  language, 

developing  behavior  management  tools,  monitoring  student  behavior,  and  creating  a 

classroom  that  engages  all  students. 

47. 

Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 

performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 

dismissal  from  the  District. 

JANUARY  12,  2017  OBSERVATION 

48. 

On  January  12,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  conducted  an  observation  of 

Respondent's  classroom  during  her  Response  to  Intervention  (RTI)  lesson.  Ms.  Avalos 

conducted  a  conference  with  Respondent  regarding  the  observation  on  February  3, 

2017,  which  was  memorialized  in  a  conference  memorandum  dated  February  6,  2017. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  designing  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  Respondent  failed 

to  effectively  manage  small  groups  in  that  she  did  not  rotate  the  groups.  As  a  result, 

she  assigned  the  wrong  group  of  students  to  work  with  her,  another  group  to  work 

with  the  teacher  assistant  and  another  group  to  work  independently.  She  failed  to 

State  the  objective  of  the  small  group  lesson  and  failed  to  model  how  to  make  a 

Consonant  Vowel  Consonant  (CVC)  word  for  the  students  that  were  in  her  group. 

Instead  Respondent  gave  verbal  instructions  and  directed  the  group  to  start  the  work 

on  their  own. 

28

49. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  refer  to  or  enforce  her  Classroom  Rules.  Respondent  interrupted  her  small 

group  lesson  on  several  occasions  to  address  the  following  off-task  behavior  of 

students  who  were  supposed  to  be  working  independently:  Student  C.  walked  around 

the  room;  Student  B.  threw  a  crayon  at  Student  U.  Respondent  moved  Student  B  to 

another  table  without  any  consequences.  Student  S.  was  talking  to  a  student  next  to 

her.  When  Respondent  asked  Student  S.  whether  she  was  helping  the  student  or 

talking,  Student  S.  did  not  respond,  but  she  stopped  talking  for  a  moment  then 

continued  to  talk  to  the  other  student.  One  student  stood  up.  Student  A  walked  over 

to  show  Respondent  his  work,  and  then  subsequently  got  underneath  a  table. 

50. 

Ms.  Avalos  determined  that  Respondent  was  unable  to  effectively  teach 

the  lesson  because  she  was  constantly  re-directing.  Ms.  Avalos  stated  that  by  that  time 

in  the  school  year,  Respondent  should  have  had  classroom  procedures  in  place  to 

effectively  address  off-task  behavior. 

51. 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  ensure  that  students  had 

materials  available  to  do  their  independent  work,  in  that  Respondent  had  to  leave  the 

small  group  she  was  working  with  to  provide  worksheets  to  two  students  who  did  not 

have  the  assignment  in  their  folders.  Respondent  then  stood  by  the  classroom  door  to 

wait  for  students  to  return  from  the  restroom.  The  lesson  was  further  delayed  while 

Respondent  retrieved  word  cards  from  another  area  of  the  classroom  before  she 

began  working  with  her  group  of  students.  As  a  result,  the  group  of  students  lost  four 

minutes  of  instruction. 

52.  |  According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference  meeting,  Respondent 

stated  that  she  erred  in  assigning  the  small  groups  because  of  something  that 

occurred  during  the  week,  and  she  taught  her  class  CVC  words  because  they  already 

29

knew  the  high  frequency  words.  She  did  not  recall  the  student  walking  around  the 

room  or  the  other  student  talking  to  her  partner.  Nor  did  she  recall  allowing  students 

to  leave  the  classroom  in  order  to  go  to  the  restroom.  Respondent  contended  that  she 

reviewed  her  Classroom  Rules  with  her  students  every  morning,  and  that  the  student 

that  did  not  have  the  worksheet  in  her  folder  was  at  fault  for  not  giving  Respondent 

the  folder  in  advance. 

53. 

Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  the  February  6,  2017 

conference  memorandum.  In  her  response  she  explained  that  Ms.  Avalos  met  with  her 

on  January  12,  2017,  to  discuss  the  December  7,  2016  observation.  She  contended  that 

she  had  no  conference  meetings  with  Ms.  Avalos  prior  to  January  12,  2017,  and 

therefore  did  not  know  what  Ms.  Avalos’  expectations  of  her  were. 

54. 

A. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  Respondent  asserted  that 

she  was  not  aware  that  she  was  required  to  post  or  review  the  learning  objective 

because  no  other  administrator  had  asked  her  to  do  that. 

B. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  contended  that 

she  was  prepared  to  deliver  her  standard-based  lesson  for  her  small  RTI  group,  but 

decided  the  previous  day  to  have  her  teacher  assistant  work  with  the  same  small 

group  the  next  day  because  they  needed  additional  help.  She  further  contended  that 

she  needed  to  work  with  the  same  group  again  because  some  of  the  students  were 

absent  when  she  worked  with  the  group  the  day  before.  Respondent  stated  that  she 

should  have  told  the  teacher  assistant  to  work  with  the  same  group  but  did  not  do  so 

because  she  became  nervous  during  the  observation  and  changed  her  plans. 

C. 

Respondent  indicated  that  she  told  the  students  that  they  were 

learning  CVC  words  because  they  knew  the  high  frequency  words  (HFW).  She  asserted 

30

that  she  showed  them  cards  with  CVC  pictures  and  words,  she  asked  them  to  separate 

vowels  and  consonants,  and  told  them  to  use  three  letters  to  make  a  CVC  word. 

D. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  stated  that 

student  C  was  walking  around  the  classroom  because  he  went  to  Respondent  to  ask 

her  a  question.  She  stated  that  moving  Student  B  was  his  consequences  as  opposed  to 

moving  his  clip,  because  student  B  does  not  like  when  Respondent  moves  him. 

Respondent  asserted  that  Student  S  was  helping  Student  J.  Respondent  asked  what 

behavior  is  realistic  for  a  kindergarten  class  during  RTI  with  respect  to  interruptions 

and  off-task  behavior.  She  further  asked  for  Ms.  Avalos  to  convey  her  expectations  as 

to  the  correct  procedure  to  monitor  behavior  and  issue  consequences. 

E. 

Also  in  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  indicated 

that  students  are  supposed  to  place  their  folders  on  her  table  when  they  run  out  of 

work  so  that  she  can  fill 

it  the  day  before  the  lesson  will  be  taught.  She  further 

indicated  that  some  of  the  students  did  not  give  her  their  folders  the  day  before  and 

that  is  why  she  had  to  leave  her  group.  Respondent  stated  that  her  teacher  assistant 

allowed  the  two  students  to  go  the  restroom,  and  she  left  her  group  to  see  why  the 

two  students  were  gone  so  long.  She  contended  that  she  would  continue  to  follow  her 

lesson  plans,  plan  standard-based  activities,  and  to  write  or  state  the  objective.  She 

asserted  that  she  would  make  every  effort  to  improve  in  the  areas  noted  by  Ms. 

Avalos. 

55. 

On  January  12,  2017,  despite  having  received  assistance,  guidance,  and 

directives  in  the  March  14,  2016  letter  prepared  by  Ms.  Sanchez,  Respondent:  (1)  failed 

to  develop  one  signal  to  always  use  for  students  to  stop  and  listen  to  her;  (2)  she  failed 

to  review  class  expectations  daily  by  using  a  visual  chart  to  assist  them  with  knowing 

31

what  they  are  expected  to  do;  and  (3)  failed  to  implement  the  AEMP  discussion  and 

participation  protocol  with  students. 

56. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

state  the  objective  and/or  standard  at  the  beginning  of  each  lesson,  and  repeat  it 

during,  and  at  the  end  of  each  lesson;  (2)  adhere  to  the  posted  Classroom  Schedule 

daily;  (3)  give  specific  instructions  so  that  students  know  what  is  expected  of  them;  (4) 

explain  the  purpose  of  the  lesson,  model  the  activity,  and  allow  time  for  the  students 

to  practice  the  skills  before  they  work  independently;  (5)  stay  focused  on  the  lesson 

objective;  (6)  state  clear  expectations  for  student  responses  to  questions  such  as  a 

raised  hand,  and  reinforce  positive  behavior;  (7)  implement  routines  and  procedures 

that  maximize  teaching  and  learning  time;  (8)  effectively  monitor  and  respond  to 

student  behavior  by  developing  and  implementing  an  effective  classroom 

management  plan  that  includes  clear  expectations,  rewards,  and  consequences;  (9) 

provide,  teach,  model,  and  practice  rules  for  small  group  instruction;  (10)  ensure  that 

students’  materials  are  ready  before  sending  them  to  work  independently  to  avoid  the 

loss  of  instructional  time;  (11)  observation  and  debriefing  with  Ms.  Avalos  of  a 

colleague's  classroom  management  procedure  during  the  month  of  February;  and  (12) 

continued  access  to  Respondent's  PAR  teacher  for  assistance  with  developing  and 

implementing  rigorous  lesson  plans,  using  various  instructional  strategies  and 

resources  to  respond  to  the  students’  needs,  including  lesson  pacing,  using  rich 

academic  language,  developing  behavior  management  tools,  monitoring  student 

behavior,  and  creating  a  classroom  that  engages  all  students. 

57. 

Ms.  Avalos  asserted  that  much  of  the  assistance  and  guidance  was  similar 

to  the  assistance  and  guidance  she  provided  on  January  18,  2017.  She  contended  that 

she  offered  the  specific  items  of  assistance  and  guidance  because  she  saw  no  evidence 

32

that  Respondent  implemented  the  previous  assistance  and  guidance.  Ms.  Avalos  also 

contended  that  she  provided  the  assistance  and  guidance  because  she  wanted 

Respondent  to  demonstrate  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance. 

58. 

Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 

performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 

dismissal  from  the  District. 

MARCH  2,  2017  OBSERVATION 

59. 

On  March  23,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  March  20,  2017,  regarding  her  observation  of 

Respondent's  classroom  on  March  2,  2017  from  10:24  a.m.  to  11:24  a.m.,  during 

Respondent's  Writer’s  Workshop/ELD  lesson.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation, 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  have  her  lesson  plans  out  and  available  for 

reference,  in  violation  of  MPC’s  policies. 

60. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  align  the  Writer's  Workshop  activity  to  the  learning  objective.  Specifically, 

Respondent  instructed  the  class  to  read  out  loud  the  learning  objective,  write  high 

frequency  words  correctly,  out  loud.  She  then  asked  the  students  to  provide  a  sample 

sentence.  When  they  provided  the  sample  sentence,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that 

Respondent  focused  on  spelling  all  of  the  words  in  the  sentence  instead  of  focusing 

the  students  on  the  high  frequency  words.  She  repeated  the  process  with  another 

sentence,  and  then  sent  the  students  to  work  in  their  writing  folders. 

61. 

Respondent  failed  to  plan  for  students  finishing  the  assignment  early. 

When  she  began  to  work  with  a  small  group  of  students,  one  student  immediately 

33

stated  that  he  had  completed  the  assignment.  When  Respondent  directed  the  student 

to  complete  an  additional  task,  the  student  replied  that  he  had  already  completed  it. 

Respondent  then  directed  the  student  to  get  a  new  piece  of  paper.  However,  after  the 

student  walked  over  to  get  more  paper,  five  other  students  followed.  Respondent 

failed  to  re-direct  the  five  additional  students  to  return  to  their  seats.  In  addition,  Ms. 

Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  closely  monitor  the  students  as  they  worked 

independently  in  their  writing  folder,  resulting  in  student  off-task  behavior.  At  least  15 

students  did  not  write  anything  at  all  and  Respondent  failed  to  check  their  work.  Five 

students  drew  pictures  instead  of  completing  the  writing  assignment,  and  three 

students  stacked  pencil  boxes.  Respondent  failed  to  bring  closure  to  the  lesson  in  that 

she  did  not  review  the  learning  objective  with  the  students  or  ask  the  students  to 

share  what  they  learned. 

62. 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  delivered  her  ELD  lesson  in  way  that 

was  difficult  for  five-year-old  students  to  understand.  Specifically,  when  Respondent 

used  a  puppet  to  demonstrate  conversational  English,  she  spoke  rapidly  for  two 

minutes  using  the  same  tone  of  voice,  which  made  it  difficult  to  follow  the 

conversational  exchanges.  When  Respondent  asked  for  student  feedback,  students 

provided  information  from  a  poster  in  the  classroom  regarding  conversational  norms. 

She  then  provided  examples  of  model  and  non-model  English  language  conversation 

herself  instead  of  having  the  students  provide  specific  examples.  As  a  result,  students 

were  unable  to  properly  practice  conversation  skills  when  they  worked  with  their 

partners.  Respondent  then  asked  individual  students  to  share  sentences  with  the  class, 

instead  of  asking  two  students  to  model  having  a  conversation.  Ms.  Avalos  also  noted 

that  Respondent  failed  to  use  discussion  techniques  to  encourage  student 

participation  and  effectively  monitor  and  assess  student  understanding. 

34

63. 

Inthe  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  expressed  concern  that 

Respondent  did  not  achieve  the  purpose  of  the  lesson  because  Respondent  failed  to 

provide  the  students  with  expectations  for  when  they  worked  independently.  As  a 

result,  students  freely  got  up  from  their  seats  to  get  paper  while  others  drew  on  their 

papers  when  they  were  supposed  to  be  writing.  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  consistently  apply  her  class  rules  and  issue  consequences  for  non-compliance 

of  the  rules.  Specifically,  Respondent's  class  rules  stated  that  warnings  would  be  issued 

for  non-compliance  before  students’  clips  are  moved  on  the  behavior  chart.  When 

three  students  propped  their  writing  folders  up  on  their  desks,  Respondent  moved 

their  clips  without  issuing  a  warning.  However,  when  eight  other  students  propped 

folders  up  on  their  desk,  Respondent  did  not  issue  a  warning  to  them  or  move  their 

clips.  In  addition,  Respondent  issued  six  warnings  to  a  student  before  moving  his  clip. 

Also,  because  Respondent  failed  to  explain  and  manage  the  procedures  for  when 

students  work  with  a  partner,  only  a  few  students  were  able  to  work  with  their  partner 

and  achieve  the  learning  objective. 

64. 

On  March  2,  2017,  despite  having  received  assistance,  guidance,  and 

directives  in  the  March  14,  2016  letter  prepared  by  Ms.  Sanchez,  Respondent:  (1)  failed 

to  develop  one  signal  to  always  use  for  students  to  stop  and  listen  to  her;  (2)  failed  to 

review  class  expectations  with  students  daily  by  using  a  visual  chart  to  assist  them  with 

knowing  what  they  are  expected  to  do;  and  (3)  failed  to  implement  the  AEMP 

discussion  and  participation  protocol  with  students. 

65. 

According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference  meeting,  Respondent 

stated  that  her  lesson  plans  were  on  the  table  but  she  forgot  to  look  at  them,  and  she 

did  not  recall  changing  her  voice  for  the  puppet.  Respondent  expressed  belief  that  she 

spoke  more  slowly  than  Ms.  Avalos  reported.  In  addition,  Respondent  defended 

35

students’  use  of  the  poster  to  write  a  sentence,  and  contended  that  students  have  to 

know  the  difference  between  sounding  out  words  and  high  frequency  words. 

Respondent  also  stated  that  when  students  work  on  a  new  skill  independently,  they 

typically  prop  their  folders  up  on  their  desks  to  look  for  high  frequency  words.  She 

also  asserted  that  when  students  first  receive  a  piece  of  paper,  they  typically  draw  a 

picture  before  they  begin  writing. 

66. 

On  March  28,  2017,  Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  the 

conference  memoranda.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  she  stated  that  she 

had  referred  to  her  lesson  plans  during  recess,  and  that  she  wrote  the  objectives  for 

both  the  Writer's  Workshop  and  ELD  lessons  on  the  board.  She  denied  stating  that  she 

forgot  to  look  at  her  lesson  plans,  but  instead  said  that  she  looks  at  them  when  she 

forgets  what  she  is  working  on. 

67. 

In  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  contended  that  she 

followed  all  pacing  plans  pursuant  to  grade-level  planning  with  the  other  kindergarten 

teachers.  She  further  contended  that  she  picked  the  lesson  on  HFWs  because  she 

noticed  that  the  students  were  not  spelling  HFWs  correctly.  Respondent  stated  that 

students  are  allowed  to  get  out  of  their  seats  to  get  additional  pieces  of  paper  but 

most  likely  did  not  during  the  observation  because  Ms.  Avalos  was  in  the  room.  She 

acknowledged  that  students  propped  their  folders  up  because  their  HFWs  were  inside 

of  them.  She  asserted  that  she  changed  to  practice  to  give  students  a  HFW  list  to  use 

so  that  they  did  not  have  to  prop  their  folders  up  and  block  her  view  of  their  work. 

Respondent  contended  that  she  did  not  bring  the  lesson  to  a  close  because  she  was 

out  of  time,  and  Ms.  Avalos  had  previously  instructed  her  to  keep  to  her  schedule. 

68. 

Respondent  indicated  that  she  did  not  feel  as  though  she  was  speaking 

too  quickly,  and  if  she  was  it  was  because  she  was  nervous.  She  contended  that  she 

36

does  not  speak  quickly  when  she  is  not  observed.  Respondent  further  contended  that 

she  typically  changed  her  voice  when  using  the  puppet  but  not  when  she  was 

observed  because  she  believed  her  voice  sounds  silly.  With  respect  to  the  ELD  lesson, 

Respondent  wrote  that  she  did  know  what  Ms.  Avalos’  expectations  were  on  how  the 

lesson  should  be  delivered,  her  training  was  insufficient,  and  she  need  additional 

training. 

69. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  stated  that  she 

reviewed  the  procedures  with  students  for  working  with  partners  on  ELD,  but  she 

suspected  they  needed  more  practice.  She  further  stated  that  students  move  their 

behavior  clips  down  without  a  verbal  warning  because  she  gives  them  a  visual  warning 

first.  Respondent  expressed  a  desire  that  the  informal  observation  process  to  be  more 

positive  because  she  was  only  told  what  she  was  doing  wrong,  and  she  felt  her  hard 

work  went  unnoticed.  She  also  stated  that  she  did  not  know  what  Ms.  Avalos’ 

expectations  were  “for  how  to  teach  in  all  areas.”  (Ex.  21.) 

70. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance: 

(1)  submit  lesson  plans  to  Ms.  Avalos  by  8:00  a.m.  at  the  start  of  each  week,  and  ensure 

that  the  lessons  plans  are  out  and  available  for  reference  during  the  instructional  day; 

(2)  follow  the  Grade  Level  Writer's  Workshop  pacing  plan  by  building  on  previously 

learned  writing  skills;  (3)  refer  to  the  Hunter’s  Lesson  Plan  Format'’  handout  Ms. 

Avalos  provided  Respondent  to  use  when  planning  activities  aligned  to  the  learning 

objective;  (4)  closely  monitor  students  as  they  work  independently  and  give  her  small 

group  work  to  complete  independently  while  Respondent  circulates  the  classroom  and 

  

only. 

'’  Respondent  was  not  required  to  use  the  handout;  it  was  given  as  a  support 

37

ensure  that  the  other  students  complete  independent  work;  (5)  when  providing 

students  a  model/non-model  of  conversational  English  using  the  puppet,  keep  the 

conversation  short  and  concise  and  change  her  voice  so  that  students  can  understand 

and  follow  the  conversation;  (6)  have  clearly  defined  expectations  for  students  as  they 

work  independently  during  Writer's  Workshop;  (7)  consistently  enforce  class  rules  and 

consequences  by  giving  warnings,  followed  by  moving  students’  clips  on  the  behavior 

chart  for  continued  failure  to  follow  the  rules,  and  provide  positive  praise  for  students 

who  follow  the  rules;  and  (8)  establish  procedures  for  students  when  working  with  a 

partner.  Ms.  Avalos  provided  Respondent  with  examples  of  procedures  Respondent 

could  use  when  students  worked  with  a  partner,  and  examples  of  expectations  when 

students  work  independently  during  Writer's  Workshop. 

71. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to  post  and  review a  clear  set  of 

expectations  for  students  when  working  with  a  partner.  The  directive  was  effective 

immediately.  Ms.  Avalos  explained  that  she  issued  the  directive  to  Respondent 

because  she  failed  to  demonstrate  consistency  in  her  classroom  management  system, 

her  classroom  was  not  well-managed,  and  she  failed  to  have  classroom  management 

and  Writer’s  Workshop  procedures  in  place  so  that  the  students  would  know  how  to 

conduct  themselves.  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  the  expectations  and  procedures  should 

have  already  been  in  place  since  it  was  near  the  end  of  the  school  year.  In  addition, 

Ms.  Avalos  saw  no  evidence  that  Respondent  implemented  the  assistance  and 

guidance  she  had  previously  provided  to  her.  She  asserted  that  when  she  asked 

Respondent  why  she  did  not  implement  it,  Respondent  indicated  that  it  was  “too 

much.” 

72. 

Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 

38

performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 

dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Avalos  further  advised  Respondent  that  she  would 

issue  Respondent  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation,  which  would  lead  to  the  discipline  set 

forth  above,  if  she  had  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time. 

MARCH  16,  2017  OBSERVATION 

73. 

On  March  16,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  observed  Respondent  in  her  classroom 

from  12:40  p.m.  to  1:40  p.m.  during  her  mathematics  lesson.'®  Following  the 

observation,  she  held  a  conference  with  Respondent  on  March  30,  2017.  Ms.  Avalos 

memorialized  the  conference  in  a  conference  memorandum  dated  April  3,  2017. 

74. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

continue  to  submit  lesson  plans  to  Ms.  Avalos  by  8:00  a.m.  at  the  start  of  each  week, 

and  ensure  that  the  lesson  plans  are  out  and  available  for  reference  during  the 

instructional  day;  (2)  ensure  that  graphic  organizers  align  to  the  Math  content  and  the 

opportunity  to  observe  a  colleague  deliver  a  lesson  on  decomposing '?  numbers;  (3) 

ask  questions  at  various  depth  of  knowledge  (DOK)  levels  to  facilitate  a  deeper 

discussion  of  the  math  content.  Ms.  Avalos  provided  a  handout  entitled  DOK  Question 

Stems  to  Respondent  for  her  use  when  lesson  planning;  (4)  deliver  lessons  that  include 

  

'8  Respondent's  performance  during  this  observation  is  not  the  subject  of  the 

charges  contained  in  the  Accusation. 

'2  Decomposing  numbers,  a  state  content  standard  for  kindergarten,  is  the 

precursor  to  subtraction,  a  first  grade  standard.  Ms.  Avalos  explained  that  if  students 

do  not  master  the  skill  of  decomposing  numbers,  they  will  most  likely  experience 

difficulty  with  subtraction. 

39

explicit  direct  instructions,  followed  by  opportunities  for  student  guided  and 

independent  practice;  (5)  when  teaching  small  group  instruction,  teach  the  skill  to  all 

students  in  the  small  group  together  at  the  same  time,  and  refrain  from  teaching 

students  individually,  to  reduce  the  amount  of  time  wasted  while  students  wait  for 

their  turn;  (6)  monitor  student  learning,  check  for  understanding,  and  review  the 

independent  work  in  order  to  assess  what  students  learned  during  their  Math  Centers; 

(7)  for  math  centers,  have  the  procedures  written  on  each  of  the  math  center  pop-up 

tents,  a  pocket  chart,  and  cards  with  student  names  assigned  to  the  math  center;  and 

(8)  continued  access  to  Respondent's  PAR  teacher  for  assistance  with  developing  and 

implementing  rigorous  lessons  plans,  using  various  instructional  strategies  and 

resources  to  respond  to  the  students’  needs,  including  lesson  pacing,  using  rich 

academic  language,  developing  behavior  management  tools,  monitoring  student 

behavior,  and  creating  a  classroom  that  engages  all  students. 

75.  —  Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to  do  the  following:  (1)  state  the 

objective  and/or  standard  of  the  lesson  at  the  beginning  of  the  lesson  and  repeat  it 

during  and  at  the  end  of  each  lesson.  Explain  the  lesson  objective  and  ask  the  students 

to  explain  it;  (2)  model  what  is  expected  of  the  students,  and  give  them  time  to 

practice  the  skill  before  expecting  them  to  complete  it  independently;  (3)  stay  focused 

on  the  lesson  objective  because  interruptions  to  key  objectives  during  the  lesson  make 

it  difficult  for  student  learners  to  stay  focused;  and  (4)  be  consistent  with  class  rules 

and  consequences  by  giving  warnings  to  students  for  not  following  the  rules,  having 

them  move  their  clip  on  the  behavior  chart  after  the  warning,  and  providing  positive 

praise  for  students  that  consistently  follow  the  rules. 

AO

APRIL  27,  2017  OBSERVATION 

76. 

On  May  15,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  a  conference 

she  held  with  Respondent  on  May  11,  2017,  regarding  her  observation  of 

Respondent's  classroom  on  April  27,  2017  during  Respondent's  language  math  lesson. 

77. 

A. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  expressed  concern 

that  Respondent  demonstrated  little  knowledge  of  the  developmental  characteristics 

of  five-year-old  students  or  how  they  learn  best.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to 

explain  the  process  of  decomposing  numbers  for  the  lesson  entitled  “I  can  decompose 

numbers  to  19.”  She  filled  in  the  number  sentence  “19=___  +  ___,”  and  did  not 

encourage  students  to  practice  using  graphic  organizers/ten  frames.  As  a  result, 

students  were  unable  to  perform  the  skill  on  their  own.  When  Respondent  asked 

students  to  find  another  way  to  decompose  the  number  19  using  the  graphic 

organizer,  nine  students  copied  Respondent's  model  and  two  others  filled  in  the 

wrong  Information.  In  addition,  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  student  learning  in  that 

she  did  not  offer  feedback  to  the  students  or  correct  their  errors. 

B. 

Respondent  failed  to  provide  clear  directions  to  students  so  that 

they  could  work  independently.  Specifically,  she  wrote  two  sets  of  number  sentences 

on  the  white  board,  one  with  the  number  19  and  one  with  the  number  18,  without 

using  the  graphic  organizer.  She  did  not  specify  what  sentence  the  students  should 

use.  Before  sending  the  students  to  their  seats  to  work,  Respondent  did  not  give  them 

the  same  graphic  organizers  to  use.  Instead,  she  told  them  to  go  to  their  tables,  gave 

them  a  blank  piece  of  paper,  and  told  them  to  write  number  sentences  for  19. 

41

C. 

Respondent  failed  to  provide  adequate  wait  time  for  students  after 

repeatedly  asking  questions,  so  that  students  were  unable  to  understand  the  questions 

or  formulate  an  answer. 

78. 

A. 

In  the  area  of  classroom  environment,  Respondent  failed  to 

establish  or  manage  classroom  routines,  transitions,  and  procedures,  in  that  she  failed 

to  use  the  timer  throughout  the  lesson.  When  she  sent  students  back  to  their  seats  to 

work  independently,  several  students  stood  around  talking,  and  another  student 

walked  to  the  classroom  door  and  opened  it. 

B. 

Respondent  also  failed  to  enforce  her  class  rules  and  issue 

consequences  to  students  who  failed  to  follow  the  rules.  Student  S.  rolled  on  the  floor 

for  10  minutes  but  Respondent  only  re-directed  him  once.  He  briefly  stopped,  but 

continued  rolling  on  the  floor.  Students  did  not  respond  to  Respondent's  requests  for 

them  to  stop  talking  and  listen  to  two  students  who  were  sharing  how  they 

decomposed  the  number  19.  Respondent  re-directed  Student  A.  when  he  was  not 

sitting  in  his  assigned  spot  on  the  rug,  however,  after  a  short  time,  he  got  up  and 

started  touching  a  book  in  the  front  of  the  room.  Respondent  threatened  to  move  his 

clip  from  yellow  to  red,  but  never  did. 

79.  —  Ms.  Avalos  explained  that  the  students’  off-task  behavior  adversely 

impacted  the  learning  environment.  She  expressed  concern  that  it  was  near  the  end  of 

the  school  year  and  Respondent's  students  did  not  appear  to  be  mastering  the 

kindergarten  standards. 

80. 

OnApril  27,  2017,  despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance 

and  directives  during  conferences  with  Ms.  Avalos  on  March  20,  2017,  and  March  30, 

2017,  and  as  memorialized  in  Conference  Memoranda  dated  March  23,  2017,  and  April 

42

3,  2017,  and  with  the  directives  in  the  March  14,  2016,  letter,  Respondent:  (1)  failed  to 

model  for  students  what  she  expected  them  to  do,  and  give  them  time  to  practice  the 

learned  skills  before  independently  completing  the  task;  (2)  failed  to  stay  focused  on 

the  lessons  objective;  (3)  failed  to  be  consistent  with  class  rules  and  consequences  by 

giving  students  warnings  for  not  following  the  rules,  moving  their  behavior  chart  clips 

after  warnings,  and  providing  positive  praise  for  those  who  consistently  followed  the 

rules;  (4)  failed  to  post  and  review  a  set  of  clear  expectations  for  students  when 

working  with  a  partner;  (5)  failed  to  develop  one  signal  to  always  use  for  students  to 

stop  and  listen  to  her;  (6)  failed  to  review  class  expectations  with  students  daily  by 

using  a  visual  chart  to  assist  them  with  knowing  what  they  are  expected  to  do;  and  (7) 

failed  to  implement  the  AEMP  discussion  and  participation  protocols  with  students. 

81. 

|  According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference  meeting  Respondent 

stated  that  she  taught  the  lesson  on  decomposing  the  number  19  the  following  day 

and  it  was  effective.  She  asserted  that  she  used  the  number  18  for  the  lesson  because 

she  used  that  number  the  day  before  and  was  successful.  Respondent  did  not  recall 

the  student  opening  the  classroom  door  and  stated  that  she  would  never  allow  the 

student  to  exit  the  room.  Respondent  agreed  that  the  students  were  confused  during 

the  lesson,  she  disputed  that  Student  S.  rolled  on  the  floor  for  10  minutes,  and  she 

asked  for  suggestions  on  how  to  work  with  students  who  behaved  like  Student  S. 

82. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

follow  the  posted  schedule  on  a  daily  basis  to  ensure  that  all  content  areas  are 

covered;  (2)  clearly  deliver  the  math  content.  Rather  than  just  explain  the  directions  to 

students,  engage  them  in  a  discussion  in  order  to  check  for  understanding  before 

asking  them  to  work  independently  to  complete  a  task;  as  a  reminder,  younger 

students  need  more  repetition,  and  more  frequent  checks  for  comprehension,  before 

43

and  during  an  activity.  If  Respondent  expected  them  to  decompose  the  number  19, 

then  model  using  that  number  only,  and  do  not  confuse  them  by  using  additional 

numbers;  (3)  provide  wait  time  for  students  after  asking  a  question,  and  do  not  restate 

the  same  question  over  and  over  —  review  and  implement  suggested  strategies  in  the 

Art  of  Questioning  of  in  Math  Class  (handout  provided);  (4)  establish,  model,  and  use 

only  one  method  to  get  students’  attention,  such  as  “Eyes  on  me,”  and  wait  for  all 

students  to  respond  before  moving  on  with  the  lesson  so  that  all  students  get  access 

to  lesson  content;  (5)  young  students  learn  best  when  structure  and  expectations  for 

behavior  have  been  established.  Establish  or  manage  classroom  routines,  transitions 

and  procedures  for  sending  students  back  to  their  seats  in  order  to  avoid  the  loss  of 

instructional  time  as  the  students  who  do  not  comply  with  requests  are  redirected.  Use 

the  timer  consistently  throughout  the  lesson  to  help  enforce  these  routines,  transitions 

and  procedures.  Ms.  Avalos  provided  detailed  instructions  and  examples  on  how  to 

establish  expectations  for  student  behavior  and  enforce  class  rules;  (6)  continued 

access  to  Respondent's  PAR  teacher  for  assistance  with  developing  and  implementing 

rigorous  lesson  plans,  using  various  instructional  strategies  and  resources  to  respond 

to  the  students’  needs,  including  lesson-pacing,  using  rich  academic  language, 

developing  behavior  management  tools,  monitoring  student  behavior,  and  creating  a 

classroom  that  engages  all  students. 

83. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to  establish  procedures  for  students, 

including  but  not  limited  to,  consistently  enforcing  her  class  rules,  using  the  timer 

consistently  throughout  her  lesson,  and  transitioning  students  from  the  rug  to  their 

seats.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  or  follow  the  directive,  it  could  lead  to  an 

overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service, 

Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

44

MAY  18,  2017  OBSERVATION 

84. 

Ms.  Avalos  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  on  May 

18,  2017  from  1:34  p.m.  to  2:15  p.m.,  during  her  Reading  Activity  lesson.  On  June  5, 

2017,  Ms.  Avalos  conducted  a  conference  meeting  with  Respondent  regarding  her 

observation.  One  June  6,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  the 

conference  meeting  in  a  memorandum. 

85. 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  establish  instructional 

outcomes  for  the  planned  activities  in  her  lesson  plans  when  she  wrote  only  the  lesson 

subject  and  activity  to  be  conducted  next  to  the  timeframe  for  the  lesson.  She  failed  to 

adhere  to  her  lesson  plans  or  follow  her  posted  schedule,  and  she  failed  to  prepare  a 

science  or  writing  lesson  even  though  she  listed  them  in  her  lesson  plans.  Instead, 

Respondent  began  a  reading  activity  that  she  had  prepared  for  the  next  day. 

86. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  failed  to  use  subject 

matter  content  standards  to  establish  rigorous  learning  goals,  in  that  she  did  not 

review  the  subject  of  lesson,  she  did  not  remind  students  of  previous  activities  they 

completed  when  they  learned  the  subject,  and  she  did  not  ask  them  to  rephrase  the 

learning  goals.  During  the  lesson,  which  was  about  identifying  the  main  idea, 

Respondent  failed  to  follow  a  logical  progression  so  that  students  could  identify  the 

main  idea.  Instead  she  asked  students  questions  focused  on  finding  details  in  a  story. 

As  a  result,  students  were  unable  to  understand  the  concept  of  a  main  idea  and  gave 

erroneous  answers  when  working  with  their  partners.  In  addition,  when  Respondent 

asked  students  to  draw  a  picture  about  the  main  idea,  which  was  about  snakes,  five 

students  drew  pictures  of  houses  or  people.  Respondent  failed  to  pace  the  lesson, 

which  resulted  in  off-task  behavior  that  she  had  to  re-direct.  Ms.  Avalos  also  noted 

that  Respondent  failed  to  provide  clear  directions  to  students  on  how  to  work  with  a 

45

partner,  in  that  she  gave  verbal  directions  and  did  not  model  for  the  students  what  she 

expected  them  to  do. 

87. 

Inthe  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  provide  a  safe  and  supportive  classroom  environment,  in  that  she  mainly 

focused  her  attention  on  several  female  students.  Specifically,  she  gave  positive  praise 

to  five  female  students  for  using  their  “think  time,”  but  did  not  praise  any  of  the  male 

students  who  were  thinking  quietly.  Respondent  failed  to  consistently  issue 

appropriate  consequences  for  off-task  behavior  when  she  moved  some  students’  clips 

without  giving  them  prior  warnings,  but  gave  other  students  multiple  warnings  before 

moving  their  clips.  For  example,  she  gave  another  student  nine  warnings  before  she 

moved  his  clip.  Five  instructional  minutes  were  lost  because  Respondent  failed  to 

establish  procedures  for  students  to  line  up  at  the  end  of  the  day.  Specifically, 

Respondent  gave  a  series  of  verbal  instructions  that  she  had  to  repeat  because  instead 

of  lining  up,  some  students  walked  around  the  room  while  others  gathered  around  the 

front  door  and  began  talking  to  each  other. 

88. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

submit  complete  lesson  plans  that  include  the  learning  objectives,  content  standards 

and  activities  in  which  students  will  be  engaged;  (2)  follow  lesson  plans  and  posted 

schedule  on  a  daily  basis  to  make  sure  all  necessary  content  areas  are  covered;  (3) 

design  lessons  aligned  to  the  expected  outcomes;  (4)  establish  rigorous  learning  goals 

for  the  students  by  communicating  the  purpose  of  the  lesson,  asking  students  to 

repeat  the  objective,  and  reviewing  it  with  them  at  the  end  of  the  lesson;  (5)  deliver  a 

teacher-directed  lesson  that  follows  a  logical  progression  in  order  to  support  student 

learning.  Plan,  prepare,  and  ask  questions  aligned  to  the  skill/concept  to  be  taught;  (6) 

pace  lessons  so  that  excess  time  is  not  spent  on  one  activity,  and  review  the  behavior 

AG

expectations  with  the  class  before  the  lesson  to  avoid  having  to  redirect  excessive  off- 

task  behavior;  (7)  provide  clear  directions  to  students  before  asking  them  to  share  with 

their  partner  by  writing  directions  on  the  board  as  a  model  for  visual  learners,  and 

provide  a  model  for  students  to  follow  as  they  share;  (8)  provide  opportunities  for  all 

students  to  share  by  using  tools  such  as  equity  sticks  —  review  suggestions  in  the 

handout  provided  (How  to  Protocol—Increasing  Student  Engagement);  (9)  consistently 

enforce  the  class  rules  by  instilling  consequences  for  students  after  one  warning,  and 

when  students  comply  with  the  rules,  consider  moving  their  behavior  clips  in  a  positive 

direction,  rather  than  only  focusing  on  the  negative  behavior  and  consequences;  and 

(10)  establish  procedures  for  having  students  line  up  at  the  end  of  the  day  to  avoid  the 

loss  of  instructional  time.  Teach  the  procedures,  model  them,  and  hold  students 

accountable. 

89. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  follow  her  lesson  plans  on  a  daily 

basis  to  ensure  she  covered  the  necessary  academic  content  on  a  daily  basis;  (2) 

enforce  classroom  rules,  give  students  one  warning  for  off-task  behavior,  and  move 

students’  clips  if  they  continued  off-task  behavior;  and  (3)  align  the  instructional 

activities  to  the  objective.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an 

immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  or  follow  the  directives,  It 

could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

2016-2017  STULL  EVALUATION 

90. 

On  May  4,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  prepared  a  Stull  evaluation  of  Respondent's 

performance  for  the  2016-2017  school  year  based  on  her  formal  and  informal 

observations.  Ms.  Avalos  commented  that  Respondent  demonstrated  a  mix  of 

developing  an  effective  practice  during  the  formal  observation,  but  during  the 

47

informal  observations,  Respondent  demonstrated  minimal  growth.  She  rated 

Respondent  ineffective  in  the  areas  of  providing  supervision  and  controlling  students 

and  regularly  preparing  appropriate  lesson  plans.  Ms.  Avalos  commented  that 

Respondent's  performance  during  the  year  ranged  from  ineffective  to  effective  levels 

of  performance,  and  that  Respondent  needed  to  improve  on  preparing  lesson  plans  in 

advance  and  having  them  available  during  instructional  time.  She  also  noted  that 

Respondent  needed  to  demonstrate  improvement  in  providing  supervision  and 

controlling  students.  Ms.  Avalos  gave  Respondent  a  Final  Evaluation  Rating  of  “Below 

Standard  Performance.” 

91. 

Ms.  Avalos  provided  an  attachment  to  the  Evaluation  that  contained  22 

specific  deficiencies  consistent  with  the  deficiencies  noted  during  the  conference 

meetings.  The  attachment  also  contained  22  recommendations  consistent  with  the 

assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  contained  in  the  conference  memoranda  provided 

to  Respondent  during  the  school  year.  Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  continued 

assistance  in  the  following  areas:  (1)  development  of  effective  classroom  management 

and  student  discipline  procedures;  (2)  lesson  planning  and  differentiation  of 

instruction;  (3)  observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  instruction  on  a  periodic  basis, 

providing  actionable  feedback,  and  specific  assistance  and  guidance;  (4)  review  of 

relevant  district  policies;  and  (4)  the  continuation  of  all  other  assistance  noted  in  the 

attachment. 

92. 

Ms.  Avalos  indicated  Respondent  would  be  evaluated  during  the  2017- 

2018  school  year.  Respondent  signed  the  evaluation  but  did  not  agree  with  it. 

93. 

On  August  23,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee  without  pay  for  a  period  of  eight  days,  and  a 

Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Acts  of  Certificated  Employee  for  the  period  of 

48

December  7,  2016,  to  April  27,  2017,  for:  (1)  unsatisfactory  performance;  and  (2) 

persistent  violation  of  and  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable 

regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  school  by  the  state  board  of 

education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  school  district  employing  her.  Specifically, 

Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  District's  Master  Plan  and  teaching  and  learning 

framework,  the  CSTP,  the  District's  Mathematics  Instructional  Guide,  and  the  CCCS  for 

ELA  and  mathematics.  For  reasons  not  made  clear  by  the  record,  Respondent  did  not 

serve  the  suspension. 

SEPTEMBER  22,  2017  OBSERVATION 

94. 

On  October  18,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  October  16,  2017,  regarding  Ms.  Avalos’ 

observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  on  September  22,  2017,  during  Respondent's 

Language  Arts  activities.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  Respondent  failed  to 

submit  a  lesson  plan  with  clearly  defined  instructional  outcomes.  Instead,  she  included 

a  list  of  loosely-related  activities  in  the  plan. 

95. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  failed  to  provide  two 

students  with  directions  or  procedures  for  a  10-minute  Writer’s  Workshop  sharing 

activity,  in  that  she  did  not  explain  how  students  should  call  on  classmates.  As  a  result, 

when  students  raised  their  hands  after  student  A.  shared  her  paper,  she  did  not  know 

what  to  do.  When  Respondent  told  Student  A.  to  “pick  someone,”  Student  A.  walked 

over  to  a  group  of  students  as  if  she  were  playing  a  game.  In  addition,  Respondent 

failed  to  explain  how  to  ask  questions,  and  she  failed  to  communicate  the  purpose  of 

the  Language  Arts  activity,  which  was  to  learn  the  difference  between  fiction  and  non- 

49

fiction.  She  did  not  use  the  District-approved  materials  from  the  Benchmark  Advance? 

literacy  program  correctly  when  she  pointed  at  pictures  in  the  book  instead  of  reading 

stories  out  loud  with  the  students. 

96. 

Ms.  Avalos  expressed  concern  that  Respondent  did  not  use  academic 

language,  such  as  “fiction,” 

Wo 

“non-fiction,”  and  “photographs”  but  instead  used  the 

terms  “fantasy,” 

oo 

“reality,”  and  “pictures.”  Respondent  also  failed  to  ensure  that  all 

students  had  an  equal  opportunity  to  participate  in  a  question-answer  session,  in  that 

she  called  on  four  students  multiple  times,  but  failed  to  call  on  the  remaining  16 

students  at  all.  Also,  Respondent  announced  to  the  class  that  she  was  going  to  use 

equity  sticks  to  call  on  students  who  had  not  participated,  but  she  only  used  the  equity 

Sticks  twice. 

97. 

Inthe  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  effectively  manage  classroom  routines,  in  that  four  students  wandered  from 

their  seats  to  talk  to  other  students  when  Respondent  attempted  to  transition  the  class 

from  their  desks  to  the  rug.  Respondent  did  not  redirect  their  behavior.  Two  students 

left  the  room  without  the  restroom  pass  in  violation  of  MPC  policy,  and  Respondent 

did  not  remind  them  to  use  it.  Respondent  also  failed  to  monitor  or  re-direct  off-task 

behavior  that  took  place  at  the  students’  work  tables  and  on  the  rug  as  follows:  three 

students  stared  at  their  papers  for  five  minutes  and  did  no  work;  two  other  students 

stopped  working  and  looked  around  the  room  at  other  students  for  five  minutes;  six 

  

2°  Benchmark  Advance  is  a  part  of  the  ELA  curriculum.  The  District  trained 

Respondent  on  the  curriculum  the  previous  summer.  Respondent  was  also  allotted 

planning  time  for  the  Benchmark  Advance  curriculum  during  the  school  year  during 

PLC  and  bank  time. 

50

other  students  looked  around  the  room  for  five  minutes  instead  of  watching 

Respondent,  and  four  other  students  put  their  heads  on  the  table  and  closed  their 

eyes  for  four  minutes. 

98. 

According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference,  Respondent  stated  that 

she  needed  assistance  with  lesson  plans,  pacing,  and  the  Benchmark  Advance 

curriculum.  Respondent  also  stated  that  she  used  popsicle  sticks  to  facilitate  student 

participation,  but  she  could  not  get  16  students  to  participate.  She  did  not  recall 

students  getting  up  from  their  table  and  going  to  another  table,  and  she  recalled  all 

the  students  being  on  task. 

99. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  guidance  and  assistance:  (1) 

submit  lesson  plans  with  clearly  defined  instructional  outcomes,  use  the  District's 

“Lesson  Design  Template”  (handout  provided),  and  continue  to  submit  lessons  on  a 

weekly  basis;  (2)  provide  students  with  clear  directions  and  procedures  for  class 

activities  so  that  students  know  how  to  interact  with  each  other,  and  use  the  examples 

in  “Open  Ended  Questions”  (handout  provided);  (3)  clearly  communicate  the  purpose 

and  objective  at  the  start  of  each  lesson  instead  of  beginning  with  an  activity;  (4)  use 

instructional  materials  correctly  by  referring  to  the  Teachers  Resource  System  and 

follow  the  suggested  steps;  (5)  use  academic  language  to  deepen  student 

understanding  of  key  vocabulary,  slow  the  speed  of  delivery  of  the  lesson,  explain  key 

words,  and  provide  examples;  (6)  use  techniques  to  ensure  students  have  an  equal 

opportunity  to  participate  in  class  discussions  and  activities,  use  equity  sticks 

consistently  throughout  the  lesson,  and  review  the  provided  handout  entitled 

“Reaching  all  Students”;  (7)  manage  classroom  routines  by  ensuring  all  students  know 

how  to  efficiently  transition  from  their  work  tables  to  the  rug,  enforce  the  MPC 

expectation  regarding  student  use  of  bathroom  passes,  and  review  The  Well  Managed 

31

Classroom  that  was  provided  during  the  conference;  (8)  monitor  student  behavior 

throughout  the  lesson,  check  for  understanding,  redirect  off-task  student  behavior;  (9) 

consistently  enforce  the  class  rules  by  instilling  consequences  for  students  after  one 

warning,  and  when  students  comply  with  the  rules,  consider  moving  their  behavior 

clips  in  a  positive  direction,  rather  than  only  focusing  on  the  negative  behavior  and 

consequences;  and  (10)  Ms.  Avalos  to  assist  with  resources  or  training  on  lesson 

planning,  pacing,  and  the  curriculum.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to 

make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance,  it  could  lead  to 

an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service, 

Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

OCTOBER  26,  2017  OBSERVATION 

100. 

On  November  8,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  November  6,  2017,  regarding  Ms.  Avalos’ 

observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  on  October  26,  2017,  during  Respondent's 

ELD/ELA  lessons.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  Ms.  Avalos  expressed 

concern  that  Respondent  demonstrated  little  knowledge  of  how  five-year-old  ELA 

students  learn.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to  plan  activities  that  included  visuals  to 

help  students  internalize  the  lesson  content.  Instead,  she  conducted  the  entire  activity 

orally.  Respondent  also  failed  to  frequently  check  for  understanding  and 

comprehension  throughout  the  lesson,  and  moved  quickly  from  one  activity  to 

another. 

101. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  follow  the  ELD  Start  Smart  lesson,  in  that  she  did  not  remind  the  students  of 

the  skill  she  was  teaching,  and  she  did  not  provide  them  with  the  prompt  and 

response  starters  and  conversation  pattern  game  cards  that  were  included  in  the 

52

curriculum.  In  addition,  Respondent's  pace  of  the  ELA  Shared  Reading  activity  did  not 

allow  time  for  students  to  process  or  independently  practice  the  skill  of  identifying  the 

initial  and  final  sounds  of  words.  As  a  result,  17  of  19  students  struggled  with 

producing  the  final  sounds,  and  instead  repeated  the  initial  sound  for  three  words. 

Instead  of  slowing  the  pace  of  the  lesson,  Respondent  moved  on  to  learning  center 

activities. 

102. 

Ms.  Avalos  asserted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  Respondent 

implemented  the  questioning  techniques  she  was  previously  provided  as  assistance 

and  guidance.  She  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  use  effective  questioning 

techniques  to  elicit  student  responses,  in  that  she  asked  multiple  questions  in  rapid 

succession,  asked  and  answered  questions  herself,  and  provided  answers  before  she 

asked  questions.  Respondent  also  failed  to  clearly  communicate  the  purpose  of  a 

Shared  Reading  lesson,  which  was  “I  can  find  the  setting  in  my  story.”  She  wrote  the 

objective  on  the  board,  but  then  told  the  students  that  they  would  not  be  learning 

about  the  setting.  Respondent  then  stated,  “There  is  morning  ...  afternoon...  and 

night”  as  examples  of  settings,  and  then  asked  the  students  to  repeat  the  objective. 

103. 

Inthe  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  establish  a  clear  set  of  consequences  for  off-task  behavior.  Specifically,  her 

behavior  chart  had  two  sets  of  consequences.  In  addition,  Respondent  did  not  review 

the  rules  with  students  who  were  off-task,  but  reprimanded  them  for  not  following 

them.  Moreover,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  sent  a  group  of  five  students  to 

work  on  iPad  learning  centers  in  order  to  use  two  applications.  Two  of  the  students 

used  a  different  application  than  the  ones  mentioned  by  Respondent,  and  another 

student  played  music.  Respondent  did  not  re-direct  those  students. 

53

104. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance  and  directives  during 

the  June  5,  2017  conference  with  Ms.  Avalos,  as  memorialized  in  the  June  6,  2017 

Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  enforce  the  classroom  rules.  She  also 

failed  to  give  students  one  warning  for  off-task  behavior  and  to  ensure  that  their  clips 

are  moved  on  the  behavior  chart  if  they  continued  the  behavior. 

105. 

Respondent  did  not  prepare  the  iPads  prior  to  student  use.  When  one 

student  struggled  with  the  headphones,  another  student  attempted  to  help  her. 

Consequently,  the  student  was  unable  to  plug  in  the  headphones  and  the  sound  of  the 

iPad  disturbed  the  other  students  who  were  working.  Respondent  never  helped  the 

student  to  make  sure  she  successfully  accessed  the  instructional  activity. 

106. 

Respondent  failed  to  efficiently  transition  students  from  the  independent 

centers  to  the  rug,  in  that  she  gave  seven  commands  in  rapid  succession  and,  as  a 

result,  12  of  16  students  did  not  walk  to  the  rug  and  sit  down.  Six  students  walked  to 

the  rug  and  stood  talking  to  each  other,  four  other  students  walked  out  of  the 

classroom  to  the  restroom,  one  student  hid,  and  another  student  walked  over  to  a 

table  and  flipped  over  two  water  bottles  repeatedly. 

107. 

Respondent  failed  to  establish  a  classroom  environment  where  students 

showed  mutual  respect  for  one  another.  While  two  students  gave  a  presentation  at  the 

front  of  the  room,  several  students  engaged  in  the  following  off-task  behavior:  five 

students  looked  around  the  room;  another  student  played  with  his  sweater  and 

Respondent  had  to  take  it  away  from  him;  another  student  played  with  a  piece  of 

paper,  but  Respondent  did  not  take  it  away;  and  two  students  yawned  loudly  twice, 

but  Respondent  did  not  redirect  them.  In  addition,  several  students  were  talking  and 

Respondent  asked  them  to  listen  to  the  presentation  with  inconsistent  results.  Because 

54

Respondent  had  to  repeatedly  address  off-task  behavior,  Respondent  was  not  able  to 

focus  on  the  students  who  were  presenting. 

108. 

According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference  Respondent  asserted 

that  she  used  visual  aids  during  a  previous  lesson  and  you  did  not  believe  she  needed 

it  for  the  observed  lesson.  She  also  asserted  that  there  was  not  enough  time  to  cover 

all  components  of  the  program,  and  she  disagreed  with  Ms.  Avalos’  description  of  the 

lesson  contents.  Respondent  indicated  that  she  did  not  recall  the  students  getting  out 

of  their  seats  and  following  directions,  and  she  contended  that  her  classroom 

environment  was  never  chaotic.  She  also  stated  that  she  did  not  have  enough 

headphones  for  the  iPads. 

109. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

plan  activities  that  include  visuals  for  every  lesson  to  make  the  learning 

comprehensible  for  students,  and  plan  for  frequent  checks  for  understanding  and 

comprehension  and  do  not  move  quickly  from  one  activity  to  another;  (2)  follow  the 

ELD  Start  Smart  lessons  to  help  EL  students  understand  the  various  activities,  and  take 

up  to  two  days  to  teach  ELD  lessons  to  avoid  feeling  rushed  to  cover  all  of  the  content 

in  one  day;  (3)  pace  your  activities  to  allow  the  five-year-old  students  to  internalize  the 

skills  taught,  and  provide  independent  activities  for  them  to  practice  them;  (4)  use 

effective  questioning  techniques  to  illicit  student  responses,  allow  adequate  wait  time 

for  students  to  process  the  questions  and  offer  a  response,  refrain  from  providing 

answers  before  asking  the  question  or  Respondent  answering  the  question  herself. 

Read  the  article  “Effective  Classroom  Discussions,”  which  was  provided  to  Respondent; 

(5)  clearly  communicate  the  purpose  of  the  lesson  and  review  the  learning  objective 

prior  to  the  lesson  to  understand  it.  Ms.  Avalos  provided  Respondent  with  a  handout 

entitled  “Know  Your  Learning  Target,”  and  suggested  that  she  read  and  review  it;  (6) 

55

remind  the  students  of  the  class  rules  when  they  engage  in  off-task  behavior,  and 

align  the  consequences  charts  so  that  it  is  clear  to  the  students;  (7)  prepare  the  iPads 

in  the  morning  as  students  are  eating  their  breakfast,  and  plug  the  headphones  into 

each  one  so  the  students  do  not  struggle  with  them;  (8)  establish  effective  transitions, 

and  consider  having  a  signal  for  each  step  like  holding  up  one  finger  to  signal  “clean- 

up  time,”  and  two  fingers  to  signal  “stand  behind  your  chair,”  etc.;  (9)  establish  a 

classroom  environment  where  students  show  mutual  respect  for  one  another,  remind 

them  of  behavior  expectations  before  asking  student  volunteers  to  share  their  work, 

and  hold  them  accountable;  (10)  continued  access  to  a  PAR  Consulting  Teacher;  and 

(11)  Ms.  Avalos  to  provide  additional  iPad  headphones. 

110. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  communicate  the  purpose  and 

objective  of  each  lesson  to  the  students,  effective  immediately;  (2)  establish  classroom 

routines  by  ensuring  that  all  students  know  how  to  efficiently  transition  from  their 

work  tables  to  the  rug;  and  (3)  monitor  student  behavior  throughout  each  lesson,  and 

redirect  off-task  behavior.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an 

immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  or  follow  the  directives,  It 

could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

NOVEMBER  7,  2017  OBSERVATION 

111. 

On  December  4,  2017,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  a 

conference  she  held  with  Respondent  on  November  30,  2017,  regarding  her 

observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  on  November  7,  2017,  during  Respondent's 

mathematics  lesson.  In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that 

Respondent  failed  to  pace  her  lesson  to  allow  time  for  the  students  to  internalize  or 

independently  count  objects  by  ones.  Specifically,  Respondent  spent  only  four  minutes 

56

on  modeling  how  to  count  out  loud  to  the  number  14,  and  spoke  rapidly  while  doing 

so.  She  provided  eight  directions  to  the  students  in  30  seconds.  Respondent  failed  to 

use  effective  questioning  techniques  to  elicit  student  responses,  in  that  she  did  not 

provide  adequate  wait  time  after  asking  questions.  She  asked  22  questions  in  rapid 

succession. 

112. 

Ms.  Avalos  asserted  that  she  saw  no  evidence  that  Respondent 

implemented  the  previous  assistance  and  guidance  regarding  effective  questioning. 

According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference,  Respondent  requested  an  audio 

recording  of  the  lesson. 

113. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  the  following  assistance  and  guidance  to  Respondent: 

(1)  pace  activities  to  allow  five-year-old  students  to  internalize  the  skills  taught  and 

provide  independent  activities  from  them  to  practice  the  skills;  (2)  use  effective 

questioning  techniques  to  illicit  student  responses,  allow  adequate  wait  time  for  the 

students  to  process  the  question  and  offer  a  response,  and  refrain  from  providing 

answers  before  asking  the  question  or  answering  the  questions.  Ms.  Avalos  provided  a 

handout  entitled  “The  Art  of  Questioning  in  Math  Class”  and  suggested  that 

Respondent  read  and  review  it;  (3)  Ms.  Avalos  to  arrange  for  Respondent  to  observe  a 

colleague  perform  a  lesson  that  demonstrates  lesson-pacing  and  questioning 

techniques  during  the  month  of  December,  which  Ms.  Avalos  would  observe  with 

Respondent  and  debrief  with  her;  (4)  continued  access  to  Respondent's  PAR  teacher; 

and  (5)  Ms.  Avalos  to  provide  a  copy  of  the  recording. 

114. 

Ms.  Avalos  asserted  that  she  and  Respondent  observed  Respondent's 

colleague  deliver  a  lesson.  Respondent  contended  that  she  did  not  receive  a  recording 

of  the  lesson. 

5/7

115. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  pace  activities  to  allow  five-year- 

old  students  to  internalize  the  skills  Respondent  planned  to  teach;  and  (2)  use  effective 

questioning  techniques  to  illicit  student  responses.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if 

Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her 

performance  or  follow  the  directives,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 

performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 

dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Avalos  also  advised  Respondent  that  if  she  were  to 

evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time,  she  would  issue  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation,  which 

may  lead  to  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal 

from  the  District. 

JANUARY  22,  2018  OBSERVATION 

116. 

Ms.  Avalos  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  on 

January  22,  2018,  from  12:42  p.m.  to  1:44  p.m.,  during  her  Reader’s  and  Writer's 

Workshop  activities.  Ms.  Avalos  conducted  a  conference  with  Respondent  regarding 

her  observation  on  January  31,  2018.  On  February  1,  2018,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized 

the  substance  of  the  conference  and  her  observations. 

117. 

In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that 

Respondent  submitted  generic  lesson  plans  that  did  not  include  the  sequence  of 

activities  for  the  Reader's  and  Writer’s  Workshop  activities  that  she  planned  to  teach. 

In  addition,  Respondent  failed  to  plan  and  design  writing  activities  aligned  to  the  “I 

can”  objective,  in  that  she  wrote  one  objective  in  her  plans  (“I  can  use  correct  letter 

form,  spaces,  and  my  writing  is  neat”),  but  wrote  on  the  whiteboard  in  class  a  different 

objective  (“I  can  use  a  circle  map  to  help  me  write”). 

58

118. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  during 

the  June  5,  2017  conference  with  Ms.  Avalos,  as  memorialized  in  the  June  6,  2017 

Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  align  instructional  activities  to  the 

objective. 

119. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  failed  to  state  the 

learning  objective  at  the  beginning  of  both  the  Reader's  and  Writer's  Workshop 

activities.  She  failed  to  properly  bring  the  Reader's  Workshop  lesson  to  a  close  when 

she  did  not  review  the  “I  can”  statement  or  ask  the  students  what  they  learned. 

Instead,  Respondent  moved  on  to  the  Writer's  Workshop  activity. 

120. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  during 

the  November  6,  2017  conference  with  Ms.  Avalos,  as  memorialized  in  the  November 

8,  2017  Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  communicate  the  purpose 

and  objective  of  each  lesson  to  the  students. 

121. 

In  addition,  during  the  Writer's  Workshop  activity,  Respondent  incorrectly 

modeled  how  to  find  the  main  idea  in  the  story  when  she  asked  the  students  to 

describe  what  they  saw  in  the  lesson  book  instead  of  asking  them  to  look  for  details  in 

the  story,  which  would  lead  them  to  the  main  idea.  Respondent  then  accepted  and 

wrote  several  adjectives  provided  by  the  students  that  did  not  align  to  the  story's  main 

idea.  Further,  Respondent  failed  to  provide  a  model  for  how  to  write  an  “All  about 

story”  that  students  could  access  when  working  independently.  As  a  result,  while  the 

15  students  who  worked  independently  were  supposed  to  write  about  transportation, 

six  students  drew  pictures  for  a  story  they  previously  wrote,  and  one  student  picked 

foxes  as  a  topic. 

59

122. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  asked  questions  in 

rapid-fire  succession,  answered  several  of  her  own  questions,  and  failed  to  provide 

students  with  enough  wait  time  to  offer  responses  before  she  began  asking  additional 

questions. 

123. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  during 

the  November  20,  2017  conference  meeting  with  Ms.  Avalos,  as  memorialized  in  the 

December  4,  2017  Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  use  effective 

questioning  techniques  to  elicit  student  responses. 

124. 

Respondent  failed  to  hold  students  accountable  for  the  class  rules  when 

she  inconsistently  redirected  students’  off-task  behaviors,  and  did  not  hold  them 

accountable  by  enforcing  consequences.  Specifically,  students  continued  to  talk 

although  she  stopped  several  times  to  redirect  students’  attention  by  giving  positive 

praise  and  awarding  points  to  groups  that  were  on  task.  In  addition,  Respondent  failed 

to  ask  students  to  move  their  clips  although  they  were  off-task,  as  follows:  (1)  six  of 

Respondent's  20  students  engaged  in  off-topic  conversation  while  sitting  on  the  rug, 

and  the  noise  from  the  conversation  became  progressively  louder;  (2)  two  male 

students  made  loud  noises  as  they  sat  on  the  rug;  and  (3)  Respondent  redirected 

Student  N.  several  times  for  touching  the  student  next  to  her  and  for  not  properly 

sitting  on  the  rug.  Although  Respondent  gave  Student  N.  several  warnings,  she  never 

directed  her  to  move  her  clip. 

125. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  during 

the  November  6,  2017  conference  meeting  with  Ms.  Avalos,  as  memorialized  in  the 

November  8,  2017  Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  student 

behavior  throughout  each  lesson  and  redirect  off-task  behaviors. 

60

126. 

During  the  Reader's  Workshop,  Respondent  failed  to  establish 

procedures  for  the  partner  activity,  in  that  she  gave  a  series  of  confusing,  contradicting 

verbal  directions  about  how  to  discuss  the  main  idea.  As  a  result,  of  the  10  pairs  of 

students,  two  chose  a  book  from  a  backpack  and  read  it  independently  without 

discussing  the  main  idea;  a  female  student  in  another  group  looked  through  a  book, 

while  her  male  partner  applied  lip  balm;  two  male  students  in  another  group  argued 

over  who  was  going  to  hold  the  book  and  eventually  got  separate  books  and  did  not 

discuss  the  main  idea  together;  and  another  student  read  through  a  book  without 

discussing  the  main  idea,  put  it  away  in  a  backpack,  and  read  a  second  book. 

127. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

submit  comprehensive  lesson  plans  that  include  the  sequence  of  activities  for  each 

content  area.  In  addition  to  the  learning  objective,  Respondent  to  state  what  she 

planned  to  do  during  the  model,  guided  and  independent  practice;  (2)  plan  and  design 

learning  activities  aligned  to  the  “I  Can”  learning  objectives  identified  in  the  plans;  (3) 

prepare  activities  in  advance,  state  the  learning  objective  at  the  start  of  each  activities, 

and  review  them  at  the  end.  Read  and  review  the  provided  Knowing  Your  Learning 

Target  handout;  (4)  deliver  the  activities  in  a  clear  and  concise  manner,  and  when 

teaching  a  skill  such  as  main  idea,  focus  on  having  the  students  find  the  details  in  the 

story;  (5)  provide  a  written  model  for  the  students  that  they  can  reference  as  they  work 

independently,  ask  for  clarification  before  they  begin  working,  and  if  Respondent 

expected  students  to  work  on  a  particular  topic,  do  not  spend  time  asking  them  to 

share  about  other  topics;  (6)  students  need  time  to  think  about  a  question  once 

Respondent  asked  it,  therefore  ask  one  question,  pause  and  wait  for  an  answer.  Do  not 

interrupt  the  students’  thinking  by  restating  the  question  several  times;  (7)  hold 

students  accountable  to  class  rules,  consistently  redirect  off-task  behavior,  and  move 

students’  chart  clips  after  one  verbal  warning  is  given;  (8)  establish  procedures  for  each 

61

learning  activity,  consider  the  number  of  steps  that  students  need  to  remember,  and 

keep  the  directions  simple  so  that  five-year-old  students  understand;  and  (9) 

continued  access  to  a  PAR  Consulting  Teacher. 

128. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  use  effective  questioning 

techniques  to  elicit  student  responses,  effective  immediately;  (2)  communicate  the 

purpose  and  objective  of  each  lesson  to  the  students,  effective  immediately;  (3) 

monitor  student  behavior  throughout  each  lesson,  and  redirect  off-task  behavior, 

effective  immediately;  (4)  submit  lesson  plans  with  clearly  defined  instructional 

outcomes  and  activities,  effective  February  5,  2018;  and  (5)  provide  students  with  clear 

directions  and  procedures  for  all  class  activities,  effective  immediately.  Ms.  Avalos 

advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement 

in  her  performance  or  follow  the  directives,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard 

performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and 

dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Avalos  also  advised  Respondent  that  if  she  were  to 

evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time,  she  would  issue  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation,  which 

may  lead  to  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal 

from  the  District. 

FEBRUARY  22,  2018  OBSERVATION 

129. 

Ms.  Avalos  conducted  an  observation  of  Respondent's  classroom  on 

February  22,  2018,  from  9:30  a.m.  to  10:51  a.m.,  during  her  ELD  activities  lesson.  Ms. 

Avalos  conducted  a  conference  with  Respondent  regarding  her  observation  on  March 

12,  2018.  On  March  13,  2018,  Ms.  Avalos  memorialized  the  substance  of  the 

conference  and  her  observations. 

62

130. 

Ms.  Avalos  saw  no  evidence  that  Respondent  implemented  the  tools 

provided  to  her  as  assistance  and  guidance.  Specifically,  in  the  area  of  delivery  of 

instruction,  Respondent  failed  to  state  the  learning  objective  at  the  beginning  of  the 

lesson,  and  she  did  not  bring  closure  to  the  lesson  by  reviewing  the  learning  objective. 

131. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  during 

the  November  6,  2017  conference  with  Ms.  Avalos,  and  memorialized  in  the  November 

8,  2017  Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  communicate  the  purpose 

and  objective  of  each  lesson  to  students. 

132. 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  asked  a  series  of  questions  in  rapid- 

fire  succession  without  providing  wait  time,  and  she  answered  several  of  the  questions 

herself.  Respondent  also  failed  to  model  the  language  skills  being  taught,  and  as  a 

result,  the  students  did  not  use  the  skills  when  they  worked  with  their  partner. 

133. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  during 

the  November  6,  2017  conference  with  Principal  Avalos,  and  memorialized  in  the 

November  8,  2017  Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  use  effective 

questioning  techniques  to  elicit  student  responses. 

134. 

Inthe  area  of  classroom  environment,  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent 

failed  to  monitor  or  redirect  off-task  behavior.  Specifically,  she  did  not  ask  students 

who  were  off-task  to  move  their  clips  on  the  behavior  chart  in  the  following  instances: 

Student  N.  walked  around  the  classroom  while  all  of  the  students  sat  on  the  rug,  and 

when  she  finally  did  sit,  she  was  on  her  knees  touching  items  on a  table.  In  addition, 

student  N.  left  the  rug  to  get  tissue  and  stayed  standing  for  three  minutes.  Ms.  Avalos 

also  noted  that  while  students  were  supposed  to  be  working  with  their  partners,  two 

sets  of  students  did  not  talk  to  each  other  (one  of  the  students  had  his  head  down). 

63

Student  D.,  who  was  on  the  rug  in  front  of  Respondent,  jumped  on  his  knees  and  then 

put  his  head  in  his  hands  instead  of  looking  at  Respondent.  At  another  point  during 

the  lesson,  Student  D.  shouted  out,  and  turn  around  three  times  to  look  at  the 

students  behind  him.  Respondent  only  warned  him  to  listen  to  the  lesson  once.  Ms. 

Avalos  asserted  that  she  expected  Respondent  to  be  able  to  effectively  manage  her 

classroom  because  of  her  tenure. 

135. 

Despite  having  been  provided  assistance,  guidance  and  directives  during 

the  November  6,  2017  conference  with  Principal  Avalos,  and  memorialized  in  the 

November  8,  2017  Conference  Memorandum,  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  student 

behavior  throughout  each  lesson  and  redirect  off-task  behaviors,  effectively 

immediately. 

136. 

According  to  Ms.  Avalos,  during  the  conference  Respondent  stated  that 

she  created  a  checklist  as  a  reminder  to  state  the  objective  and  review  it  at  the  end  of 

the  lesson.  Respondent  contended  that  she  restated  a  question  in  order  to  provide 

scaffolding  for  the  students.  She  stated  she  had  not  been  trained  how  to  provide  all  of 

the  ELD  lessons.  However,  Respondent  had  been  trained  in  the  curriculum,  she 

practiced  teaching  the  lessons,  and  the  lesson  had  been  planned  during  bank  time. 

Respondent  further  contended  that  she  tried  not  to  discipline  student  N.  because  she 

could  be  very  disruptive  when  disciplined. 

137. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

clearly  state  the  learning  objective  at  the  beginning  of  each  activity  and  review  it  with 

the  students  at  the  end;  (2)  ask  a  question,  provide  three  to  five  seconds  of  wait  time 

before  Respondent  called  on  a  student  to  answer,  and  do  not  repeat  the  question 

several  times  so  as  not  to  confuse  the  students;  (3)  model  in  a  clear  and  concise 

manner  what  she  expects  the  students  to  do,  go  step-by-step  by  the  process,  and 

64

ensure  that  the  students  understand  what  to  do  before  asking  them  to  complete  the 

task  independently;  (4)  consistently  monitor  and  redirect  student  off-task  behavior  by 

providing  one  warning  for  a  student  who  engages  in  off-task  behavior  and  ask  them 

to  move  their  clip  if  they  require  redirection  again,  to  demonstrate  consistency  with 

instilling  consequences  for  their  behavior;  (5)  Ms.  Avalos  reminded  Respondent  that 

they  observed  a  colleague  teach  an  English  lesson  on  February  8,  2016  and  the  lesson 

was  structured,  the  teacher  reviewed  the  skill  on  a  chart,  both  a  model  and  non-model 

constructive  conversation  was  modeled  with  a  student,  routines  and  procedures  were 

in  place,  “think  time”  was  provided  for  the  students,  and  the  lesson  was  appropriately 

paced;  and  (6)  continued  access  to  a  PAR  Consulting  Teacher. 

138. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  communicate  the  purpose  and 

objective  of  each  lesson  to  the  students,  effective  immediately;  and  (2)  monitor 

student  behavior  throughout  each  lesson,  and  redirect  off-task  behavior,  effective 

immediately.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to  make  an  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  or  follow  the  directives,  it  could  lead  to  an 

overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service, 

Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms.  Avalos  also  advised 

Respondent  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time,  she  would  issue  a 

Below  Standard  Evaluation,  which  could  lead  to  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service, 

Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

Subsequent  Evaluation 

139. 

Ms.  Avalos  observed  Respondent  in  the  classroom  on  April  12,  2018, 

from  1:07  p.m.  to  2:03  p.m.,  during  her  Writer's  Workshop  phonics  activities.  Ms. 

Avalos  noted  that  although  Respondent  submitted  lesson  plans  for  the  week,  she  did 

not  align  activities  to  the  learning  objectives  listed  in  the  plans.  Specifically, 

65

Respondent  stated  in  her  plans  that  students  would  use  a  graphic  organizer  to  write  a 

persuasive  piece.  However,  she  only  assigned  the  students  to  complete  the  organizer 

but  did  not  address  the  persuasive  piece.  For  the  phonics  activity,  Respondent 

indicated  in  her  plans  that  students  would  blend  CVC  words  and  manipulate  the 

beginning  and  end  of  the  words.  However,  during  the  lesson,  Respondent  only 

focused  the  students  on  changing  the  beginning  letter.  Ms.  Avalos  also  noted  that 

Respondent  failed  to  prepare  advanced  phonics  lessons  to  challenge  the  17  out  of  20 

students  who  received  benchmark  scores  on  the  DIBELS  assessment. 

140. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  did  not  clearly 

communicate  the  purpose  of  the  learning  objective  (writing  a  persuasive  piece),  in  that 

she  asked  the  students  to  read  out  loud,  “I  can  use  a  graphic  organizer  to  help  me 

write  a  persuasive  piece”  (“I  can”  Statement),  but  she  did  not  explain  what  the  terms 

“persuasive”  or  “graphic  organizer  meant.”  When  it  became  clear  that  the  students 

could  not  pronounce  or  define  the  terms  “graphic  organizer”  and  “persuasive,” 

Respondent  merely  repeatedly  read  the  terms  out  loud  without  explaining  what  they 

meant.  She  failed  to  ensure  the  students  knew  what  they  meant  before  proceeding 

with  the  lesson.  When  Respondent  directed  the  students  to  talk  to  their  partners  about 

what  they  were  learning,  they  simply  repeated  the  “I  can”  Statement. 

141. 

Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  Respondent  failed  to  model  for  the  students  how 

to  construct  a  writing  piece  and  instead  focused  on  filling  out  the  graphic  organizer. 

As  a  result,  students  merely  copied  what  Respondent  had  written  on  the  board,  and 

nine  out  of  20  students  did  not  complete  the  task. 

142. 

Respondent  failed  to  follow  the  District's  curriculum  to  deliver  the 

phonics  activity,  and  she  did  not  implement  the  components  of  the  lesson  as  outlined 

in  the  teacher's  edition.  For  example,  she  did  not  hold  up  letter  cards  and  have  the 

66

students  repeat  the  sounds,  and  she  did  not  allow  the  students  to  manipulate  words  to 

make  different  sounds. 

143. 

Respondent  failed  to  use  one  consistent  method  for  getting  the  students’ 

attention.  During  the  lesson,  she  counted  backwards  from  five  four  times  and  she 

counted  backwards  from  10  once.  As  a  result,  Respondent  received  inconsistent  results 

in  getting  the  students  to  focus  on  her.  She  then  stated,  “Eyes  one  me  when  I  count  to 

three.”  However,  after  Respondent  counted  to  three,  students  continued  to  talk,  and 

two  students  stood  by  their  desks  instead  of  sitting  on  the  rug  as  directed  by 

Respondent. 

144. 

Respondent  failed  to  implement  her  class  rules  in  that  she  did  not 

consistently  enforce  the  consequences  for  off-task  behavior.  As  a  result,  students 

inconsistently  responded  to  her  redirection.  For  example,  after  she  redirected  student 

D.  twice,  she  asked  him  to  move  his  clip  down  on  the  behavior  chart.  He  walked  over 

to  the  chart,  stood  in  front  of  it  for  five  minutes  waiving  his  clip  in  the  air  and  touching 

the  other  students’  clips  without  any  redirection  from  Respondent.  Respondent  did  not 

redirect  student  R.  when  he  turned  around  while  sitting  on  rug  and  looked  at  the  other 

students  instead  of  writing  words  on  his  individual  whiteboard.  She  redirected  another 

student  four  times  before  asking  the  student  to  move  her  clip  on  the  behavior  chart. 

Another  student  talked  continuously  while  sitting  on  the  rug.  Respondent  redirected 

him  twice  but  did  not  ask  him  to  move  his  clip. 

145. 

Ms.  Avalos  offered  Respondent  the  following  assistance  and  guidance:  (1) 

lesson  plans  serve  as  a  guide  for  daily  instruction;  align  activities  to  the  learning 

objective  listed  in  the  lesson  plan  to  ensure  all  necessary  content  is  covered;  (2)  plan 

differentiated  learning  activities  to  meet  the  various  academic  needs  of  the  students. 

Plan  enrichment  activities  to  challenge  the  students  who  scored  Benchmark  on  DIBELS 

67

and  CORE  Phonics  assessments;  (3)  clearly  communicate  the  purpose  of  the  learning 

activities  to  help  the  students  understand  what  they  are  learning.  Clarify  any  language 

in  the  “I  Can”  statements  that  the  students  may  have  difficulty  understanding  and 

explain  in  kid-friendly  terms  what  they  mean;  (4)  deliver  the  learning  activities  in  a 

clear  and  concise  manner,  and  align  the  writing  skills  to  the  Kindergarten  Common 

Core  State  Standards  for  writing.  When  reviewing  a  graphic  organizer,  do  not  focus 

solely  on  the  procedure  for  completing  the  graphic  organizer,  and  model  for  them 

how  to  transfer  the  information  on  it  to  write  several  sentences  around  the  topic;  (5) 

follow  the  District-adopted  Benchmark  Advance  teachers’  resources  to  plan  and 

deliver  ELA  activities,  and  review  the  activities  in  advance  to  have  a  clear 

understanding  of  the  content;  (6)  use  a  consistent  method  for  getting  the  students’ 

attention.  Give  the  command,  wait  for  the  students  to  respond,  and  redirect  any 

students  who  do  not;  (7)  implement  effective  routines  and  procedures  to  allow  for  a 

smooth  transition  from  one  activity  to  another.  When  sending  the  students  back  to 

their  seats,  have  a  system  in  place,  and  consider  dismissing  them  by  rows  to  avoid 

having  them  talk  and  huddle  around  their  desks;  (8)  implement  class  rules  and  enforce 

consequences  for  off-task  behavior.  Clearly  explain  the  rewards  system  so  the  students 

understand  exactly  what  behavior  goals  and  rewards  they  are  working  toward;  and  (9) 

reflect  on  the  support  received  from  the  PAR  Consulting  Teacher  and  implement  what 

was  learned. 

146. 

Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  to:  (1)  monitor  student  behavior 

throughout  each  lesson,  and  redirect  off-task  behavior,  effective  immediately;  (2) 

submit  lesson  plans  with  clearly  defined  instructional  outcomes  and  activities,  effective 

immediately;  (3)  establish  classroom  routines  by  ensuring  that  all  students  know  how 

to  efficiently  transition  from  their  work  tables  to  the  rug;  (4)  clearly  communicate  the 

learning  objective  to  the  students  and  clarify  any  terms  that  may  confuse  them, 

68

effectively  immediately;  (5)  follow  the  District-adopted  Benchmark  Advance  Teacher 

Resource  System  to  plan  and  deliver  ELA  activities,  effective  immediately;  and  (6) 

provide  a  written  model  for  the  students  that  they  can  reference  as  they  work 

independently,  effective  immediately.  Ms.  Avalos  advised  that  if  Respondent  failed  to 

make  an  immediate  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  or  follow  the 

directives,  it  could  lead  to  an  overall  below  standard  performance  evaluation,  a  Notice 

of  Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District.  Ms. 

Avalos  also  advised  Respondent  that  if  she  were  to  evaluate  Respondent  at  that  time, 

she  would  issue  a  Below  Standard  Evaluation,  which  could  lead  to  a  Notice  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service,  Notice  of  Suspension,  and  dismissal  from  the  District. 

147. 

A. 

Respondent  submitted  a  written  response  to  the  April  30,  2018 

conference  memo.  In  the  area  of  planning  and  preparation,  Respondent  stated  that  it 

was  the  students’  first  time  using  the  graphic  organizer,  teachers  change  their  lesson 

plans  at  times  to  meet  the  needs  of  their  students,  and  that  the  students  were  able  to 

correctly  use  the  graphic  organizer  the  next  day.  Respondent  asserted  that  although 

17  of  20  students  scored  at  the  benchmark  level,  some  students  were  still  confused 

about  beginning  sounds.  She  further  asserted  that  she  was  never  told  that  students 

were  required  to  explain  the  learning  objective  to  each  other;  however,  the  class  was 

working  on  trying  to  explain  the  learning  objective  in  their  own  words  and  some 

students  were  better  at  it  than  others. 

B. 

In  the  area  of  delivery  of  instruction,  Respondent  stated  her 

explanation  that  she  did  not  follow  the  Benchmark  Advance  Teachers  Resource  System 

to  deliver  the  phonics  lesson  on  the  letter  “k”  because  it  was  not  a  part  of  her  lesson 

and  it  was  not  a  part  of  her  objective.  She  further  stated  that  she  did  not  teach  all  the 

lessons  from  the  guide  book  because  it  was  too  much  to  cover,  so  she  selected  parts 

69

of  the  guide  in  different  areas  to  help  her  students  with  their  learning  needs. 

Respondent  asserted  that  she  asked  Ms.  Avalos  on  several  occasions  to  clarify  what 

part  of  the  Benchmark  program  she  was  expected  to  use,  but  she  never  received 

clarification.  She  indicated  that  she  planned  to  attend  training  in  the  summer  on  how 

to  use  the  phonological  awareness  lessons.  Respondent  stated  that  she  typically  sent 

students  back  to  their  seats  from  the  rug  by  row  color,  but  on  the  day  of  the 

observation,  she  sent  them  to  their  seats  all  at  once  in  order  to  save  time.  She  further 

stated  that  after  some  reflection,  she  would  continue  to  use  her  normal  method  of 

sending  students  to  their  seats.  Respondent  stated  that  she  reviewed  her  rules  with 

her  class  on  a  daily  basis,  and  that  she  regularly  enforced  them  with  respect  to  the 

behavior  chart  and  having  students  move  their  clips  accordingly. 

2017-2018  STULL  EVALUATION 

148. 

On  April  25,  2018,  Ms.  Avalos  prepared  a  Stull  evaluation  of  Respondent's 

performance  for  the  2017-2018  school  year  based  on  her  formal  and  informal 

observations.  She  scheduled  a  Final  Evaluation  conference  meeting  for  April  23,  2018, 

and  rescheduled  it  for  April  25,  2018,  pursuant  to  Respondent's  request.  Respondent 

did  not  attend  either  meeting.  Ms.  Avalos  issued  the  Final  Evaluation  in  absentia. 

149. 

Ms.  Avalos  commented  that  while  Respondent's  practice  during  the 

formal  planned  observations  was  mostly  developing,  her  observations  and  data  from 

informal  observations  demonstrated  that  Respondent  did  not  meet  the  “developing” 

standard.  Ms.  Avalos  saw  no  evidence  that  Respondent  made  attempts  to  progress  in 

meeting  the  data-based  and  growth  objectives  Respondent  planned  and  discussed 

with  Ms.  Avalos  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year.  Ms.  Avalos  commented  that  in 

area  of  professional  responsibilities,  Respondent's  performance  had  mostly  been  at 

the  effective  level.  However,  she  rated  Respondent  ineffective  in  the  areas  of  providing 

70

supervision  and  controlling  students,  and  rated  her  as  developing  in  the  area  of 

regularly  preparing  appropriate  lesson  plans.  She  advised  Respondent  to  continue 

working  on  submitting  comprehensive  lesson  plans  and  consistently  implementing  her 

classroom  management  plan.  Ms.  Avalos  further  commented  that  Respondent 

exhibited  ineffective  practice  in  several  instructional  elements,  and  she  demonstrated 

minimal  growth  despite  receiving  multiple  forms  for  feedback.  She  gave  Respondent  a 

Final  Evaluation  Rating  of  “Below  Standard  Performance.” 

150. 

Ms.  Avalos  provided  an  attachment  to  the  Evaluation  that  contained  22 

specific  deficiencies  consistent  with  the  deficiencies  noted  during  the  conference 

meetings.  The  attachment  also  contained  22  recommendations  consistent  with  the 

assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  contained  in  the  conference  memoranda  provided 

to  Respondent  during  the  school  year.  Ms.  Avalos  explained  that  she  made  the 

recommendations  so  that  Respondent  could  improve  and  become  an  effective 

teacher.  She  offered  to  continue  to  provide  Respondent  with  the  following  assistance 

in  the  following  areas:  (1)  lesson  planning  and  implementing  instructional  strategies; 

(2)  opportunities  for  professional  development,  both  on  and  off-site;  (3)  the 

opportunity  to  observe  other  teachers  to  view  implementation  of  instructional 

strategies  and  classroom  management  systems;  (4)  review  of  relevant  district  policies 

on  interactions  with  students;  and  (5)  continuance  of  all  other  assistance  noted  in  the 

attachment.  Ms.  Avalos  indicated  Respondent  would  be  evaluated  during  the  2018- 

2019  school  year. 

151. 

On  May  24,  2018,  Ms.  Avalos  issued  to  Respondent  a  Notice  of 

Suspension  of  Certificated  Employee,  and  a  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  or  Acts  of 

Certificated  Employee  for  the  period  of  May  2017,  to  February  2018,  for:  (1) 

unsatisfactory  performance;  (2)  unprofessional  conduct;  and  (3)  persistent  violation  of 

71

and  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations  prescribed 

for  the  government  of  the  public  school  by  the  state  board  of  education  or  by  the 

governing  board  of  school  district  employing  her.  Specifically,  Respondent  failed  to 

follow  the  District’s  Master  Plan  and  teaching  and  learning  framework,  the  CSTP,  the 

District's  Mathematics  Instructional  Guide,  and  the  CCCS  for  ELA  and  mathematics. 

152. 

Ms.  Avalos  recommended  in  the  notice  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  of 

Certificated  Employee  that  Respondent  be  suspended  for  15  days  and  dismissed  from 

the  District.  She  stated  her  explanation  that  she  made  the  recommendations  because 

despite  being  a  teacher  for  more  than  20  years  and  receiving  three  years  of  assistance 

and  guidance,  Respondent's  teaching  practice  did  not  improve  over  the  two  years  that 

Ms.  Avalos  observed  her.  Ms.  Avalos  noted  that  she  offered  assistance  and  guidance  to 

Respondent,  and  then  had  to  issue  directives  to  her  because  the  assistance  and 

guidance  was  not  implemented.  Ms.  Avalos  contended  that  she  continued  to  observe 

repeated  deficiencies  with  Respondent's  classroom  management,  delivery  of 

instruction,  and  lesson  planning  and  preparation.  Consequently,  Ms.  Avalos  stated  that 

she  did  not  believe  Respondent's  teaching  would  improve  if  she  was  allowed  to 

continue  in  the  classroom.  Ms.  Avalos  contended  that  Respondent's  teaching  was 

ineffective  and  resulted  in  a  delay  of  instruction  to  the  students.  Ms.  Avalos  expressed 

concern  that  Respondent's  teaching  practice  cognitively  harmed  students  in  that  they 

experienced  gaps  in  learning  and  did  not  learn  the  necessary  skills  and  concepts  that 

would  prepare  them  for  first  grade.  She  stated  that  the  time  she  spent  conducting 

numerous  observations  and  conference  meetings  with  Respondent  took  time  away 

from  her  other  duties  and  adversely  impacted  her  performance  as  a  principal.  For 

reasons  not  made  clear  by  the  record,  Respondent  did  not  serve  the  suspension. 

72

153. 

Rosalinda  Guerrero  Elmore  is  a  Certificated  Performance  Evaluation 

Support  (CPES)  Coordinator  with  the  District's  Division  of  Human  Resources.  She 

obtained  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  from  California  State  University,  Northridge  in  1997 

and  a  Master  of  Arts  degree  in  Educational  Leadership.  She  also  earned  MSTC,  BCLAD, 

and  administrative  credentials.  Ms.  Elmore  previously  taught  third,  fourth,  and  fifth 

grades,  she  was  an  instructional  coach  in  the  subject  of  mathematics  for  pre- 

kindergarten  through  fifth  grade  students,  an  assistant  principal,  and  an  elementary 

school  principal  for  six  years.  She  is  familiar  with  the  CSTP  and  the  District's  teaching 

and  learning  framework. 

154. 

Asa  CPES  Coordinator,  Ms.  Elmore  works  with  principals  and  assistant 

principals  to  co-observe  teachers  in  the  classroom.  She  explained  that  each  year  she, 

along  with  principals  and  assistant  principals,  undergo  online  training  to  calibrate  their 

observations  and  ensure  uniformity  of  performance  critique.  Ms.  Elmore  further 

explained  that  it  is  her  practice  to  debrief  with  her  co-observer  following  the 

observation  to  memorialize  deficiencies,  and  the  evidence  aligned  to  them,  by 

comparing  notes.  She  also  assists  in  drafting  conference  memoranda,  and  helps  to 

develop  a  plan  to  address  any  deficiencies.  Ms.  Elmore  stated  that  for  every  deficiency 

identified,  assistance  and  guidance  Is  offered  that  is  aligned  to  help  improve  the 

teacher's  practice.  She  asserted  that  if  a  deficiency  is  not  observed  by  both  co- 

observers,  it 

is  not  included  in  the  conference  memorandum. 

155. 

Ms.  Elmore  asserted  that  Respondent  was  assigned  to  her  caseload 

because  of  her  Below  Standard  evaluations.  She  co-observed  Respondent  in  the 

classroom  with  Ms.  Avalos  on  the  following  dates:  December  7,  2016,  March  2,  2017, 

April  27,  2017,  May  18,  2017,  September  27,  2017,  October  26,  2017,  January  22,  2018, 

and  April  12,  2018.  Ms.  Elmore  stated  that  on  those  dates,  she  and  Ms.  Avalos  entered 

73

the  classroom  at  the  same  time  and  sat  at  opposite  ends  of  the  room.  She  further 

stated  that  she  and  Ms.  Avalos  met  to  debrief  following  the  observations  according  to 

her  typical  practice.  They  discussed  their  observations  and  assistance  and  guidance  to 

address  the  noted  deficiencies.  Either  she  prepared  the  draft  conference  memoranda 

using  both  sets  of  notes,  or  Ms.  Avalos  would  prepare  the  draft  conference 

memoranda.  Although  Ms.  Elmore  did  not  co-observe  Respondent  with  Ms.  Avalos 

January  12,  2017,  March  16,  2017,  November  7,  2017,  or  February  22,  2018,  she 

assisted  Ms.  Avalos  with  drafting  the  conference  memoranda. 

156. 

Ms.  Elmore  stated  that  the  conference  memoranda  accurately 

memorialized  the  jointly  identified  deficiencies,  and  that  for  the  observations  she  did 

not  attend,  she  accurately  prepared  the  conference  memoranda  from  Ms.  Avalos’ 

notes.  She  asserted  that  the  assistance  and  guidance  provided  to  Respondent, 

including  the  handouts,  were  typically  issued  by  the  District  to  assist  underperforming 

teachers.  Ms.  Elmore  also  asserted  that  during  the  observations,  she  saw  no  evidence 

that  Respondent  implemented  the  assistance,  guidance,  or  directives  she  previously 

received. 

157. 

Frances  Baez  is  the  District's  Administrator  of  Instruction.  In  that  position 

she  oversees  150  schools  in  Local  District  East.  She  earned  a  Ph.D.  in  Teacher 

Education  from  Claremont  College,  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  Spanish  Literature 

from  the  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles,  and  multi-subject  and  administrative 

services  credentials  from  California  State  University,  Los  Angeles.  She  is  familiar  with 

the  CCSS,  and  most  recently  provided  training  to  teachers  in  common  core  standards 

and  language  arts  in  June  2019.  Ms.  Baez  has  conducted  teacher  performance 

evaluations  for  more  than  10  years,  and  estimated  that  she  performed  hundreds  of 

evaluations  during  that  time.  In  addition,  as  a  part  of  her  duties,  she  has  rendered 

74

decisions  on  whether  a  teacher  is  teaching  to  standards.  Also,  Ms.  Baez  utilizes 

resources  to  calibrate  her  observations  that  describe  strategies  and  techniques, 

including  classroom  management  strategies,  to  improve  student  outcomes.  Ms.  Baez 

asserted  that  those  resources  allow  her  to  determine  whether  a  lesson  Is  effective  and 

of  sufficient  quality.  Upon  questioning,  Ms.  Baez  acknowledged  that  she  had  never 

been  a  kindergarten  teacher  and  she  did  not  observe  Respondent  in  the  classroom. 

However,  Ms.  Baez's  testimony  was  afforded  weight  based  upon  her  training  and 

experience. 

158. 

On  August  22,  2018,  Ms.  Baez  sent  Respondent  a  letter  scheduling  a 

meeting  for  September  4,  2018,  to  discuss  her  possible  dismissal  from  the  District.  She 

explained  in  the  letter  that  the  purpose  of  the  meeting  was  to  allow  Respondent  to 

present  any  statements  or  documents  in  response  to  the  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

Service  with  Recommendation  for  Dismissal  and  Notice  of  15-Day  Suspension,  issued 

on  May  24,  2018,  and  the  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Service  and  Notice  of  8-Day 

Suspension,  issued  on  August  23,  2017.  Ms.  Baez  explained  that  thereafter,  she  would 

make  a  recommendation  whether  or  not  the  District  would  move  forward  with 

Respondent's  dismissal,  which  would  be  submitted  to  the  Board  of  Education. 

159. 

A. 

In  a  written  response  to  the  August  22,  2018  letter,  Respondent 

stated  that  she  attended  elementary,  middle  school,  and  high  school  in  the  District, 

and  was  inspired  by  her  elementary  school  teachers  to  become  a  teacher  herself. 

While  in  middle  school  and  high  school,  Respondent  tutored  elementary  school 

students  and  worked  as  a  tutor  at  the  YMCA.  While  in  college,  she  tutored  at-risk  high 

school  students,  and  she  assisted  two-preschool  teachers  while  she  earned  her 

credential.  She  also  taught  Adult  School  for  one  year. 

75

B. 

Respondent  asserted  that  she  taught  bilingual  students  because 

she  is  fully  bilingual  herself,  as  she  speaks  both  English  and  Spanish.  She  further 

asserted  that  she  enjoyed  working  with  children  and  teachers  and  wished  to  continue. 

Respondent  contended  that  she  worked  hard  her  entire  teaching  career  and  she  tried 

her  best  to  prepare  her  lessons  and  materials.  She  further  contended  that  she 

consistently  attended  professional  development  during  her  career  to  improve  her 

teaching,  and  that  she  tried  her  best  to  collaborate  with  other  teachers  to  better  serve 

her  students.  Respondent  noted  that  in  the  summer  of  2018,  she  attended  professional 

development  in  Benchmark  Advance,  science,  math,  Social-Emotional  Harmony,  and 

phonemic  awareness  in  order  to  improve  her  performance  and  better  serve  her 

students.  She  concluded  by  stating  her  desire  to  remain  employed  by  the  District  and 

expressing  her  belief  that  she  motivated  her  students  to  always  do  their  best  and  not 

give  up  when  challenged. 

C. 

Although  Respondent  indicated  in  her  response  that  she  included 

attachments  for  Ms.  Baez's  review  in  lieu  of  attending  the  September  4,  2018  meeting 

in  person,  Ms.  Baez  contended  that  she  did  not  receive  any  additional  documents  from 

Respondent. 

160. 

Ms.  Baez  reviewed  the  conference  memoranda  prepared  by  Ms.  Sanchez 

and  Ms.  Avalos,  Respondent's  responses  to  them,  the  charges  contained  in  the  Notices 

of  Unsatisfactory  Performance,  and  the  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  issued  to 

Respondent.  She  noted  the  repeated  deficiencies  in  the  areas  of  lesson  planning, 

classroom  management,  and  the  delivery  of  instruction.  Ms.  Baez  determined  that  the 

evidence  gathered  during  the  observations  supported  a  conclusion  that  Respondent 

failed  to  demonstrate  any  appreciable  improvement  despite  being  offered  assistance 

and  guidance,  and  despite  having  been  issued  directives  aimed  at  improving  her 

76

teaching.  She  determined  from  her  review  of  the  documents  that  Respondent's 

performance  was  not  likely  to  improve.  Ms.  Baez  expressed  concern  that  Respondent's 

teaching  caused  harm  to  students  in  the  form  of  learning  gaps  and  lack  of 

foundational  reading  and  writing  skills.  She  further  opined  that  Respondent  should  not 

return  to  the  classroom.  Ms.  Baez  stated  that  she  did  not  find  Respondent's  response 

to  the  August  22,  2018  letter  compelling,  because  Respondent  did  not  address  the 

noted  deficiencies,  she  did  not  explain  how  she  applied  the  assistance  and  guidance, 

and  she  did  not  demonstrate  that  her  teaching  practice  had  improved. 

161. 

On  September  6,  2018,  Ms.  Baez  sent  Respondent  a  letter  stating  that, 

based  on  the  information  available  to  her,  including  Respondent's  positon  paper,  she 

concluded  that  the  proposed  disciplinary  action  should  be  forwarded  to  the  Board  of 

Education  for  disposition,  and  that  she  would  be  recommending  that  the  District  move 

forward  with  Respondent's  dismissal. 

Respondent's  Evidence 

162. 

Respondent  mostly  testified  in  a  general,  global  fashion,  and  did  not 

address  the  91  allegations  set  forth  in  the  Accusation  with  much  specificity.  However, 

the  recurring  themes  throughout  Respondent's  testimony  were:  (1)  her  belief  that  she 

did  not  receive  the  necessary  assistance  and  guidance  that  would  allow  her  to  address 

the  needs  of  her  students  who  were  in  foster  care  or  had  Individual  Education 

Programs  (IEPs),  and  therefore  she  did  receive  the  help  she  needed  to  be  an  effective 

teacher;  (2)  she  always  prepared  her  lesson  plans  and  wrote  the  objective  of  the  lesson 

on  the  board  in  her  class;  (3)  she  did  not  receive  the  bulk  of  the  assistance  and 

guidance  listed  in  the  conference  memoranda  either  during  the  conference  meetings 

or  in  her  mailbox;  (4)  Ms.  Avalos  arbitrarily  subjected  her  to  criticism;  (5)  she  complied 

7/

with  all  provided  assistance  and  guidance;  and  (5)  her  requests  to  Ms.  Avalos  for  help 

either  went  unanswered  or  Ms.  Avalos  told  her  that  she  did  not  have  time  to  assist  her. 

163. 

Respondent  offered  one  evaluation  from  each  of  the  following  school 

years  1995-1996,  1999-2000,  2002-2003,  2003-2004,  2005-2006,  2006-2007,  and  2007- 

2008.  All  of  the  evaluators  rated  Respondent  as  “Meets  Standard  Performance.”  The 

evaluators  commended  Respondent  for  her  teaching,  and  indicated  that  Respondent 

continued  to  grow  professionally.  They  asserted  that  she  sought  assistance  and 

accepted  feedback  and  coaching,  and  her  lessons  were  always  organized.  The 

evaluators  noted  that  Respondent  planned  her  lessons  for  effective  delivery  of 

instruction,  and  she  provided  an  environment  for  effective  learning.  They  further 

commented  that  Respondent  demonstrated  classroom  management  and  that  she  used 

a  variety  of  questions  to  facilitate  student  participation. 

164. 

On  the  other  hand,  one  of  the  evaluators  noted  that  Respondent  needed 

to  “work  on  creating  an  appropriate  climate  for  learning  for  her  students.  She  needs  to 

work  on  planning  and  implementing  classroom  procedures  and  routines  that  allow  her 

to  teach  and  not  spend  a  lot  of  time  with  constant  student  disruption.”  (Ex.  H,  p.  3.) 

The  evaluator  recommended  that  Respondent  observe  other  teachers  for  examples  of 

how  to  maintain  control  of  a  classroom  and  minimize  disruptions.  (/d.,  p.  2.)  In 

addition,  two  evaluators  from  three  different  school  years  noted  that  Respondent 

needed  to  improve  her  classroom  management  skills,  provide  specific  directions  to  the 

students,  and  check  for  student  comprehension.  They  further  suggested  that  she  use 

proximity  to  improve  student  behavior,  ask  open-ended  questions,  model  every 

lesson,  and  communicate  learning  goals  for  all  students.  (Exs.  D,  E,  and  F.)  These  noted 

deficiencies  are  similar  to  the  deficiencies  noted  by  Ms.  Avalos. 

78

Character  Testimony 

165. 

Deisy  Sandoval,  Elizabeth  Amaral,  and  Mireya  Jimenez,  who  are  teachers 

at  MPC,  provided  character  testimony.  Ms.  Sandoval,  Ms.  Amaral,  and  Ms.  Jimenez 

described  Respondent  as  a  hardworking  teacher  who  came  to  work  early  to  plan  her 

lessons  and  remained  at  school  long  after  the  school  day.  They  asserted  that 

Respondent  had  good  relationships  with  the  teachers  at  MPC  and  they  observed  only 

positive  interactions  between  Respondent  and  her  students.  Additionally,  Respondent 

sought  guidance  on  how  to  improve  her  teaching  and  accepted  feedback. 

166. 

Upon  questioning,  Ms.  Sandoval,  Ms.  Amaral,  and  Ms.  Jimenez,  who  have 

all  been  teachers  with  the  District  for  more  than  10  years,  all  acknowledged  that 

kindergarten  is  a  critical  year  for  student  learning  and  that  if  the  students  do  not 

receive  effective  teaching,  the  student  could  experience  learning  gaps.  They  also 

agreed  that  it 

is  important  for  teachers  to  comply  with  directives  issued  by  the 

principals  and  align  lessons  with  the  CSTP.  Ms.  Amaral,  Ms.  Jimenez,  and  Ms.  Sandoval 

further  acknowledged  that  the  District's  teaching  and  learning  framework  is  based  on 

the  standards,  and  that  it 

is  important  to  follow  assistance  and  guidance  provided  by 

evaluators.  Finally,  they  all  testified  that  teachers  at  MPC  are  expected  to  check  their 

mailboxes  on  campus  daily. 

167. 

Ms.  Amaral  and  Ms.  Jimenez  served  as  Respondent's  union 

representative  and  were  present  during  conference  meetings.*'  They  observed  Ms. 

  

21  Ms.  Jimenez  was  present  during  the  February  6,  2017,  April  3,  2017,  May  15, 

2017,  and  June  6,  2017,  conference  meetings.  Ms.  Amaral  was  present  during  the 

19

Avalos  read  from  what  they  presumed  was  a  draft  conference  memorandum  and  hand 

Respondent  various  documents,  which  they  believed  to  be  the  handouts  mentioned  by 

Ms.  Avalos  during  the  meetings.**  Ms.  Amaral  and  Ms.  Jimenez  asserted  that  Ms. 

Avalos  issued  directives  to  Respondent.  They  described  Respondent  as  willing  to 

accept  the  critiques  and  abide  by  the  assistance,  guidance,  and  directives  given  by  Ms. 

Avalos.  However,  Ms.  Amaral  and  Ms.  Jimenez  never  observed  Respondent's  teaching, 

and  therefore  they  lacked  direct  knowledge  of  whether  Respondent  implemented  the 

assistance  and  guidance  or  complied  with  the  directives. 

Credibility  Findings” 

The  Commission  found  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Sanchez,  Ms.  Avalos,  and  Ms. 

Elmore  to  be  credible,  as  they  observed  Respondent  independently  over  a  period  of 

  

March  23,  2017,  October  18,  2017,  November  18,  2017,  December  4,  2017,  February  1, 

2018,  March  13,  2018,  and  April  30,  2018  conference  meetings. 

2  Ms.  Jimenez  and  Ms.  Amaral  did  not  receive  copies  of  the  documents. 

*3  In  this  matter,  the  Commission  evaluated  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses 

pursuant  to  the  factors  set  forth  in  Evidence  Code  section  780:  the  demeanor  and 

manner  of  the  witness  while  testifying,  the  character  of  the  testimony,  the  capacity  to 

perceive  at  the  time  the  events  occurred,  the  character  of  the  witness  for  honesty,  the 

existence  of  bias  or  other  motive,  other  statements  of  the  witness  which  are  consistent 

or  inconsistent  with  the  testimony,  the  existence  or  absence  of  any  fact  to  which  the 

witness  testified,  and  the  attitude  of  the  witness  toward  the  proceeding  in  which  the 

testimony  has  been  given.  The  manner  and  demeanor  of  a  witness  while  testifying  are 

the  two  most  important  factors  a  trier  of  fact  considers  when  judging  credibility.  The 

80

time,  and  reached  similar  conclusions  concerning  Respondent's  performance.  Their 

perspectives  were  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Baez,  who  reviewed 

documents  submitted  by  Respondent  and  concluded  that  Respondent  should  be 

dismissed  from  District.  Ms.  Sanchez,  Ms.  Avalos,  and  Ms.  Elmore  testified  in  a  clear, 

concise,  unequivocal  manner,  and  supported  their  perspectives  with  descriptive  facts. 

The  Commission  afforded  great  weight  to  the  testimony  of  Ms.  Avalos  and  Ms.  Elmore. 

168. 

The  testimony  of  Respondent  was  afforded  less  weight,  as  her  testimony 

was  disjointed,  difficult  to  follow,  and  did  not  fully  address  the  allegations  set  forth  in 

the  Accusation.  Her  contentions  that  Ms.  Avalos’  depiction  of  her  teaching  practice 

was  inaccurate,  she  had  never  seen  the  CSTP,  the  District  did  not  provide  her  with 

training  on  the  curriculum,  she  did  not  receive  the  assistance  and  guidance  offered  by 

Ms.  Avalos,  and  that  she  always  prepared  and  taught  from  her  lesson  plans  were 

unpersuasive.  Additionally,  Respondent  was  slow  in  answering  questions,  and 

appeared  to  have  great  difficulty  recalling  facts.  Consequently,  the  Commission  gave 

more  weight  to  the  written  memos  penned  by  Respondent  in  response  to  Ms.  Avalos’ 

conference  memos  than  to  her  testimony  itself,  as  they  better  explained  Respondent's 

perspective.  However,  the  Commission  did  not  find  that  Respondent's  responsive 

memos  discredited  either  the  testimony  of,  or  the  conference  memos  penned  by,  Ms. 

Avalos,  nor  did  the  Commission  consider  them  weightier  than  the  testimony  of  Ms. 

Elmore. 

  

mannerisms,  tone  of  voice,  eye  contact,  facial  expressions  and  body  language  are  all 

considered,  but  are  difficult  to  describe  in  such  a  way  that  the  reader  truly  understands 

what  causes  the  trier  of  fact  to  believe  or  disbelieve  a  witness. 

81

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Absent  a  statute  to  the  contrary,  the  burden  of  proof  in  disciplinary 

administrative  proceedings  rests  upon  the  party  making  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of 

Fountain Valley  (1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  The  “burden  of 

proof”  means  the  obligation  of  a  party,  if  he  or  she  is  to  prevail  on  a  particular  fact,  to 

establish  by  evidence  a  requisite  degree  of  belief  or  conviction  concerning  such  fact. 

(Redevelopment  Agency  v.  Norm's  Slauson  (1985)  173  Cal.App.3d  1121,  1128.)  The 

burden  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  Is  thus  on  District  to  prove  the  charging 

allegations. 

2. 

The  standard  of  proof  in  this  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d 

1035,  1039-1040;  Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  "The  phrase  ‘preponderance  of  evidence’  Is 

usually  defined  in  terms  of  probability  of  truth,  e.g.,  ‘such  evidence  as,  when  weighed 

with  that  opposed  to  it,  has  more  convincing  force  and  the  greater  probability  of 

truth.’  (BAJI  (8th  ed.),  No.  2.60.)”  (1  Witkin,  Evidence,  Burden  of  Proof  and 

Presumptions  §  35  (4th  ed.  2000).) 

3. 

A  permanent  District  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause  only  after  a 

dismissal  hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  44934,  and  44944.)** 

4. 

Under  section  44944,  subdivision  (b),  the  dismissal  hearing  must  be 

conducted  by  a  three-member  Commission  on  Professional  Competence.  Two 

members  of  the  Commission  must  be  non-district  teachers,  one  chosen  by  the 

  

4  Further  references  to  statute  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

82

Respondent  and  one  by  the  district,  and  the  third  member  of  the  Commission  must  be 

an  administrative  law  judge  from  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

5. 

When  a  school  board  recommends  dismissal  for  cause,  the  Commission 

may  only  vote  for  or  against  it.  Likewise,  when  suspension  Is  recommended,  the 

Commission  may  only  vote  for  or  against  suspension.  The  Commission  may  not 

dispose  of  a  charge  of  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  an  alternative  sanction.  (8 

44944,  subd.  (c)(1)(3).) 

6. 

Section  44932  provides  in  part: 

(a) 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except 

for  one  or  more  of  the  following  causes: 

(1)  Immoral  or  unprofessional  conduct. 

(4)  Unsatisfactory  performance. 

[W]...  [9] 

[W]...  [9] 

(7)  Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the 

school  laws  of  the  state  or  reasonable  regulations 

prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 

State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the 

school  district  employing  him  or  her. 

7. 

Unprofessional  conduct  as  used  in  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  may  be  defined 

as  conduct  that  violates  the  rules  or  ethical  code  of  a  profession  or  is  unbecoming  a 

member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing.  (Board of  Ed.  v.  Swan  (1953)  41  Cal.2d  546, 

83

553,  overruled  in  part,  on  another  ground,  in  Bek/aris  v.  Board  of  Ed.  (1972)  6  Cal.3d 

575,  588,  fn.  7.) 

8. 

The  term  "unsatisfactory  performance”  is  not  specifically  defined  in  the 

Education  Code  or  case  law.  Inasmuch  as  there  is  separate  cause  for  dismissal  for 

unprofessional  conduct  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  44932,  and  we  are  not  to  presume 

the  Legislature  intended  to  enact  completely  duplicative  statutes  (Jn  re  Maes  (2010) 

185  Cal.App.4th  1094,  1110),  unsatisfactory  performance  must  mean  something 

different  from  unprofessional  conduct.  In  fact,  section  44938,  subdivision  (c),  specifies 

that  "unsatisfactory  performance”  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal 

specified  in  section  44932.  While  unprofessional  conduct  can  be  determined  by 

analyzing  a  teacher's  conduct  relative  to  the  broader  educational  community, 

unsatisfactory  performance  must  be  analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher's 

performance  as  evaluated  by  his  or  her  employing  school  district.  Section  44938 

supports  this  proposition.  Section  44938  requires  a  charge  of  unsatisfactory 

performance  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  notice  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  and 

refers  to  section  44660  et  seq.,  which  in  turn  establishes  guidelines  for  how  school 

districts  should  evaluate  and  assess  the  performance  of  their  certificated  employees. 

Thus,  cause  for  discipline  may  be  established  if  a  certificated  employee  performs 

unsatisfactorily  to  his  employing  school  district.  However,  the  purpose  of  the  statute 

giving  tenure  to  teachers  is  to  insure  an  efficient  permanent  staff  of  teachers  whose 

members  are  not  dependent  on  caprice  for  their  positions  as  long  as  they  conduct 

themselves  properly  and  perform  their  duties  efficiently  and  well.  (Bakersfield 

Elementary  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260, 

1293,  fn  20,  citing  56  Cal.Jur.3d  (2003)  Schools,  §  411,  p.  757.)  Therefore,  a  reasonable 

limitation  is  that  an  employing  school  district  cannot  be  arbitrary  or  capricious  in 

84

making  decisions  regarding  whether  a  certificated  employee  has  performed 

unsatisfactorily. 

9, 

Cause  for  discipline  against  a  teacher  must  relate  to  her  fitness  to  teach 

within  the  mearing  of  factors  enumerated  in  the  case  of  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of 

Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229-230  (Morrison).  The  California  Supreme  Court  set 

forth  guidelines  (eight  factors)  to  aid  in  determining  whether  the  conduct  in  question 

indicates  such  unfitness: 

(1) 

=  The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely 

affected  students,  fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational 

community,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated. 

(2) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct. 

(3) 

The  type  of  credential  held  by  the  person  involved. 

(4) 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances 

surrounding  the  conduct. 

(5) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the 

motives  resulting  in  the  conduct. 

(6) 

The  likelihood  of  the  reoccurrence  of  the  questioned 

conduct. 

(7) 

|  The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an 

adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional 

rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other  teachers. 

(8) 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct. 

85

10. 

Not  all  "Morrison  factors"  need  be  present  for  the  Morrison  test  to  be 

satisfied.  (Governing  Board  of  ABC  School  District  v.  Haar  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  369.) 

Moreover,  the  Morrison  analysis  need  not  be  conducted  on  each  individual  fact 

established,  but  rather  can  be  applied  to  the  accumulated  facts  established 

collectively.  (Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429,  1457.) 

11. 

—s  "Persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the 

State  Board  of  Education  or  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing 

her,”  which  concerns  Education  Code,  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(7),  requires  a 

"showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High 

School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal.App.3d 

1176,  1196.) 

12. 

The  term  “willful”  carries  a  volitional  coloration  which  excludes  the  notion 

of  accidental  or  even  negligent  conduct.  (Coomes  v.  State  Personnel  Bad.  (1963)  215 

Cal.App.2d  770,  775.)  A  refusal  needs  to  be  “conscious,  intentional  and  deliberate  to 

be  willful.”  (Goodhew  v.  Industrial  Acc. Commission  (1958)  157  Cal.App.2d  252,  257.) 

“Willful”  is  “voluntary  and  intentional,  but  not  necessarily  malicious.”  (Black's  Law  Dict. 

(9th  ed.  2009)  p.  1737,  col.  2.) 

13. 

Section  44939  provides  in  part: 

Upon  the  filing  of  written  charges,  duly  signed  and  verified 

by  the  person  filing  them  with  the  governing  board  of  a 

school  district,  or  upon  a  written  statement  of  charges 

formulated  by  the  governing  board,  charging  a  permanent 

86

employee  of  the  district  with  immoral  conduct,  ...  with 

willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without 

reasonable  cause,  as  prescribed  by  reasonable  rules  and 

regulations  of  the  employing  school  district,  ...  the 

governing  board  may,  if  it  deems  such  action  necessary, 

immediately  suspend  the  employee  from  his  duties  and 

give  notice  to  him  of  his  suspension,  and  that  30  days  after 

service  of  the  notice,  he  will  be  dismissed,  unless  he 

demands  a  hearing. 

14. 

Section  44944,  subdivision  (a)(5),  provides  that  no  testimony  shall  be 

given  or  evidence  introduced  relating  to  matters  that  occurred  more  than  four  years 

prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice.  As  such,  in  the  instant  matter,  the  statute  of 

limitations  began  running  on  February  6,  2015,  based  on  Factual  Finding  5. 

15. 

The  CSTP  provides  in  part: 

Effective  teaching  happens  through  thoughtful  planning 

focused  on  defined  outcomes  for  student  learning  and 

leveraging  of  teachable  moments.  . 

..  Effective  teaching  Is  a 

form  of  inquiry  wherein  teachers  use  evidence  and  analysis 

of  students’  strengths  and  struggles,  and  their  own 

performance,  to  guide  their  practice  in  support  of  student 

learning. 

The  CSTP  are  organized  around  six  interrelated  domains  of 

teaching  practice.  The  following  are  the  six  standards: 

8/7

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

Engaging  and  Supporting  All  Students  in 

Learning 

Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective 

Environments  for  Student  Learning 

Planning  Instruction  and  Designing  Learning 

Experiences  for  All  Students 

Assessing  Students  for  Learning 

Developing  as  a  Professional  Educator 

[EJach  standard  is  organized  into  a  set  of  big  ideas  or 

elements  that  identify  key  areas  within  that  particular 

domain  of  teaching.  Each  element  is  further  illustrated  with 

reflective  questions  that  encourage  teaches  to  explore 

aspects  of  teaching  practice  throughout  their  careers. 

[W]...  [9] 

[W]...  [9] 

Standard  2 
Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective  Environments  for 
Student  Learning 

Teachers  promote  social  development  and  responsibility 

within  a  caring  community  where  each  student  is  treated 

fairly  and  respectfully.  They  create  physical  or  virtual 

learning  environments  that  promote  student  learning, 

reflect  diversity,  and  encourage  constructive  and  productive 

interactions  among  students.  They  establish  and  maintain 

learning  environments  that  are  physically,  intellectually,  and 

88

emotionally  safe.  Teachers  create  a  rigorous  learning 

environment  with  high  expectations  and  appropriate 

support  for  all  students.  Teachers  develop,  communicate, 

and  maintain  high  standards  for  individual  and  group 

behavior.  They  employ  classroom  routines,  procedures, 

norms,  and  supports  for  positive  behavior  to  ensure  a 

climate  in  which  all  students  can  learn.  They  use 

instructional  time  to  optimize  learning. 

[W]...  [9] 

dol...” 

2.5  Developing,  communicating,  and  maintaining  high 

standards  for  individual  and  group  behavior 

As  teachers  develop,  they  may  ask,  “How  dol...”  or  “Why 

e 

facilitate  student  participation  in  classroom  decision- 

making? 

e 

e 

foster  and  support  appropriate  student  behavior? 

collaborate  with  students...  to  establish,  maintain, 

and  communicate  standards  for  student  behavior? 

e 

work  proactively  to  present  and  respond  guickly  to 

minimize  behavioral  issues? 

e 

understand  and  respond  to  appropriate  behaviors  in 

an  efficient,  fair,  and  eguitable  way? 

89

e 

help  all  students  learn  to  take  responsibility  for  their 

own  behavior  and  actions? 

2.7  Using  instructional  time  to  optimize  learning 

As  teachers  develop,  they  may  ask,  “How  dol...”  or  “Why 

organize  instruction  to  optimize  learning  time? 

pace  instruction  to  accomplish  learning  goals? 

re-direct  students’  off-task  behavior  to  make  the 

most  of  instructional  time? 

[TN]...  [1] 

dol...” 

e 

e 

e 

[W]...  [9] 

Standard  6 

Developing  as  a  Professional  Educator 

Teachers  reflect  on  their  teaching  practice  to  support 

student  learning.  They  establish  professional  goals  and 

engage  in  continuance  and  purposeful  professional  growth 

and  development.  They  collaborate  with  colleagues  and 

engage  in  the  broader  professional  community  to  support 

teacher  and  student  learning.  ... 

[W]...  [9] 

90

6.3  Collaborating  with  colleagues  and  the  broader 

professional  community  to  support  teacher  and  student 

As  teachers  develop,  they  may  ask,  Howdol...”  or  “Why 

learning 

dol...” 

[W]...  [9] 

e 

collaborate  with  teachers,  administrators,  ...  to 

ensure  that  all  students’  diverse  learning  needs, 

interests,  and  strengths  are  met? 

e 

remain  receptive  to  the  feedback  of  colleagues, 

mentors,  and  supervisors  in  support  of my  teaching 

practice  and  student  learning? 

e 

benefit  from  and  contribute  to  professional 

organizations  to  improve  my  teaching? 

16. 

As  discussed  in  more  detail  below,  District  established,  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that  Respondent  demonstrated  unprofessional 

conduct  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(1)),  unsatisfactory  performance  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(4)), 

persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)  (7)), 

and  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular  assignments  without  reasonable  cause  (§  44939). 

As  such,  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  position  as  a  permanent 

certificated  employee  of  District. 

91

Unsatisfactory  Performance 

17. 

|  As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  8,  unsatisfactory  performance  must  be 

analyzed  with  an  eye  toward  the  teacher's  performance  as  evaluated  by  Respondent's 

employing  school  district.  The  evidence  showed  District  issued  Notices  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service  and  Suspension  on  two  occasions  to  Respondent,  for  her  failure 

to  perform  her  duties  satisfactorily,  despite  numerous  warnings,  directives,  and 

substantial  assistance  and  guidance.  Specifically,  from  January  18,  2017  through  March 

13,  2018,  Respondent  received  nine  conference  memos  outlining  her  repeated  failures 

to  state  the  learning  objective  or  applicable  standard  at  the  beginning  of  a  lesson, 

align  activities  to  the  learning  objective,  develop  and  consistently  apply  class  rules  and 

consequences,  demonstrate  classroom  management,  monitor  student  learning  and 

check  for  understanding,  utilize  effective  questioning  strategies,  provide  written 

models  for  students  to  utilize  while  they  work  independently,  develop  lesson  plans 

with  clearly  defined  instructional  outcomes,  monitor  student  behavior  throughout  her 

lessons,  follow  lesson  plans,  and  many  other  deficiencies.  These  failures,  established  by 

the  credible  testimony  of  Ms.  Avalos  and  Ms.  Elmore,  who  observed  Respondent's 

poor  work  performance  over  the  years,  remained  uncorrected,  despite  multiple  and 

extended  interventions  provided  by  the  administration  and  a  PAR  professional. 

18.  |  Despite  the  Notices  of  Unsatisfactory  Services,  potential  suspensions, 

multiple  below  standard  Stull  evaluations,  and  the  guidance  and  assistance,  directives, 

and  coaching  resources  provided  by  Ms.  Sanchez  and  Ms.  Avalos,  Respondent 

continued  to  demonstrate  an  apparent  inability  or  unwillingness  to  perform  as 

required.  Given  these  factors,  District  demonstrated  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  that  Respondent  performed  unsatisfactorily  for  multiple  consecutive  years,  in 

violation  of  Code  section  44932,  subd.  (a)(4). 

92

Persistent  Violation  of  or  Refusal  to  Obey  School  Laws  /  Willful 

Refusal  to  Perform  Regular  Assignments 

19. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  11  and  12,  cases  interpreting  whether  a 

teacher  has  persistently  and  willfully  violated  or  refused  to  obey  school  laws  require  a 

showing  of  intentional  and  continual  refusal  to  cooperate.  Here,  the  evidence  showed 

that  Respondent  failed  to  follow  multiple  directives,  and  failed  to  show  immediate  and 

sustained  improvement  after  the  issuance  of  below  standard  Stull  evaluations,  multiple 

notices  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  and  potential  suspension.  Specifically, 

Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  directives,  failed  to  use  effective  questioning 

techniques,  failed  to  develop  lesson  plans  with  clearly  defined  instructional  outcomes 

and  activities,  failed  to  state  the  learning  objective  at  the  beginning  of  the  lesson, 

failed  to  ensure  the  proper  and  complete  delivery  of  lessons  to  her  students,  and 

failed  to  follow  pacing  plans.  As  a  result,  during  numerous  observations,  Respondent's 

students  were  confused,  unable  to  correctly  complete  their  work  independently,  and  in 

some  cases  did  not  at  all  due  to  Respondent's  failure  to  properly  explain  how  to 

complete  activities.  In  some  instances,  Respondent  provided  an  incorrect  model. 

20. 

Additionally,  Respondent  failed  to  establish  and  implement  a  behavior 

system  as  required  by  MPC’s  policies.  In  particular,  MPC’s  policy  expressly  directs 

teachers  to  establish  routines  and  procedures  to  keep  interruptions  to  a  minimum  in 

order  to  improve  student  achievement.  Respondent  repeatedly  failed  to  develop  and 

implement  “an  effective  classroom  management  plan  that  [included]  clear 

expectations,  rewards,  and  consequences,”  and  to  post,  teach,  demonstrate,  and 

consistently  implement  the  class  rules  by  praising  student  compliance  or  issuing 

appropriate  consequences.  The  evidence  showed  that  Ms.  Avalos  observed 

Respondent's  class  on  a  number  of  occasions  where  students  were  off-task,  out  of 

93

their  seats,  talking,  making  noise,  leaving  the  classroom  without  permission,  and  other 

inappropriate  behaviors,  often  without  Respondent  addressing  or  redirecting  the 

inappropriate  behavior.  Although  Ms.  Avalos  directed  Respondent  repeatedly  to  adopt 

and  implement  an  effective  behavior  support  system  for  her  students,  Respondent 

failed,  or  was  otherwise  unable,  to  comply. 

21. 

These  same  factors  also  demonstrated  Respondent's  refusal  to  perform 

regular  assignments,  particularly  her  failure  to  comply  with  multiple  directives  issued 

by  Ms.  Sanchez  and  Ms.  Avalos.  Given  the  above,  District  has  demonstrated  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  Respondent  persistently  violated  or  refused  to 

obey  school  laws,  including  MPC’s  policies  and  the District's  job  description,  and  the 

CSTP,  and  willfully  refused  to  perform  regular  assignments,  in  violation  of  Education 

Code  8§  44932,  subd.  (a)(7),  and  44939. 

22. 

Respondent  contended  that  the  granting  of  her  Motion  for  Immediate 

Reversal  of  Suspension  supports  a  legal  conclusion  that  she  did  not  willfully  refuse  to 

perform  her  regular  assignments.  The  ALJ  that  heard  the  motion  found  that  the 

allegations  contained  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  did  not  demonstrate  that 

Respondent's  actions  were  willful.  However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  pursuant  to 

section  4439,  subdivision  (c)(1),  the  ruling  on  the  motion  was  based  solely  on  the  facts 

alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  and  not  any  of  the  evidence  considered  by  the 

Commission. 

Unprofessional  Conduct 

23. 

Asset  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  7,  unprofessional  conduct  addresses 

whether  a  teacher  is  unfit  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  by  reason  of  inadequacies,  and 

whether  a  teacher's  conduct  is  unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good 

94

standing,  respectively.  Here,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  Respondent  failed  to 

adhere  to  and/or  carry  out  specific  teaching  duties,  in  direct  violation  of  numerous 

warnings  or  directives  issued  by  Ms.  Sanchez  and  Ms.  Avalos.  Specifically,  Respondent 

failed  repeatedly  to  follow  lesson  and  pacing  plans,  teach  effective  directed  lessons, 

follow  the  teacher's  edition  in  Treasures  (reading/language  arts  program)  and  correctly 

deliver  ELD/ELA  lessons  and  the  Reader's  and  Writer's  Workshop  activities,  resulting  in 

an  overall  failure  to  teach  those  core  subjects  with  fidelity.  Additionally,  the  evidence 

showed  that  Respondent's  repeated  failure  to  demonstrate  effective  classroom 

management,  monitor  and  address  student  behavior,  coupled  with  her  repeated 

instances  of  unpreparedness,  often  resulted  in  a  disorganized  classroom,  as  well  as  an 

on-going  loss  of  instructional  time  for  her  students.  Respondent's  failure  to  comply 

with  numerous  directives,  most  of  them  recurring,  issued  to  her  from  March  14,  2016, 

through  February  22,  2018,  totaling  21,  and  correct  her  teaching  inadequacies, 

represented  a  sustained  inability  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  District,  thereby 

demonstrating  her  unfitness  for  service. 

24. 

Similarly,  to  the  extent  that  Respondent's  failure  to  comply  with  repeated 

directives  related  to  a  continual  unwillingness  to  adhere  to  specific  orders  issued  by 

those  in  authority  over  her,  such  as  using  effective  questioning  techniques,  submitting 

lesson  plans  with  clearly  defined  instructional  outcomes  and  activities  Respondent 

planned  to  teach,  and  communicating  the  purpose  and  objective  of  her  lessons  to  her 

students,  reasonably  demonstrated  a  level  of  defiance,  constituting  conduct 

unbecoming  of  a  member  of  a  profession  in  good  standing  (i.e.,  unprofessional 

conduct). 

95

Morrison  Factors 

25. 

As  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  9,  after  establishing  unprofessional 

conduct,  it  must  be  established  whether  such  evident  conduct  renders  Respondent 

unfit  to  teach,  pursuant  to  the  Morrison  factors: 

A. 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 

students,  fellow  teachers,  or  the  educational  community,  and  the  degree  of  such 

adversity  anticipated.  This  factor  has  maximum  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of 

adverse  action.  As  set  forth  in  detail  above,  Respondent  failed  to  follow  numerous 

directives  issued  by  Ms.  Sanchez  and  Ms.  Avalos,  and  correct  a  number  of  teaching 

deficiencies,  despite  an  inordinate  amount  of  assistance  and  guidance,  including  the 

assistance  of  the  school  psychologist,  a  behavior  specialist,  and  a  Foster  Care  Youth 

Counselor,  modeling,  and  consulting  provided  by  a  PAR  professional.  Consequently, 

Respondent's  students  experienced  a  constant  loss  of  instructional  time,  the  delivery 

of  ineffective  directed  lessons,  instruction  that  lacked  fidelity  concerning  the 

reading/language  arts  and  math  programs,  a  poorly  managed  classroom,  and  a 

number  of  other  unacceptable  practices,  all  obstructing  their  ability  to  access  the 

curriculum. 

B. 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  This  factor 

has  moderate  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action,  in  that  the  events  in 

question  are  not  remote,  as  they  occurred  between  one  and  two  years  ago. 

C. 

The  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person  involved. 

This  factor  has  minimal  application,  in  that  the  type  of  credential  held  by  Respondent 

did  not  serve  as  a  relevant  factor  either  explaining,  defending,  or  excusing  her  failures 

to  carry  out  her  duties  as  a  teacher. 

96

D. 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the 

conduct.  This  factor  has  maximum  application,  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action. 

The  evidence  showed  that  Respondent  was  given  extensive,  intensive,  and  repeated 

assistance  and  guidance,  including  at  least  nine  conferences  with  Ms.  Avalos  between 

January  8,  2017,  and  March  12,  2018,  and  the  assistance  of  a  PAR  professional,  but 

failed  to  make  a  marked  and  sustained  improvement  in  her  performance  as  a  teacher. 

In  addition  to  the  assistance  and  guidance,  Respondent  received  multiple  Notices  of 

Unsatisfactory  Service  and  faced  suspension,  but  none  of  those  actions  resulted  in 

Respondent  correcting  her  deficiencies. 

E. 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting 

in  the  conduct.  While  Respondent's  performance  was  not  praiseworthy,  the  "motives" 

underlying  her  conduct  remain  unclear.  Therefore,  this  factor  has  minimal  application. 

F. 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct.  This 

factor  has  maximum  application  and  weighs  in  favor  of  adverse  action.  The  evidence 

clearly  established  that  Respondent  was  unsuccessful  in  remediating  her  deficiencies, 

despite  substantial  intervention.  As  such,  if  Respondent  is  permitted  to  return  to  the 

classroom,  the  likelihood  is  great  that  she  would  continue  to  perform  with  evident 

unfitness. 

G. 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse 

impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  person  involved,  or  other 

certified  persons.  The  parties  raised  no  constitutional  issues  in  this  matter. 

H. 

The  publicity  or  notoriety  given  to  the  conduct.  This  factor  has  no 

application  in  this  matter,  as  the  record  includes  no  evidence  of  publicity  or  notoriety 

stemming  from  Respondent's  conduct. 

97

26. 

In  light  of  the  above,  the  Morrison  factors,  on  balance,  indicate  that 

Respondent  is  unfit  to  teach,  as  the  number  of  factors  with  maximum  application 

outweighs  the  number  of  factors  with  less.  Specifically,  District  has  met  its  burden  of 

demonstrating  that  Respondent's  retention  in  the  profession  poses  a  significant 

danger  of  harm  to  its  students,  school  employees,  or  others  who  might  be  affected  by 

her  actions  as  a  teacher. 

Conclusion 

27. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  Commission  has  determined,  by  unanimous 

vote,  that  cause  exists  to  dismiss  Respondent  from  her  employment  with  the  District  as 

a  permanent  certificated  employee,  for  her  unsatisfactory  performance,  persistent 

violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations,  willful  refusal  to  perform  regular 

assignments  without  reasonable  cause,  and  unprofessional  conduct. 

98

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Lourdes  Prieto  is  sustained  and  Lourdes 

Prieto  shall  be  dismissed  as  an  employee  of  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 

forthwith. 

DATE:  December  26,  2019 

DATE:  December  26,  2019 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DATE:  December  26,  2019 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(c  DocuSigned  by: 

2CF83E060BAA47E... 

ANNE  GORDON 

Commissioner 

DocuSigned  by: 

Prtie t7} 

A075FBD240A1437... 

PETER  D.  SOMBERG 

Commissioner 

DocuSigned  by: 

(aymun  Svuys 

CARMEN  D.  SNUGGS 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

99

