BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
MODESTO  CITY  SCHOOLS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

in  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  against: 

JEFF  ZEHINER,  Respondent 

OAH  No.  2019050922 

DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  the  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (CPC  or  Commission)  in  Modesto,  California,  on  September 

10,  through  13,  20719.  The  Commission  was  comprised  of  John  Colombo,  Andrea 

Mitcheil,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Erin  R.  Koch-Goodman. 

Roman  J.  Mufioz  and  Nia  D.  Franklin,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Dannis,  Woliver,  Kelley, 

represented  the  Modesto  City  Schools  (District). 

Ernest  H.  Tuttle  TIL,  Attorney  at  Law,  Tuttle  &  McCloskey,  represented  Jeff  Zehner 

(respondent),  who  was  present  at  hearing. 

The  Commission  met  to  deliberate.  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on 

September  13,  2079.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Respondent  has  been  ernployed  by  the  District  as  an  elernentary  school 

teacher  since  1990.  Specifically,  respondent  taught  grades  4,  5,  and  6,  at  Burbank 

Elementary  School  (Burbank),  from  1990  to  2000  and  2003  to  2007;  El  Vista  Elementary 

School,  from  2000  to  2003;  and  Ensien  Elementary  School  (Ensien),  from  2007  to  2016. 

While  at  Burbank  and  Ensien,  respondent  organized  a  “Noon  League  Sports  Program" 

(Noon  League).  Students  signed  up  to  play  team  sports  during  their  lunch  hour  and 

respondent  created  teams  and  set  game  schedules  for  different  sports  throughout  the 

year.  In  addition,  for  a  period  of  time  including  1998  to  2004,  respondent  coached  a 

boys’  basketball  team  at  Grace  M.  Davis  High  School  (Davis).  In  2071,  while  teaching  at 

Ensien,  respondent  was  narned  “Teacher  of  the  Year"  for  Stanislaus  County,  grades  4-6. 

2. 

During  his  tenure,  respondent  taught  a  diverse  population  of  students.  At 

Burbank,  respondent  served  a  population  of  low  socio-economic,  mostly  minority 

students,  where  parental  involvement  was  not  common.  Conversely,  at  Ensien, 

respondent  served  a  population  of  high  socio-economic,  mostly  Caucasian  students, 

where  parental  involvernent  was  high. 

Statement  of  Charges 

3, 

On  April  15,  2019,  the  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  approved  Resolution  No. 

18/19-5CS  adopting  a  Statement  of  Charges  for  Disrnissal  and  Immediate  Suspension 

Without  Pay  against  respondent.  The  Board  alleged  multiple  violations  of  the 

Education  Code,  including  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service, 

and  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  State  or  reasonable 

regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  or 

by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,

subds.  (a)(1),  (4),  (6),  &  (8).)  More  specifically,  the  Statement  of  Charges  alleges 

respondent  engaged  in  a  series  of  sexual  games  with  a  District  student,  from  1997  to 

2004,  and  lied  to  the  District  about  the  conduct  at  issue.  The  District  served  the 

Statement  of  Charges  on  respondent  on  April  16,  2019.  On  April  23,  2019,  respondent 

timely  returned  a  Demand  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense.  A  hearing  before  the 

Commission  followed. 

Conduct  at  Issue 

4. 

In  2018, 

mm  LY  t 

reported  to  the  Modesto  Police 

Department  that,  from  1997  to  2004,  when  he  was a  District  student,  respondent 

engaged  in a  series  of  inappropriate  sexual  games  with  him.  Also  in  2018,  IE 

spoke 

to  the  Enslen  principal,  informing  her  of  the  same  allegations.  The  District  conducted 

an  investigation,  interviewing  respondent  and 

mi.  The  Statement  of  Charges 

followed. 

5. 

i i:  31  years  old.  He  is  single  and  lives  in  San  Diego.  He  was  born 

and  raised  in  Modesto,  and  was  a  District  student  from  1993  to  2006.  He  attended 

Burbank,  Mark  Twain  Junior  High  School  (Mark  Twain),  and  Davis.  He  was  a  better- 

than-average  student  and  an  exceptional  athlete,  playing  both  basketball  and  football. 

SB  dreamed 

of  someday  playing  in  the  National  Football  League  (NFL)  as  a 

quarterback. 

6. 

After  high  school  graduation,  HEB  attended  Marshall  University,  in 

Huntington,  West  Virginia,  on a 

full  athletic  scholarship  for  football;  however,  he  left 

Marshall  because  of  disagreements  with  the  head  coach.  He  transferred  to  Mendocino 

Community  College,  and  then  attended  and  graduated  from  California  Lutheran

University  in  Thousand  Oaks,  California,  where  he  continued  to  play  football. 

Ultimately, 

a:  dreams  of  playing  in  the  NFL  were  never  realized.  However, 

i: 

older  brother  played  in  the  NFL  for  the  Philadelphia  Eagles. 

7. 

Today,  mi  has  a  job  coaching  athletics  in  San  Diego,  but  his 

employment  history  is  rife  with  short-term  jobs.  He  has  had  difficulty  maintaining 

long-term  employment  and  forming  lasting  relationships  with  people.  He  cites 

problems  with  male  authority  and  an  inability  to  trust  people.  He  has  also  been 

unfaithful  to  almost  every  girlfriend,  admitting  an  addiction  to  pornography  and  being 

consumed  with  lustful  and  immoral  desires.  In  2017,  SB  sought  help  for  his 

addiction;  and  found  a  men’s  sexual  purity  support  group  at  Parkhill  Church. 

discovered  that  his  inability  to  thrive,  poor  conduct,  and  destructive  behaviors  were 

driven  by  trauma  he  experienced  in  his  youth.  The  group  leader  identified  red  flags, 

including  being  exposed,  before  age  13,  to  pornography  and  masturbation  by  a 

stranger. 

im 

immediately  thought  about  his  relationship  with  respondent,  and  that, 

from  1997  to  2004,  respondent  had  engaged 

mm 

in  a  series  of  inappropriate  sexual 

games,  involving  pornography,  vibrators,  masturbation,  and  inappropriate  touching. 

SB  spoke  to  the  group  leader  and  then  to  his  mother,  recounting  respondent's 

behavior  to  each  of  them.  He  then  reported  the  same  to  the  Modesto  Police  and  the 

Enslen  principal.  SB  was 

interviewed  by  the  Modesto  Police  and  the  District,  and 

called  as  a  witness  at  hearing  by  the  District.  A  summary  of  his  testimony  follows. 

8. 

im 

met  respondent  in  1997,  while  playing  in  the  Noon  League.  He  was 

10  years  old  and  in  grade  4  at  the  time.  Respondent  took  an  interest  in 

mi  telling 

im 

he  was  an  excellent  athlete;  encouraging  him  to  practice  and  play;  and  offering 

to  hel 

p 

hone  his  skills. 

enjoyed  respondent's  attention.  At  home, 

Oy 

had  very  little  parental  supervision/attention.  His  mother  was  working multiple  jobs,

and  his  father  was  in  jail.  RB  saw  respondent  as  a  mentor  and  a  father-figure;  he 

looked  up  to  respondent,  and  wanted  to  make  him  proud. 

9. 

Between  1998  and  2000,  grades  5  and  6,  respondent  was  mm: 

classroom  teacher.  mi  also  continued  to  play  in  Noon  League  for  respondent. 

During  that  time,  respondent  loaded  SE with  certificates  of  accomplishment  and 

outstanding  achievement  awards  in  both  academics  and  athletics.  At  the  same  time, 

respondent  repeatedly  took |  {fe  the  mall  and  bought  him  athletic  gear,  including 

shoes  and  clothes.  He  also  took  ito  Davis  to  watch  the  freshman  boys’  basketball 

team  practice  and  play  games.  Sometimes,  respondent  arranged  for  Tio  be  the 

scorekeeper  for  a  Davis  game. 

10. 

 Atage  13,  in  grade  7  (2000-2001), IB  attended  Mark  Twain. 

Respondent  telephoned 

im 

at  home  to  talk  and  invited 

im 

over  to  his 

condominium.  But  without  daily  contact  at  school,  their  communication  waned.  Then, 

respondent  bought  mm  a  home  computer.  Thereafter,  SB anc  respondent  began 

communicating  more  often  again  via  email  and  AOL  Instant  Messenger.  Respondent 

invited 

mm  over  to  his  condominium;  SB went,  and  almost  every  time,  he  and 

respondent  were  alone  together.  The  two  worked  out  in  respondent's  converted 

garage/weight  room,  watched  sports  on  television,  and  talked. 

11. 

During  one  visit,  respondent  taught  mi  how  to  play  cards  (blackjack 

and  poker)  and  gave 

mm  money  to  bet  on  their  games.  Respondent  also  introduced 

to  betting  on  sporting  events;  the  two  bet  on  both  college  and  professional 

games.  When 

mm 

lost  a  bet,  respondent  assigned  him  a  “consequence”:  wash 

respondent's  car,  help  in  respondent's  classroom,  or  clean  something  in  respondent's 

condominium.  SH 

completed  the  assigned  tasks.

12. 

Atthe  same  time,  respondent  continued  to  buy 

im 

athletic  gear, 

either  by  going  to  the  mall  or  by  telephone  at  EastBay  Sports.  In  addition,  respondent 

began  taking 

io  sporting  events,  both  college  and  professional  matches. 

Respondent  drove  ito  and  from  the  events,  paid  for  i  ticket,  and  bought 

HB food.  Most  often,  the  two  were  alone  together  in  the  car.  On  one  occasion,  while 

driving,  respondent  put  his  hand  on  mi:  thigh.  SB  was  immediately 

uncomfortable  and  moved  his  leg  away  from  respondent.  On  another  day,  respondent 

told  TB  about 

his  mentor,  who  had  been  fired  from  teaching  for  becoming  too 

close  to  students.  SB  was  confused  by  the  story,  wondering  why  respondent  would 

tell  him  about  it. 

13. 

In  summer  2001,  respondent  paid  for  SB  to  attend  multiple  basketball 

camps,  including  Stanford  University,  Mike  Terpstra  (Oakland),  and  Santa  Clara 

University.  Respondent  frequently  visited  | 

camp  and  watched  him  play. 

Respondent  also  communicated  with  the  camps  regarding  mm  and  arranged  for 

i  io  be  placed  with  certain  coaches.  That  summer,  respondent  also  bought  ;  | 

a  book  -  Russell  Rules:  11  Lessons  on  Leadership  From  the  Twentieth  Century’s 

Greatest  Winner,  by  Bill  Russell.  Resoondent  wrote  in  the  front  cover: 

im  To  a  friend  I  treasure  dearly.  This  book  is  to  serve 

memory  to  the  basketball  camps  for  the  summer  of  2001. 

You  keep  improving  and  you  have  unlimited  potential  as  an 

athlete.  But  no  matter  how  great  you  become  or  the 

success  you  achieve,  you  will  never  be  a  better  athlete  than 

you  are  a  person.  You  are  a  special  human  being. 

Always  A  Friend,  J.  Z.

14. 

Atage  14,  in  grade  8  (2001-2002),  SE  continued  to  visit  respondent  at 

his  condominium.  During  one  visit,  respondent  talked  to  SB  about  “the  birds  and 

the  bees.”  He  cautioned 

mm  about  the  consequences  of  an  unplanned  child  and  the 

impact  it  would  have  on  his  future  prospects  as  an  athlete.  He  told im  to  use 

condoms  when  he  had  sex.  He  also  encouraged 

to  masturbate,  telling  him  “It 

feels  good.  You  can  do  it  before  school.”  In  addition,  during  an  online  discussion, 

respondent  challenged 

mm.  “let's  keep  track  of  the  number  of  times  we  masturbate 

in  one  day,  and  tally  our  ‘scores’”,  or  words  to  that  effect.  Thereafter,  respondent,  on 

occasion,  invited  mi  over  to  his  condominium  using  the  words:  “we  can  watch 

sports  and  ‘score.’” 

15. 

mm  continued  to  visit  respondent  at  his  condominium.  They  worked 

out,  talked,  watched  sports  on  television  and  bet  on  games.  Now  when 

mm 

lost a 

bet,  respondent  gave  him  different  “consequences.”  The  first  time,  respondent  handed 

i  :  typed-out  list  of  “challenges,”  all  sexual  in  nature,  with  corresponding  dollar 

figures  next  to  each  one.  Respondent  told ;  |  he  would  pay  the  amounts  listed  for 

each  challenge SRE  completed.  After  that,  respondent  left  the  list  of  “challenges” 

sitting  on  his  master  bathroom  vanity;  and  SE  was  to  go  into  respondent's  master 

bedroom  to  complete  a  challenge.  When  a  television  game  took  a  commercial  break, 

or  at  halftime,  respondent  told  IE  ‘anytime  you're  ready,  you  can  go  do  a 

‘challenge,’”  or  words  to  that  effect.  During  countless  visits,  SHB  walked  into 

respondent's  master  bathroom  to  find  the  list. 

completed  each  challenge  while 

he  was  alone  in  respondent's  bedroom,  and  then  respondent  paid  him. 

16. 

SB  completed  many  “challenges”  for  of  respondent,  including:  “put 

your  flaccid  penis  on  a  piece  of  paper  and  draw  an  outline;  then,  make  your  penis 

erect  and  put  it  on  a  piece  of  paper  and  draw  an  outline”; 

uw, 

ou 

“use  a  handheld  massager 

on  your  penis  while  you  masturbate”;  “masturbate  while  viewing  a  picture  from  a

uy, 

ou 

Sports  Illustrated  Swimsuit  magazine  and  ejaculate  on  the  picture”;  and  “watch  the 

pornographic  movie  on  the  VHS  tape  in  the  video  recorder  in  my  bedroom  and 

masturbate.”  Sometimes,  respondent  asked  Ti  for  proof  he  had  completed  a 

challenge,  so 

mm 

left  the  Sports  Illustrated  picture  he  had  ejaculated  onto  and  the 

outline  of  his  erect  penis  on  respondent's  bathroom  vanity.  For  the  latter,  respondent 

told  mm  “looks  pretty  good  there,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  A  few  times,  when 

mm 

lost  a  bet,  respondent  “challenged”  i  to  get  dressed  nicely  and  go  to  Olan  Mills  to 

get  photos  taken; 

mm  always  refused. 

17. 

One  weekend,  respondent  took  mm  and  his  best  friend,  i”  Vii 

AZ,  to  Mt.  Diablo  for  a  day-hike.  Respondent  drove  the  trio  about  one-hour 

west  of  Modesto  to  Mt.  Diablo.  While  at  Mt.  Diablo,  respondent  took  candid  photos  of 

the  boys.  On  another  weekend,  respondent  drove 

and  NC  about  one-hour 

east  of  Modesto  to  his  cabin  in  Pinecrest.  While  at  the  cabin,  respondent  took  the  boys 

hiking  and  they  all  played  outdoor  games,  including  darts.  Again,  respondent  took 

candid  photos  of  the  boys.  In  one  photo,  respondent  asked  the  boys  to  turn  away 

from  him,  lower  their  pants  and  underwear  below  their  buttocks,  and  “moon”  him;  the 

boys  complied.  In  the  evening,  respondent  organized  an  indoor  game  of  “dark  tag,” 

with  the  cabin  lights  out  and  the  three  of  them  each  armed  with  a  can  of  shaving 

cream.  They  ate  dinner  together  and  talked,  and  then  the  boys  went  to  sleep  in  the 

cabin’s  guestroom.  The  next  morning,  while  the  boys  were  still  asleep,  resoondent 

entered  their  bedroom  with  a  vibrator  in  his  hand.  Respondent  sat  down  on im: 

bed,  turned  the  vibrator  on,  and  held  it  against  a:  penis.  HEB  woke  up,  startled, 

and  pushed  respondent's  hand  away  from  his  body.  Respondent  remained  sitting  on 

im  :  bed,  laughing.  TB  got  out  of  bed. 

18. 

|  Notwithstanding  the  above, 

mz 

continued  to  visit  respondent  at  his 

condominium.  At  some  point,  respondent  expressed  a  desire  for 

io  attend  Davis,

respondent's  alma  mater  and  where  he  coached  boys’  basketball,  and  not  Modesto 

High  School  where  SB was  assigned.  Respondent  told  J to  select  the  Davis 

“Health  Academy”  on  his  District  paperwork,  a  program  for  students  interested  in  a 

career  in  the  health/medical  fields.  Although  SB  wes  not  interested  in  the 

health/medical  fields,  he  selected  the  Davis  “Health  Academy”  on  his  District 

paperwork  and  was  reassigned  to  Davis. 

19. 

In  the  summer  before  high  school,  respondent  paid  for  |  fie  attend 

multiple  basketball  camps,  including  California  State  University,  Stanislaus  and 

Modesto  Junior  College.  Respondent  frequently  visited 

mm  at  camp  and  watched 

him  play.  Respondent  communicated  with  the  camps  regarding 

and  directed 

camps  to  place  SB  with  certain  coaches.  Respondent  continued  to  buy  mm 

athletic  gear  and  take  him  to  sporting  events. 

20. 

Atage  15, 

mm  began  grade  9  at  Davis  (2002-2003).  He  played 

freshman  football  and  basketball,  with  respondent  serving  as  the  assistant  coach  for 

the  freshman  boys’  basketball  team.  Respondent  continued  to  invite 

to  his 

condominium  to  work  out,  watch  sports,  and  talk;  and 

im 

continued  to  visit 

respondent.  Respondent  continued  to  make  bets  with 

and  assign  him  sexual 

“challenges.”  That  year,  resoondent  bought  mm  a  cellular  telephone,  and  frequently 

called 

im 

on  it.  When ie  sic  not  answer,  respondent  left  a  voicemail  message; 

but  respondent  became  angry  with  SB  when 

he  failed  to  promptly  return  his  calls  or 

i:  voice-mailbox  was  full  and  respondent  was  unable  to  leave  a  message. 

Respondent  continued  to  buy  SB athletic  gear  and  take 

to  sporting  events. 

When 

im 

began  dating,  respondent  offered 

im 

his  condominium’s  guestroom  to 

have  “safe  sex”  with  his  girlfriend.  Respondent  also  offered  to  buy  SB  condoms; 

mz 

refused.

21. 

That  year,  respondent  started  sending  interest/recommendation  letters 

to  colleges  and  universities  regarding  is  athletic  abilities.  Resoondent  also  had 

begin  drafting  the  same.  Respondent  hired  a  college  recruiter  for  mm  to 

pursue  an  athletic  scholarship/placement  at  a  Division  I  school.  One  day,  respondent 

told 

im 

he  needed  a  workout  video  to  send  to  prospective  colleges;  so,  respondent 

took 

to  the  Davis  gym  and  set  up  his  video-recorder.  Respondent  directed 

mm 

to  start  by  shooting  baskets,  but  respondent  quickly  became  upset  with  mi 

Respondent  turned  off  the  video-recorder,  and  told 

mm 

“you  don't  know  how  to 

shoot.  We  have  to  teach  you  how  to  shoot  all  over  again”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

JE was  distressed  with  the  interaction,  and  did  not  know  why  respondent  was  mad 

at  him. 

22. 

 Atage  16,  in  grade  10  (2003-2004), 

played  sophomore/junior 

varsity  (JV)  boys’  football  and  basketball.  That  year,  respondent  stopped  coaching  the 

freshman  boys’  basketball  team  and  started  working  as  the  assistant  coach  for  the  JV 

boys’  basketball  team.  When  SB  turned  16,  respondent  bought  him  a  new  car, 

leaving  an  approximately  $18,000  to  $20,000  cashier  check  at  the  dealership  for 

im 

and  his  mother  to  pick  out  the  car.  Respondent  told 

im 

he  bought  him  the  car 

because  he  wanted 

to  concentrate  on  athletics  and  not  have  to  work.  At  the 

same  time,  respondent  began  dating  Rosie,  his  now  wife.  Respondent  told 

not 

to  tell  Rosie  that  he  had  bought  him  a  new  car,  because  “she  doesn’t  approve  of  our 

relationship.”  However,  there  was  little  risk  SB  would  talk  to  Rosie,  as  respondent 

never  left  Rosie  and 

mm 

alone  in  the  same  room  together.  Nonetheless, im  did 

not  like  Rosie. 

23. 

While  playing  JV  basketball,  the  varsity  boys’  basketball  coach  asked 

Ito  move-up  and  play  for  him.  Respondent  strongly  discouraged  SB  from 

10

making  the  move,  but im  chose  to  move-up  anyway.  Thereafter,  the  relationship 

between  mi  and  respondent  faded. 

24. 

At  high  school  graduation,  respondent  gave im  $1,000.  Since 

graduation, 

mm 

has  seen  respondent,  face-to-face,  fewer  than  five  times;  and  they 

have  communicated  less  than  a  dozen  times,  and  even  then,  only  briefly  via  email  or 

Facebook  messaging.  While  in  college, SR 

contacted  respondent  and  asked  for 

money  to  pay  his  credit  card  debts;  respondent  agreed  and  gave 

im 

between 

$1,000  and  $2,000.  After  college,  in  2012,  SB  found  work  as  a  volunteer  football 

coach  for  California  State  University  San  Diego.  He  needed  a  laptop  computer  for 

work,  but  had  limited  funds.  He  contacted  respondent  and  asked  for  money  to  buy  a 

laptop  computer;  respondent  agreed  and  gave  mm  money.  SB  contacted 

respondent  after  high  school  for  money,  because  respondent  had  bought  him  things 

in  the  past  and  he  hoped  respondent  would  do  so  again. 

25. 

In2017/,  FE  wrote  respondent  a  letter,  thanking  him  for  helping  and 

coaching  him  in  basketball,  sending  him  to  camps,  and  encouraging  him  to  read 

books;  but  also  recounting  for  respondent  the  series  of  inappropriate  sexual 

challenges  he  had  performed,  as  a  child,  at  respondent's  behest.  After  that,  SB  told 

his  mother,  the  Modesto  Police,  and  the  District  about  respondent's  conduct.  mz 

has  hired  a  civil  attorney.  Today, 

im 

reflected:  “this  is 

a  tough  deal.  I  was  looking  for 

a  father  figure;  I  trusted  somebody  and  was  manipulated  and  used  for  their  pleasure.” 

Now,  “I'm  not a 

little  kid  anymore.  I  know  what  happened  and  it  was  wrong.  I'm  not 

mad  at  [respondent];  I'm  trying  to  forgive  him;  and  I'm  getting  help.  I  [also]  don’t 

blame  [respondent]  for  me  not  becoming  an  NFL  player.” 

11

a 

26. 

i  i: 

31  years  old.  He  is  married  with  two  minor  children  and  lives 

in  Roseburg,  Oregon  with  his  family.  He  was  born  and  raised  in  Modesto,  and  was  a 

District  student  from  1993  to  2006.  He  attended  Burbank,  Mark  Twain  and  Roosevelt 

junior  high  schools,  and  Davis.  Most  recently, ABE  served  in  the  armed  forces 

(2010-2019);  he  was  in  combat,  and  was  honorably  discharged. 

27. 

In  school,  AD  anc  SB were  best  friends.  To  date,  AD  anc 

mm 

remain  friends,  although  distant.  When  they  are  both  in  Modesto,  they  get 

together;  otherwise,  they  communicate  via  infrequent  texts.  Less  than  a  year  ago, 

i  called  i  and  reported  being  a  victim  of  respondent's  abuse  while  he  was 

in  school.  S|  listened,  but  neither  confirmed  nor  denied  he  too  had  been  a 

victim  of  respondent.  Then, ABE  wes  contacted  by  the  District  and  asked  about  his 

interactions  with  respondent  while  he  was  in  school.  The  District  interviewed  yt 

and  called  him  as  a  witness  at  hearing.  A  summary  of  his  testimony  follows. 

28.  AE first  met  respondent  in  1997,  when  he  was  10  years  old,  in 

grade  4,  and  played  in  the  Noon  League.  Respondent  took  an  interest  in  AB  anc 

befriended  him.  Respondent  asked ABE about  his  home  life,  and 

reported  being  raised  by  his  mother  and  grandmother,  with  no  father  at  home.  During 

grade  5,  respondent  contacted  A:  mother  and  asked  if ABE  could  switch 

tracks,  so  respondent  could  be  his  grade  6  teacher;  A:  mother  agreed.  At  age 

12,  in  grade  6  (1999-2000), ABE  was  assigned  to  respondent's  classroom.  ny 

| 

also  continued  to  play  in  the  Noon  League  for  respondent.  AE  saw  respondent 

as  a  coach,  mentor,  and  father-figure;  he  looked  up  to  respondent;  and  he  respected 

respondent's  opinion  of  him  more  than  his  own  mother’s  opinion. 

12

  

29. 

In  grade  school  (1997-2000),  respondent  bought AB 

athletic  gear, 

either  at  the  mall  or  by  phone  from  EastBay  Sports.  Respondent  also  took 

Re 

Davis  to  watch  the  freshman  boys’  basketball  team  practice  and  play  games. 

30. 

In  middle  school  (2000-2002), ABE 

attended  Mark  Twain  and 

Roosevelt.  ABE  continued  to  communicate  with  respondent  via  email  and  AOL 

Instant  Messenger.  Respondent  invited  i  over  to  his  condominium.  i 

went;  sometimes,  SB  was 

also  present.  At  his  condominium,  AE  anc 

respondent  worked  out,  watched  sports  on  television,  ate,  and  talked.  i  has  a 

very  specific  and  fond  memory  of  making  lasagna  with  respondent  at  his 

condominium. 

31. 

Onone  visit,  respondent  taught  NY  how  to  play  cards  (blackjack 

and  poker)  and  he  gave  S|  money  to  bet  on  their  games.  Respondent  also 

introduced  TE‘  betting  on  sporting  events;  the  two  bet  on  both  college  and 

professional  games.  When  he  lost  a  bet,  ABE  washed  respondent's  car  or  cleaned 

up  around  the  condominium.  AEE 

aso  played  in  respondent's  fantasy  football 

league. ABE  went  to  respondent's  condominium  to  draft  his  team; AB 

won 

the  season  in  or  about  2000. 

32. 

Respondent  also  took AT 

to  sporting  events,  both  college  and 

professional.  Respondent  drove 

Re  and  from  the  events,  paid  for  i  : 

ticket,  and  bought  AEE 

f000.  In  the  summers  of  2000  and  2001,  respondent  paid 

for  AE  to  attend  a  couple  of  basketball  camps,  including  Pacheco’s  Hoops. 

Respondent  frequently  visited  AE)  anc 

ae  at  camp  and  watched  them  play. 

33. 

One  weekend,  respondent  took  sf  and  Te  to  Mt.  Diablo  for  a 

day-hike.  Respondent  drove  the  trio  about  one-hour  west  of  Modesto  to  Mt.  Diablo. 

While  at  Mt.  Diablo,  respondent  took  candid  photos  of  the  boys.  On  another  weekend, 

13

respondent  drove  mi  and  ABE  about  one-hour  east  of  Modesto  to  his  cabin  in 

Pinecrest.  While  at  the  cabin,  respondent  took  the  boys  hiking  and  they  all  played 

outdoor  games,  including  darts.  Again,  respondent  took  candid  photos  of  the  boys.  In 

one  photo,  respondent  asked  the  boys  to  turn  away  from  him,  lower  their  pants  and 

underwear  below  their  buttocks,  and  “moon”  him;  the  boys  complied.  Later,  i 

saw  the  photo  at  respondent's  condominium. 

34. 

Respondent  continued  to  buy  i  athletic  gear,  take  him  to  sporting 

events,  and  invite  him  over  to  his  condominium.  Respondent  also  continued  to  make 

sports  bets  with  A |  However,  now  when  i:  lost  a  bet,  respondent  did  not 

assign  him  chores.  Instead,  respondent  told 

he  would  pay  him  if  he 

completed  a  challenge. ABE  accepted  and  went  into  respondent's  master 

bedroom  closet,  masturbated  and  ejaculating  onto  a  Sports  Illustrated  magazine 

picture.  Respondent  wanted  proof  of  completion  and  told  AT 

io  leave  the 

picture  on  the  bathroom  vanity  after  he  completed  the  challenge. AB 

complied. 

35. 

Notwithstanding  the  above, AB 

continued  to  visit  respondent  at  his 

condominium.  At  some  point,  respondent  expressed  a  desire  for  Ti  i. 

attend 

Davis,  and  not  Modesto  High  School,  where  AE  wes  assigned.  Respondent  told 

ATE  to  select  the  Davis  “Health  Academy”  on  his  District  paperwork;  the  program 

was  for  students  interested  in  a  career  in  the  health/medical  fields. ABE  was  not 

interested  in  the  health/medical  fields,  but  he  selected  the  Davis  “Health  Academy”  on 

his  District  paperwork  and  was  reassigned  to  Davis. 

36. 

In  or  about  the  summer  before  high  school, ABE  sutfered  a  knee 

injury.  He  was  unable  to  go  to  any  basketball  camps  that  summer  and  could  not  play 

freshman  boys’  basketball  at  Davis.  Even  still,  resoondent  remained  engaged  in 
ABE s 

life. 

14

37. 

Atage  16,  in  grade  10  (2003-2004),  i  played  JV  boys’  basketball. 

That  year,  respondent  stopped  coaching  freshman  boys’  basketball  and  started 

working  as  the  assistant  coach  for  the  JV  boys’  basketball  team.  While  playing  JV 

basketball,  the  varsity  boys’  basketball  coach  asked  AT 

to  move-up  and  play  for 

him.  i  chose  to  move  and  play  on  the  varsity  team.  Thereafter,  the  relationship 

between  i  and  respondent  faded.  The  last  time ry 

|  saw  respondent  was  in 

2007,  about  a  year  after  he  graduated  from  high  school,  about  town  in  Modesto. 

38. 

At  hearing,  AEE  acimitted  “this  is  not  where  I  want  to  be.”  When 

SB called  him,  about  a  year  ago,  he  tried  to  be  a  good  friend  and  just  listen.  When 

the  District  called  him,  he  was  uncomfortable  having  to  relive  things  from  20  years 

ago.  Ultimately,  he  is  torn.  i  believes  respondent  “played  a  huge  part  in  my  life; 

he  molded  me;  [and]  the  values  I  teach  my  children  I  got  from  him.”  Now,  “my  heart 

breaks;  I  did  nothing  wrong;  I  was  just  a  kid;  [what  happened]  was  not  good;  I’m 

embarrassed  to  say  I  masturbated  for  money;  I  was  a  poor,  young  kid;  I  feel  like  I  did 

something  wrong;  I'm  disgusted.  These  are  memories  I've  kept  from  20  years  ago.” 

RESPONDENT 

39. 

Respondent  is  54  years  old.  He  was  born  in  Pasadena,  but  grew  up  in 

Modesto.  He  attended  Enslen,  Roosevelt,  and  Davis.  He  went  to  Modesto  Junior 

College  and  then  California  State  University  Stanislaus.  He  earned  his  teaching 

credential  in  Turlock.  For  29  years,  he  has  been  employed  by  the  District,  and  he  has 

always  received  satisfactory  teaching  evaluations. 

40. 

Respondent  loves  teaching  and  his  students.  He  strives  to  be  highly 

involved  with  students,  and  attends  workshops  and  lectures  to  make  himself  a  better 

teacher.  He  has  developed  creative  teaching  modalities  to  more  fully  engage  students 

15

in  academic  learning.  He  is  also  a  strong  advocate  for  involving  kids  in  physical  activity 

via  team  sports;  hence,  organizing  the  Noon  League  at  Burbank  and  Enslen,  for  no  pay. 

41. 

Overall,  respondent  describes  himself  as  a  generous  person  and  a  poor 

money  manager.  Prior  to  July  2004,  respondent's  “practice”  was  to  buy  shoes  and 

clothes  for  students  in  need,  although  he  was  unable  to  name  any  additional  students, 

other  than  SB anc  iz  and  lavish  his  friends  with  expensive  trips,  including  a 

50th  birthday  weekend  trip  to  play  golf  at  Pebble  Beach,  Spy  Glass,  and  Poppy  Hills  for 

three.  However,  on  July  15,  2004,  he  married  his  wife,  Rosie,  and  thereafter  stopped 

spending  on  students  and  friends,  because  he  needed  to  focus  his  finances  on  his 

family.  Today,  respondent  and  his  wife  are  proud  parents  to  two  minor  children,  a  boy 

and  a  girl.  In  2012,  respondent's  mother  died.  She  left  respondent  a  substantial 

inheritance;  and  the  inheritance  money  has  allowed  respondent  to  once  again  be 

financially  generous  with  others. 

42. 

Respondent  confirmed  meeting  JE  arc  i  in  1997  or  1998, 

when  they  were  in  grade  4,  playing  in  the  Noon  League  at  Burbank;  and  contacting 

i  :  mother  to  request  he  switch  tracks  so  i  could  be  in  respondent's 

grade  6  class  with im.  He  admitted  buying  JB  anc  AB 

athletic  gear, 

because  the  boys  asked  for  the  items.  He  acknowledged  taking 

mm 

and  ATE  to 

Davis  to  watch  boys’  basketball  practices  and  games,  college  and  professional  sporting 

events,  Mt.  Diablo  for  a  day-hike,  and  overnight  to  his  cabin  at  Pinecrest,  all  without 

other  adults.  He  remembers  having  SB  and  ABE over  to  his  condominium,  but 

only  after  they  graduated  grade  6,  referring  to  them  then  as  “former  students.”  He  also 

admitted  making  excellent  lasagna.  He  did  encourage  both  boys  to  attend  Davis  for 

high  school,  and  he  did  tell  them  to  designate  their  interest  in  the  Davis  “Health 

Academy”  to  ensure  placement  at  Davis.  Finally,  he  conceded  paying  for  both  boys  to 

attend  multiple  basketball  camps  in  or  about  the  summers  of  200,  2001,  and  2002.  In 

16

addition,  for  IB alone,  respondent  also  admitted  buying:  a  home  computer,  a 

cellular  phone,  books,  a  college  scout,  and  a  new  car  ($18,000  -  $20,000).  After  high 

school,  respondent  recalled  giving im  $1,000  to  $2,000  for  credit  card  debt,  and 

money  for  a  laptop  computer. 

43. 

However,  respondent  denies  teaching  either  boy  how  to  play  cards; 

betting  with  the  boys  on  card  games  or  sporting  events;  giving  them  money  to  bet 

with;  or  having  them  do  chores  or  anything  sexual  while  at  his  condominium.  He  also 

denies  talking  to  mm  about  sex  or  offering  his  condominium’s  guestroom  to  ;  | 

to  have  sex  in  with  his  high  school  girlfriend.  However,  respondent  acknowledged 

having  a  handheld  massager  for  his  back,  with  several  attachments,  but  he  could  not 

remember  whether  he  showed  it  to  mm  or  not.  Further,  he  denied  placing  his  hand 

on  mi:  leg,  at  any  time. 

44. 

Respondent  offered  character  and  support  testimony  from  seven 

colleagues  and  friends:  Kristen  Marine,  Katrina  Martin,  Stephanie  Orona,  and  Sarah 

Shank;  Larry  Ashabraner,  Mark  Musselmann,  and  Curtis  Reynolds. 

Kristen  Marine,  Katrina  Martin,  Stephanie  Orona,  and 

Sarah  Shank 

45. 

Ms.  Marine  worked  with  respondent  at  Enslen,  and  had a  child  in  his 

class.  Ms.  Marine  described  respondent  as  a  “well-respected  teacher,  who  brought  new 

ideas  into  the  classroom.”  Ms.  Martin  also  worked  with  respondent  at  Enslen,  and 

found  him  to  have  “fantastic  teaching  skills.”  Ms.  Orona  worked  with  respondent  at 

Enslen,  and  had  a  child  with  attention  issues  in  his  class.  Ms.  Orona  noted  her  son 

“loved  [respondent].”  She  was  impressed  with  respondent's  ability  to  “get  kids 

involved.”  Ms.  Shank  has  had  two  children  in  respondent's  class.  She  is  a  “highly 

involved  parent”  at  Enslen.  She  thinks  of  respondent  as  an  “absolutely  fabulous 

17

teacher”  and  an  “incredibly  generous  person.”  None  of  the  women  knew  respondent 

when  he  taught  at  Burbank. 

Larry  Ashabraner 

46. 

Mr.  Ashabraner  is  a  District  elementary  school  teacher.  He  and 

respondent  met  at  Burbank  when  their  teaching  schedules  overlapped  for  a  few 

months  in  the  2001-2002  school  year.  Mr.  Ashabraner  described  respondent  as  “always 

very  generous.”  He  was  aware  respondent  helped  a  student  buy  a  car.  Respondent  was 

also  very  generous  with  Mr.  Ashabraner:  including  Mr.  Ashabraner  and  his  family  on  a 

Zehner  family  trip  to  Disneyland;  allowing  the  Ashabraner  family  to  use  the  Zenner 

cabin  in  Pinecrest;  and  took  Mr.  Ashabraner  golfing  at  Pebble  Beach  and  to  a  three- 

day  Ron  Clark  workshop  in  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Mr.  Ashabraner  considers  respondent  to 

be  “enthusiastic  about  learning”  and  engaged  with  students  inside  and  outside  the 

classroom,  sometimes  even  playing  basketball  with  students  at  lunch. 

47, 

Mr.  Ashabraner  has  also  interacted  with  respondent  socially,  including 

playing  in  respondent's  fantasy  football  league.  Respondent  holds  the  draft  at  his 

condominium,  and  Mr.  Ashabraner  has  attended.  One  year,  Mr.  Ashabraner  arrived  at 

the  draft  party  and  noticed  several  young  men  also  drafting  teams.  Mr.  Ashabraner 

questioned  respondent,  and  respondent  confirmed  for  Mr.  Ashabraner  that  the  young 

men  were  all  former  students.  For  Mr.  Ashabraner,  he  wanted  assurances  that 

everyone  playing  in  the  league  was  over  the  age  of  18  and  no  longer  a  District 

student,  because  “legally,  |  don’t  want  to  be  involved  with  students  outside  the 

workplace.  I  want  to  leave  work  at  work,  and  home  at  home."  Mr.  Ashabraner  does  not 

recall  respondent  saying  he  took  two  students  overnight  to  his  Pinecrest  cabin.  “Tf 

parents  did  not  go,  |  would  have  questions.  Being  alone  with  students  is  not  the  best 

choice  for  an  educator  to  make:  not  the  best  situation  to  put  a  teacher  or  a  student  in; 

18

the  appearance  is  not  the  best.”  Years  earlier,  Mr.  Ashabraner  recalled  his  credentialing 

program  cautioning  new  teachers  to:  “make  sure  there  are  always  two  students 

present  with  you  and  always  keep  your  classroom  or  office  door  open.” 

Mark  Musselmann 

48. 

|  Mr.  Musselmann  has  been  a  District  teacher  for  28  years.  He  teaches  and 

coaches  basketball  at  Mark  Twain.  Mr.  Musselmann  has  known  respondent  for  20 

years.  They  met  when  respondent  came  to  watch im  and  A  play  basketball  at 

Mark  Twain.  Mr.  Musselmann  describes  respondent  as  a  colleague  and  his  best  friend, 

and  characterizes  him  as  “generous  with  everyone.”  Respondent  took  Mr.  Musselmann 

to  play  golf  at  Pebble  Beach,  Spy  Glass,  and  Spanish  Hill  for  his  50th  birthday.  He  is 

aware  that  respondent  was  helping |  (Ee ABE financially,  and  knows 

respondent  bought | 

computer  as  well  as  paid  the  down  payment  on a  car  for 

him.  He  saw  respondent  as  a  mentor  to 

mi.  in  anormal  relationship  between  a 

teacher  and  a  former  student.  Mr.  Musselmann  has  helped  students  before,  giving  a 

student  $500  once,  explaining  “It  is  not  out  of  the  ordinary  for  a  teacher  to  financially 

help  a  student.” 

Curtis  Reynolds 

49. 

|  Mr.  Reynolds  works  for  the  Stanislaus  County  Office  of  Education.  He  has 

been  a  District  teacher  at  Burbank  and  Enslen,  and  coached  girls’  basketball.  He  has 

known  respondent  for  15  years;  they  have  co-taught  classes  together;  and  become 

friends  outside  of  work.  Mr.  Reynolds  also  has  had  a  child  in  respondent's  class.  Mr. 

Reynolds  believes  respondent  “relates  well  with  kids.”  He  described  him  as  “a  good 

basketball  coach,  and  a  better  than  average  spender  on  kids;  but  providing  extras  Is 

common  for  all  teachers.”  Mr.  Reynolds  knew  respondent  paid  for  TB to  attend 

19

several  basketball  camps,  and  respondent  told  Mr.  Reynolds  he  was  helping 

im 

make  car  payments.  Respondent  was  also  generous  with  Mr.  Reynolds  and  his  family, 

letting  them  use  his  Pinecrest  cabin. 

50. 

When  questioned,  Mr.  Reynolds  expressed  concern  about  respondent 

having 

im 

at  his  condominium  without  other  adults  present.  Mr.  Reynolds 

cautioned:  this  is  “the  part  of  education  that  scares  the  hell  out  of  me...  as  a  teacher 

and  a  coach,  we  are  one  accusation  away  from  never  being  able  to  coach  again.  We 

must  take  as  many  precautions  as  possible.”  When  Mr.  Reynolds  takes  the  girls’ 

basketball  team  out-of-state,  he  insists  on  having  female  chaperones  travel  too. 

Discussion 

51. 

A  teacher  is  an  educator,  a  role-model,  and  a  mentor;  students  aspire  to 

be  like  their  teachers.  A  teacher  is  also  an  authority  figure,  a  power  broker,  and  a 

guardian,  with  the  ability  to  reward  and  discipline  a  student.  To  be  a  teacher  requires 

selflessness  and  an  ability  to  focus  solely  on  assisting  students  in  their  journey  to  learn, 

grow,  and  discover  self-reliance.  To  be  a  teacher  means  not  negatively  influencing, 

controlling,  or  manipulating  students  into  acting  for  the  teacher's  own  benefit. 

Children  are  vulnerable.  They  lack  understanding  and  awareness  of  right  and  wrong, 

and  they  are  powerless  to  reject  a  teacher.  Finally,  for  students  with  absent  parents,  a 

teacher  can  become  the  strongest  influence  in  their  lives:  such  awesome  power  comes 

with  awesome  responsibility. 

52. 

Between  1997  and  2004,  respondent  was a  District  teacher.  His  Burbank 

teaching  assignment  allowed  him  to  meet  mm  a  District  grade  4  student.  When  they 

met,  respondent  was  32  years  old  and  SB  was 

10.  Over  several  years,  respondent 

developed  a  personal  relationship 

with 

p 

.  For 

,  respondent  was  an  athletic 

p 

20

  

coach,  a  teacher,  a  mentor,  and  a  father-figure.  SB trusted  respondent.  Respondent 

Saw  Tl  es  an  excellent  athlete,  a  former  student,  and  a  good  friend. 

53. 

mi 

|  and  respondent  testified  at  hearing.  For  many  things, 

mi  A |  and  respondent  provided  very  similar  factual  accounts  (e.g.,  Mt. 

Diablo  day-hike,  overnight  at  Pinecrest  cabin,  the  purchase  of  items,  basketball  camps, 

etc.).  Together,  their  testimony  is  taken  as  true.  However,  ;  |  and  Ay 

|  also 

testified  that  respondent  had  them  engage  in  sexual  games  and  touching;  while 

respondent  denies  any  such  conduct  occurred.  Given  the  factual  dispute,  a  credibility 

evaluation  is  necessary. 

54. 

IE  offered  compelling  and  tortuous  testimony.  His  demeanor  was,  at 

all  times,  appropriate  for  the  topic:  solemn,  intense,  and  emotional.  He  revealed 

extensive  private  and  personal  information,  with  no  concern  for  his  public  image  and 

no  personal  gain.  Yet,  at  the  same  time,  he  acknowledged  and  thanked  respondent  for 

his  help.  Overall,  mi:  testimony  was  mature  and  insightful  and  was  deemed 

reliable.  AEE 

offered  similar  testimony,  revealing  private  and  painful  facts  about 

his  childhood;  and  yet,  he  admitted  remaining  indebted  to  respondent  for  his  help  in 

becoming  the  man  he  is  today.  His  demeanor  reflected  his  struggle  to  share 

embarrassing  facts  about  his  childhood  and  his  mentor.  Ultimately,  iz 

corroborated  mi:  factual  accounts  and  appeared  at  hearing  without  a  bias  or 

motive.  Overall,  Ti  testimony  was  deemed  truthful  and  reliable. 

55. 

In  comparison,  respondent's  testimony  was  troublesome.  First,  he 

focused  his  testimony,  almost  entirely,  on  his  most  recent  teaching  position  at  Enslen 

and  his  recent  awards  and  accolades;  however,  his  teaching  at  Enslen  is  not  at  issue  in 

this  case.  When  asked  about  mm  and 

|  specifically,  respondent  exhibited  an 

inability  to  answer  questions  directly:  he  qualified  his  answers;  used  euphemisms  (e.g., 

“No,  not  that  I  recall.  No.");  and  claimed  a  lack  of  memory.  In  addition,  respondent's 

21

demeanor  showed  confusion  and  frustration  and  lacked  any  emotion,  except  when  he 

spoke  of  his  lasagna  recipe.  Ultimately,  respondent  has  every  motive  to  deny  the 

allegations  because  his District  job  is  at  issue;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  respondent  often 

appeared  disconnected  and  uninterested  in  the  proceedings.  Overall,  respondent's 

testimony  was  evasive  and  his  demeanor  lacked  believability. 

Facts  Not  IN  DISPUTE 

56. 

There  was  no  dispute  that  respondent:  repeatedly  bought 

im 

athletic 

gear,  including  clothes  and  shoes;  bought  him  a  computer,  a  cellular  phone,  books, 

and  a  car;  took 

io  sporting  events,  both  college  and  professional;  paid  for 

im 

to  attend  a  myriad  of  basketball  camps;  hired  a  college  scout  for 

mm.  took  SR  for 

a  day-hike  at  Mt.  Diablo  and  for  an  overnight  trip  to  his  Pinecrest  cabin;  and 

repeatedly  entertained 

mm 

at  his  condominium,  where  the  two  were  most  often 

alone  together. 

57. 

Respondent  freely  admitted  to  all  of  the  above  and  appeared  completely 

unaware  that  these  undisputed  facts  were  problematic.  First,  resoondent  formed  an 

inappropriately  close  relationship  with im  a  District  student  and  a  minor;  and 

whether  JE  was  a  "former  student”  or  not  is  a  distinction  without  a  difference. 

Second,  respondent's  male  character  witnesses  were  adamant  that  teachers  should  not 

be  alone  with  a  District  student,  or  someone  under  the  age  of  18,  and  should  not  take 

a  District  student  on  an  overnight  trip  without  another  adult  present.  Mr.  Ashabraner 

explained  further:  “Being  alone  with  students  is  not  the  best  choice  for  an  educator  to 

make;  not  the  best  situation  to  put  a  teacher  or  a  student  in;  the  appearance  is  not  the 

best.”  Third,  repeatedly  buying  things  for 

a  student  with  limited  means,  left 

J  constantly  indebted  to  respondent.  Respondent's  relationship  with  IB  wes 

rife  with  uneven  power  and  influence,  and  respondent  should  have  known  better. 

22

FACTS  IN  DISPUTE 

58. 

Respondent  denies  talking  to 

im 

about  sex  and  masturbation,  offering 

his  guestroom  to  have  sex  with  his  girlfriend,  having 

mm  perform  a  series  of 

sexual  challenge,  and/or  placing  his  hand  on  ma:  thigh  and  a  vibrator  on  mi: 

penis.  Respondent's  denials  were  not  believable,  and  therefore,  his  testimony  Is  not 

credited.  The  Commission  finds  that  between  1997  and  2004,  respondent  engaged 

im  in  a  series  of  inappropriate  sexual  games. 

MORRISON  CRITERIA 

59. 

Education  Code  sections  44932  and  44944  create  the  statutory 

framework  for  this  proceeding.  The  statutes  give  discretion  to  both  the  District  and  the 

Commission.  The  District  has  the  right  to  determine  when  to  seek  disciplinary  action 

against  a  teacher  and  what  discipline  to  seek.  The  Commission,  however,  is  not  bound 

by  the  District's  choice.  It  has  broad  discretion  in  disciplinary  matters.  Its  role  is  not 

limited  to  determining  whether  charged  conduct  in  fact  occurred,  but  it  must  also 

decide  whether  that  conduct  demonstrates  unfitness  to  teach  when  measured  against 

the  criteria  set  forth  in  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229- 

30.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Burman  (Fontana)  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  219-22.)  In 

exercising  its  discretion  in  this  matter,  the  Commission  determines  whether  dismissal  is 

warranted  by  the  facts  established  at  the  hearing. 

60. 

Before  a  decision  can  be  made  as  to  whether  respondent's  conduct  was 

immoral  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1)),  dishonest  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(4)), 

constituted  evident  unfitness  for  service  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(6)),  and/or  was  a 

persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  the  school  laws  of  the  State  or  reasonable 

regulations  prescribed  for  the  government  of  the  public  schools  by  the  State  Board  or 

23

by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district  employing  him  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd. 

(a)(8)),  the  Commission  must  determine  whether  respondent's  conduct  demonstrated 

he  was  unfit  to  teach  using  the  Morrison  criteria.  (Board  of  Education  v.  Jack M.  (1977) 

19  Cal.3d  691,  696.)  The  Morrison  criteria  are:  (1)  the  likelihood  the  conduct  may  have 

adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers;  (2)  the  degree  of  such  adversity 

anticipated;  (3)  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct;  (4)  the  type  of 

teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved;  (5)  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 

circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct;  (6)  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of 

the  questioned  conduct;  and  (7)  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an 

adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved 

or  other  teachers.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  p.  229.) 

LIKELIHOOD  CONDUCT  MAY  HAVE  ADVERSELY  AFFECTED  STUDENTS  OR 

TEACHERS 

61. 

Between  1997  and  2004,  respondent  spent  an  inordinate  amount  of  time 

focused  on  one  District  student.  Respondent's  singular  focus  on  IE  took  time  and 

attention  away  from  other  equally  deserving  students  in  his  classes,  the  Noon  League, 

and  those  he  coached  in  basketball.  In  addition,  his  failure  to  maintain  proper  student- 

teacher  boundaries  with 

mm 

is  cause  for  further  concern  regarding  other  students  in 

his  sphere  of  influence. 

62. 

Further,  respondent's  conduct  reflects  poorly  on  the  District  and 

teachers,  in  general.  The  District  is  now  under  greater  scrutiny  for  failure  to  protect 

students;  and  teachers  are  now  viewed  as  suspect,  even  if  they  have  maintained  proper 

boundaries  with  their  students. 

24

THE  DEGREE  OF  THE  ADVERSE  EFFECT 

63. 

|  Respondent's  behavior  has  caused 

a  great  deal  of  suffering, 

resulting  in  an  inability  to  thrive,  repeated  poor  conduct,  and  destructive  behaviors. 

More  specifically,  he  has  had  difficulty  maintaining  long-term  employment  and 

forming  lasting  relationships  with  people.  He  has  problems  with  male  authority  and  an 

inability  to  trust  people.  He  has  also  been  unfaithful  to  almost  every  girlfriend, 

admitting  an  addiction  to  pornography  and  being  consumed  with  lustful  and  immoral 

desires. 

PROXIMITY  OR  REMOTENESS  IN  TIME  OF  THE  CONDUCT 

64. 

The  conduct  at  issue  took  place  over  15  years  ago;  between 

approximately  1997  and  2004,  when  TB was  in  grades  4  through  10,  and  he  was 

between  10  and  16  years  old. 

im 

is  now  31.  However,  remoteness  in  time  does  not 

excuse  respondent's  conduct. 

TYPE  OF  TEACHING  CERTIFICATE 

65. 

Respondent  is 

a  Multi-Subject  Credentialed  teacher  with  29  years  of 

teaching  experience. 

EXTENUATING  AND  AGGRAVATING  CIRCUMSTANCES 

66. 

Respondent  is 

a  credentialed  teacher.  His  behavior  was  offensive  and 

inconsistent  with  the  tenets  of  teaching.  Respondent  should  have  known  better  than 

to  conduct  himself  as  he  did;  and  his  behavior  raises  legitimate  concerns  about 

respondent's  overall  character  and  his  ability  to  make  good  decisions. 

25

LIKELIHOOD  OF  RECURRENCE 

67. 

Between  1997  and  2004,  respondent  formed  an  incredibly  close 

relationship  with  a  District  student;  leaving 

mm  beholden  to  respondent  in  any 

number  of  ways.  At  hearing,  in  2019,  respondent  failed  to  recognize  that  his 

relationship  with 

mm 

with  or  without  the  sexual  games,  was  inappropriate.  In  fact, 

respondent  freely  admitted  spending  more  than  $25,000  on 

mm 

Given  respondent's 

lack  of  insight  and  awareness,  his  conduct  likely  might  occur  again.  However, 

respondent  is  now  married  with  two  minor  children,  and  he  is  very  occupied  with  his 

family.  In  addition,  his  most  recent  teaching  position  was  at  Enslen,  with  fully-engaged 

parents,  and  not  Burbank,  where  students  had  minimal  parental  supervision. 

Altogether  respondent's  current  situation  makes  the  likelihood  of  repetition  less,  his 

children  will  grow  up  and  move  out,  and  he  will  again  be  left  with  a  void  to  fill;  and 

paired  with  his  clear  lack  of  judgement,  the  risk  is  too  great. 

ADVERSE  IMPACT  OR  CHILLING  EFFECT  UPON  THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHTS 

OF  THE  TEACHER  INVOLVED  OR  OTHER  TEACHERS 

68. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  dismissing  respondent  would  inflict  an 

adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  respondent  or  other 

teachers. 

CONCLUSION 

69. 

After  considering  the  Morrison  criteria  outlined  above,  the  evidence 

established  that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

26

Causes  of  Action 

IMMORAL  CONDUCT 

70. 

In  general,  the  term  “immoral”  is  defined  as  “that  which  is  hostile  to  the 

welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been 

confined  to  sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude  or 

indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  willful,  flagrant  or 

shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 

members  of  the  community,  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the 

public  welfare.”  (The  Board  Of  Education  Of  The  San  Francisca  Unified  School  District 

et  al  v.  Marilyn  Welland  (1960)  179  Cal  App.2d  808,  811.)  The  immoral  conduct  of  a 

teacher  has  been  compared  to  the  unprofessional  conduct  or  moral  turpitude  of  an 

attorney.  “Moral  turpitude  is  sometimes  used  synonymously  with  dishonesty  or  a  high 

degree  of  unfairness.”  Ub/d)} 

DISHONESTY 

71, 

Dishonesty  indicates  a  lack  of  honesty;  a  disposition  to  lie,  cheat,  or  steal 

(www.dictionary.com);  or  to  deceive.  (Midway  District  of  Kern  County  v.  Griffeath 

(1946)  29  Cal.2d  13,  18.  “Dishonesty  necessarily  includes  the  elernent  of  bad  faith." 

(South  vo  Smith  (1971)  16  CaLApp.3d  450,  456.)  "[I]t  means  fraud,  deception,  betrayal, 

faithlessness;  an  absence  of  integrity;  a  disposition  to  cheat,  deceive  or  defraud: 

deceive  and  betray.”  (/bid}  “Dishonest  conduct  may  range  from  the  smailest  fib  to  the 

most  flagrant  lie.  Not  every  impropriety  will  constitute  immoral  or  unprofessional 

conduct,  and  not  every  falsehood  will  constitute  ‘dishonesty’  as  a  ground  for 

discipline.”  (Fontana  Unified  School  District  v.  Burrnan  (Fontana)  (1998)  45  Cal.  3d  208, 

220,  in.  123 

at

72. 

“Where  dishonesty  is  involved, 

notice  ‘would  not  serve  the  purpose  of  §  44938,  which  is  to  allow  a  permanent 

employee  the  chance  to  correct  his  or  her  conduct  and  thus  overcome  grounds  for  the 

charge.” 

Vir 

(Bassett  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1988)  201  Cal.App.3d  1444,  1447.)  “[NJotice  would  serve  no  useful  purpose  in  cases  of 

dishonesty:  ‘It  is  rather  clear  that  the  stigma  of  recognized  immorality,  known 

dishonesty,  conviction  of  a  felony  or  of  a  crime  involving  moral  turpitude,  or  of  guilt  of 

criminal  syndicalism  or  sedition  could  not  be  removed  by  ninety  days’  good  behavior.” 

(Fresno  City  H.S.  Dist.  v.  De  Caristo  (1939)  33  Cal.App.2d  666,  674-675.) 

73. 

The  District  alleges  respondent  misled  and  withheld  information  during 

his  District  interview  and/or  deposition  regarding: 

the  approval  he  received  from  mm:  mother  regarding  the 

many  purchases  he  made.  Respondent  failed  to  recall  how 

he  obtained  approval  from im:  mother  (e.g.,  In  person, 

email,  or  over  the  phone).  Respondent  admitted  to  making 

a  number  of  big  purchases  for  mm  including  a  car, 

computer,  and  cell  phone,  but  was  unable  to  recall  or 

provide  any  specific  information  as  to  how  he 

communicated  with  either  Te or  his  mother  to  arrange 

for  most  of  the  purchases. 

74. 

The  District  failed  to  prove  respondent  was  dishonest.  No  evidence  was 

offered  at  hearing  regarding  respondent's  communication  with  m7:  mother. 

Therefore,  this  allegation  is  dismissed. 

28

PERSISTENT  VIOLATIONS 

The  school  district  board  has  the  right  to  adopt  rules  governing  the  conduct  of  its 

employees  and  to  require  the  employees  to  observe  the  rules.  However,  a  single 

violation  of  a  school  board’s  rules  is  not  of  itself  cause  for  the  dismissal  of  a 

permanent  teacher  under  subdivision  (a}{8}  of  section  44932.  (Governing  Board of  the 

Oakdale  Union  School  District  v.  Seaman  (Seaman  (1972)  28  Cal App.3d  77,  84.)  The 

Legislature,  apparently  to  allow  an  opportunity  for  correction,  has  decreed  that  a 

single  violation  is  insufficient  to  warrant  dismissal;  “it  is  the  persistent  disregard”  of 

school  rules  that  subdivision  (a}(8)  is  designed  to  regulate.  (Board  of  Education  of 

Richmond  School  District  v.  Mathews  (1957)  149  Cal App.2d  265,  272.3  As  such,  the 

District  must  establish  that  an  employee’s  refusal  to  follow  the  laws  or  regulations  was 

“oersistent,”  Le.  “stubborn  and  continuing.”  (San  Dieguito  Union  High  School  District 

¥.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  174  Cal App.3d  1176,  1183) 

Isolated  incidents  or  incidents  involving  an  issue  unresolved  over  a  period  of  time  are 

not  generally  considered  “persistent.”  (Bourland  v.  Cammussion  on  Professional 

Competence  (1985)  174  Cal  App.3d  317.)  The  word  “persistent”  is  defined  by 

lexicographers  as  “refusing  to  relent;  continuing,  especially  in  the  face  of  opposition 

...  stubborn;  persevering  ...  constantly  repeated.”  (Seaman,  supra,  28  Cal.  App.3d  at 

82.)  In  other  judicial  decisions,  the  word  has  been  interpreted  to  mean  “continuing  or 

constant.”  (bia) 

75. 

Here,  the  District  alleges  respondent  violated  the  following  laws: 

e 

Education  Code  section  212.5  which  prohibits  “sexual 

harassment"  in  California  schools.  Sexual  harassment 

includes  conduct  that  has  the  purpose  or  effect  of 

having  a  negative  impact  upon  the  individual's  work 

29

or  academic  performance,  or  of  creating  an 

intimidating,  hostile,  or  offensive  work  environment. 

® 

Board  Policy  (BP}  4119.21  which  requires  employees 

“to  maintain  the  highest  ethical  standards,  exhibit 

professional  behavior,  follow  district  policies  and 

regulations,  and  abide  by  state  and  federal  laws.” 

Further  all  employees  are  expected  “to  exercise  good 

judgment  and  maintain  professional  standards  when 

interacting  with  current  [Modesto  City  Schools],  or 

minor  students  in  general.” 

EVIDENT  UNFITNESS  FOR  SERVICE 

76. 

Evident  unfitness  for  service  means  “clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or 

unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason  of  temperamental  defects  or 

inadequacies.  Unlike  ‘unprofessional  conduct,’  ‘evident  unfitness  for  service’  connotes 

a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that 

one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.” 

(Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(  Woodlands  (1992)  2  CalLApp  4th  1429,  1444.)  The  Morrison  criteria  must  be  analyzed 

as  a  threshold  matter  to  determine  if  the  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  Vidi  at 

p.  1445.)  If  the  Morrison  criteria  are  met,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  if  the  teacher's 

unfitness  is  evident’;  Le.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in 

temperament.”  (/bia/) 

77. 

In  sum,  the  Cormmission  finds  respondent  had  an  improper  relationship 

with  a  District  student,  involving  big  purchases,  activities  outside  of  school,  and  a 

series  of  inappropriate  sexual  games.  Overall,  respondent  displayed  willful,  flagrant, 

30

and  shameless  conduct;  and  showcased  a  failure  to  exercise  good  judgment  and 

maintain  professional  boundaries  when  interacting  with  current  District  students  or 

minor  students  in  general.  Finally,  respondent's  conduct  displayed  a  fixed  character 

trait  inconsistent  with  the  tenets  of  teaching.  Given  the  above,  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence  established  that  respondent's  conduct  was  immoral,  a  persistent  violation  of 

Board  policy,  and  involved  an  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

78, 

Finally,  all  arguments  and  evidence  presented  to  support  respondent's 

asserted  affirmative  defenses  have  been  considered  and  are  rejected. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A  permanent  employee  may  be  dismissed  for  cause.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44934) 

Causes  include:  immoral  conduct,  dishonesty,  persistent  violation  of  Board  policy,  and 

evident  unfitness  for  service.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44932,  subds.  (a}(1},  (4),  (6),  &  (3 

2. 

A  permanent  employee  served  with  a  Notice  of  Dismissal  is  entitled  to  a 

due  process  hearing.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44934.)  Education  Code  section  44944  astablishes 

the  right  to  a  hearing,  the  process  for  selecting  the  three-member  CPC,  and  sets  forth 

the  CPC's  authority  to  issue  a  final  decision.  The  standard  of  proof  in  a  teacher 

dismissal  proceeding  is  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  an 

Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal  App.3d  1035,  1039-1040.3  A  preponderance 

of  the  evidence  means  that  the  evidence  on  one  side  of  an  issue  outweighs, 

preponderates  over,  and  is  more  than  the  evidence  on  the  other  side  of  the  issue,  not 

necessarily  in  number  of  witnesses  or  quantity,  but  in  the  convincing  effect  the 

evidence  has  on  those  to  whom  it 

is  addressed.  In  other  words,  the  term  refers  to 

evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.  (Peaple  ex  rel  Brown 

vo  fri-Union  Seatoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal App  4th  1549,  1567) 

31

Causes  for  Discipline 

3, 

A  trier  of  fact  may  consicer  the  totality  of  the  offensive  conduct, 

evaluating  facts  in  the  aggregate.  (Woodland  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1456-1457) 

When  a  camel's  back  is  broken,  the  trier  of  fact  need  not  weigh  each  straw  in  its  load 

to  see  which  one  could  have  done  the  deed.  Second,  causes  can  be  consolidated.  "It  is 

true  that  a  particular  act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  a  teacher  may  constitute  more 

than  one  of  the  causes  for  his  rermoval  specified  in  Education  Code  section  13403, 

[now  44932)"  (farguin  v.  Commission  an  Professional  Competence  (1978)  84 

CalApp.3d  251,  260.)  “Acts  that  are  unprofessional  conduct  may  at  the  same  time  be 

evidence  of  evident  unfitness,  i.e.  a  fixed  character  trait  or  ternperarmental  defect  which 

renders  the  teacher  incapable  of  avoiding  acts  that  are  unprofessional.”  (id)  "The 

prohibitions  against  immoral,  and  unprofessional  conduct,  and  conduct  involving 

rnoral  turpitude  by  a  teacher  constitutes  a  general  ban  on  conduct  which  would 

indicate  nis  unfitness  to  teach.”  (Morrison,  supra  1  Cal.3d  at  p.  233.)  “Unprofessional 

conduct,”  as  used  in  section  44932,  subdivision  {a},  has  been  viewed  broadly  as 

‘conduct  such  as  to  indicate  unfitness  to  teach.” 

ree 

(Perez  v  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (1983)  149  Cal App.3d  1167,  1174.) 

4, 

Based  upon  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  cause  exists  to  disrniss 

respondent  under  Education  Code  section  44932  for  immoral  conduct,  persistent 

violations  of  Board  policy,  and  an  evident  unfitness  for  service  based  upon  his 

improper  relationship  with  a  District  student,  involving  big  purchases,  activities  outside 

of  school,  and  a  series  of  inappropriate  sexual  games. 

32

Discipline 

5. 

Here,  the  Commission  has  only  two  choices:  to  dismiss  or  not  to  dismiss. 

(Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a}.)  "The  commission  shail  not  have  the  power  to  dispose  of 

[a]  charge  of  dismissal  by  imposing  probation  or  other  alternative  sanctions.  The 

imposition  of  suspension...  shall  be  available  only  in  a  suspension  proceeding 

authorized  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44932  or  Section  44933.”  (Fantana, 

suora,  45  Cal.3d  at  p.  216) 

6. 

Based  upon  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  the  District  proved,  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that  respondent  violated  sections  44932,  subdivisions 

(a}(1),  (6),  and  (8),  and  the  conduct  supports  dismissal  of  respondent. 

Hf 

Hf 

if 

if 

ff 

ff 

ff 

ff 

ff 

ff 

ft 

ff 

33

ORDER 

The  Modesto  City  Schools  dismissal  of  respondent  Jeff  Zenner  from  his 

employment  as  a  teacher  at  Ensien  Elementary  School  is  UPHELD.  Respondent's  appeal 

of  his  dismissal  from  employment  with  the  Modesto  City  Schools  is  DENIED. 

DATE:  October  12, 

2019 

MATE: 

October  14, 

2019 

DATE:  October  11, 

2019 

nro  DocuSigned  by: 

Solin  Colombo 

20964 DD... 
“nae  AFADASC7 

JOHN  COLOMBO 

Commission  Member 

ro  DocuSigned  by: 
? 

:  Urrelrtia  Mite hth 

2442... 
Nee AABSB4EFD7F 

ANDREA  MITCHELL 

Commission  Member 

oo  DocuSigned  by: 
oO) 
f 
; 
:  oa 
wan  6DE44509A8FFACS... 

¢  -¢ 
fem 
fade  Hackin 

Ae 

A 

ERIN  R.  KOCH-GOODBMAN 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearing

