BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
POWAY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Appeal  of  the  Termination  of: 

RAMIL  PUNONGBAYAN,  Appellant 

POWAY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT,  Respondent 

Case  No.  2019-01 

OAH  No.  2020010407 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Marion  J.  Vomnof,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  February  10,  2020,  in  San  Diego,  California. 

Ricardo  Ochoa,  Attorney  at  Law,  Ochoa  Law,  Attorney  for  Poway  Schoo! 

Employee  Association  (PSEA  or  union),  represented  appellant  Ramil  Punongbayan. 

Mark  R.  Bresee,  Attorney  at  Law,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Rudd  &  Romo, 

represented  respondent  Poway  Unified  School  District  (district). 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  At  the  close  of  the  presentation 

of  evidence,  the  parties’  joint  motion  to  keep  the  record  open  to  file  written 

arguments  was  granted.  The  record  was  held  open  until  April  24,  2020,  for  submission 

of  opening  briefs,  and  until  May  1,  2020,  for  submission  of  briefs  in  opposition.  The 

briefs  were  marked  and  received  into  evidence  as  follows:  appellant's  opening  brief

  

was  marked  as  Exhibit  D;  district's  opening  brief  was  marked  as  Exnibit  13;  appellant's 

brief  in  opposition  was  marked  as  Exhibit  E;  and  district’s  brief  in  opposition  was 

riarked  as  Exhibit  14.  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  1,  2020. 

PROTECTIVE  ORDER 

Appellant's  personnel  file,  received  as  Exhibit  C,  is  subject  to  a  protective  order 

sealing  this  file  because  it  was  not  practical  to  recact  information  from  it  and  simply 

redacting  his  name  would  not  protect  his  privacy.  The  protective  order  governs  the 

release  of  documents  to  the  public.  A  reviewing  court,  parties  to  this  matter,  their 

attorneys,  and  a  governmental  agency  decision  maker  or  designee  under  Government 

Code  section  11517  may  review  the  documents  subject  to  the  protective  order. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background  Information 

1. 

Appellant  is 

a  member  of,  and  represented  at  this  hearing  by,  the  PSEA. 

He  was  employed  by  the  district  as  a  Campus  Security  Specialist  and  was  working  at 

Rancho  Bernardo  High  School  (RBHS).  On  February  25,  2019,  at  8:45  am.  a  student 

sitting  in  her  car  in  the  student  parking  fot,  observed  appellant  urinating  into  bushes 

located  at  the  edge  of  the  parking  lot.  The  student  reported  the  incident  to  school 

administration  who  conducted  an  investigation.  On  March  14,  2079,  schoo! 

administration  met  with  appellant  and  his  union  representative,  and  appellant 

admitted  to  the  alleged  conduct.  On  March  18,  2019,  appellant  was  placed  on  paid 

administrative  leave.

Stipulated  Facts 

2. 

Appellant  and  district  agreed  to  the  following  stipulation  of  facts: 

Appellant  was  employed  by  the  district  from  August  26,  2002,  until 

September  12,  2019,  as  a  Campus  Security  Specialist. 

As  a  classified  employee  of  the  district,  appellant  was  subject  to  and 

protected  by  the  Rules  and  Regulations  for  the  Classified  Service  of  the 

Personnel  Commission  of  the  District  (PC  Rules),  including  grounds  for 

disciplinary  action  and  the  discipline  procedures  to  be  followed. 

District  Administrative  Regulation  4.313.1  also  enumerates  grounds  for 

disciplinary  action. 

On  or  about  June  6,  2019,  appellant  was  served  with  and  received  a 

Notice  of  Proposed  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges. 

On  August  9,  2019,  appellant  was  provided  an  opportunity  to  respond  to 

the  Notice  of  Proposed  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges,  in  a 

pre-disciplinary  Ske//y'  conference  before  the  district’s  superintendent's 

  

"In  Skelly  v.  State  Personnel  Board  (1975)  15  Cal.3d  194,  215,  the  California 

Supreme  Court  held  that  in  order  to  satisfy  due  process,  an  agency  considering 

disciplinary  action  against  a  public  employee  must  afford  the  employee  certain  “pre- 

removal  safeguards,”  including  “notice  of  the  proposed  action,  the  reasons  therefor,  a 

copy  of  the  charges  and  materials  upon  which  the  action  is  based,  and  the  right  to 

respond,  either  orally  or  in  writing,  to  the  authority  initially  imposing  discipline.”  The 

Supreme  Court's  directive  gave  rise  to  an  administrative  procedure  known  as  a  Skelly

designee,  Carol  A.  Osborne,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Learning  Support 

Services.  Appellant  attended  the  conference  with  representation,  and  was 

provided  an  opportunity  to  be  heard.  Following  the  conference,  the 

designee  recommended  that  the  disciplinary  process  move  forward 

without  modification. 

e 

Onor  about  September  12,  2019,  the  Board  of  Education  (board)  took 

action  to  terminate  appellant's  employment  with  the  district.  Prior  to  this 

meeting,  appellant  was  notified  that  the  board  would  hear  the  charges 

against  him  on  that  date,  that  the  board  would  make  a  decision 

regarding  his  employment,  and  that  he  could  attend  the  meeting  to 

appeal  the  recommendation  to  terminate  his  employment.  Appellant 

attended  the  board  meeting  with  representation,  and  was  provided  an 

opportunity  to  be  heard  prior  to  the  board’s  deliberations  and  decision. 

e 

On  September  13,  2019,  appellant  was  notified  of  the  board's  action  to 

terminate  his  employment,  and  his  right  to  appeal  the  board's  decision 

pursuant  to  PC  Rules,  Section  60.500. 

e 

On  October  1,  2019,  appellant  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Appeal  to  the  PC, 

appealing  the  board's  action  on  the  grounds  that  the  penalty  invoked  is 

excessive.  (PC  Rules,  60.500.2(A)(2).) 

  

hearing,  in  which  an  employee  has  the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  charges  upon 

which  the  proposed  discipline  is  based.

e 

On  October  4,  2019,  the  PC  Interim  Director  transmitted  notice  of 

appellant’s  appeal  to  the  district  assistant  superintendent. 

e 

The  PC  subsequently  exercised  its  discretion  under  the  PC  Rules, 

specifically  Rule  60.500.3(B),  to  appoint  a  hearing  officer  to  conduct  the 

appeal  hearing  and  report  the  findings  and/or  recommendations  of  the 

PC.  Timely  notice  was  provided  to  appellant  that  his  appeal  hearing 

would  occur  on  February  10,  2020,  and  of  the  time  and  location  of  the 

hearing. 

Appellant’s  Job  Description 

3. 

The  district’s  job  description  for  a  Carnpus  Security  Specialist  lists  the 

following  as  the  “Basic  Function"  of  the  position: 

Under  the  direction  of  an  Assistant  Principal,  patrol  and 

supervise  campus  activities  to  assure  the  well-being  and 

safety  of  students,  staff  and  visitors  in  school-site  activities; 

assure  student  compliance  with  school  and  district  policies 

and  regulations. 

The  duties  of  this  position  that  are  most  relevant  here  include:  patrol  and 

SUDErvise  assigned  areas  of  campus,  assuring  students  are  safe,  orderly  and  within 

supervised  areas;  enforce  school  and  district  rules,  regulations,  and  procedures; 

investigate  and  report  unusual,  suspicious  or  criminal  activities;  detain  individuals 

suspected  of  illegal  or  prohibited  activity  according  to  establisned  procedures;  monitor 

student  behavior  and  activity  during  passing  periods  and  lunchtime;  and  assure 

compliance  with  school  rules.

District's  Evidence 

STUDENT'S  DECLARATION 

4. 

In  a  declaration’,  signed  under  penalty  of  perjury,  a  student  reported  an 

incident  that  occurred  on  February  25,  2019,  at  8:45  a.m.  in  the  student  parking  lot. 

She  wrote  the  following: 

I  was  sitting  in  my  car  towards  the  back  of  the  lot  waiting 

for  second  period.  I  saw  the  security  guy  walk  up  towards 

the  bushes  and  look  around  for  people.  He  missed  me,  and 

then  turned  around  and  urinated  on  the  fence  facing  the 

softball  field  area.  1  turned  away  and  did  not  see  any  “skin.” 

I  didn't  feel  uncomfortable  —  just  surprised.  I  just  feel  that 

he  shouldn't  be  doing  that  in  public  /  on  a  school  campus. 

The  security  guard  was  short  and  had  longer  hair. 

The  declaration  concluded  with  the  statement  that  the  student  did  not  want  to 

testify  at  hearing  or  trial,  and  she  also  wrote,  “I  want  to  be  anonymous.” 

MONICA  ROYAL,  TEACHER 

5. 

Ms.  Royal  is 

a  photography  teacher  at  RBHS,  and  testified  that  one 

morning  a  senior  student,  who  Ms.  Royal  described  as  “a  very  happy  person,”  came 

  

*  The  parties  stipulated  to  the  admission  of  the  student's  declaration  without 

any  limitation.

into  her  class  and  approached  her  desk,  “looking  shaken.”  The  student  reported?  that 

as  she  was  sitting  in  her  car  in  the  student  parking  lot,  a  security  guard  walked  around 

in  front  of  her  car  and  then  urinated.  She  did  not  believe  the  security  guard  saw  her  as 

she  was  in  her  car.  Ms.  Royal  told  the  student  to  immediately  report  the  incident  to 

administration,  and  the  student  said  she  had  already  done  so.  The  student  appeared 

shocked  and  angry.  After  her  conversation  with  the  student,  Ms.  Royal  prepared  a 

written  statement  about  this  conversation,  and  her  testimony  was  consistent  with  her 

statement. 

TERESA  SMALL,  ATTENDANCE  SUPERVISOR 

6. 

Teresa  Small  works  in  the  attendance  office  at  RBHS,  and  testified  that  on 

February  27,  2019,  a  student  came  into  the  attendance  office  and  asked  if  she  could 

speak  with  Ms.  Small  and  her  coworker,  Heidi  Huisman.  Both  were  familiar  with  the 

student  as  she  had  previously  worked  in  the  office  as  an  intern.  Ms.  Small  described 

the  student  as  “outgoing,”  but  on  this  day  she  seemed  worried  and  uncomfortable. 

The  student  said  she  was  sitting  in  her  car  in  the  parking  lot  on  February  25,  2019, 

talking  on  her  phone  with  her  mother,  when  an  individual  she  described  as  the  campus 

security  guard  with  the  long  hair  in  a  ponytail,  walked  past  her  car  and  over  to  the 

fence  facing  the  fields  and  urinated.  The  student  drives  her  younger  sister  to  school 

each  day,  and  said  she  was  glad  her  sister  was  not  in  the  car  with  her  at  the  time.  Ms. 

Small  asked  the  student  if  she  felt  comfortable  talking  with  her  Assistant  Principal, 

Kellie  Moore,  and  the  student  said,  “yes.”  Ms.  Small  immediately  contacted  Ms.  Moore 

to  let  her  know  the  student  would  be  coming  to  see  her.  Ms.  Small  provided  a  written 

  

>  All  testimony  of  what  the  student  told  other  witnesses  was  received  as 

administrative  hearsay  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11513.

Statement  about  her  interaction  with  the  student,  and  her  testimony  was  consistent 

with  her  statement. 

ELLIE  MOORE,  ASSISTANT  PRINCIPAL 

7. 

Kellie  Moore  is  in  her  fourth  year  as  Assistant  Principal  at  RBHS.  Ms.  Small 

advised  her  of  the  meeting  with  the  student,  and,  as  Ms.  Moore  was  going  to  be  out  of 

the  office,  she  worked  with  Assistant  Principal  Yael  Bozzay  to  obtain  the  student's 

statement.  Ms.  Moore  contacted  the  director  of  human  resources  who  advised  her  to 

talk  to  the  student  and  get  her  written  staternent,  take  photographs  of  the  location  of 

the  incident,  and  gather  as  much  evidence  as  possible,  and  then  meet  with  appellant 

and  his  union  representative  to  allow  appellant  to  give  his  version  of  the  events. 

Ms.  Moore  explained  that  the  student  "has  first  period  off-role,”  which  meant 

that  she,  as  well  as  a  many  other  students,  had  first  period  off  so  were  either  already  in 

the  parking  lot  or  were  arriving  at  this  time  in  preparation  for  a  second  period  class. 

Ms.  Moore  met  with  the  student,  who  expressed  her  concern  about  her  younger  sister 

or  anyone  else  who  may  have  to  witness  a  campus  security  guard  relieving  himself  on 

the  school  campus  The  student  knew  this  conduct  was  inappropriate  for  a  campus 

security  Quard,  and  she  did  not  want  appellant  to  know  that  she  was  the  one  who  had 

reported  the  incident.  Ms.  Moore  and  the  student  went  to  the  “scene,”  and  Ms.  Moore 

photographed  the  area  where  the  student  identified  her  car  was  parked  and  where 

appellant  was  standing.  The  student  said  appellant  was  not  hidden  behind  the  bushes 

and  she  knew  he  was  urinating  “because  she  saw  the  stream  of  urine.”  Ms.  Moore 

estimated  that  it  was  about  10  feet  from  the  student's  car  to  where  she  identified  that 

appellant  was  standing.

Ms.  Moore  reviewed  an  aerial  photograph‘  of  the  campus  and  explained  that 

there  were  several  ways  for  appellant  to  get  to  the  student  parking  lot  from  the  main 

part  of  the  campus.  The  closest  restrooms  to  the  student  parking  lot  were  unlocked 

porta-potties  located  at  the  edge  of  the  parking  lot  next  to  the  softball  field,  which  Ms. 

Moore  estimated  to  be  about  50  yards,  and  a  30  second  walk,  from  the  point  where 

appellant  urinated.  Porta-potties  are  delivered  to  the  campus  each  year  when  the 

softball  and  baseball  teams  start  to  practice,  and  they  remain  in  place  throughout  the 

entire  season.  Ms.  Moore  provided  documentation  that  the  porta-potties  were 

delivered  to  the  campus  on  February  19,  2019.  There  were  additional  restrooms  in  the 

pool  area  and  behind  the  press  box  on  the  far  side  of  the  football  field,  and  both  of 

these  restrooms  were  accessible  by  foot  or  golf  cart.  Ms.  Moore  noted  that  as  a 

campus  security  specialist,  appellant  “had  a  master  key  for  everything.” 

On  March  14,  2019,  Ms.  Moore  interviewed  appellant,  who  was  accompanied  by 

his  union  representative,  Arthur  Hall.  She  had  already  interviewed  the  student  and  the 

other  individuals  who  provided  written  statements.  The  delay  in  scheduling  the 

interview  was  due  to  working  with  schedules  of  both  the  appellant  and  his  union 

representative.  Ms.  Moore  summarized  the  meeting  as  follows:  She  told  appellant  that 

she  had  received  a  report  from  a  student  who  witnessed  appellant  urinating  in  the 

student  parking  lot  near  the  bushes,  and  she  asked  appellant  if  that  had  happened, 

  

*  Photographs  of  the  campus  reflected  that  the  student  parking  lot  is  in  the 

“lower”  or  southern  section  of  the  campus,  and  the  football  field  (stadium)  is  located 

to  the  north  of  that  parking  lot.  From  the  student  parking  lot  there  is 

a  path  that 

connects  to  a  traffic  circle  located  to  the  left  (or  west)  of  the  stadium,  and  another 

path  that  follows  around  the  south  side  of  the  stadium  to  the  pool  area  on  the  right.

and  he  immediately  said,  “Yes.”  Appellant's  “tone  was  defensive.”  Both  she  and  Mr. 

Hall  asked  appellant  if  ne  had  his  cart  with  him  or  if  he  could  get  to  the  pool  or  press 

box  restrooms,  “and  the  only  thing  he  said  was  that  he  didn’t  want  to  leave  the 

student  parking  jot.”  As  he  was  being  asked  these  questions,  appellant's  demeanor 

changed,  “he  got  very  agitated,”  was  defensive,  “his  voice  was  getting  very  loud,”  he 

clinched  his  fists,  and  he  kept  saying  that  he  just  had  to  go  and  did  not  want  to  leave 

the  parking  jot.  Appellant  did  not  say  that  he  was  overcome  with  a  sudden  urge  or 

that  he  was  hidden  behind  a  bush,  and  he  never  apologized  or  expressed  remorse  or 

"a  lack  of  judgment"  on  his  part.  She  asked  appellant  to  provide  a  written  statement, 

and  he  refused. 

Ms.  Moore  recailed  that  the  director  of  human  resources  advised  they  would 

need  to  ensure  that  the  incident  was  not  the  result  of  a  medical  issue,  and  Ms.  Moore 

did  not  believe  she  asked  the  question  at  this  meeting,  but  appellant  did  not  mention 

a  medical  issue.  She  did  ask  whether  it  was  an  emergency  for  him  to  urinate,  and  he 

responded,  “No.” 

Ms.  Moore  began  supervising  security  specialists  in  August  20178,  and  appellant 

was  on  leave  fromm  November  through  January,  and  then  on  March  18,  2019,  he  went 

out  on  paid  administrative  leave  as  a  result  of  this  incident.  As  his  supervisor  and 

assistant  principal  at  RBHS,  at  this  time  Ms.  Moore  does  not  have  confidence  in 

appellant's  judgment  as  a  campus  security  specialist.  She  stated  that  “it  was  a 

profound  lack  of  judgment  to  make  a  decision  to  urinate  in  public  when  anyone  could 

see  him.”  If  a  student  had  engaged  in  this  same  conduct,  it  is  a  “suspendable  offense 

that  can  equate  to  sexual  harassment.”  Ms.  Moore  doubts  appellant's  ability  to  make 

sound  decisions. 

10

DAVID  LEIVIASTER,  PRINCIPAL 

8. 

David  LeMaster  is  in  his  eighth  year  as  principal  at  RBHS.  RBHS  has 

approximately  2,350  students  and  is  located  adjacent  to  Bernardo  Heights  Middle 

School.  He  was  aware  of  the  investigation  conducted  by  Ms.  Moore,  and  she  kept  him 

apprised  of  what  was  going  on  and  the  result  of  investigation.  Mr.  LeMaster  does  not 

have  confidence  in  appellant's  judgment  when  viewed  with  the  campus  security 

specialist  job  description,  which  states  that  one  of  the  primary  responsibilities  is  to 

orovide  a  safe  and  secure  campus,  to  monitor  student  behavior,  and  to  report 

incidences  of  students  doing  things  that  they  should  not  be  doing.  Urinating  in  public 

is  a  violation  of  Education  Code  section  4900,  and  itis  “an  Hlegal  act." 

aod 

“The  very  act  of 

urinating  in  public,  in  the  presence  of  students,  as  witnessed  by  a  student,  where  there 

were  restrooms  accessible,”  reflects  a  lack  of  ability  to  decipher  what  is  the  right  thing 

to  do.  “You  would  expect  students  to  do  those  kinds  of  things.  But  you  don’t  expect 

people  who  are  supervising  and  making  sure  the  campus  is  safe  to  do  those  types  of 

activities.” 

Appellant's  Evidence 

9, 

Appellant  has  worked  for  the  district  for  17  years,  and  has  held  the 

position  of  campus  security  specialist  at  RBHS  during  this  entire  time.  He  described  the 

February  25,  2019,  incident  as  follows:  On  that  day  he  was  assigned  to  patrol  the 

student  parking  lot.  The  district  issued  golf  carts  and  most  security  specialists  used  a 

cart  while  patrolling,  but  appellant  preferred  to  walk  around,  and  explained  that  he 

was  less  visible  and  it  was  easier  to  move  about  without  a  cart.  It  was  first  period,  and 

he  parked  his  cart  near  the  entrance  on  the  south  side  of  the  parking  lot.  As  he  walked 

around  the  parking  lot,  he  said,  “ET  felt  like  I  needed  to  go  to  the  restroom.  And! 

couldn't  contain  myself.  And  Ijust  had  to  go.  So  T  went  behind  a  bush  and  proceeded 

14

to  go.”  He  acknowledged  that  this  did  not  excuse  what  he  did.  He  had  never  done  this 

before.  He  was  aware  that  this  was  a  time  of  day  when  there  was  very  heavy  student 

traffic  as  many  were  arriving  for  their  first  class,  and  he  was  also  aware  that  many 

students  sat  in  their  cars  and  wait  until  it  is  time  for  class.  He  did  not  deny  that  a 

student  saw  him  urinating  in  public. 

Appellant  stated  that  it  is  “pretty  far"  from  the  student  parking  lot  to  other  parts 

of  the  campus:  It  would  have  taken  him  four  to  five  minutes  to  walk  to  the  restrooms 

located  by  the  pool,  and  eight  to  ten  minutes  to  walk  to  the  restrooms  located  behind 

the  press  box  near  the  stadium.  it  would  have  taken  three  minutes  to  walk  to  his  golf 

cart,  anc  once  in  his  cart  he  would  need  to  unlock  a  gate  regardless  of  which  way  he 

went.  Appellant  had  a  master  key,  but  unlocking  a  gate  would  slow  him  down.  Porta- 

potties  are  located  next  to  the  playing  field  during  softball  and  baseball  seasons,  but 

he  said  they  were  not  present  on  this  day.  If  they  had  been  present,  he  certainly  would 

nave  used  them. 

Appellant  acknowledged  that  he  would  be  able  to  patral  more  of  the  lot  more 

quickly  and  more  comprehensively  if  he  rode  in  a  cart  rather  than  walking,  but  he 

explained  that  students  “keep  an  eye  on  the  cart,  if  you're  walking  around,  you  are 

able  to  not  be  seen.”  In  addition  to  ensuring  that  students  are  safe,  appellant 

considered  it  part  of his  job  to  try  to  catch  students  doing  things  they  were  not 

supposed  to  be  doing. 

During  the  March  14,  2019,  meeting  with  Ms.  Moore,  appellant  was  not  asked  if 

ne  had  a  medical  condition  that  may  have  led  to  his  need  to  urinate,  and  he  did  not 

tell  Ms.  Moore  that  he  had  such  a  medical  condition.  Appellant  provided  a  copy  of  an 

after-visit  summary  from  an  October  29,  2019,  doctor  visit,  which  reflected  the  reason 

for  the  visit  was  “urinary  urgency”  and  that  he  was  prescribed  Tamsulosin  (Flomax). 

12

When  asked  why  he  waited  for  eight  months  to  see  a  doctor,  he  explained  that  he 

thought  “it  was  normal”  for  his  age  to  have  this  condition,  but  when  the  problem 

progressed,  he  sought  medical  advice. 

Appellant  testified  that  he  apologized  “right  away”  during  the  March  74,  2019, 

meeting.  He  refused  to  write  a  staternent  as  Ms.  Moore  requested  “because  I  already 

admitted  to  what  I  needed  to  admit  to.”  When  asked  if  he  offered  the  district  an 

apology  at  the  Ske//y  meeting,  he  replied,  "As  T  recall,  yes,  sir.”  Regarding  an  apology 

at  the  school  board  hearing,  he  responded,  "My  exact  word  was,  ‘Iwas  contrite. 

Poa 

Appellant  had  been  on  what  he  referred  to  as  a  workers’  compensation  “stress 

leave”  from  mid-November  2018,  through  mid-January  2019,  and  testified  that  he  was 

subsequently  diagnosed  with  “anxiety  and  depression.”  He  confirmed  that  his  workers’ 

compensation  claim  stated  that  he  was  suffering  from  anxiety  and  depression;  and 

alleged  neck,  shoulder,  back,  and  foot  pain,  lock  jaw,  and  headaches,  due  to 

communications  with  his  supervisors.  The  pressure  was  related  to  his  work 

performance  and  his  supervisor  raising  issues  about  his  performance.  He  said,  “I  felt 

like  Lwas  being  pressured  to  do  things...  so  started  talking  to  my  union  rep,”  and 

then  went  to  the  workers’  compensation  doctor.  He  returned  to  work  in  mid-January 

2019  after  he  was  released  by  his  doctor. 

Appellant  provided  eight  performance  evaluations,  beginning  with  a 

probationary  review  in  April  2003  to  the  most  recent  review  dated  December  3,  2013. 

The  evaluations  reflected  that  appellant  met  or  exceeded  standards  or  expectations, 

and  the  reviews  reflected  no  deficiencies,  letters  of  warning,  or  discipline. 

Three  of  appellant's  children  attend  school  in  the  district,  including  one  child 

who  is 

a  junior  at  RBHS.  His  job  means  a  lot  to  him  and  he  ts  “part  of  the  community.” 

13

He  said  he  “felt  like  I  disappointed  a  lot  of  people  when  I  did  the  action  I  did  and  also, 

you  know,  it  was  pretty  ernbarrassing,  not  only  for  myself  but  also  for  my  student  that 

goes  there  now.” 

10. 

Arthur  Hill  has  been  the  lead  employee  representative  with  the  PSEA  for 

two  and  one-half  years,  and  one  of  his  duties  is  representing  employees  in 

investigatory  interviews.  He  attended  the  March  14,  2019,  meeting  with  appellant,  and 

said  appellant  admitted  urinating  on  school  grounds  and  also  apologized.  When  asked 

on  cross-examination  about  appeilant’s  apology  he  responded,  “I  believe  he  said  he 

was  sorry  for  doing  that,  but  he  had  to  go  to  the  bathroom.”  He  agreed  that  appellant 

got  agitated  during  the  meeting  but  said  appellant  did  not  raise  his  voice;  however, 

Mr.  Hill  later  testified  that  appellant  was  calm  during  the  entire  meeting.  Mr.  Hill  did 

not  recall  if  appellant  was  asked  to  write  a  statement  but  he  acknowledged  that  he 

had  advised  appellant  not  to  do  so.  Mr.  Hill's  testimony  was  inconsistent  and  for  that 

reason  not  very  credible. 

Parties’  Arguments 

11. 

Appellant  contended  that  the  penalty  of  termination  is  excessive  and  that 

he  should  be  suspended  and  allowed  to  return  to  his  job  on  a  public  high  school 

campus.  He  agreed  that  the  essential  facts  are  undisputed,  that  some  punishment  is  in 

order  “for  lack  of  judgment,”  and  stated,  “I  have  never  denied  nor  minimized  the 

wrongdoing.”  He  argued  that  suspension  is  appropriate  based  on  his  long  history  of 

employment  with  the  cistrict  and  his  clean  employment  record. 

12. 

District  argued  that  the  undisputed  facts  alone  are  sufficient  to  uphold 

the  board's  termination,  and  noted  that  urinating  in  public  is  prosecutable  as  a  crime 

under  Penal  Code  section  370.  In  addition,  appellant  had  a  duty  to  assure  the  well- 

14

being  and  safety  of  the  students  and  to  assure  students  were  in  compliance  with 

policies  and  regulations;  appellant  acknowledged  that  restrooms  were  available;  the 

incident  had  a  clear  impact  on  the  student;  and  appellant  never  stated  he  had  an 

"“amergency”  or  acknowledged  that  he  used  poor  judgment  until  after  he  was 

terminated  and  had  filed  his  appeal  of  the  boara’s  decision.  This  reinforced  the  boara’s 

conclusion  that  they  lack  confidence  in  appellant's  judgment  and  ability  to  serve  as  a 

role  model  for  students. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  section  451173  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  shall  prescribe 

written  rules  and  requiations,  governing  the  personnel 

rnanagerment  of  the  classified  service,  which  shall  be  printed 

and  made  available  to  employees  in  the  classified  service, 

the  public,  and  those  concerned  with  the  administration  of 

this  section,  whereby  these  employees  are  designated  as 

permanent  employees  of  the  schoo!  district  after  serving  a 

prescribed  period  of  probation  that  shall  not  exceed  one 

year. 

(0)  Any  employee  designated  as  a  permanent  employee 

shall  be  subject  to  disciplinary  action  only  for  cause  as 

prescribed  by  rule  or  regulation  of  the  governing  board  of 

the  school  district,  but  the  governing  board's  determination 

15

of  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  for  disciplinary  action  shail  be 

conclusive. 

(c)  The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  shall  adopt  rules 

of  procedure  for  disciplinary  proceedings  that  shall  contain 

a  provision  for  informing  the  employee  by  written  notice  of 

the  specific  charges  against  him  or  her,  a  staternent  of  the 

employee's  right  to  a  hearing  on  those  charges,  and  the 

time  within  which  the  hearing  may  be  requested  that  shall 

be  not  less  than  five  days  after  service  of  the  notice  to  the 

employee,  and  a  card  or  paper,  the  signing  and  filing  of 

which  shall  constitute  a  demand  for  hearing,  and  a  denial  of 

all  charges.  The  burden  of  proof  shall  rernain  with  the 

governing  board  of  the  school  district,  and  any  rule  or 

regulation  to  the  contrary  shall  be  void. 

(d)  No  disciplinary  action  shall  be  taken  for  any  cause  that 

arose  before  the  employee's  becoming  permanent,  nor  for 

any  cause  that  arose  more  than  two  years  preceding  the 

date  of  the  filing  of  the  notice  of  cause  unless  the  cause 

was  concealed  or  not  disclosed  by  the  employee  when  it 

could  be  reasonably  assumed  that  the  employee  should 

have  disclosed  the  facts  to  the  employing  school  district. 

(e)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  construed  to  prohibit  the 

governing  board  of  a  school  district,  pursuant  to  the  terrns 

of  an  agreement  with  an  employee  organization  under 

Chapter  10.7  (commencing  with  Section  3540)  of  Division  4 

16

of  Title  1  of  the  Government  Code,  from  delegating  its 

authority  to  determine  whether  sufficient  cause  exists  for 

disciplinary  action  against  classified  employees...  to  an 

impartial  third  party  hearing  officer.  However,  the 

governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  retain  authority 

to  review  the  determination  under  the  standards  set  forth  in 

Section  1286.2  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure. 

(1)  A  governing  board  of  a  school  district  shall  delegate 

its  authority  to  a  judge,  as  defined  in  Section  44990,  to 

determine  whether  sufficient  cause  exists  for  disciplinary 

action  against  a  classified  ernployee  involving  allegations  of 

egregious  misconduct,  as  defined  in  Section  44932,  and 

involving  a  minor,  as  defined  in  Section  44990.  The  judge's 

ruling  shall  be  binding  upon  all  parties. 

(2)  A  judge  authorized  under  this  subdivision  to  conduct  a 

hearing  involving  allegations  as  described  in  Section  44010 

or  440171  of  this  code,  or  as  described  in  Sections  11165.2 

to  11165.6,  inclusive,  of  the  Penal  Code,  shall  conduct  that 

hearing  in  accordance  with  Article  3.3  (commencing  with 

Section  44990)  of  Chapter  4  and  Section  49077  of  this  code. 

(3)  The  term  “representative  of  the  respondent,”  within  the 

meaning  of  Article  3.3  (commencing  with  Section  44990)  of 

Chapter  4,  shall  include,  but  not  necessarily  be  limited  to,  an 

exclusive  labor  representative. 

17

(g)  This  section  shall  apply  only  to  school  districts  not 

incorporating  the  merit  system  as  outlined  in  Article  6 

(commencing  with  Section  45240)  of  this  chapter. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  45116  provides: 

A  notice  of  disciplinary  action  shall  contain  a  statement  in 

ordinary  and  concise  lanquage  of  the  specific  acts  and 

omissions  upon  which  the  disciplinary  action  ts  based,  a 

statement  of  the  cause  for  the  action  taken  and,  if  it 

is 

claimed  that  an  employee  has  violated  a  rule  or  regulation 

of  the  public  school  employer,  such  rule  or  regulation  shall 

be  set  forth  in  said  notice. 

A  notice  of  disciplinary  action  stating  one  or  more  causes  or 

grounds  for  disciplinary  action  established  by  any  rule, 

regulation,  or  statute  in  the  language  of  the  rule,  regulation, 

or  statute,  is  insufficient  for  any  purpose. 

A  proceeding  may  be  brought  by,  or  on  behalf  of,  the 

employee  to  restrain  any  further  proceedings  under  any 

notice  of  disciplinary  action  violative  of  this  provision. 

This  section  shall  apply  to  proceedings  conducted  under 

the  provisions  of  Article  6  (commencing  with  Section  45240) 

of  this  chapter. 

3, 

Before  the  personnel  commission  may  impose  discipline  upon  an 

employee,  the  district  has  the  burden  of  establishing  by  a  preponderance  of  evidence 

18

that  the  employee  has  committed  the  acts  or  omissions  alleged  in  the  Notice  of 

Proposed  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  and  that  these  acts  or  omissions 

violated  district  policies.  The  conduct  of  district  employees  is  governed  by  the 

Education  Code,  Chapter  60  of  the  Rules  of  the  Personnel  Commission  of  the  district 

(Personnel  Commission  Rules},  and  Administrative  Procedure  (AP)  4.313.1. 

4. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  45312  and  Personnel  Commission 

Rule  60.500.3  (B),  the  commission  appointed  an  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office 

of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  to  conduct  the  hearing  and  report 

findings  or  recommendations  to  the  commission.  The  commission  may  accept,  reject 

or  amend  the  findings  or  recommendations  of  the  Administrative  Law  Judge. 

5, 

Commission  Rule  60.500.1  (£)  and  AP  4.313.1  provide  causes  for  dismissal 

or  disciplinary  action  of  a  permanent  classified  employee  inciuding,  but  are  not  limited 

to,  the  following: 

® 

Incompetence  or  inefficiency  in  the  performance  of 

duties  [AP  4.313.1(5}a};  Personnel  Commission  Rule 

60.500.  1(E)(4)] 

e 

Insubordination  [AP  4.313.1(5}(c}  Personnel 

Commission  Rule  60.500.1(6)(3)] 

e® 

Carelessness  or  negligence  in  the  performance  of 

duty  or  in  the  care  or  use  of  district  property  [AP 

4.3713.1(5id):  Personnel  Commission  Rule 

60.500.  1(E}10) J 

19

Discourteous,  offensive,  or  abusive  conduct  or 

language  toward  other  employees,  pupils  or  the 

public  [AP  4.313.1(5}{e};  Personnel  Commission  Rule 

60.500.  1(EM4)] 

Personnel  conduct  unbecoming  of  an  employee  of 

the  district  [AP  4.373.1(65)0)4 

Willful  or  persistent  violation  of  the  Education  Code 

or  rules  and  regulations  of  the  district  [AP 

4.373.165}  Ss}. 

Any  willful  conduct  tending  to  injure  the  public 

services  [AP  4.313.1(5Hf})  Personnel  Commission  Rule 

60.500.7(E}(18}.] 

It  was  not  established  that  appellant  is  subject  to  disciplinary  action  for 

incompetence  or  inefficient  perforrnance  of  his  duties  in  violation  of  Personnel 

Commission  Rule  60.500.1(E}(1)  and  AP  4.313.1(5}(a}.  The  term  ‘incompetency’ 

generally  indicates  ‘an  absence  of  qualification,  ability  or  fitness  to  perform  a 

prescribed  duty  or  function.’  (Pollack  v.  Kinder  (1978)  85  Cal  App.3d  833,  &37)) 

Incompetency  is  distinguishable  from  negligence,  in  that  one  ‘may  be  competent  or 

capable  of  performing  a  given  duty  but  negligent  in  performing  that  duty.’  Ua!  at  p. 

838.)  He  was  negligent  in  performing. 

It  was  not  established  that  appellant  violated  Personnel  Commission  Rule 

60.500.1(E}(3)  and  AP  4.313.1(5ic}  by  being  insubordinate.  Insubordination  is  refusal  to 

obey  an  order.  Evidence  reflected  that  appellant  refused  to  provide  a  written 

20

Statement  as  requested  by  Ms.  Moore,  however,  no  evidence  was  presented  that  she 

ordered  him  to  do  so. 

8, 

The  district  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

appellant  violated  Personnel  Commission  Rule  60.500.1{E)(16)  and  AP  4.313.7(){d)  in 

that  he  was  careless  or  negligent  in  the  performance  of  duty  or  in  the  care  or  use  of 

district  property.  Urinating  in  public,  in  the  student  parking  and  at  a  time  that  he  knew 

the  parking  lot  was  very  busy,  and  only  feet  from  parked  cars,  showed  a  lack  of 

common  sense  and  decency.  This  violation  constitutes  a  separate  cause  for  dismissal 

from  employment  as  a  permanent  classified  employee. 

9, 

The  district  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

appellant  violated  Personnel  Commission  Rule  60.500.1{E}(4)  and  AP  4.313.1(5){e}  in 

that  he  engaged  in  discourteous,  offensive,  or  abusive  conduct  or  language  toward 

other  employees,  pupils  or  the  public.  Urinating  in  public,  in  a  student  parking  lot, 

during  a  time  when  he  knew  students  would  be  arriving  or  were  already  sitting  in  their 

cars,  was  offensive  and  uncivil  behavior.  These  violations  constitute  a  separate  cause 

for  dismissal  from  employment  as  a  permanent  classified  employee. 

10. 

The  district  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

appellant  violated  AP  4.313.1(5}{)  in  that  his  personal  conduct  was  unbecoming  of  an 

employee  of  the  district.  Appellant's  behavior  was  contrary  to  the  rules  and  regulations 

of  the  district  and  of  the  school  where  he  worked,  and  his  conduct  that  morning 

violated  the  very  rules  he  was  charged  with  enforcing.  This  violation  constitutes  a 

separate  cause  for  dismissal  from  employment  as  a  permanent  classified  employee. 

11. 

The  district  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

appellant  violated  AP  4.373.1(5}(s)  in  that  he  engaged  in  wilful  or  persistent  violation 

a1

of  the  Education  Code  or  rules  and  regulations  of  the  district.  Appellant’s  conduct  was 

a  violation  of  Education  Code  section  4900,  and  could  also  have  resulted  in  a  criminal 

charge  under  Penal  Code  section  370.  This  violation  constitutes  a  separate  cause  for 

dismissal  from  employment  as  a  permanent  classified  employee. 

12. 

The  district  has  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

appellant  violated  Personnel  Commission  Rule  60.500.1(E}(18})  and  AP  4.313.  1(5)(9  in 

that  he  engaged  in  willful  conduct  tending  to  injure  the  public  services.  A  campus 

security  specialist  is  expected  to  be  law-abiding  while  performing  his  duties  and  to 

model  positive  behavior  for  students.  Appellant  admitted  to  urinating  in  public  and 

acknowledged  that  his  conduct  was  the  result  of  a  profound  lapse  in  judgment.  This 

violation  constitutes  a  separate  cause  for  dismissal  from  employment  as  a  permanent 

classified  employee. 

Fvaiuation 

13. 

Appellant's  appeal  is  based  solely  on  his  assertion  that  termination  of 

employment  is  excessive  discipline.  Appellant  admitted  to  the  conduct  and  agrees  that 

some  discipline  is  in  order.  However,  he  argues  he  has  met  or  exceeded  standards  on 

all  his  evaluations,  has  had  no  prior  discipline  during  his  17  years  with  the  district,  and 

a  lengthy  suspension  is  appropriate  for  his  first  offense.  The  district  maintained  that, 

regardiess  of  appellant's  length  of  employment  and  lack  of  prior  discipline,  his 

conduct  on  February  25,  2019,  was  egregious  and  demonstrated  a  profound  lack  of 

judgment,  such  that  the  board  has  lost  confidence  in  appellant’s  ability  to  carry  out 

the  duties  of  his  position  of  trust. 

The  “basic  function"  of  a  campus  security  specialist  is  to  assure  the  well-being 

and  safety  of  students  and  “assure  student  compliance”  with  school  and  district  polices 

2a

and  regulations;  here,  appellant  violated  those  very  policies  and  regulations.  If 

appellant  had  observed  a  student  urinating  in  the  student  parking  lot,  or  if  he  had 

been  advised  that  such  an  act  had  occurred,  he  would  have  the  responsibility  to  report 

the  student  to  administration  and  to  possibly  “detain”  the  student  in  accordance  with 

school  or  district  procedures,  and  the  student  would  be  subject  to  suspension. 

Urinating  in  public  is  also  actionable  as  a  crime  under  the  Penal  Code.  Appellant's 

conduct  was  also  unbecoming  a  district  employee. 

Appellant's  conduct  showed  a  lack  of  common  sense.  He  was  aware  that  at  this 

time  of  the  day  students  were  entering  the  parking  lot,  or  were  already  sitting  in  their 

cars,  and  he  used  extremely  poor  judgment  in  choosing  to  urinate  at  the  edge  of  the 

parking  lot  just  feet  from  cars—only  10  feet  from  the  student's  car.  Urinating  in  public 

was  cdiscourteous  and  offensive  to  the  student  who  witnessed  the  incident,  and  to 

students  and  staff  who  subsequently  became  aware  of  the  incident. 

Appellant  contended  at  hearing  that  he  suffers  from  a  medical  condition  which 

causes  urinary  urgency.  However,  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that  he  suffered  from 

this  condition  in  February  2019.  Appellant  testified  that  he  felt  that  at  his  age  his 

urinary  condition  was  normal,  “but  it  continued  to  progress,“  and  eight  months  later 

he  sought  medical  attention.  He  did  not  advise  Ms.  Moore  that  he  had  a  urinary 

urgency  condition,  and  in  fact,  when  she  asked  if  he  had  urinated  in  the  parking  lot 

due  to  an  “emergency,”  he  said,  "No."  He  only  told  Ms.  Moore  that  he  “had  to  go"  and 

“did  not  want  to  leave  the  parking  lot.”  On  October  29,  2019,  after  he  had  been 

terminated  and  after  he  had  filed  his  appeal,  he  sought  medical  advice.  In  addition,  the 

medical  visit  summary  cid  not  list  a  diagnosis  but  provided  that  the  reason  for  the  visit 

was  “urinary  urgency,”  and  that  appellant  had  been  prescribed  Flomax. 

2

Appellant  testified  that  he  was  not  aware  that  the  porta-potties  were  in  place 

on  February  25,  20719.  This  testimony  does  not  seem  entirely  credible  for  several 

reasons.  Appellant  was  aware  that  porta-potties  were  delivered  each  year  when  the 

softball  and  baseball  tears  begin  to  practice,  and  were  located  between  the  outfield 

and  the  student  parking  lot.  On  the  day  of  the  incident,  the  porta-potties  had  already 

been  in  place  for  at  least  three  to  four  “school  days”  and  it  does  not  seem  reasonable 

that  he  would  not  have  observed  these  while  patrolling  the  student  parking  lot,  or 

driving  or  walking  to  other  parts  of  the  campus.  Further,  as  a  person  with  a  need  to 

urinate  “quickly,”  tt  would  seem  reasonabie  that  he  would  routinely  be  aware  of  the 

location  of  the  nearest  restroom. 

There  was  inconsistent  testimony  regarding  the  March  14,  2019,  meeting. 

Appellant  admitted  to  Ms.  Moore  that  he  urinated  in  the  parking  lot,  and  testified  that 

he  apologized  to  her.  Ms.  Moore  confirmed  that  appellant  admitted  to  the  conduct 

but  said  his  “tone  was  defensive”  and  he  did  not  apologize.  He  became  very  agitated, 

his  face  became  red,  he  was  “getting  angry”  and  became  "very  loud.”  Appellant  never 

expressed  to  Ms.  Moore  that  his  urinating  in  public  was  a  serious  lack  of  judgment.  Mr. 

Hall  first  testified  that  appellant  apologized,  and  later  said,  “I  believe  he  apologized.” 

Mr.  Hall  first  said  appellant  was  agitated,  then  later  said  appellant  was  calm 

throughout  the  meeting  and  did  not  raise  his  voice. 

However,  it  did  not  appear  that  appellant  understood  the  egregiousness  of  his 

conduct.  There  was  no  evidence  that  he  attempted  to  reach  any  of  the  three  available 

restrooms;  he  did  not  dispute  Ms.  Moore's  testimony  that  he  said  he  just  had  to  go 

and  said  several  times  that  he  did  not  want  to  leave  the  parking  lot.  This  is  conduct 

that  would  not  be  tolerated  if  done  by  a  student,  yet  appellant  now  states  despite  his 

“lack  of  judgment,”  he  should  be  allowed  to  return  to  his  position  after  a  lengthy 

24

suspension.  Appellant  has  demonstrated  that  the  district  cannot  trust  him  to  perform 

his  duties,  and  therefore  the  decision  to  terminate  was  reasonable  and  appropriate. 

ORDER 

The  appeal  of  Ramil  Punongbayan  is  denied.  The  Recommendation  for 

Dismissal  terminating  Ramil  Punongbayan  from  employment  with  the  Poway  Unified 

School  District  is  affirmed. 

DATE:  June  1,  2020 

DocuSigned  by: 

Manon  Vomluof 

S83DFDSe2F  395444. 

MARION  J.  VOMHOF 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

25

