BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARINGS  AND  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
ELK  GROVE  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of 

Carl  Chapin,  Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2020040006 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  video  conference  before  a  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (Commission)  of  the  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District 

(District)  on  August  17  through  24,  2020,  in  Sacramento,  California.  The  Commission 

included  Alayna  Carter,  Denise  Lambert,  and  Timothy  Aspinwall,  Administrative  Law 

Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  presiding. 

Gabriela  D.  Flowers  and  Katherine  S.  Holding,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

District. 

Christopher  ©.  Harnmer,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Cari  Chapin  (respondent), 

who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

On  August  26,  2020,  the  record  was  re-opened  for  the  parties  to  submit 

motions  regarding  Exhibit  1  and  Exhibit  N,  and  for  either  party  to  file  an  opposition. 

The  District  fled  a  motion  to  admit  Exhibit  1  for  jurisdictional  purposes,  and

respondent  filed  a  motion  to  withdraw  Exhibit  N.  Neither  party  objected.  Both  motions 

were  gramted,  and  the  record  closed  on  September  4,  2020. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background  and  Procedural  History 

1. 

Respondent  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  He  was 

rnost  recently  assigned  to  Cosumnes  Oaks  High  School  to  teach  health  education 

during  the  2018-19  school  year.  Respondent  also  most  recently  coached  the  girls’ 

tennis  team  at  Franklin  High  Schoo!  during  the  2018-19  season. 

2. 

On  March  6,  2020,  David  Reilly,  Associate  Superintendent  for  Human 

Resources  signed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  and  Statement  of  Charges  (Statement 

of  Charges)  recommending  termination  of  respondent's  employment  with  the  District 

on  the  bases  of  (1)  immoral  conduct;  (2)  dishonesty;  (3)  evident  unfitness  for  service; 

and/or  (4)  persistent  violation  of  or  refusal  to  obey  school  laws  of  the  state  or 

reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  governing  board  of  the  District.  Respondent 

timely  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing/Notice  of  Defense.  On  August  6,  and  August  11, 

2020,  respectively,  the  District  filed  and  served  a  First  and  Second  Amended  Statement 

of  Charges.  This  hearing  proceeded  on  the  Second  Amended  Statement  of  Charges. 

District's  Evidence 

3. 

The  District's  primary  evidence  includes  testimony  and  written 

statements  of  female  students  at  Franklin,  Cosumnes  Oaks,  and  Laguna  Creek  High 

Schools,  that  during  2017  and  2018,  respondent  inappropriately  touched  and  made 

inappropriate  comments  to  and  about  female  students  and  members  of  the  girls’

tennis  team.  The  District’s  evidence  also  includes  testimony  from  school  and  District 

administrators  that  respondent's  comments  and  conduct  violated  specific  rules  and 

policies,  and  that  respondent  was  dishonest  during  an  interview  with  a  District 

administrator. 

M..E.'S  TESTIMONY  AND  WRITTEN  STATEMENT 

4. 

MLE.  is  currently  a  student  at  University  of  California  (UC),  Berkeley.  She 

graduated  from  Franklin  High  School  in  2079.  MLE.  played  on  the  varsity  girls’  tennis 

team  throughout  high  school,  and  was  co-captain  during  her  senior  year. 

5. 

Respondent  arrived  as  the  head  coach  of  the  girls’  tennis  team  before  the 

2017-18  season,  M.E.’s  junior  year.  Respondent  told  the  team  they  looked  “rag-tag” 

because  they  did  not  dress  uniformly.  M.E.  dressed  more  modestly  in  keeping  with  her 

religious  beliefs.  Specifically,  M.E.  wore  a  T-shirt  and  leggings  in  the  team  colors 

instead  of  the  standard  tank  top  and  skirt  or  shorts.  Respondent's  comments  to  the 

team  that  they  looked  “rag-tag”  continued  into  the  2078-19  season.  Respondent  made 

these  comments  to  the  entire  team,  but  looked  straight  at  MLE.  in  a  way  that  singled 

her  out. 

6. 

Respondent  was  disrespectful  of  MLE.'s  religious  commitments,  and  less 

accommodating  of  her  scheduling  needs  than  he  was  with  other  team  members.  On 

one  occasion,  M.E.  told  respondent  she  needed  to  miss  a  non-league  tennis  maich  to 

attend  an  important  religious  event.  Respondent  told  her  she  should  attend  the  tennis 

maich  instead.  On  another  occasion,  respondent  told  M.E.  that  she  would  not  be 

allowed  to  play  in  an  upcoming  tennis  match  if  she  missed  part  of  a  practice  to 

provide  tutoring  to  a  student  in  advanced  placement  physics.  In  contrast,  respondent

permitted  other  team  members  to  miss  portions  of  tennis  practice  in  order  to  attend 

other  school  club  meetings. 

7. 

On  one  occasion,  respondent  brought  a  new  uniform  to  show  to  the 

team.  When  the  team  members  said  they  did  not  like  it,  respondent  asked  them 

whether  it  was  because  the  uniform  is  "not  sexy  enough.”  M.E.  and  the  other  giris  on 

the  team  were  taken  aback  by  this  comment. 

8. 

Respondent  frequently  told  the  girls  on  the  team  that  they  had  “fit 

bodies”  and  “good-looking  bodies.”  Respondent's  repeated  comments  to  the  girls  that 

they  had  “fit  bodies”  and  “good-looking  bodies”  made  M.E.  feel  very  uncomfortable, 

especially  given  that  the  girls  on  the  team  were  typically  wearing  tank  tops  and  short 

skirts.  Respondent  would  often  qualify  these  comments  with  a  statement  that  “I  mean 

this  in  the  most  professional  way  possible.”  Such  statements  did  not  lessen  the  fact 

that  his  comments  made  M.E.  and  other  team  members  feel  uncomfortabie. 

9, 

Respondent  frequently  put  his  hand  on  M.E.’s  lower  back  after  matches 

when  she  was  reporting  her  scores  to  him  during  her  junior  and  senior  years.  He  also 

held  MLE.'s  hand  after  a  rnatch  for  a  length  of  time  that  made  her  uncomfortable. 

10. 

On  one  occasion  in  front  of  the  tennis  team,  respondent  lifted  the  leg  of 

his  gyrn  shorts  to  show  the  spandex  he  was  wearing  underneath  and  to  demonstrate 

that  the  girls  could  keep  tennis  balls  under  their  shorts  or  skirt  if  they  wore  spandex. 

The  girls  felt  uncomfortable  with  respondent  showing  them  his  spandex 

undergarment.  MLE.  cid  not  want  to  see  what  was  under  respondent's  gym  shorts. 

171. 

At  the  end  of  the  tennis  season  in  her  senior  year,  M.E.  and  three  other 

members  of  the  girls’  tennis  team,  M.W.,  V.T.,  and  E.C.,  decided  to  report  to  the  schoo! 

administration  their  concerns  about  respondent’s  comments  and  inappropriate

touching.  The  tipping  point  for  them  was  the  fact  that  respondent  had  missed  most  of 

an  important  tennis  match  in  favor  of  coaching  a  girls’  flag  football  team  practice  in 

their  preparation  for  the  “powder-puff”  game  —  an  annual  intramural  girls  flag  football 

game.  M.E.  and  her  three  teammates  who  carne  forward  were  bothered  by  the  fact 

that  respondent  was  very  strict  with  them  regarding  attendance  at  tennis  practices  and 

rnatches,  yet  he  decided  to  miss  most  of  a  match  to  coach  a  girls’  flag  football 

practice. 

12. 

 M_E.  and  her  three  teammates  told  the  school  principal,  Chantelle  Albiani, 

about  respondent's  numerous  inappropriate  comments  to  the  girls’  tennis  team 

regarding  their  bodies,  his  unweicome  touching,  and  his  disrespect  for  her  religious 

commitments.  M.E.  felt  tt  was  her  responsibility  to  come  forward  because  she  was  co- 

captain  of  the  team  and  was  able  to  articulate  matters  reasonably  well  with  adults. 

Also,  M.E.  felt  she  was  doing  this  for  the  benefit  of  younger  players  who  would  be  on 

the  team  in  coming  years,  and  who  may  not  have  the  same  advocacy  skills  to  address 

the  issues  relating  to  respondent's  comments  and  conduct. 

13. 

M.E.  was  also  interviewed  by  Dean  Bowen,  a  law  enforcement  liaison 

employed  by  the  District.  She  told  him  of  her  experiences  with  respondent,  and  her 

concerns  regarding  his  cormments  and  conduct.  When  Officer  Bowen  asked  her 

whether  respondent's  touching  was  “sexual,”  M.E.  said  it  was  not.  Officer  Bowen  did 

not  define  what  he  meant  by  “sexual”  when  he  asked  the  question.  Today,  MLE.  is  two 

years  older,  has  a  better  understanding  of  events,  and  disagrees  with  her  prior 

staternent  that  none  of  respondent’s  conduct  was  sexual.

&.C.'S  TESTIMONY  AND  VVRITTEN  STATEMENT 

14, 

E.C.  is  currently  going  into  her  first  year  at  ULC.  Berkeley.  She  graduated 

from  Franklin  High  School  in  2020.  E.C.  played  on  the  girls’  tennis  team  frorn  her 

freshman  year  through  the  beginning  of  her  senior  year.  During  her  sophomore  and 

junior  years,  respondent  was  the  head  coach;  and  during  her  senior  year,  respondent 

was  no  longer  the  coach. 

15. 

EC.  noticed  that  respondent  treated  M.E.  more  harshly  than  he  treated 

the  other  team  co-captain,  A.R.  If  M.E.  missed  a  practice,  respondent  would  “get  mad.” 

if  ALR.  missed  a  practice  or  a  gare,  respondent  “would  not  scold  her  as  much.”  If  MLE. 

had  to  miss  a  practice  because  of  a  religious  holiday,  respondent  would  "get  mad  at 

her  in  front  of  the  of  the  whole  team”  and  embarrass  her.  E.C.  also  saw  respondent  tell 

M.E.  in  front  of  the  tearn  that  she  should  "just  skip”  a  religious  holiday  and  come  to 

practice. 

16. 

EC.  also  observed  respondent  tell  the  team  on  multiple  occasions  that 

“you  have  fit  bodies”  and  other  similar  comments.  E.C.  felt  uncomfortable  and  unsafe 

when  respondent  commented  on  their  bodies.  The  fact  that  he  qualified  his  comments 

as  being  said  in  a  professional  way  “did  not  make  it  okay.” 

17. 

Respondent  physically  touched  £.C.  in  ways  that  made  her  feel 

uncomfortable  and  unsafe.  Once  after  she  was  playing  during  practice,  he  touched  her 

arm  and  asked  her  if  sne  was  “sweating  yet.”  On  another  occasion,  respondent 

touched  E.C.  on  the  calf  and  congratulated  her  for  a  good  game  as  she  was  walking 

away  from  him.  She  did  not  expect  respondent  to  reach  out  and  touch  her,  and  this 

made  her  feel  uncomfortable  and  unsafe.

16 

 £.C.  also  saw  respondent  pull  up  his  gym  shorts  to  show  he  was  wearing 

spandex  underneath,  EC  and  other  tearm  members  were  taken  aback  by  this.  The 

assistant  coach,  Mark  Stinson,  was  present  and  later  remarked:  “that  was  weird,  and 

"rn  a  guy.” 

19. 

Amalie  student  was  the  manager  for  the  girls’  tennis  team.  On  one 

occasion  when  the  rnanager  was  getting  water  from  the  water  jug,  the  spigot  was 

close  to  his  groin  area.  A  member  of  the  girls’  tennis  team  was  bent  over  to  get  some 

water  and  her  head  was  also  near  the  manager's  groin  area.  Respondent  said  “that's 

just  wrong,”  in  the  presence  of  his  team.  They  later  talked  amongst  thernselves  about 

respondent's  inappropriate  comment. 

20. 

During  E.C.’s  junior  year,  respondent  sent  an  email  to  the  girls’  tennis 

team  stating  in  part: 

T  have  a  lot  of  nice  dessert  items  left  over  from  our 

wedding.  You  gals  get  some  if  you  want  tomorrow  after 

practice,  They  are  yummy  and  not  too  large,  so  your  sugar 

intake  will  not  be  that  much.  You  are  ail  fit,  so  a  nice  little 

treat  after  practice  #1  will  be  nice. 

E.C.  felt  that  this  reference  to  portion  size  and  the  girls’  physical  fitness  conveyed 

gender  stereotypes  regarding  physical  appearance,  and  that  respondent  would  not 

have  sent  the  same  email  to  a  boys’  team. 

21. 

£.C.  often  played  tennis  at  the  same  racquet  club  as  respondent.  While  at 

the  racquet  club,  respondent  once  told  E.C.  that  her  seventh-grade  sister  is  “cute”  and

that  “she's  my  little  wildcat.”'  This  comment  made  E.C.  feel  uncomfortable  because  she 

does  not  want  her  younger  sister  to  have  to  face  respondent's  comments  about  her 

physical  appearance  when  she  starts  to  play  tennis  on  the  high  school  team. 

22. 

During  a  team  practice  at  the  racquet  club,  the  girls  were  looking  at 

some  new  uniforms  out  on  the  tennis  court.  Respondent  brought  a  blanket  from  his 

car  and  told  the  girls  they  could  change  into  the  new  uniform  on  the  court  behind  the 

blanket.  The  girls  did  not  do  so. 

23. 

After  she  spoke  with  Ms.  Albiani,  E.C.  was  interviewed  by  Officer  Bowen. 

He  asked  her  whether  any  of  respondent's  comments  were  “sexual  in  nature.”  E.C. 

answered  “no.”  Officer  Bowen  did  not  define  what  he  meant  by  “sexual”  when  he 

asked  the  question.  At  the  time  she  felt  respondent's  comments  were  inappropriate. 

Now,  she  believes  respondent’s  comments  had  some  “sexual  connotation.” 

V.T.’S  TESTIMONY  AND  WRITTEN  STATEMENT 

24. 

~=~*V.T. 

is  currently  going  into  her  first  year  at  U.C.  Irvine.  She  graduated 

from  Franklin  High  School  in  2020.  V.T.  played  on  the  girls’  tennis  team  only  during  her 

junior  year,  2018-19.  Respondent  was  the  head  coach,  and  Mr.  Stinson  was  the 

assistant  coach. 

25. 

 V.T.  was  present  when  respondent  made  a  pointed  comment  to  the  team 

that  one  of  the  players  had  missed  a  scrimmage  match.  M.E.  was  the  player  who 

missed  the  match  because  she  had a  religious  holiday.  Respondent  appeared  to  be 

angry  that  M.E.  missed  the  match.  Respondent  also  told  the  team  that  he  did  not  like 

that  the  team  was  not  dressed  uniformly  during  matches,  and  made  it  clear  that  he  did 

  

'  The  Franklin  High  School  mascot  is  a  wildcat.

not  like  the  fact  that  M.E.  did  not  dress  in  the  standard  uniform.  Respondent  continued 

to  say  that  the  team  looked  “rag-tag,”  even  after  they  were  able  to  get  T-shirts  with 

the  same  logo  as  on  the  tank-tops,  which  was  the  standard  uniform. 

26. 

VT.  also  observed  respondent  make  comments  to  the  girls’  tennis  team 

about  their  bodies,  such  as  “I  see  some  really  fit  athletic  bodies.”  He  would  often 

preface  these  comments  with  a  staternent  that  he  “does  not  mean  it  in  a  bad  way.”  In 

V.T.'s  view,  respondent  should  not  have  commented  about  their  bodies  if  he  felt  it 

necessary  to  qualify  his  comment  that  way. 

27, 

Respondent  sometimes  touched  V.T.  on  her  shoulder  during  coaching 

moments.  She  also  noticed  that  other  tearn  members  were  visibly  uncomfortable  with 

respondent  touching  them. 

28. 

VT.  was  also  present  when  respondent  lifted  his  shorts  to  show  the  girls 

how  to  store  a  tennis  ball  in  a  spandex  undergarment.  V.T.  felt  respondent  could  have 

explained  verbally  without  demonstrating  how  to  keep  a  tennis  ball  underneath  his 

spandex,  Mr.  Stinson  was  present  during  the  incident,  and  agreed  that  “it  was  a  little 

weird.” 

M.VV.'S  TESTIMONY  AND  WRITTEN  STATEMENT 

29. 

MW.  played  on  the  Franklin  High  School  girls’  tennis  team  while 

respondent  was  the  coach.  M.W.  noticed  that  respondent  treated  M.E.  differently  than 

he  treated  other  players.  For  exarnple,  respondent  said  the  team  looked  “rag-tag”  in 

front  of  the  team  when  M.E.  mentioned  her  need  to  wear  more  modest  clothing 

because  of  her  religious  beliefs.  Also,  respondent  told  the  team  they  needed  to  make 

tennis  2  priority  in  response  to  MLE.'s  request  to  miss  a  game  in  order  to  attend  a 

religious  holiday.  He  did  not  get  as  upset  with  other  players  who  were  less  consistent

in  their  attendance  than  M.E.,  and  who  also  wore  clothing  different  than  the  usual  tank 

top  and  a  skirt  or  shorts. 

30. 

MW.  was  also  present  when  respondent  told  the  tennis  team  on  multiple 

occasions  that  they  had  fit,  athletic,  or  good-looking  bodies.  The  girls  were  visibly 

uncomfortable  when  respondent  said  these  things. 

31. 

Respondent  made  her  feel  uncomfortable  by  placing  his  hand  on  her 

back  and  shoulder  without  asking  permission  to  do  so.  To  her  observation,  respondent 

would  put  his  hand  on  the  girls’  backs  or  shoulders  whenever  he  got  close  to  therm. 

She  noticed  that  he  pulled  the  girls  in  closer  when  he  would  shake  hands.  M.\W.’s 

perception  is  that  respondent  took  “every  opportunity”  to  touch  members  of  the  team. 

She  felt  this  was  a  violation  of  their  boundaries,  and  that  feels  like  respondent  did  not 

respect  them  at  all. 

32. 

MAW.  was  present  when  respondent  lifted  his  shorts  to  show  he  was 

wearing  spandex  underneath.  He  then  asked  the  girls  whether  it  was  “weird”  for  him  to 

do  that.  Mr.  Stinson  was  present  when  respondent  lifted  his  shorts  to  show  his 

spandex.  Mr.  Stinson  said  it  was  “weird.” 

CLS  TESTIMONY 

33. 

CL  attended  Franklin  High  School,  and  was  on  the  tennis  team  in  2077 

when  respondent  was  coach.  She  was  present  when  respondent  told  the  tearn  they 

“looked  good”  during  warm-ups  and  practices.  She  understood  this  to  be  more  about 

their  bodies  than  physical  conditioning.  These  comments  made  her  feel 

uncomfortable.  C.L.  was  also  present  when  respondent  commented  that  some  players, 

M.E.  and  M.T.,  dressed  differently  than  in  the  standard  uniform. 

10

34, 

Following  a  tennis  match  respondent  gave  her  a  “high-five”  but  then  held 

onto  her  hand  above  her  head  for  what  seemed  like  30  seconds  to  a  minute  while  he 

continued  to  talk  to  her  about  the  game,  before  finally  releasing  her  hand. 

Respondent's  conduct  made  her  feel  uncomfortable. 

M.'s  TESTIMONY  AND  VYRITTEN  STATEMENT 

35. 

H.C.  is  currently  a  student  at  U.C.  Davis,  going  into  her  sophomore  year. 

She  graduated  frorn  Laguna  Creek  High  School  in  2019,  where  she  played  on  the  girls’ 

tennis  team  and  served  for  a  short  time  as  a  manager  for  the  boys’  tennis  team  during 

her  sophomore  year  in  2017.  Respondent  was  head  coach  of  the  boys’  tearm  in  2017. 

36. 

Respondent  made  comments  to  H.C.  that  made  her  uncomfortable  while 

she  was  serving  as  a  team  manager.  On  one  occasion  when  she  was  picking  up  tennis 

balls  from  the  court,  respondent  told  her  to  pick  them  up  faster  because  she  looked 

“athletic.”  On  another  occasion  when  she  was  cleaning  some  dirt  from  around  a  net, 

respondent  told  her  to  use  a  tool  because  he  did  not  want  her  to  “ruin  [her]  pretty 

little  fingernails.” 

and  clothing. 

time  to  study. 

37. 

H.C.  also  observed  respondent  make  numerous  comments  to  another 

female  manager,  LV.  Respondent  frequently  complimented  LV.  about  her  make-up 

38. 

H.C.  felt  that  respondent’s  comments  to  her  and  L.V.  were  “over  the  line” 

of  professional  conduct.  H.C.  decided  to  stop  working  as  a  team  manager  in  part 

because  of  respondent's  conduct  toward  herself  and  L.V.,  and  in  part  to  allow  more 

14

L.W. S  TESTIMONY 

39. 

LV.  graduated  frorn  Laguna  Creek  High  School.  She  was  a  manager  for 

the  boys’  tennis  team  from  her  sophomore  year  in  2075  through  her  senior  year. 

Respondent  was  the  head  coach  during  that  time. 

40. 

Respondent  made  numerous  comments  that  made  LV.  fee! 

uncomfortable.  He  would  frequently  make  comments  to  her  about  what  she  was 

wearing.  On  one  occasion  respondent  made  a  comment  to  the  entire  boys’  team 

about  what  she  was  wearing  as  a  tactic  to  get  their  attention  during  roll  call. 

Specifically,  respondent  called  out  to  the  team  to  look  at  the  “really  cute  skirt”  she  was 

wearing.  The  team  became  very  quiet,  and  LV.  felt  very  uncomfortable.  Respondent 

then  said  to  them:  “Don't  be  weird,  I  have  a  daughter.” 

AY, 

On  another  occasion,  while  they  were  at  another  schooi  for  a  tennis 

match,  respondent  told  the  female  managers  he  wanted  to  take  thern  to  dinner.  He 

did  not  say  why  he  was  asking  them,  and  she  did  not  know  his  intentions. 

Respondent's  statement  made  LY.  feel  very  uncomfortable.  Respondent  again  tried  to 

rake  it  seem  okay  by  saying:  “Thave  a  daughter.”  This  did  not  make  it  any  less 

uncomfortable  for  LV. 

42, 

MV.  would  not  serve  as  a  team  manager  for  respondent  again.  During  the 

time  she  served  as  the  team  manager  under  respondent,  she  was  “going  through  a  lot 

of  things”  and  did  not  understand  how  inappropriate  his  conduct  was.  Now,  as  she 

looks  back,  his  conduct  was  really  inappropriate. 

12

M.A  .2'S  TESTIMONY  AND  INTERVIEW  STATEMENT 

43, 

M.H.2  graduated  fromm  Cosummnes  Oaks  High  School,  She  will  enter  her 

first  year  at  Cosumnes  River  College  this  fail. 

44. 

Respondent  was  M.H.2's  driver  education  teacher  at  Cosummnes  Oaks 

High  School.  Respondent  would  frequently  “stare”  at  her  “up  and  down"  and  call  ner 

“cute”  and  “beautiful.”  This  happened  every  week.  When  she  saw  respondent  coming, 

ali  she  could  think  about  was  him  calling  her  “cute”  and  “beautiful.”  Respondent’s 

comments  would  go  “too  far”  and  made  M.H.2  uncomfortable. 

45. 

Because  of  respondent's  behavior,  M.H.2  would  not  ask  respondent  when 

she  had  a  question,  but  rather  she  would  figure  it  out  on  her  own.  She  did  not  want  to 

be  near  respondent  during  class,  and  avoided  him  before  and  after  class  so  as  not  to 

be  alone  with  him. 

JACQUELYN  VWIOCLDRIDGE S  TESTIMONY 

46, 

Jacquelyn  Wooldridge  ts  a  vice  principal  at  Cosumnes  Oaks  High  School. 

Her  responsibilities  include  ensuring  that  teachers  behave  appropriately  with  students. 

To  follow-up  on  concerns  regarding  respondent's  conduct,  Ms.  Wooldridge  and 

another  vice  principal,  Jesse  Champion,  interviewed  a  random  selection  of  students 

from  Cosumnes  Oaks  High  School.  Ms.  Wooldridge  wrote  the  student's  responses  to  a 

standard  set  of  interview  questions.  Several  of  the  responses  were  concerning  to  Ms. 

Wooldridge,  as  set  forth  below. 

DW.  was  a  student  in  respondent’s  driver  education  class  and  advocacy  class 

during  the  2017-18  school  year.  On  one  occasion,  D.W.  had  her  hair  in  a  bun  and  her 

fingernails  polished  in  pink.  Respondent  looked  at  her  and  said:  “You  have  your  bun 

13

done  and  your  nails  done,  you  look  good.”  Respondent  also  frequently  told  the 

students  “you're  a  threesome”  as  students  broke  into  groups,  and  “I'm  going  to  get 

real  anal  with  you  guys.”  DW.  felt  respondent  was  making  these  comments 

intentionally  because  “he  always  did  it.” 

M.H.  was  a  student  in  respondent's  driver  education  class  during  the  2017-18 

school  year.  M.H.  was  on  the  cheer  team.  Respondent  told  her  that  their  “uniforms 

look  good,”  that  their  “dancing  was  nice,”  and  that  they  “were  on  point  with  [their] 

skills.” 

MU.  was  a  student  in  respondent's  driver  education  class  during  the  2017-18 

school  year.  M.H.  remembered  that  respondent  would  sometimes  touch  students’  hat, 

most  often  “African  American  girts.” 

47. 

Ms.  Wooldridge  interviewed  other  students  in  addition  to  those 

referenced  above.  Most  of  the  stucents  said  positive  things  about  respondent. 

CHANTELLE  ALBIANI'S  TESTIMONY 

48, 

Chantelle  Albiani  has  been  the  principal  of  Franklin  High  School  for 

almost  seven  years.  She  knows  respondent  as  a  tennis  coach  at  Franklin  High  School. 

In  addition,  she  knew  respondent  when  they  both  taught  at  Florin  High  School  many 

years  ago. 

49, 

In  October  2018,  the  school  athletic  director  brought  M.E.  and  M.W.  to 

Ms.  Albiani’s  office  directly  after  they  had  come  to  his  office  and  told  him  they  were 

uncomfortable  with  respondent's  comments  and  conduct.  M.E.  and  M.W.  told  Ms. 

Albian  that  two  other  students,  V.T.  and  E.C.,  were  also  uncomfortable  with 

respondent's  comments  and  conduct.  Ms.  Albiani  then  met  with  all  four  girls  together 

14

in  her  office.  At  Ms.  Albiani’s  request,  the  four  students  sat  at  ner  conference  table  and 

wrote  their  statements.  She  then  interviewed  each  of  them,  and  took  notes  of  what 

they  told  her. 

50. 

Based  on  her  interviews  of  the  students  and  their  written  statements,  Ms. 

Albiani  believes  respondent  violated  numerous  standards  in  the  Secondary  Coaches 

Handbook  (Handbook)  that  is  given  to  the  coaches  every  year.  All  coaches  in  the 

District  are  expected  to  be  familiar  with  and  adhere  to  the  standards  included  in  the 

Handbook.  The  Statement  of  Philosophy  in  the  Handbook  says,  in  part,  that  “[tihe 

primary  aim  of  the  programs  Is  the  positive  development  of  the  participant.”  The 

Handbook  also  provides  a  section  titled  Athietic  Guidelines  —  Sportsmanship,  which 

includes  “six  core  principles:  trustworthiness,  respect,  responsibility,  fairness,  caring, 

and  good  citizenship.” 

51. 

Ms.  Alblani  believes  respondent's  comments  and  conduct  with  the  girls’ 

tennis  team  failed  to  meet  these  and  other  provisions  of  the  Handbook.  Specifically, 

the  girls  on  the  team  felt  uncomfortable  with  and  disrespected  by  respondent's 

frequent  comments  about  their  bodies  and  attire,  frequent  touching,  showing  his 

spandex  undergarment,  and  disrespectful  treatment  of  M.E.  regarding  her  request  to 

miss  a  tennis  match  to  attend  a  religious  holiday  and  her  choice  to  wear  more  modest 

clothing  consistent  with  her  religious  beliefs. 

52. 

Ms.  Albiani  would  not  trust  respondent  to  behave  appropriately  around 

students.  She  could  not  assign  him  to  work  in  a  class  with  any  certainty  that  he  would 

not  make  inappropriate  comments,  inappropriately  touch  students,  or  disrespect  their 

religious  practices.  No  students  should  ever  be  put  in  a  position  where  they  have  to 

worry  whether  a  teacher  will  make  inappropriate  comments,  touch  them  without 

permission,  or  disrespect  their  religious  practices. 

15

KERI  VAN  DE  STAR'S  TESTIMONY 

53. 

Keri  Van  de  Star  is  employed  as  the  director  of  human  resources  of  the 

District.  She  has  been  employed  in  that  capacity  since  August  2008.  She  was  previously 

employed  as  a  school  principal  at  various  schools  for  a  total  of  11  years,  as  a  vice 

principal  for  several  years,  and  as  a  teacher. 

54. 

Ms.  Van  de  Star  learned  of  the  concerns  regarding  respondent  from  a 

District  legal  compliance  specialist  who  had  obtained  information  from  Ms.  Albian. 

Ms.  Van  de  Star  read  the  written  statements  that  M_E.,  E.C,  MW,  and  V.T.  prepared, 

and  Ms.  Albiani’s  interview  notes  from  her  meetings  with  them.  Ms.  Van  de  Star  also 

reviewed  the  written  statements  generated  through  the  investigations  at  Laguna  Creek 

and  Casumnes  Oaks  High  Schools.  Ms.  Van  de  Star  was  concerned  by  the  number  and 

nature  of  respondent's  comments  to  students,  which  were  inappropriate  and 

disrespectful  to  the  students. 

55. 

Ms.  Van  de  Star  interviewed  respondent  in  October  2018.  Respondent's 

statements  during  the  interview  are  accurately  set  forth  in  paragraphs  16  through  18 

of  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Some  of  respondent's  statements  during  the  interview 

were  concerning  to  Ms.  Van  de  Star,  such  as  his  statement  that  he  did  not  think  lifting 

his  shorts  to  show  his  spandex  undergarment  would  make  the  girls  feel 

uncomfortable,  and  continued  to  think  that  it  should  not  make  thern  feel 

uncomfortable. 

56. 

Based  on  respondent's  comments  and  conduct,  Ms.  Van  de  Star  believes 

ne  violated  the  District’s  Human  Dignity  Policy,  which  includes  the  statement  that  part 

of  the  District's  mission  is  to  "provide  a  positive  harmonious  environment  in  which 

16

student  unity  and  respect  for  the  diverse  makeup  of  the  school  community  ts 

promoted.”  His  conduct  and  comments  detracted  from  these  objectives. 

57. 

Based  on  the  seriousness  of  respondent's  conduct,  and  the  District’s 

responsibility  to  ensure  the  safety  of  students,  termination  is  the  appropriate  discipline 

in  this  matter.  In  reaching  this  conclusion,  Ms.  Van  de  Star  took  into  consideration  the 

fact  that  respondent  does  not  have  prior  discipline  in  the  District. 

DAVID  REILLY 'S  TESTIMONY 

58. 

David  Reilly  is  employed  as  the  District  associate  superintendent  for 

human  resources.  He  has  held  this  position  for  approximately  five  years.  His 

responsibilities  incluce  employee  discipline,  recruitment,  and  labor  negotiations.  He 

was  previously  employed  as  an  assistant  superintendent  at  Sequoia  Unified  School 

District,  and  also  worked  in  different  districts  as  a  principal,  vice  principal,  and  high 

school  English  teacher. 

59. 

Mr.  Reilly's  understanding  of  respondent's  conduct  is  based  on  his  review 

of  written  information  including  statements  prepared  by  students,  summaries  of 

student  interviews,  Ms.  Albiani’s  interview  notes,  Mr.  Bowen’s  report  regarding  his 

student  interviews,  and  letters  of  support  submitted  in  favor  of  respondent. 

60. 

Based  on  respondent's  comments  and  conduct,  Mr.  Reilly  believes  that 

respondent  failed  to  meet  the  District's  job  description  for  a  teacher.  Specifically, 

respondent  failed  to:  model  “standards  of  pupil  behavior,”  maintain  a  “positive  and 

professional  image,”  “[dlisolay  the  use  of  good  judgment,”  or  to  “[m]aintain 

professional  relationships  with  pupils.” 

17

61. 

Based  on  respondent’s  comments  and  conduct,  Mr.  Reilly  believes 

respondent  violated  the  District's  Board  Policy  (B.P.}  against  sexual  harassment  (B.P. 

5145.7),  which  includes  but  is  not  limited  to  “verbal,  visual  or  physical  conduct  of  a 

sexual  nature”  when  the  conduct  has  the  effect  of  “creating  an  intimidating,  hostile  or 

offensive  educational  or  work  environment.”  Types  of  conduct  which  may  constitute 

sexual  harassment  include  “unwelcome  leering  [and]  sexual  flirtations,”  “sexual  jokes,” 

aoa 

and  “teasing  or  sexual  remarks  about  students.” 

62. 

Mr.  Reilly  believes  respondent  violated  the  District's  code  of  ethics  (BP 

4119.21),  which  states  that  a  teacher  shall  not  “intentionally  expose  the  student  to 

embarrassment  or  disparagement”  or  “exclude  any  student  from  participation”  on  the 

basis  of  “race...  gender...  or  religious  beliefs.”  In  addition,  the  standards  require  that 

the  teacher  “shall  make  reasonabie  effort  to  protect  the  student  from  conditions 

harmful  to  learning  or  to  health  and  safety.” 

63. 

Mr.  Reilly  believes  respondent  violated  the  District's  nondiscrimination 

policy  (BP  0410),  and  nondiscrimination/harassment/intimidation/bullying  policy  (BP 

5145.3},  both  of  which  prohibit  unlawful  discrimination  against  an  individual  or  group 

based  on  categories  including  race,  religion,  and  gender. 

64, 

Based  on  Mr.  Reilly's  review  of  the  evidence  including  respondent's 

comments  and  conduct,  and  the  letters  of  support  on  respondent's  behalf,  Mr.  Reilly 

belleves  that  termination  of  respondent’s  employment  is  appropriate  and  necessary  to 

ensure  the  safety  of  students. 

18

Respondent's  Evidence 

RESPONDENT S  TESTIMONY 

65. 

Respondent  earned  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  in  physical  education  in  1985,  and 

a  teaching  credential  in  1986,  from  California  State  University  (CSU)  Chico.  He  earned  a 

driver  education  and  driver  training  credential  in  1987,  and  a  Master  of  Science  in 

physical  education  in  1999,  from  CSU  Sacramento. 

66. 

Respondent  has  worked  for  the  District  as  a  contracted  teacher  for 

approximately  34  years.  He  started  as  a  substitute  teacher  in  1987,  and  was  hired  ina 

permanent  position  as  a  physical  education  and  driver  education  teacher  at  Elk  Grove 

High  School  in  1988.  He  has  since  taught  driver  education,  physical  education,  and 

health  education  at  District  high  schools,  most  recently  at  Cosumnes  Oaks  High 

School.  Respondent  also  worked  as  a  coach  for  boys’  and  girls’  teams  in  various  sports. 

Most  recently,  he  worked  as  the  head  coach  of  the  girls’  tennis  team  at  Franklin  High 

School  2017  through  2018)  and  the  boys’  tennis  team  at  Laguna  Creek  High  Schoo! 

(2014  through  2018}.  Respondent  also  coached  boys’  and  girls’  football,  basketball, 

and  softball  at  various  times.  Taken  as  a  whole,  respondent  coached  57  seasons  in  the 

District,  including  13  seasons  as  a  varsity  coach  in  boys’  and  girls’  sports. 

67. 

Respondent  enjoys  teaching.  He  knew  from  his  senior  year  in  high  schoo! 

he  wanted  to  be  a  teacher.  His  greatest  role  models  in  life  were  his  teachers  and 

coaches.  Respondent  received  positive  evaluations  (meets  or  exceeds  standards)  in 

2014  and  2018  for  his  teaching  of  health  education. 

68. 

In  2002,  respondent  completed  a  coaching  education  program  which  was 

required  to  work  as  a  coach  in  the  District.  The  coaching  manual  for  the  course  lists  a 

set  of  appropriate  nonverbal  behaviors,  including  touching  such  as  “pats  on  the  back, 

19

taking  someone’s  hand,  putting  an  arm  around  the  player  shoulder,  and  so  forth." 

Respondent  utilizes  these  types  of  nonverbal  positive  reinforcement  with  both  male 

and  female  athletes,  patting  ther  on  the  shoulder  or  back.  He  may  also  touch  an 

athlete  when  demonstrating  proper  athietic  technique. 

69. 

Respondent  initially  became  concerned  about  the  Franklin  High  School 

tennis  team  uniforms  in  2017,  after  one  of  the  fans  at  a  tennis  match  asked  him  why 

his  team  was  not  dressed  uniformly.  Respondent  later  spoke  with  the  team  and  told 

them  “we  don’t  want  to  look  rag-tag.”  During  the  2017  season,  respondent  asked 

assistant  coach  Eva  Wilson-Lee  to  coordinate  the  selection  and  acquisition  of  team 

uniforms.  In  2078,  the  team  co-captain  A.R.  took  charge  of  the  uniforms.  Respondent's 

only  concern  was  that  the  uniforms  have  the  team  logo  and  be  color  coordinated. 

Some  of  the  girls  ordered  tank  tops  and  skirts,  and  some  wore  T-shirts  and  leggings. 

70. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  had  no  problem  with  the  fact  that  MLE. 

chose  to  wear  a  T-shirt  and  leggings  as  her  uniform,  and  that  he  never  criticized  her 

about  that.  She  did  her  best  to  dress  consistently  with  her  religious  beliefs,  which  was 

“outstanding.”  Respondent  also  testified  that  he  never  discouraged  her  from  attending 

a  religious  event  or  pressured  her  to  attend  a  tennis  match  instead  of  a  religious 

holiday.  Respondent  denied  that  he  treated  MLE.  differently  than  other  players, 

including  A.R.  Respondent  testified  that  it  was  either  a  misunderstanding  or  MLE.  "is 

not  being  entirely  truthful”  in  her  statements  against  him. 

71. 

In  2018,  respondent  sent  the  team  written  rules  and  policies  regarding 

attendance  at  practices  and  tennis  matches.  Concerning  practices,  the  rules  were  that 

no  other  extracurricular  activity  would  take  priority  over  an  in-season  practice.  If  there 

was  a  school-related  meeting  that  overlapped  with  practice,  a  player  would  be 

20

required  to  attend  at  least  nalf  of  the  tear  practice.  The  only  valid  excuse  to  miss  a 

tennis  match  was  a  physical  injury  verified  by  a  physician's  note. 

72. 

Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  enforce  the  attendance  policies  as 

written,  and  that  physical  injury  was  not  the  only  reason  a  tearn  member  could  miss  a 

tennis  match.  Respondent  aiso  considered  iliness,  academics,  and  religious  holidays  to 

be  valid  reasons  to  miss  a  match.  He  never  told  the  girls  they  should  miss  an  academic 

obligation  for  a  tennis  match,  though  he  would  sometimes  ask  whether  they  could  do 

both  by  showing  up  a  little  late  to  the  match  or  the  academic  event.  Respondent  also 

testified  that  he  never  showed  favoritism  regarding  attendance  requirements,  and 

never  disciplined  a  player  for  missing  a  practice. 

73. 

Respondent  does  not  recall  touching  E.C.  on  her  calf,  but  may  have  done 

so  if  he  was  sitting  on  the  18-inch  deck  next  to  the  court  when  she  reported  her  scores 

to  him.  Respondent  recails  telling  E.C.  that  her  younger  sister  is  “cute.”  His  intent  was 

to  show  a  positive  attitude.  Respondent  denied  that  he  referred  to  E.C.’s  younger  sister 

as  “my  little  wildcat." 

74, 

Respondent  sometimes  told  the  tearn  that  he  wants  to  see  them  “all 

sweating”  to  help  motivate  them  before  practice.  During  practice,  he  would  sometimes 

grab  someone's  wrist  who  was  nearby  and  ask  “are  you  sweating  yet?” 

75. 

Respondent  sometimes  told  the  team  that  they  have  “fit,  athletic  bodies.” 

Respondent  was  “trying  to  be  nice”  in  saying  this.  He  did  not  use  the  phrase  “qood- 

looking  bodies.”  He  would  preface  his  cornments  about  their  "fit,  athletic  bodies”  with 

a  statement  that  he  means  this  "In  the  most  professional  way  possible”  because  he 

knew  some  girls  would  potentially  take  it  the  wrong  way.  Respondent  now  regrets 

rnaking  such  comments  as  he  is  aware  they  could  make  some  girls  uncomfortable. 

a1

76. 

Respondent  pulled  up  his  gym  sharts  approximately  four  inches  above 

his  knee  to  demonstrate  how  the  girls  could  keep  tennis  balls  underneath  their 

compression  shorts.  He  did  this  because  some  of  the  younger  players  would  set  tennis 

balls  on  the  ground  near  their  feet  while  practicing  their  serves,  which  presented  a 

tripping  hazard.  Respondent  now  understands  how  his  conduct  could  make  some  girls 

uncomfortable,  because  he  is  an  adult  exposing  his  body  to  some  degree.  He  now 

realizes  that  he  should  have  verbally  described  how  to  keep  a  tennis  ball  in  one’s 

spandex,  rather  than  demonstrating  how  to  do  so. 

77. 

Respondent  denied  putting  his  hand  on  the  giris’  backs  or  shoulders 

whenever  he  was  clase  to  them,  or  pulling  them  closer  in  after  shaking  hands. 

Respondent  acknowledged  touching  the  girls  when  they  were  reporting  scores  to  him 

following  a  tennis  match.  Respondent  also  acknowledged  that  he  asked  two  different 

girls,  A.B.  and  T.N.,  for  hugs  after  their  tennis  matches  in  2018.  He  gave  both  side  hugs. 

78 

Respondent  does  not  specifically  recail  telling  H.C.  to  run  and  pick  up 

tennis  balls  because  it  made  her  “look  athletic”  but  may  have  done  so  with  the  idea 

that  he  was  “trying  to  be  nice.”  He  recalls  telling  H.C.  something  about  her  “little 

fingers”  while  she  was  cleaning  out  the  anchor  holes  for  the  tennis  nets.  He  now  sees 

now  his  comment  could  be  construed  as  sexist. 

79. 

Respondent  does  not  recall  commenting  about  L.V.'s  makeup  or  outhts, 

but  he  may  have  complemented  her  in  an  effort  “to  be  nice.”  Respondent 

acknowledged  tt  was  a  bad  choice  on  his  part  if  he  did  so.  Respondent  does  not  recail 

calling  attention  to  L.V's  skirt  with  the  boys’  tennis  team,  though  he  could  have  done 

so.  Respondent  testified  that  if  he  did,  it  was  a  poor  attempt  on  his  part  “to  be  nice.” 

2a

80. 

Respondent  offered  take  a  group  of  the  tennis  team  managers  to  lunch 

to  thank  them  for  their  service.  He  never  took  them  to  lunch,  and  testified  that  he 

would  never  take  only  one  manager  to  lunch. 

81. 

Respondent  acknowledged  that  he  said  “that  looks  wrong”  when  a  male 

was  dispensing  water  from  a  cooler  because  it  looked  like  he  was  urinating.  He  “owns” 

that  it  was  wrong  for  him  to  say  this. 

82. 

Respondent  denied  telling  the  girls  they  could  try  on  a  new  uniform  on 

the  tennis  court,  or  bringing  a  blanket  out  onto  the  court  for  them  cover-up  while  they 

were  changing  into  the  new  uniform.  The  uniform  vendor  brought  one  blouse  and  one 

skirt  for  the  girls  to  look  at.  Respondent  walked  away  and  let  the  girls  look  at  the 

uniform. 

83. 

Respondent  acknowledged  that  he  sent  an  email  to  the  girls’  tennis  team 

offering  to  share  some  dessert  from  his  wedding.  He  was  “trying  to  be  nice”  and 

wanted  to  share  his  excitement  about  the  beginning  of  the  tennis  season.  He  now  sees 

how  the  email  referencing  portions  of  the  dessert  and  the  girls’  physical  fitness  would 

make  them  feel  uncomfortable. 

84. 

Respondent  sometimes  told  students  they  would  be  a  “threesome”  when 

they  were  breaking  into  groups.  He  also  sometimes  told  students  he  was  “anal”  as  a 

way  of  letting  them  know  he  is  rigid  and  meticulous.  He  did  not  intend  any  sexual 

innuendo  by  these  comments,  and  he  does  not  believe  there  is  anything  wrong  for 

him  to  use  such  words  in  these  contexts. 

85. 

Respondent  testified  that  M.H.2’s  account  of  events  is  “way  overdone.” 

He  did  not  look  at  her  “up  and  down"  or  take  his  comments  “too  far”  as  she  said.  He 

might  have  called  her  “cute”  as  a  way  “to  be  nice.”  He  understands  now  that  it  can 

2

rnake  a  student  uncomfortable  to  call  her  “cute”  and  that  it  is  not  okay  to  do  so. 

Respondent  acknowledged  that  he  was  “too  loose”  in  calling  students  “cute.” 

86. 

Respondent  sometimes  touched  female  students’  hair  —  maybe  three  or 

four  times  —  because  he  thought  it  looked  "good  or  cute.”  He  testified  that  he  would 

never  touch  a  student’s  hair  without  their  permission,  and  that  this  was  his  “old  school 

way”  of  trying  to  “be  nice”  by  letting  them  know  their  hair  looks  good. 

87. 

Respondent  asserted  he  did  not  realize  his  conduct  and  comments  were 

inappropriate  at  the  time.  He  has  since  realized  his  conduct  was  unacceptable  because 

his  wife,  who  is  a  human  resources  manager,  has  helped  open  his  eyes  to  these 

matters.  Respondent  and  his  wife  have  engaged  in  role-play,  which  has  helped  him 

better  understand  how  others  may  perceive  his  conduct  and  comments. 

88. 

Respondent  testified  that  watching  the  students  testify  in  this  matter  was 

“traumatic”  and  helped  him  to  understand  the  impact  of  his  conduct.  He  wishes  a  team 

captain  or  an  adult  had  let  him  know  he  was  making  them  uncomfortable. 

89. 

Respondent  believes  that  he  was  “naive”  during  this  tire  of  his  career. 

He  “pushed  the  envelope  on  being  nice”  and  realizes  he  has  “room  for  improvement.” 

Respondent  testified  that  if  he  returns  to  teaching,  he  would  not  engage  in  similar 

conduct  again  and  would  do  a  much  better  job  adhering  to  the  District's  written 

standards.  In  respondent's  view,  “everybody  would  be  fine"  if  he  returns  to  teaching. 

90. 

That  being  said,  respondent  testified  that  some  of  the  girls  on  the 

Franklin  High  Schoo!  tennis  team  were  "Intentionally  untruthful”  and  that  there  was 

some  “collaboration”  on  their  part  to  make  up  false  allegations.  He  testified  that  some 

of  the  allegations  are  not  true.  For  example,  he  contended  that  he  was  never  biased 

with  respect  to  religious  holidays  or  any  of  the  girls’  requests  to  wear  more  modest 

24

clothing;  he  never  suggested  that  the  girls  try  on  a  new  uniform  by  changing  behind  a 

blanket  on  the  tennis  court;  he  never  held  a  girl’s  hand  for  an  extended  time  in  a  high- 

five;  and  never  tried  to  pull  girls  closer  while  shaking  their  hand.  He  further  testified 

that  sorne  of  the  girls  may  have  been  motivated  to  make  false  allegations  about  him 

when  “they  ended  up  not  liking”  him  because  they  felt  he  was  inconsistent  with  his 

own  attendance  rules  and  for  this  reason  “wanted  to  get  rid  of”  him. 

PIALLIE  WWILSON'S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

91. 

Hallie  Wilson  is  currently  a  student  at  the  University  of  San  Francisco.  She 

graduated  from  Franklin  High  School,  where  she  played  varsity  tennis.  Respondent  was 

her  coach,  and  her  mother,  Eva  Wilson-Lee,  was  the  assistant  coach  in  her  senior  year. 

She  prepared  a  letter  of  support  for  respondent  after  her  mother  told  her  about  his 

situation  with  the  District.  In  her  letter,  she  wrote  that  respondent  "isn’t  the  man  that 

some  of  the  girls  on  the  tearm  claim  he  is;  he  really  is  just  a  passionate  coach  who  gave 

high-fives  and  pats  on  the  back  and  that’s  really  all  there  is  to  it.” 

92. 

Ms.  Wilson  testified  that  some  of  the  girls  did  not  like  respondent 

because  they  wanted  to  attend  to  their  schoolwork  rather  than  come  to  practice,  and 

others  did  not  like  him  because  of  his  “overly  enthusiastic”  demeanor.  She  does  not 

recall  that  respondent  expressed  any  concern  about  the  tennis  uniforms,  other  than  he 

wanted  the  girls  to  wear  school  colors.  She  was  never  uncomfortable  around 

respondent  and  never  heard  him  say  anything  inappropriate.  She  did,  however, 

acknowledge  that  it  would  be  inappropriate  if  he  said  a  girl  is  “cute.” 

EVA  VILSON-LEE’S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

93. 

Eva  Wilson-Lee  is  employed  in  the  field  of  real  estate  and  mortgage 

loans.  She  knows  respondent  through  their  mutual  interest  in  tennis.  They  met  at 

22

Laguna  Creek  Racquet  Club,  where  they  sometimes  played  as  doubles  partners.  When 

he  became  head  coach  of  the  girls’  tennis  team  at  Franklin  High  School,  she  offered  to 

serve  as  his  assistant  coach,  which  he  accepted.  She  does  not  see  respondent  outside 

of  tennis. 

94. 

Ms.  Wilson-Lee’s  impression  of  respondent  as  a  coach  is  that  he  is  very 

organized  and  very  enthusiastic.  During  her  year  as  assistant  coach,  she  was  present  at 

most  practices  and  matches.  She  was  also  present  when  respondent  would  talk  with 

the  tearm  before  and  after  practices  and  matches.  She  does  not  recall  respondent 

saying  anything  inappropriate.  She  saw  him  pat  girls  on  the  back,  give  high-fives,  and 

fist  bumps.  She  saw  respondent  give  a  side  hug  to  a  player  after  a  very  difficult  match, 

with  the  player's  permission.  She  did  not  feel  these  actions  were  inappropriate.  She 

also  heard  respondent  tell  the  girls  “you  have  fit  athletic  bodies.”  She  did  not  feel  this 

was  inappropriate. 

95. 

Ms.  Wilson-Lee  was  in  charge  of  coordinating  the  selection  of  team 

uniforms.  Respondent  was  not  involved  in  this  by  his  own  choice.  Respondent  did  not 

care  whether  players  wore  tank  tops  or  T-shirts,  or  snarts  or  miniskirts.  He  did  not 

complain  in  front  of  Ms.  Wilson-Lee  about  the  fact  that  M.E.  wore  a  T-shirt  and 

leggings.  There  were  also  other  girls  who  did  not  wear  the  team  uniform. 

96. 

Ms.  Wilson-Lee  did  not  hear  respondent  make  any  inappropriate 

statements  to  the  girls.  Sne  acknowledged  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  respondent 

to  call  attention  to  a  girl's  skirt  in  front  of  a  group  of  boys.  She  also  acknowledged  it 

would  not  be  appropriate  if  respondent  repeatedly  called  a  girl  “beautiful.”  It  would 

also  concern  her  if  the  girls  felt  uncomfortable  around  him. 

20

VIARK  STINSON'S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

97. 

Mark  Stinson  retired  three  years  ago  as  the  chief  of  police  in  the  City  of 

Sonora.  During  the  2017-18  school  year,  he  volunteered  as  a  tearn  parent  with  the 

Franklin  High  School  giris’  tennis  tearm.  He  attended  approximately  80  to  90  percent  of 

the  matches.  During  the  2018-19  school  year,  he  served  as  assistant  coach.  In  that 

capacity  he  attended  all  matches  and  practices,  except  for  one  practice.  He  was 

present  a  majority  of  the  time  when  respondent  would  speak  with  the  girls  before  and 

after  practices,  and  before  matches. 

98. 

Respondent  expressed  frustration  during  the  2017-18  season  that  the 

uniform  was  “hodgepodge”  with  team  members  wearing  whatever  they  wanted. 

During  the  2018-2019  season,  respondent  told  everyone  that  he  wanted  the  team  to 

look  a  little  more  “uniform”  with  the  team  logo  and  colors.  He  also  told  them  they 

could  wear  a  skirt,  shorts,  or  leggings. 

99. 

Mr.  Stinson  heard  respondent  tell  the  girls  on  three  or  four  occasions 

that  they  have  “fit  athletic  looking  bodies.”  He  did  not  think  this  was  an  inappropriate 

complement.  Mr.  Stinson  saw  respondent  pull  up  his  shorts  in  front  of  the  team  to 

show  how  they  could  put  a  tennis  ball  under  their  spandex.  He  did  not  perceive  any 

sexual  innuendo,  but  thinks  it  might  have  been  better  for  him  to  explain  verbally  rather 

than  providing  a  physical  demonstration. 

100. 

Mr.  Stinson  did  not  see  respondent  treat  M.E.  differently  than  any  of  the 

other  girls.  He  never  heard  respondent  tell  M.E.  he  she  should  attend  a  tennis  match 

instead  of  a  religious  event,  and  does  not  believe  he  would  do  so. 

107. 

Some  of  the  girls,  including  A.R.,  E.B,  and  E.C.,  complained  about 

respondent's  attendance  policies.  None  of  the  players  ever  complained  to  Mr.  Stinson, 

at

though  he  overheard  the  girls  complaining  amongst  each  other  that  respondent  was 

too  aggressive,  and  that  they  felt  forced  to  practice  when  it  was  too  hot  or  that  they 

had  to  miss  other  school  events.  Mr.  Stinson  did  not  hear  or  receive  complaints  that 

respondent  said  or  did  things  that  made  them  uncomfortable. 

102. 

Mr.  Stinson  wrote  in  his  letter  of  support  that  it 

is  possible  some  of  the 

allegations  “might  be  in  retaliation  for  nis  stricter  attendance  guidelines”  and  that 

some  of  the  allegations  “may  have  been  embellished  to  make  them  sound  more 

egregious.”  At  the  time  Mr.  Stinson  wrote  his  letter,  he  had  not  read  the  charges 

against  respondent  and  did  not  know  what  the  allegations  were. 

SRIAN  BROWNE'S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

103. 

Brian  Browne  is  employed  as  a  special  education  teacher  at  Laguna  Creek 

High  School.  Mr.  Browne  met  respondent  approximately  five  years  ago  when 

respondent  was  head  coach  of  the  boys’  tennis  team  at  Laguna  Creek  High  School.  Mr. 

Browne  served  as  assistant  coach  of  the  boys’  team  with  respondent.  Mr.  Browne 

wrote  his  letter  of  support  on  behalf  of  respondent  while  he  was  still  serving  as  his 

assistant  coach.  Mr.  Browne  is  now  the  head  coach  for  the  boys’  and  girls’  tennis  teams 

at  Laguna  Creek  High  School. 

104. 

Mr.  Browne's  observations  of  respondent  as  a  tennis  coach  are  all 

positive.  He  did  not  see  respondent  say  anything  inappropriate  to  the  members  of  the 

boys’  tearm  or  the  team  managers,  who  were  typically  members  of  the  girls’  tennis 

team. 

105. 

One  of  the  team  managers,  H.C.,  told  Mr.  Browne  that  respondent  had 

said  inappropriate  things  to  her,  which  Mr.  Browne  reported  to  the  school 

administration.  Mr.  Browne  wrote  his  letter  of  support  for  respondent  before  H.C.  had 

28

told  him  of  ner  concerns.  Mr.  Browne  has  “only  good  things  to  say”  about  H.C.  and  ne 

made  her  team  captain  of  the  girls’  tennis  tearm. 

106. 

Mr.  Browne  believes  it  would  be  inappropriate  for  a  coach  to  ask  female 

team  managers  out  to  lunch,  and  would  not  do  so.  He  also  believes  it  would  be 

inappropriate  for  a  coach  to  tell  girls  that  they  have  “fit  athletic  bodies,”  that  they  are 

“beautiful,”  or  that  they  have  “pretty  little  fingernails.” 

LYNDA  BETTENCOURT’S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

107. 

Lynda  Bettencourt  is  employed  as  a  teacher  at  James  Rutter  Middle 

School,  in  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District.  She  was  previously  employed  at  Cosumnes 

Oaks  High  School,  where  she  taught  health,  focus  on  college  and  career,  and  AVID  for 

students  preparing  for  college.  Ms.  Bettencourt  coached  girls’  softball  at  Cosumnes 

Oaks  and  Elk  Grove  High  Schoois.  She  also  coached  girls’  powder-puff  football  with 

respondent  for  five  years  at  Cosumnes  Oaks  High  School. 

108. 

Ms.  Bettencourt  worked  with  respondent  as  a  teacher  for  11  years.  Sne 

was  chair  of  the  Health  Department  at  Cosumnes  Oaks,  where  both  she  and 

respondent  taught  classes  in  health.  Ms.  Bettencourt  and  respondent  worked 

collaboratively  developing  lessons  and  talking  about  best  practices.  Sne  has  been  in 

his  classroom  approximately  50  times  while  class  was  in  session.  She  observed  that 

respondent  was  very  engaged  with  his  students  in  a  positive  way.  Ms.  Bettencourt 

never  heard  students  complain  about  respondent. 

109. 

Ms.  Bettencourt  coached  powder-puff  football  with  respondent  for  five 

consecutive  years.  The  powder-puff  season  includes  approximately  four  weeks  of 

practice  before  the  game,  and  there  were  approximately  60  to  70  girls  on  the  team. 

Ms.  Bettencourt  observed  respondent  interacting  with  the  girls.  He  was  very  clear  and 

29

Structured  in  his  directions,  and  gave  a  lot  of  praise  for  good  performance.  The  girls 

appreciated  the  structure  and  high  expectations.  Ms.  Bettencourt  never  saw 

respondent  touch  students  inappropriately  or  heard  him  make  any  inappropriate 

comments. 

110. 

Ms.  Bettencourt  is  familiar  with  some  of  the  allegations  in  this  matter. 

She  would  advise  him  not  to  tell  girls  that  they  have  “fit  athletic  bodies.”  He  should 

find  other  ways  to  encourage  physical  fitness.  She  would  also  advise  against 

commenting  that  a  girl  ts  “cute.”  Comments  to  students  should  be  based  on 

achievements  rather  than  physical  appearance.  It  would  not  be  appropriate  for  a 

teacher  to  repeatedly  call  a  female  student  “beautiful.”  She  would  also  advise  against 

talking  to  the  gris’  tennis  team  about  food  portion  size.  Finally,  she  would  not  use  the 

word  “anal”  outside  the  context  of  a  sex  education  class. 

MICHAEL  BRADLEY'S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

1771. 

Michael  Bradley  retired  from  the  California  Highway  Patrol  (CHP)  in  2019. 

He  now  works  at  special  events  with  the  Santa  Ciara  Police  Department. 

112. 

Mr.  Bradley  has  known  respondent  since  2002,  when  they  were  both 

coaching  girls’  basketball  at  Sheldon  High  School.  Respondent  served  as  an  assistant 

coach  for  the  girls’  varsity  basketball  team,  and  Mr.  Bradley  served  as  head  coach  for 

the girls’  junior  varsity  basketball  team.  They  had  direct  contact  as  girls’  basketball 

coaches  through  2005. 

113. 

Mr.  Bradley's  impressions  of  respondent  as  a  coach  are  that  he  was  very 

professional  and  very  structured  such  that  the  girls  knew  what  to  expect.  He  was 

always  very  encouraging  and  helped  the  girls  learn  from  their  mistakes.  He  saw 

30

respondent  touch  the  girls  with  "hugs  of  celebration”  and  "taps  on  the  shoulder.”  He 

never  saw  anything  about  respondent's  coaching  that  would  “raise  his  eyebrows.” 

114. 

Mr.  Bradley  also  visited  respondent's  driver  education  classes  at 

Cosumnes  Oaks  High  School  to  give  presentations  as  a  CHP  officer  during  2009 

through  2019.  Mr.  Bradley  observed  that  respondent  ran  a  very  structured  class,  held 

students  accountable,  and  did  not  allow  excessive  talking.  Mr.  Bradley  never  saw 

respondent  do  or  say  anything  harmful  to  a  student. 

115. 

Asa  coach,  Mr.  Bradley  would  not  make  a  direct  statement  to  girls  about 

their  bodies.  He  would  not  tell  a  girl  she  is  “beautiful.”  He  would  not  touch  a  girl's  calf 

as  a  form  of  congratulations. 

ANNETTE  STRINGER’S  TESTIMONY  AND  LETTER  OF  SUPPORT 

116. 

Annette  Stringer  is  employed  as  a  school  counselor  at  Cosumnes  Oaks 

High  School.  She  has  known  and  worked  with  respondent  since  1999,  first  at  Sheldon 

High  School  where  she  worked  as  a  counselor,  and  now  at  Cosumnes  Oaks  where  she 

has  worked  for  over  10  years. 

117. 

Ms.  Stringer  frequently  receives  cornplaints  from  students  about 

teachers.  She  has  not  received  compiaints  from  students  about  respondent  acting 

inappropriately.  Her  impression  of  respondent  as  a  teacher  is  that  he  is  very  passionate 

and  tries  to  do  the  right  thing  by  students. 

Discussion 

118. 

The  testimony  and  written  statements  of  the  students  from  Franklin, 

Casumnes  Oaks,  and  Laguna  Creek  High  Schools,  are  credible  and  convincing.  Each  of 

the  students  who  testified  were  sincere  and  honest.  Each  provided  an  account  of 

31

events  that  is  consistent  with  the  others,  yet  sufficiently  distinct  that  they  are  not 

contrived  or  rehearsed.  Their  testimony  and  written  statements  considered  as  a  whole, 

provide  an  accurate  account  of  respondent's  conduct  and  comments  ~  which  were 

clearly  inappropriate  and  violated  specific  rules  and  policies  in  the  District. 

119. 

The  testimony  of  school  and  District  administrators  was  aiso  clear  and 

convincing  regarding  how  respondent's  comments  and  conduct  violated  Board 

Policies  and  District  requirements  as  alleged  in  the  Staternent  of  Charges,  and  why 

termination  of  respondent's  ernployment  is  the  appropriate  discipline.  They  clearly 

considered  the  evidence  regarding  respondent's  comments  and  conduct,  and  took 

into  account  respondent's  statements  and  letters  of  support.  Based  on  the  evidence  as 

a  whole,  the  District  reasonably  determined  that  termination  of  respondent's 

employment  is  the  appropriate  discipline. 

120. 

Respondent  advanced  a  number  of  arguments  regarding  the  merits  of 

the  allegations  and  the  appropriate  level  of  discipline.  These  are  discussed  below,  not 

necessarily  in  the  order  presented  at  hearing. 

121. 

First,  respondent  argued  that  sore  of  the  girls  from  Franklin  High  School 

were  “intentionally  untruthful”  and  that  there  was  some  “collaboration”  because  they 

“wanted  to  get  rid  of”  him.  The  evidence  does  not  support  this  argument.  The  four 

girls  who  came  forward  to  Ms.  Albiani  are  known  to  her  as  being  highly  responsible 

and  respected,  and  they  appeared  to  be  sincere  in  their  statements  to  her.  There  is  no 

meaningful  evidence  that  their  statements  or  testimony  were  untruthful  or  the  product 

of  illicit  collaboration.  Rather,  they  each  gave  their  own  honest  account  of  what  they 

witnessed  regarding  respondent's  comments  and  conduct.  Based  on  the  evidence  as a 

whole,  respondent's  argument  that  the  witnesses  from  Franklin  High  School  were 

32

rnotivated  to  give  false  statements  and  testimony  on  the  theory  that  they  resented  his 

strict  attendance  policies  is  unconvincing. 

122. 

Second,  with  respect  to  the  alleged  comments  and  conduct  which 

respondent  either  admitted  or  testified  might  nave  occurred,  respondent  testified  he 

now  understands  nis  conduct  and  comments  were  inappropriate,  and  that  ne  will  not 

engage  in  similar  misconduct  in  the  future.  Respondent  testified  that  his  wife,  a  human 

resources  professional,  helped  him  become  more  aware  of  his  conduct  through 

discussions  and  role-play.  Respondent's  testimony  in  this  regard  did  not  demonstrate 

an  increased  level  of  understanding  and  acceptance  of  responsibility  sufficient  to 

ensure  that  he  will  not  engage  in  similar  misconduct  in  the  future.  Respondent  also 

testified  that  the  testimony  from  the  students  in  this  matter  helped  him  better 

understand  and  appreciate  the  impact  of  his  conduct  and  comments,  to  the  paint  that 

it  was  “traumatic”  for  him  to  hear  them  testify.  This  is  a  human  response  to  the 

students’  compelling  testimony.  However,  respondent’s  testimony  that  he  learned 

from  and  was  affected  by  their  testimony  does  not  provide  sufficient  assurance  that  he 

would  not  engage  in  similar  misconduct  in  the  future. 

123. 

Third,  respondent  admitted  he  told  students  that  he  was  about  to  “get 

anal”  with  them,  and  that  students  who  were  breaking  into  groups  were  a  “threesome.” 

He  testified  that  it  was  “not  wrong”  for  him  say  these  things  to  his  students,  when 

considered  in  context.  Respondent's  testimony  Is  concerning.  The  words  “get  anal”  and 

“threesome”  have  sexual  connotations  which  are  inappropriate  for  a  classroom.  If 

respondent  wanted  to  tell  his  students,  as  he  testified,  that  he  is  “meticulous”  he  could 

have  used  that  or  another  word  with  a  similar  meaning.  If  he  wanted  students  to 

organize  into  a  group  of  three,  he  could  have  told  them  just  that.  The  fact  that 

respondent  does  not,  even  now,  accept  that  he  was  wrong  to  use  the  words  “get  anal” 

33

and  “threesome”  in  anormal  classroom  context  demonstrates  that  he  cannot  or 

chooses  not  to  appropriately  monitor  his  own  language. 

124. 

Fourth,  respondent  argued  that  his  conduct  and  comments  were  not 

sexual  in  nature,  and  that  his  intent  was  to  encourage  and  compliment  students. 

Respondent's  argument  is  not  persuasive.  Some  of  his  conduct  and  many  of  his 

comments  were  clearly  sexual  in  nature.  For  example,  respondent  asked  the  tennis 

team  if  they  disliked  the  uniforms  because  they  were  “not  sexy  enough.”  By  its  own 

terms,  this  comment  was  sexual  in  nature.  Other  comments  such  as  telling  the  boys’ 

tennis  team  to  look  at  L.V.'s  “really  cute  skirt,”  repeatedly  telling  M.H.2  that  she  is 

“cute”  and  “beautiful,”  and  joking  that  it  “looks  wrong”  when  a  male  student  was 

dispensing  water  near  his  groin,  are  all  sexual  in  nature.  Respondent's  conduct  was 

also  sexual  in  nature  when  he  looked  at  M.H.2  “up  and  down”  and  touched  female 

students’  hair. 

125. 

Fifth,  respondent  argued  that  he  was  not  dishonest  in  his  interview  with 

Ms.  Van  de  Star,  and  that  he  provided  honest  answers  to  the  extent  he  could  recall  the 

information  requested.  This  argument  is  persuasive  with  respect  to  the  alleged 

falsehoods  set  forth  in  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

126. 

Finally,  respondent  argued  that  his  conduct  was,  at  worst,  unprofessional 

conduct  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a2),  and  that  the  District 

rnust  therefore  employ  progressive  discipline.  It  is  not  necessary  to  a  decision  in  this 

matter  to  determine  whether  rescoondent’s  conduct  constitutes  unprofessional  conduct 

within  the  meaning  of  the  Education  Code.  The  District  did  not  charge  respondent  with 

unprofessional  conduct.  Rather,  the  District  alleged  as  grounds  for  dismissal  immoral 

conduct,  dishonesty,  evident  unfitness  for  service,  and  persistent  violations,  none  of 

which  require  progressive  discipline.  The  determination  of  whether  cause  to  dismiss 

34

exists  under  these  grounds  Is  set  forth  in  the  Legal  Conclusions  below.  Preliminarily,  it 

is  necessary  to  determine  whether  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

Fitness  to  Teach 

127. 

In  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  235 

(Morrison),  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  an  individual  can  be  removed  from  the 

teaching  profession  only  upon  a  showing  that  he  is  not  fit  to  teach.  The  court  listed 

the  following  factors  as  relevant  when  determining  whether  a  teacher's  conduct 

indicates  that  he  is  fit  to  teach:  “[1]  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely 

affected  students  or  fellow  teachers,  [2]  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated,  [3] 

the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct,  [4]  the  type  of  teaching  certificate 

held  by  the  party  involved,  [5]  the  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances,  if  any, 

surrounding  the  conduct,  [6]  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives 

resulting  in  the  conduct,  [7]  the  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned 

conduct,  and  [8]  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse  impact 

or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other 

teachers.”  (Ja.  at  pp.  229-230.)  As  set  forth  below,  when  respondent's  conduct  is 

considered  in  light  of  the  Morrison  factors,  the  District  established  respondent's 

unfitness  to  teach. 

  128. 

Adverse  Effect  of  Respondent's  Conduct.  Respondent's  conduct  clearly 

had  an  adverse  effect  on  students,  as  is  evident  by  their  testimony.  Respondent's 

comments  and  conduct  caused  significant  stress  and  discomfort  for  girls  on  the  tennis 

team,  managers  of  the  boys’  tennis  team,  and  students  in  his  classes.  In  addition, 

respondent  set  a  poor  example  of  male  behavior  for  both  boys  and  girls,  such  as  when 

he  called  attention  to  L.V.'s 

uf 

“really  cute  skirt”  in  front  of  the  boys’  tennis  team.  A 

teacher  is  often  described  as  “’..  .  an  exemplar,  whose  words  and  actions  are  likely  to 

35

be  followed  by  the  children  coming  under  [his]  care  and  protection.’  (Pa/o  Verde  etc. 

Sch.  Dist.  v.  Hensey  (1970)  9  Cal.App.3d  967,  970.)  Respondent  violated  the  trust 

placed  in  him  by  his  inappropriate  comments  and  conduct. 

129. 

Degree  of  Adversity  Anticipated.  Respondent's  repeated  inappropriate 

comments  and  conduct  sent  a  message  to  students  that  it  is  acceptable  for  a  teacher 

or  coach  to  engage  in  the  types  of  misconduct  he  displayed.  For  these  reasons,  there 

is  a  Substantial  likelihood  respondent's  conduct  had  a  significant  adverse  effect  on 

students  who  observed  and  experienced  his  conduct. 

130. 

Proximity  or  Remoteness  in  Time  of  Respondent's  Conduct.  Respondent 

engaged  in  misconduct  during  2017  and  2018.  The  District  investigated  the  allegations 

beginning  in  October  2018,  and  served  respondent  with  a  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss 

and  Statement  of  Charges  in  March  2020.  Respondent's  misconduct  Is  not  remote  in 

time. 

131. 

Respondent's  Teaching  Certificate.  Respondent  teaches  high  school 

students  in  health  and  driver  education,  and  serves  as  a  coach.  High  school  students 

are  impressionable.  Respondent,  as  a  teacher  and  coach,  is  expected  to  display 

appropriate  adult  behavior.  Instead,  his  inappropriate  comments  and  conduct,  caused 

teen  girls  to  feel  uncomfortable  in  his  presence  and  set  a  poor  example  for  all  teens 

who  observed  or  experienced  his  misconduct. 

132. 

Extenuating  or  Aggravating  Circumstances.  There  Is  no  justification  or 

excuse  for  respondent's  misconduct.  There  are  no  aggravating  circumstances  beyond 

the  misconduct  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges. 

133. 

Praiseworthiness  or  Blameworthiness  of  Respondent's  Motives.  The 

evidence  is  mixed  with  respect  to  respondent's  motives.  On  the  one  hand,  there  was 

36

substantial  testimony  from  respondent's  supporting  witnesses  that  he  is  an 

enthusiastic  coach  and  teacher,  that  he  provides  good  structure  and  direction  to 

athletes,  and  that  he  gives  appropriate  encouragement.  On  the  other  hand, 

respondent  admitted  to  making  comments  about  girls’  physical  appearance  that  even 

his  supporters  would  view  as  inappropriate  and  inadvisable.  The  evidence  is  not  clear 

what  respondent's  motives  were  in  telling  girls  they  are  “beautiful,”  “cute,”  that  they 

have  “athletic-looking  bodies,”  or  the  other  comments  he  made.  The  effect  was  to 

make  them  feel  uncomfortable  around  him.  Respondent's  motives  are  clearer 

regarding  his  treatment  of  M.E.  For  example,  when  he  directed  comments  at  M.E. 

regarding  the  “rag-tag”  appearance  of  the  team,  and  the  absence  of  a  team  member 

from  a  match,  respondent's  motive,  at  least  in  part,  was  to  single  her  out  in  front  of 

her  teammates.  The  effect  was  to  unfairly  single  her  out  and  impermissibly  burden  her 

religious  practices.  Respondent's  motives  in  this  respect  are  blameworthy. 

134. 

Likelihood  of  Recurrence.  Respondent  did  not  demonstrate  substantial 
  

rehabilitation.  While  respondent's  conversations  with  his  wife  and  his  increased 

understanding  of  his  conduct  are  steps  in  the  right  direction,  they  do  not  demonstrate 

rehabilitation  sufficient  to  ensure  he  would  not  engage  in  similar  misconduct  in  the 

future.  It 

is  also  concerning  that  respondent  failed  to  fully  acknowledge  his  misconduct 

with  respect  to  M.E.,  and  that  he  still  believes  it  was  “not  wrong”  to  use  the  words  “get 

anal”  and  “threesome”  in  the  classroom.  In  addition,  respondent  engaged  in 

misconduct  both  as  a  coach  and  in  the  classroom.  Thus,  even  if  the  District  terminated 

his  coaching  responsibilities,  a  substantial  likelihood  remains  that  he  would  again 

engage  in  classroom  misconduct. 

37

135. 

Chilling  Effect  of  Discipline.  There  is  no  evidence  that  dismissal  of 

respondent  will  have  an  adverse  or  chilling  effect  upon  respondent's  constitutional 

rights  or  the  constitutional  rights  of  any  other  teachers. 

136. 

When  all  the  Morrison  factors  are  considered,  the  District  established 

that  respondent  is  unfit  to  teach. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 

A  school  district  seeking  to  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

from  its  employment  bears  the  burden  of  proof  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 

(Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035; 

Bevit  v.  Brisco  (1989)  211  Cal.App.3d  986.)  The  term  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

means  “more  likely  than  not.”  (Sandoval  v.  Bank  of  Am.  (2002)  94  Cal.App.4th  1378, 

1388.) 

2. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1),  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “immoral”  conduct.  In 

San  Diego  Unitied  School  District  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (2011) 

194  Cal.App.4th  1454,  1466,  the  court  explained  that: 

A  teacher  may  ...  be  dismissed  for  “[i]mmoral  or 

unprofessional  conduct.”  (§  44932,  subd.  (a)(1).)  “’The  term 

“immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is 

hostile  to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to 

good  morals.  Immorality  has  not  been  confined  to  sexual 

matters,  but  includes  ...  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward 

good  order  and  the  public  welfare.’” 

ail 

(Board  of  Education  v. 

38

Welland  (1960)  179  Cal App.2d  808,  811,  4  Cal  Rotr.  286.) 

Moreover,  the  definition  of  immoral  or  unprofessional 

conduct  must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  unique 

position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed 

“responsibilities  and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which 

do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.”  (Board  of  Trustees 

v.  Stubblefield  supra,  16  Cal.App.3d  at  p.  624,  94  Cal. Rotr. 

318.) 

3, 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  respondent  showed  a  moral 

indifference  and  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and  the  public  welfare. 

His  conduct  was  inconsistent  with  the  reasonable  expectations  society  places  upon 

teachers  to  model  appropriate  adult  conduct  to  the  students  they  teach,  and  to 

protect  the  safety  of  students  and  advance  their  educational  welfare.  Consequently, 

based  on  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  the  District  established  cause  to  dismiss 

respondent  for  immoral  conduct  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a}{1). 

A 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  {a}(6},  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  ernployee  for  “evident  unfitness  for 

service.”  In  Woodland  Joint  Unified  School  District  v.  Commusston  on  Professional 

Competence  (1992)  2  Cal App  Ath  1429,  1444,  the  Third  District  Court  of  Appeal  stated 

that  the  term  “evident  unfitness  for  service”  as  used  in  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a}(6),  "connotes  a  fixed  character  trait,  presumably  not  remediable  merely 

on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing 

school  district."  ia}  In  other  words,  “‘Te}vident  unfitness  for  service’  requires  that 

39

unfitness  for  service  be  attrioutable  to  a  defect  in  temperament...”  such  that  it  is 

unlikely  the  teacher  will  reform.  (/¢  at  p.  1445} 

5. 

Respondent's  comments  and  conduct,  as  alleged  and  proven  at  hearing, 

and  his  failure  to  fully  acknowledge  his  comments  and  conduct  during  his  testimony, 

demonstrate  that  he  is  unsuitable  for  teaching  due  to  a  fixed  character  trait,  not 

remediable  rnerely  on  notice  that  his  conduct  failed  to  meet  the  District's  expectations. 

Consequently,  based  on  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  the  District  established  cause 

to  disrniss  respondent  for  evident  unfitness  for  service  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (a}(6}. 

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a}(&),  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  ernmployee  for  persistent  violations  of  or 

refusal  to  obey  reasonable  regulations  prescribed  by  the  District's  governing  board. 

The  evidence  established  that  respondent,  by  his  comments  and  conduct,  committed 

acts  constituting  persistent  violations  of  the  rules  of  the  District,  and  that  such  acts 

demonstrated  an  evident  unfitness  to  teach.  Consequently,  based  on  the  Factual 

Findings  as  a  whole,  the  District  established  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  4493?  subdivision  (a}(8). 

7. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  {a}{4},  a  school 

district  may  discipline  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  “dishonesty.”  As  set  forth 

in  Factual  Finding  125,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  engaged  in 

dishonesty  as  alleged  in  the  Statement  of  Charges.  Consequently,  the  District  did  not 

establish  cause  to  dismiss  respondent  for  dishonesty  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44932,  subdivision  (ay4}. 

AQ

ORDER 

Respondent  Carl  Chapin  is  DISMISSED  from  his  position  as  a  certificated 

employee  of  the  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District  pursuant  to  Legal  Conclusions  1 

through 6, jointly  and  individually. 

DATE:  September  29, 

2020 

DATE:  September  29, 

2020 

DATE:  September  29, 

2020 

DecuSigned  by: 

Alayna,  (avtuy 

BEZ/4FR7F11F 493... 

ALAYNA  CARTER,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional 

Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

Denise  Lambert 

CBES0D63A0A143F  ... 

DENISE  LAMBERT,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional 

Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

ZS 

De 

26BAECCBESEF47S... 

TIMOTHY  J.  ASPINWALL,  Chair 

Commission  on  Professional 

Competence 

41

