BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Proceeding to Suspend: 

JAMES ZEMAN, Respondent 

OAH No. 2020070285 

DECISION

This matter was heard before the Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) by videoconference on December 2 and 3, 2020, pursuant to the 

November 3, 2020, order converting this matter to a videoconference hearing due to 

the COVID-19 pandemic. The Commission is comprised of the following members:

Kimberly A. Binning-Chevlin, Thomas Lawrence, and Abraham M. Levy, Administrative 

Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, who presided over 

the matter.

Kari D. Sullivan, Deputy General Counsel, San Diego Unified School District, 

represented San Diego Unified School District (the District).

Jon Cadieux, Attorney at Law, Smith Steiner Vanderpool, represented James 

Zeman, respondent, who was present.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The hearing record was closed,

and after the Commission completed its deliberations, the matter was submitted for 

decision on January 22, 2021. 

SUMMARY

The District seeks to affirm a five-day suspension against Mr. Zeman due to 

alleged unprofessional conduct he engaged in between 2018 and 2020 as 

documented by the principal at the school where he is employed. After reviewing the 

evidence of record and applicable sections of the Education Code and District policy,

the Commission finds that the District failed to prove that Mr. Zeman engaged in any 

unprofessional conduct under the Education Code and District policy. The Suspension 

Charges are dismissed. 

FINDINGS OF FACT 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

James Zeman has been a teacher for 40 years and employed by the 

District since approximately 1999. Mr. Zeman teaches second grade at Marvin 

Elementary. However, during his time at the District he has mostly taught fourth grade. 

2.

Acacia Thede, Chief Human Resources Officer, signed the Notice of Intent 

to Suspend respondent and the Suspension Charges on May 5, 2020, in her official 

capacity.

The District detailed in the Suspension Charges the facts, laws and District 

policy on which the District relied to seek to suspend Mr. Zeman from employment 

with the District due to persistent violations or refusal to obey regulations and district 

polices pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(2), and (a)(8), and 

unprofessional conduct pursuant to District Administrative Procedure section 7045. 

The Suspension Charges did not identify a time period for the proposed suspension 

2

but in a document prepared by the principal at Mr. Zeman’s school, Armando Tovar,

dated March 11, 2020, he recommended a five-day suspension. In closing arguments 

the District confirmed it is seeking a five-day suspension. The District in the 

Suspension Charges also did not identify the specific subdivisions of District 

Administrative Policy section that were allegedly violated. However, Cara Marshall, a 

human resources officer with the District who processed Mr. Tovar’s suspension 

recommendation, testified that the applicable sections of Section 7045 the district is 

alleging are (b)(2), (b)(4), (c)(1), and (d)(1). 

The factual assertions in the Suspension Charges are detailed below. 

On June 10, 2020, Mr. Zeman timely appealed the suspension action, 

denying that grounds for suspension from employment exists, and this hearing 

3. 

4. 

followed. 

The Allegations in the Suspension Charges 

5. 

The District makes a number of factual allegations in the Suspension 

Charges based on conduct that is alleged to have occurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020. 

During this time, Mr. Tovar was the principal at Mr. Zeman’s school. Mr. Tovar issued a 

“Letter or Warning-Unprofessional Conduct” to Mr. Zeman on December 6, 2018, and 

a “Letter of Reprimand-Unprofessional Conduct” to him dated September 12, 2019. In 

addition, Mr. Tovar documented a discussion he had with Mr. Zeman on March 20,

2019, regarding issues they discussed. On November 25, 2019, a 45-day Notice of 

Unprofessional conduct was issued pursuant to Education Code section 44938 by Ms. 

Marshall with the District. Mr. Tovar assisted Ms. Marshall in the preparation of that 

notice.

3

6.

The Suspension Charges also reference two incidents of Mr. Zeman’s 

alleged conduct Mr. Tovar observed on February 19, 2020, and March 4, 2020.

The December 6, 2018, Letter of Warning, Evidence in Support of 

Allegations, and Commission’s Findings 

7. 

As noted on December 6, 2018, Mr. Tovar issued a Letter of Warning to 

Mr. Zeman in which he memorialized meetings he had with him on November 30, 

2018, and December 4, 2018. The “issues” they discussed were: 

  Zeman teaching about lynching and disembowelment “gutting” of 

African Americans; 

  Zeman discussing the beheading/killing of Jewish people by Nazis; 

  Zeman teaching about the killings/mistreatment of other ethnic groups 

throughout history that are not aligned with grade level standards; and 

  Three staff persons and a parent witnessing Zeman publicly humiliating a 

student after school by screaming at the child. 

  Zeman admitted to each of these things but expressed no remorse and 

indicated he’d reached a point of frustration with the student; 

8. 

In support of these allegations the District called Mr. Tovar. He stated he 

discussed these alleged incidents with Mr. Zelman on November 30, 2018, and 

December 4, 2018, and recorded these discussions in a document captioned “Letter of 

Warning-Unprofessional Conduct” dated December 6, 2018. Mr. Tovar did not sign or 

date it. Mr. Zeman signed the letter and wrote, “I have seen the letter.” 

4

9.

In this document Mr. Tovar wrote that at their meeting on November 30, 

2018, Mr. Tovar acknowledged that he had taught the subjects identified in Mr. Tovar’s 

memo, that “he did not always teach from the rigid standards” because students need 

to have a wide range of experiences, and he was not sorry for his “actions.” Mr. Tovar 

testified that “murder and mayhem” are not part of the curriculum. He agreed, 

however, that a teacher may depart from the curriculum if he or she obtains approval. 

In the Letter of Warning Mr. Tovar cited District Administrative Policy 7045 subdivision 

“C.2.e.” He wrote the following: 

This code is a set of ideals which the teaching profession 

expects its members to honor and follow. . . . You violated 

this when you created a pattern of misconduct for a variety 

of issues which have been documented. . . . Your 

unprofessional conduct has had a profound negative 

impact on the school community. . . .  

10. 

In his hearing testimony, Mr. Zeman explained that the topics identified 

in the bullet points in the letter related to the subjects of the African-American 

experience in the United States, the history of slavery in the United States specifically, 

the Native Americans’ experience in the United States, and the experience of Jews 

during the Holocaust. He said two prior principals who supervised him had authorized 

him to teach these subjects. He further stated that he had provided Mr. Tovar with the 

materials from which he taught these subjects, and he stopped teaching them in 

response to Mr. Tovar’s concerns. 

Mr. Zeman commented that students in the fourth grade are required to be 

taught California history; he said they need to be taught about Native Americans; 

5

some of the people who came for the gold rush, he said, part of their job was to “get 

rid” of Native Americans. 

11. 

After considering the pertinent and relevant evidence of record, the 

Commission finds that the District did not prove that Mr. Zeman violated District 

Administrative Policy 7045 or standards regarding the teaching of the subject areas 

identified in the three bullet points under the first paragraph in the Suspension 

Charges. Mr. Zeman credibly contradicted Mr. Tovar’s testimony that these “topics” 

were not part of the approved curriculum. Two administrators before Mr. Tovar 

allowed him to teach these topics as part of lessons concerning the African-American 

and Native American experiences and the Holocaust. Aside from Mr. Tovar’s vague 

testimony that these “topics” were not part of the fourth grade curriculum, the District 

did not offer evidence that these subjects were not part of the fourth grade 

curriculum.1 Also, after Mr. Tovar expressed concerns, Mr. Zeman stopped teaching the 

subjects and turned over his materials to Mr. Tovar. These materials were not provided 

to the Commission. An adverse inference is drawn that had these materials been 

submitted, they would have supported Mr. Zeman’s testimony that prior 

administrators approved their use as part of the curriculum.

12.

Regarding the incident in which Mr. Zeman is accused of yelling at and 

humiliating a student, it is first noted that the District did not offer the testimony of 

three staff persons and a parent who purportedly witnessed the incident, as alleged in 

 

1 As pled, the Suspension Charges incorrectly suggest that the topics Mr. Zeman 

was teaching were the “lynching” and “disembowelment” of African-Americans and the 

“beheading” of Jews, as opposed to the broader subject areas of slavery and the 

Holocaust through materials Mr. Zeman used.

6

the Suspension Charges.2 Also, the Commission found it difficult to glean from the 

documentary evidence the nature of the incident and when it occurred. The 

Commission believes that the charge refers to an incident on an undetermined date 

after school at the school “gate” where Mr. Zeman scolded a student. The 

Commission’s understanding is derived from Mr. Zeman’s testimony. Mr. Zeman did 

not dispute that he confronted the student at the gate. He said he has a “loud” voice 

which is commonly known, and he was not screaming at the student as the Suspension 

Charges allege. He said he was speaking loudly to get the student’s attention. Kelly 

Murphy, a fellow teacher who testified in this hearing, confirmed that Mr. Zeman has a 

loud voice “in general,” as did other witnesses who testified in this hearing. Ms. 

Murphy added that having a loud voice is “just him,” meaning a feature of his 

personality. According to Mr. Zeman, the student was inappropriately trying to go 

through a gate used for kindergartners, and this posed a safety challenge. He 

2 The District called two witnesses, N

 F

 and A

 S

, who are the 

 

parents of children who went to Marvin. But their testimony is not found to relate to 

the allegation that he screamed and humiliated “a student”. Ms. S

 testified she 

heard “shouting and yelling” coming from Mr. Zeman’s class in “April 2019”. Ms. F

 

said only that Mr. Zeman went “towards yelling” at students. The District offered 

Exhibit 4, an email from an unidentified parent who said he or she saw Mr. Zeman 

“loudly yelling” at “two students” on October 18, 2018, in the morning. This is not the 

incident charged in the Suspension Charges because this alleged incident the parent 

documented in the email occurred in the morning and involved two students not “a 

student” after school. 

7

acknowledged he told Mr. Tovar he had reached “a point of frustration” with the 

Based on Mr. Zeman’s credible testimony, the Commission finds that the District 

did not prove that Mr. Zeman screamed at the student or publicly humiliated the 

student. 

student. 

March 20, 2019, Summary of Conference and Charges, Evidence, and 

Commission’s Findings 

13.  Mr. Tovar held a meeting with Mr. Zeman on March 20, 2019, and 

recorded that meeting in a document captioned “Summary of Conference.” A 

“Summary of Conference” does not represent a disciplinary action. In this document 

Mr. Tovar wrote the following as issues they discussed:

Mr. Zeman did not take students to a scheduled school-wide talent show 

on March 3, 2019; 

The school’s office had been receiving personal calls for Mr. Zeman;

Mr. Zeman did not attend a scheduled IEP meeting on March 18, 2019; 

and

Mr. Zeman did not take his students to lunch on time and only allowed 

them 5 minutes to eat on March 19, 2019.

14.

In this summary document Mr. Tovar wrote more specifically that the 

personal phone calls involved doctor and hair cut appointments and “personal orders”

for “wine etc.” In addition, Mr. Tovar stated that the Individualized Education Program 

(IEP) meeting was on January 7, 2019, not March 18, 2019, as referenced in the 

8

summary. Mr. Tovar documented that Mr. Zeman told him he does not have a cell 

phone and tries to make calls during breaks. He told Mr. Tovar he did not receive calls 

for wine orders. 

15. 

Related to the Suspension Charges that are referenced in the March 30,

2019, summary, the District called Brandi Friend. Ms. Friend worked in the office as an 

administrative assistant and answered telephone calls. Ms. Friend only testified that 

Mr. Zeman received “personal calls.” She did not elaborate further. However, in an 

email she wrote on March 19, 2019, Ms. Friend stated that “frequent calls” came from 

Mr. Zeman’s doctor, pharmacy and from his hair stylist for haircut reminders. In the 

email Ms. Friend clarified there was just “one call” for a “wine order” that was ready to 

be picked up. In this email she disputed Mr. Zeman’s contention in his email that this 

call was from a “Diane” with the “Food and Wine Institute,” an organization that 

sponsors a special program for children about organic farming food preparation and a 

trip to a farm. She acknowledged that she was familiar with this organization. 

16.  Mr. Zeman’s testimony regarding these incidents is summarized as 

follows: He said he simply forgot about the March 3, 2019, talent show. He does not 

have a cell phone, and he does not have a personal email account. He has back 

problems and was being scheduled for injections to his back, and his doctor’s office 

left messages for him at the school’s office late on a Friday. Mr. Zeman was there for 

the student’s IEP but had to leave the meeting early, and the IEP meeting was 

rescheduled. With respect to the allegation he took students late to lunch, Mr. Zeman 

said this occurred during a “modified” day when school ends at lunch and the lunch 

period is brief. Mr. Zeman said his class instruction ran into this period. He said he was 

not going to let the children miss lunch. 

9

17.

After giving due consideration to the relevant documentary and 

testimonial evidence, applicable Education Code sections and District Policy 7045, the 

Commission finds that the conduct alleged in the Suspension Charges relating to these 

allegations does not represent violations of any Education Code section or District 

Administrative Policy 7045. Mr. Zeman credibly explained that he attended the IEP 

meeting but had to leave early, and the meeting was rescheduled. On March 3, 2019, 

Mr. Zeman simply forgot to take his class to the talent show. The phone calls made to 

the school’s office, while inconsiderate, do not constitute unprofessional conduct. 

September 12, 2019, Letter of Reprimand, Evidence, and 

Commission’s Findings 

18.  On September 12, 2019, Mr. Tovar issued a Letter of Reprimand to Mr. 

Zeman. This letter of reprimand was issued after a meeting the two men had on 

September 4, 2019. The Letter of Reprimand contains the following specific instances 

of alleged conduct:

Mr. Zeman reported your absence in the SAMS [the Substitute 

Assignment Management System] as ill the first two teacher prep days,

as personal necessity the final prep day, and as personal necessity the 

first two days of instruction;

Mr. Tovar attempted to contact Mr. Zeman on August 25, 2019,

regarding absences and asked Mr. Zeman to call the school site or email 

to provide information regarding absences and a return date. Mr. Zeman 

did not respond;

Mr. Tovar attempted to contact Mr. Zeman by phone on August 27, 2019,

and August 28, 2019, regarding his absences and left a voicemail asking 

10 

Mr. Zeman to call the school to provide information related to his 

absences and a return date. Mr. Zeman failed to respond; 

Mr. Zeman’s classroom was not prepared for the first day of instruction;

Upon Mr. Zeman’s return on August 28, 2019, Mr. Tovar observed 

students reading independently for 22 minutes, and then Mr. Zeman 

called students to the carpet to conduct a read aloud. Afterwards Mr. 

Zeman sent students back to their desks to read independently for 12 

minutes. When questioned if he had lesson plans he response was “no”; 

and 

12, 2019.

Mr. Zeman stated to staff members and families that he did not have 

instructional materials when materials were available in the back room,

and any additional materials should have been requested by completing 

the materials inventory form that was distributed to all staff on August 

19. Mr. Tovar testified that the conduct detailed in the Letter of Reprimand 

concerned Mr. Zeman’s grade level change from the fourth grade to the second grade, 

and his failure to be ready for the students on the first class day. Mr. Tovar said he 

reached out to Mr. Zeman multiple times and received no response. He said that when 

Mr. Zeman was absent, there were no lesson plans left for the substitute teacher, and 

when Mr. Tovar arrived on August 28, 2019, students were not engaged in purposeful 

lessons. Mr. Tovar asked Mr. Zeman if he had done any planning, and he said no 

planning was done. Mr. Zeman stated that he wasn’t given instructional materials. Mr. 

Tovar further said that Mr. Zeman told families he did not have instructional materials, 

which was not accurate. The librarian and a grade level colleague had offered to give 

11 

him grade level materials. Mr. Zeman failed to pick up these materials. Mr. Tovar said 

the District also provided the materials, and teachers are instructed if they don’t have 

instructional materials they need “to do something”. When Mr. Tovar met with Mr. 

Zeman they discussed his ability to access grade level plan materials to be taught. 

20. 

In response to not being present the first day of class, Mr. Zeman told 

Mr. Tovar that teachers call out the first day all the time. Mr. Tovar said that this is not 

true based on his 19 years of experience. 

21.  Mr. Zeman’s testimony regarding his conduct the first days of class in 

August 2019 is summarized as follows: 

Mr. Zeman is originally from Illinois, and his 97-year old mother still lives there. 

During the summer he visits and helps arrange her care. Shortly before he was to 

return to California for the start of school, his mother fell and he was concerned she 

had stroke. He needed to stay a couple of days longer to make sure she was okay. 

Mr. Zeman called to have a substitute for the first days of the school year. He 

said every student had a mathematics book but there were no social science books. 

Mr. Zeman said Mr. Tovar should have ensured that these books were available for the 

students at that time. Regarding his absence, Mr. Zeman pointed out that his personal 

life is his business, and he called in and arranged to have a substitute teacher. For 

some reason, that substitute was told to not come in by one of the office secretaries. 

Mr. Zeman stressed that he did not fail to call in because he was angry about his 

assignment to the second grade from the fourth grade as the District has implied. He 

said he thanked everyone at the school for helping him when he returned. 

22. 

The Commission has considered the testimonial and documentary 

evidence of record with respect to these charges and the applicable sections of the 

12 

Education Code and District Procedure section 7045. Based on this evidence of record,

the Commission cannot find that Mr. Zeman’s conduct on August 28, and 29, 2019, 

constituted unprofessional conduct, a failure to not have prepared a subject carefully,

or a persistently occurring violation of the Education Code or District policy. The 

Commission has reached this conclusion for these reasons: 

That there was no lesson plan on the first day of school does not instantly lead 

to the conclusion Mr. Zeman did not carefully prepare the subjects he was teaching, 

though the Commission is concerned that Mr. Zeman did not have a lesson plan 

prepared for the start of school August 28, 2019. With this noted, the Commission 

understands that the first day of class at any school is a day when teachers are getting 

to know their students and organizing their classrooms and materials. Further and 

importantly, Mr. Zeman’s absences at the start of the school year were justified. In fact, 

he contacted the school to have a substitute teacher for his absence that first day. 

Although he was not required to explain why he was absent, Mr. Zeman credibly 

explained he was absent at that time due to concerns about his mother’s health. Also, 

as a factor the Commission has considered, his failure to have a prepared lesson plan 

at the start of the school appeared to have been an isolated incident. According to the 

evidence of record, Mr. Zeman has been a dedicated and professional teacher who is 

committed to his students’ education, and it would have been out of character for him 

to not have carefully planned his teaching subjects. To the Commission, the core of the 

problem that resulted in this charge seems to have been communication issues 

between Mr. Zeman and Mr. Tovar. 

13 

Mr. Tovar’s Observations Regarding Mr. Zeman’s Conduct,

Recommendation for Suspension, Relevant Evidence, and 

Commission’s Findings 

23. 

As described in the Suspension Charges on February 19, 2020, and March 

4, 2020, Mr. Tovar observed two “incidents” involving Mr. Zeman. On March 11, 2020, 

Mr. Tovar prepared a document captioned “Recommendation for Suspension” in which 

he recommended that Mr. Zeman be suspended for five days based on the conduct 

discussed above, in addition to the two incidents he allegedly observed on February 

19, 2020, and March 4, 2020. Mr. Tovar cited District Policy 7045 “Section C.2.e.” He 

directed Mr. Zeman to stop yelling at students directly in front of their peers and 

refrain from leaving students unsupervised. Mr. Zeman refused to sign the document 

Mr. Tovar prepared. According to Ms. Marshall, the District’s human resources officer,

Mr. Zeman failed to respond to a request for a “pre-disciplinary meeting,” and the 

District decided to pursue Mr. Tovar’s recommendation.

24. 

Regarding the first of these “new” incidents, as described in the 

Suspension Charges on February 19, 2020, when Mr. Tovar was walking by Mr. 

Zeman’s classroom, he heard Mr. Zeman yelling “every day every day I have to tell 

you.” Mr. Tovar said he was able to hear Mr. Zeman yelling at the student although the 

doors and windows of the classroom module were closed. Mr. Zeman said this to the 

student in the presence of the whole class. The student went outside to get a folder in 

his backpack. To a question posed to him on cross examination, Mr. Tovar said he 

talked to the student and the student seemed “a little distraught,” but told Mr. Tovar 

he was “good” and he was “just going to class.” 

14 

25. Mr. Tovar emailed Mr. Zeman about the incident, and Mr. Zeman told 

him the student had forgotten his homework for the week and Mr. Zeman was at a 

loss for what to do. 

26.  Mr. Zeman in his testimony concerning this incident, stated he was not 

yelling at the student. He said the student had been coming to class without his 

homework, and Mr. Zeman had contacted his father. His father had his hands full 

because the student’s mother had died four years previously from cancer. Mr. Zeman 

wanted the student to come to class prepared. He denied he berated the student, and 

he said the student was not upset. Mr. Zeman also said windows above the doors were 

open so it was not hard to hear what was going on in the classroom. He said that the 

student’s father did not complain about the incident. 

27. 

In evaluating this incident, the Commission has considered the testimony 

of both Mr. Tovar and Mr. Zeman. The Commission notes that the conclusion that 

someone is “yelling” as opposed to speaking “loudly” can be largely subjective. Mr. 

Zeman acknowledged that his tone is “loud,” and he is known for his loud tone. The 

guidance Mr. Tovar stated he gave to Mr. Zeman highlights the subjective nature of 

assessing whether a person was yelling or was just loudly talking. When testifying, Mr. 

Tovar stated he advised Mr. Zeman that a teacher should use a “warm demander” tone 

when upbraiding a student for behavior. But even when using this “warm demander” 

tone, it is easy to see that a person may conclude that a teacher is yelling at the 

student. With this noted, the Commission finds with regards to this allegation that the 

District did not prove Mr. Zeman humiliated the student when he demanded he get his 

folder from his backpack or that  Mr. Zeman engaged in any conduct violative of the 

Education Code or District Policy 7045. 

15 

28.

As further alleged in the Suspension Charges, Mr. Tovar observed a 

second incident involving Mr. Zeman on March 4, 2020, when Mr. Tovar was walking 

by Mr. Zeman’s classroom and saw Mr. Zeman leave his classroom unattended to visit 

a colleague on the playground. When asked why he left the classroom, Mr. Zeman said 

that he left the classroom to ask a colleague about “technology.” Mr. Tovar testified 

Mr. Zeman left for one to two minutes. 

29.  Mr. Zeman called Kelly Murphy, a fellow teacher at Marvin who teaches 

the second grade. Her classroom was next to Mr. Zeman’s on March 4, 2020. She has 

been a teacher at Marvin for 25 years. 

Ms. Murphy gave the following testimony regarding the March 4, 2020, 

allegation: On this date Mr. Zeman asked her to “watch his class” while he went to get 

technical support for the “Promethean board”3 he was using in his classroom. The date 

and Mr. Zeman’s request stand out to her because Mr. Tovar talked to her about it that 

day. Ms. Murphy said it was “no big deal to her” and she was “surprised that Mr. 

Tovar” even talked to her about this incident. She said that Mr. Zeman left his class for 

no more than “30 seconds” and it is not accurate “to say he left his class unattended.” 

She stressed that he did not leave his class unattended. Mr. Zeman was coming back 

when she went to check on his class.

Ms. Murphy stated that for 15 years teachers at Marvin use a “buddy up” system 

with each other so they can take restroom breaks. She said she and Mr. Zeman 

3 The “Promethean” screen is a display screen used by teachers to display 

 

various instructional materials they present in their classrooms.

16 

watched each other’s classrooms when needed so they can take breaks. Mr. Tovar had 

not changed this practice. 

30.  Mr. Zeman offered this testimony regarding the March 4, 2020, incident:

He needed to get the help of fellow teacher Ms. Solis because of problems he was 

having with the “Promethean Board.” Ms. Solis’s classroom was no more than 50 feet 

from his classroom. Mr. Zeman did not leave his classroom unattended. He asked Ms. 

Murphy who was his “buddy teacher” to watch his class and she agreed. Mr. Tovar 

asked him why he left the classroom, and Mr. Zeman told him that he needed to go to 

Ms. Solis’s class to get help with this “Promethean Board.” He left the class for maybe 

30 seconds. The time was so brief that Ms. Murphy was coming to the ramp as he was 

returning. 

31. 

The Commission has considered the relevant documentary and 

testimonial evidence regarding this allegation and the relevant applicable sections of 

the Education Code and District Administrative Policy 7045. The Commission finds Mr. 

Zeman did not leave his classroom unattended on March 4, 2020. He asked Ms. 

Murphy to watch his class for a brief time while he sought help regarding technology 

he was using to instruct his class. Mr. Zeman’s conduct on March 4, 2020, does not 

represent a violation of the Education Code and/or District Administrative Policy 7045. 

Mr. Zeman’s Testimony 

32.  Mr. Zeman testimony is summarized as follows: He has been teaching at 

the District since 1997 and at Marvin Elementary since the 1999 or 2000 school year. 

He started teaching in Illinois and has a total of 40 years of teaching experience. He is 

still enthusiastic about teaching children, loves working with children, seeing them 

getting interesting in subjects, seeing that “light come on,” and seeing them grow. At 

17 

73 years old, he is getting to the end of his teaching career, and he has not enjoyed 

teaching so much the last years due to his interaction with the District’s administration 

during this time. 

As a teacher, Mr. Zeman has always received positive evaluations. He submitted 

Summary Evaluation Reports dated June 2008, May 1, 2010, and April 28, 2017. In 

these reports two principals at Marvin rated him as “effective” as a teacher, the highest 

rating under six categories. One of his former principals described him as an “intense” 

and “demanding” teacher. As an indication of his qualities as a teacher since October 

3, 2012, Mr. Zeman is evaluated on a five-year evaluation cycle. Mr. Zeman earned this 

distinction because he has been deemed a “highly qualified” teacher under the No 

Child Left Behind legislation. 

Mr. Zeman’s favorite grade to teach is the fourth grade, but he has taught all 

grade levels. He regards himself as a demanding teacher, demands a lot from his 

students and gets a lot out of them. He finds fourth graders able to do a lot of things 

and work independently on their own. At Marvin most students are on track and able 

to do exciting things; read novels and relate to characters specifically and deal with 

more challenging topics. 

Over the course of his 23-year career at Marvin, he has gotten along with 

principals and noted that he would like to have a good relationship with Mr. Tovar. He 

added that he is willing to make changes contrary to the District’s assertion in opening 

comments that he is not amenable to change. He also said he would be willing to work 

with Mr. Tovar. 

33.  Mr. Zeman’s testimony regarding the specific allegations in the 

Suspension Charges has been incorporated above. 

18 

Testimony of Individuals on Mr. Zeman’s Behalf

34. Mr. Zeman called Aldo Osuna, Marilyn Henetz and Vanetta Morkunas as 

character witnesses. 

Mr. Osuna’s testimony is summarized as follows: He is a parent and two of his 

children, and two of his sister’s children have been Mr. Zeman’s students. Last year one 

of his children was in Mr. Zeman’s class; his youngest is now in second grade.

Mr. Osuna’s children have had only positive experiences with Mr. Zeman; he 

said “they love him.” His nephew had problems at school; and his sister “choiced” to 

have him attend Marvin. Mr. Zeman figured out a way to work with his nephew; he 

tried different things, and his nephew “totally turned around as a student.” 

Mr. Osuna asked the school to assign Mr. Zeman for his son and daughter. He is 

very happy that his youngest son has him now in second grade; his son loves him; his 

daughter is now in the tenth grade and remembers Mr. Zeman fondly with only 

positive things to say about her experience with him. 

Mr. Osuna said that Mr. Zeman does not “yell” at students. He heard he is a 

tough teacher from other parents. But he is fair, and Mr. Osuna doesn’t have any 

complaints. He described Mr. Zeman as “a great teacher over a long-time span,” and 

he recommends him to everyone. He said that Mr. Zeman taught his kids how to take 

notes and prepared them for middle school. Their experience with him has been great. 

12.  Ms. Henetz’s testimony is summarized as follows: 

She worked as a teacher in a combination second-third grade class and retired 

in 2014. She worked with Mr. Zeman at Marvin and observed his teaching practices; he 

19 

was the “staff developer”; the staff developer helps train teachers; the best teachers 

apply and are tasked with doing this. 

As staff developer, Mr. Zeman was assigned to work on the second grade level 

development because tests scores had dropped; he went to classes and showed the 

teachers how to improve. Ms. Henetz was very impressed with him. 

Ms. Henetz can’t speak highly enough about what Mr. Zeman did in class. She 

worked with a staff developer previously, but Mr. Zeman developed rapport with the 

students and put thought into lessons. 

Ms. Henetz said that Mr. Zeman was “very firm” with teachers and students. She 

observed him “yell” adding quickly “we all yell.” She said he has a big voice; he would 

“boom something” out as she put it. She never saw anything that would lead her to 

believe he is unable to handle students in a calm manner. 

14.  Ms. Morkunas is the parent of four of Mr. Zeman’s former students. Mr. 

Zeman taught her last child in 2017. All of her children got a lot out of Mr. Zeman’s 

class. She saw Mr. Zeman interact with students at Halloween and on field trips where 

she was a chaperone. Her oldest daughter is now 24 years old and told her that Mr. 

Zeman prepared her well for both middle school and high school. Her son loved Mr. 

Zeman because Mr. Zeman was able to handle the classroom, and her son wasn’t able 

to get distracted. 

She said that Mr. Zeman could be harsh, but parents recognized his qualities as 

a teacher. She never saw him yell, but she agreed he has a loud voice and speaks 

loudly. She said he was not mean. 

20 

Parties’ Closing Arguments

35.

In its closing argument, the District asked that the five-day suspension be 

affirmed based on the record and consistent with the progressive discipline that was 

imposed upon Mr. Zeman. The District stressed that Mr. Zeman told Mr. Tovar that he 

was not sorry for his conduct. 

Mr. Zeman argued that cause does not exist to support a suspension. He 

argued further that given his willingness to work with administration to correct any 

perceived deficits, no purpose would be served in imposing the suspension even if 

cause existed. Mr. Zeman cited the testimony of parents who have had numerous 

children in his class, and Mr. Zeman’s distinction as a “highly qualified” teacher. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Education Code Sections 

1. 

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for imposing 

discipline against a permanent employee.4 Pursuant to Subdivision (a)(2), a permanent 

employee may be disciplined for unprofessional conduct and, under Subdivision (a)(8),

a permanent employee may be disciplined for persistent violation of or refusal to obey 

4 Section 44932 provides the various grounds for “dismissal” of a permanent 

 

employee. Other sections in the same article (Sections 44934 to 44937) reference a 

“dismissal or suspension” proceeding and cross-reference Section 44932. Reading 

these statutes together the language “the grounds for dismissal” in Section 44932 is 

construed to include “grounds for suspension”. 

21 

the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government 

of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school 

district employing him or District polices. 

2. 

Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the 

process for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and 

sets forth the Commissions’ authority regarding its final decision. 

3. 

Education Code sections 44934 and 44938 outline the procedures the 

District must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent 

employee. 

Applicable District Administrative Policy 

4. 

District Policy section 7045 is entitled the “Code of Ethics of the Teaching 

Profession.” Subdivision (C)(2)(b)(2) requires that a teacher “[prepare] the subject 

carefully, [present] it without distortion and---within the limits of time and the 

curriculum--- [give] all points of view a fair hearing.”

District Policy section 7045, subdivision (C)(2)(b)(4), requires that a teacher 

“[honors] the integrity of students and influences them through constructive criticism 

rather than by ridicule and harassment.”

District Policy section 7045, subdivision (C)(2)(c)(1), provides that a teacher

“[h]as an obligation to support the profession and the institution and not to 

misrepresent them in public discussion. When being critical in public the educator has 

an obligation not to distort the facts. When speaking or writing about policies the 

educator must take adequate precautions to distinguish the educator’s private views 

from the official position of the institution.” 

22 

