BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
WILLIAM S. HART UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

ERIKA HALLEN, 

a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2020040554 

DECISION 

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter 

by videoconference on May 25 through 28 and June 1 through 4, 24, 25, 29 and 30, 

2021.1 The Commission consists of Nicholas Abruzzo, Los Angeles County Office of 

Education; Maria Jackson, El Grove Unified School District; and Administrative Law 

Judge Laurie Pearlman, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, 

who presided.

 

1 The hearing was conducted remotely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Barrett K. Green, Michelle M. Holmes, and James A. Becerra, Attorneys at Law, 

represented complainant William S. Hart Union High School District (District).

Tamra M. Smith, Attorney at Law, represented Erika Hallen (respondent).

Oral and documentary evidence was presented. Motions were argued and ruled 

upon at hearing for the reasons stated in the record. The record was left open until 

August 2, 2021, for the filing of Respondent’s brief regarding admission of prior 

statements (marked for identification as Exhibit 552), the District’s closing brief 

(marked for identification as Exhibit 75), and a request for a protective order sealing 

confidential records. 

A protective order was issued, as requested. To protect the identify of students 

and minors, the court reporter was ordered to use students’ and minors’ first names 

and last initials when preparing the transcript. That practice has been followed in this 

decision except student J

 B. is referred to as JC. 

The case was submitted for decision on August 2, 2021. The Commission 

thereafter conducted its deliberations in executive session. 

The District seeks to dismiss respondent, a math teacher at a continuation high 

school, based on allegations that she inappropriately crossed the boundary between 

her professional role as a teacher and that of a friend or confidant of the students she 

was assigned to instruct, despite repeated warnings and admonitions; was dishonest 

regarding several instances of alleged misconduct; was dishonest and deceptive in the 

District’s investigation of her alleged misconduct; harbored and assisted two minors 

SUMMARY 

2

who were on the run and allowed them and other students to stay at her home; acted 

questionably in fostering 17-year-old student G

 C.; and aided, abetted, facilitated, 

encouraged, or condoned G

 C.’s assault of student JC. 

Respondent asserts that the District has brought a baseless case against her in 

retaliation for being a whistleblower relating to actions by the school’s former 

principal. She contends that she is an excellent teacher and dedicated running coach 

who was an asset to the District’s students because she listened to them, respected 

them, related to them, and inspired them. 

While the District failed to produce sufficient evidence to establish certain 

charges, the Commission concludes that there is sufficient cause to terminate 

respondent’s employment, and the factors set forth in 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (

) demonstrate Respondent is unfit to teach. 

Therefore, Respondent’s dismissal is upheld. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Parties and Jurisdiction 

1.

Respondent is a certificated, permanent employee of the District and, at 

all times relevant, was assigned as a math teacher at Bowman High School (Bowman), 

a continuation school. Continuation schools provide a high school diploma program 

for students aged 16 to18 who have not graduated from high school, are required to 

attend school, and are at risk of not completing their education. Students who attend 

Bowman are considered at-risk for various reasons including low self-esteem, distress, 

anxiety, grief, substance abuse, contact with the criminal justice system, lack of 

motivation, family issues, or a disconnect from education causing a secondary issue of 

3

credit deficiency. Bowman serves approximately 400 students, a majority of whom are 

socioeconomically-disadvantaged, in the foster care system, homeless, or students 

with disabilities. 

2. 

The District issued a Preliminary Notice of Possible Dismissal and 

Statement of Charges against respondent, dated August 28, 2019. On January 15, 

2020, a Statement of Charges against respondent alleging factual and legal grounds 

for termination of her employment with the District was signed by Michael Vierra, 

Ph.D., the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources. In February 2020, 

the District’s five-member Governing Board considered and approved the 

recommendation to dismiss. 

3. 

On March 5, 2020, Respondent timely requested a hearing and this 

matter ensued. All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Education Code Provisions Alleged as Causes for Termination 

4. 

As grounds for dismissal, the District alleges that respondent 

a.

Immoral conduct, under Education Code (Code) section 44932, 

b. 

Dishonesty, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4); 

c. 

Evident unfitness for service, under Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6); and 

d. 

Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the 

state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by 

4

demonstrated:

subdivision (a)(1);

 

 

 

 

the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district 

employing her, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

Statement of Charges 

5. 

In its Statement of Charges, the District alleges that: 

a. 

On February 12, 2018, you had a discussion with a 

Hart District student regarding your personal life, including 

your personal problems and issues in your life. This 

occurred during a break in class while other students were 

present. The other students heard what you said and 

reported the matter to Administration because they were 

concerned that you sounded depressed and that you might 

be suicidal. The student with whom you shared your 

feelings was at the time in a very fragile state because he 

and his three siblings, his parents, and grandmother were 

renting a living room in a house that they were living in. The 

student’s family had moved to a safe haven home because 

the father was allegedly abusing his mother.

b.

On May 3, 2018, you shared with your class that you 

were having a bad day and discussed with the class some 

issues you were having with your son. Instead of providing 

instruction during the class, you assigned students 

independent work that afternoon. This resulted in three 

students coming up to the office: two of the students were 

roughhousing, and the third student had an earring 

5

accidently ripped out of his ear. Another student started 

yelling and ran out of the class; this student was found in 

the health office hyperventilating. You did not call the office 

or warn Administration that any of this was happening. On 

or about that same day, the Principal and AP had a 

conversation with you about professionalism and 

appropriateness of boundaries. It was discussed with you 

that it is inappropriate for you to be sharing your personal 

issues with your students. It was recommended that if you 

are having a “bad day,” you should take the day off to 

address the issues rather than let your emotions affect your 

professional responsibilities as a teacher. You were 

reminded about boundaries and that students should not 

be on a friendly level with you, where you would be talking 

to them about personal problems.

c. 

In or about May 17, 2018, you were observed leaving 

campus during your preparation period. In your car was 

student A.C. A.C. was 18 years old at the time and was 

expected to graduate that day from Bowman. You and A.C. 

were observed returning to school separately approximately 

twenty to thirty minutes later. A.C. was coming up the hill 

by foot, as you pulled in through the driveway. You were 

interviewed by Principal Robin Geissler and then-Assistant 

6

Principal Eran Zeevi2 regarding the matter. You admitted to 

taking A.C. to his house, claiming that you did this so that 

A.C. could get his notes that he needed to graduate. You 

knew it was wrong to be alone with A.C., and that is why 

you dropped him off down the street before you arrived at 

school. You said it was, an “idiotic mistake” that you made. 

Principal Geissler and AP Zeevi reminded you about your 

duties and responsibilities as a teacher, including the 

importance of boundaries between teachers and students, 

and admonished you about how inappropriate your 

conduct was. You were sent home for the remainder of the 

day. 

d. 

Thereafter, at a meeting held in September 2018, 

(now-Principal) Eran Zeevi expressed to you his concern 

that there had been a pattern of behavior where you get 

emotionally involved with students from the campus 

(including having students call you “Mom”), and of you 

getting immersed in students’ personal lives. Principal Zeevi 

directed you to be more aware of what you are doing and 

how it is perceived. 

2 Eran Zeevi began working for the District in 2006. He served as Assistant 

 

Principal at Bowman from 2012 to 2018 under Principal Geissler. Zeevi served as 

Bowman’s Principal from 2018 until his resignation in December 2020.

7

e. 

On October 4, 2018, the Bowman registrar received a 

call from a former student asking for you. The Registrar told 

the caller that school was finished for the day and the 

Registrar did not know if you were available. The Registrar 

checked your classroom by phone and went back to the 

phone call to inform the caller that you were not in your 

classroom. When the Registrar asked the caller for a 

message to leave you, the caller hung up. The Registrar 

looked up the caller’s number and it turned out to be a 

former student (S.D.) who left Bowman in February 2017 

and had been a drug user on a drug contract. 

f. 

On October 11, 2018, you allowed students to play 

Uno and Playdough during intervention, when you were 

supposed to be providing them instruction in math. 

Attached as Exhibit 3 is an October 11, 2018 email to you 

from Principal Zeevi regarding this matter. 

g. 

During the 2018-19 school year, you allowed a minor 

(T.W.) to stay at your house while she was on the run and 

with a warrant out for her arrest for having robbed the 

house of T.W.’s Grandmother. You also allowed another 

minor (B.T.) to stay at your house during the same time 

frame. B.T. had allegedly assisted T.W. in robbing the house 

of T.W.’s Grandmother. A court later ordered that T.W. have 

no further contact with B.T. 

8

Not only did you harbor these on-the-run minors at your 

house, you met T.W.’s sister at school to obtain clothes for 

T.W. so that she could remain on the run. 

h.

You also wore a t-shirt to school, promoting B.T.’s 

rap logo, consisting of a ski mask with holes cut out. You 

were observed at school embracing a female student (who 

was also wearing the t-shirt) and posing for a photo. You 

were also observed standing next to another student, 

texting with each other and sharing items from your phone, 

as though you were personal friends, and not 

teacher/student. 

i. 

During the 2018-19 school year, you repeatedly 

intruded into the personal lives of your students. Students 

reported this to their counselors (“Erika needs to not be in 

our damn business,” is what they said).

j. 

During the 2018-19 school year, you repeatedly told 

students about your own personal issues and involved them 

with your problems. 

k. 

During the 2018-19 school year, you foster-parented 

a 17-year-old student (G.C.) under questionable 

circumstances, and this student was apparently taken away 

from you for cause. After you began fostering G.C., you 

arranged for him to attend a traditional District high school 

(Golden Valley), rather than Bowman because you were 

9

teaching at Bowman. G.C. later failed all of his classes at 

Golden Valley. G.C. was later taken away from you and you 

were apparently ordered by the Department of Children 

and Family Services to have no further contact with him. 

Nevertheless, you took G.C. to Court on December 28, 2018 

in response to a warrant for his arrest, and convinced the 

judge to permit G.C. to live with you, with the Court 

apparently not knowing the directive from DCFS. Once GC’s 

probationary officer and DCFS found out, G.C. was 

subpoenaed back into court with a recommendation to 

detain him. G.C. was later taken away from you again and 

placed in a group home. 

l. 

During the 2018-19 school year, you took in S.Z., a 

graduate of Bowman, to live with you. You then posted on 

social media in September 2018 how beautiful S.Z. is and 

how much you love her, and that this 19-year-old young 

lady completes you, as follows: To my beautiful (symbol) on 

her 19th birthday. I (love symbol) you more than words can 

say. In many ways, you saved me. You have given me so 

many incredible gifts. S

, without you my life would not 

be complete (heart symbol) Our love has fueled my passion 

and purpose - I give you all the credit for helping me 

discover my greatest gift (100 symbol) You are and will 

always be my hero. You (sic) talents are never-ending. 

Creative, beautiful, visionary but most if (sic) all you can 

10 

laugh at yourself (laughing symbol) Not to mention you are 

an amazing trail runner!! 

m. 

You posted on social media on or about September 

4, 2018, that several Bowman students are your “sons from 

another mother.” One student is a transgender student who 

identifies as a boy. These students in turn referred to you as 

“Mom.” Your post included the following: You girls make 

my life sweeter (emojis) I cherish everyday - to my sons 

from another (emoji) you are the stars in my sky and I’m 

blessed just to know you. 

n. 

With respect to your students, you posted on social 

media on or about June 4, 2018 that you “Miss my Babygirl” 

and “The Plug,” as follows: I (heart symbol) running into my 

favorite students!! (symbol) Glad it’s (symbol) Summer 

Break (symbol) Miss my Babygirl and The Plug!!! 

o. 

Thereafter, during the 2018-19 school year you were 

placed on paid administrative leave pending the District’s 

investigation of allegations of misconduct against you. 

Despite your placement on paid leave, and repeated 

admonishments that you maintain a professional and 

nonsocial relationship with your students, you continued to 

socialize with students, including Hart District students. You 

allowed 18-year-old student B.T. to live with you in your 

house; you also allowed Bowman student T.W. to stay at 

11 

your house periodically; and you have socialized (including 

going shopping) with current Bowman student S.H. 

p. 

I met with you during the 2018-19 school year to 

investigate some of the allegations contained in this Notice. 

When I met with you, you were dishonest in some of your 

responses regarding your relationship with current and 

former students. 

q. 

You aided and abetted, facilitated, condoned, and/or 

encouraged student G.C. to assault student J.C.

As a teacher, you are responsible for modeling proper 

behavior for young, impressionable students. You are 

supposed to protect students from harassing conduct. Your 

behavior as described above reflects that, to the contrary, 

you have exploited your authority in order to cultivate 

social or perhaps romantic relationships with vulnerable 

students. 

Your conduct evinces a betrayal of the trust placed in you 

to care for and educate the children of the community.

Your conduct may also constitute sexual harassment, in 

violation of Education Code section 200 et seq., California 

Code of Regulations, Title 5, section 4915 et seq., District 

Board Policies and regulations as identified above, and is in 

contravention of the California Standards for the Teaching 

Profession. 

12 

When asked about the above-described incidents, you were 

dishonest about the facts, and the nature of your 

relationship with the students involved. 

(Ex. 56.) 

Students 

Respondent’s Failure to Maintain a Professional Relationship with 

6.

Respondent worked at Bowman as a math teacher. She held two 

preliminary credentials: a single subject credential in foundational level mathematics 

that expired in April 2020 and a multiple subject credential that expired in December 

2019. Because respondent was on administrative leave, she did not complete induction 

or clear her preliminary credentials. 

7. 

Respondent began working for the District as a substitute teacher in 

August 2013, worked in a long-term substitute teacher assignment during the 2016-

2017 school year, was a probationary teacher at Bowman during the 2017-2018 school 

year, and was hired to teach at Bowman during the 2018-2019 school year. The District 

placed her on paid administrative leave effective November 29, 2018. 

8. 

Bowman’s mission is: 

to forge strong, positive connections with students so they 

can achieve independence, build confidence, and gain 

academic knowledge. . . . Bowman creates a trusting, caring 

environment . . . . Positive relationships are the core of 

Bowman's success. We acknowledge that growth occurs 

when individuals feel safe, respected, and appreciated. 

13 

Bowman creates a culture that values people and 

connections, making it a unique, accepting, academic 

environment for students to succeed on many levels. 

(Exhibit 507.)

9. 

To this end, Bowman’s students and teachers are encouraged to connect 

on a personal level and Bowman students call all teachers and counselors by their first 

names. Some students took this to the next level by addressing respondent as “mom.” 

While respondent did not discourage students from doing so, the evidence presented 

did not establish that respondent requested or encouraged them to call her “mom.” 

FEBRUARY 12, 2018 INCIDENT 

10.  On February 12, 2018, a student informed then-Assistant Principal Eran 

Zeevi that respondent had shared information about her teaching career and personal 

life with a student. Another student overheard the conversation and reported to 

Administration that respondent had seemed depressed and suicidal and that he was 

concerned for respondent’s safety. Zeevi testified at the administrative hearing and 

was also deposed prior to the hearing. 

11.

Zeevi held a meeting with respondent on February 12, 2018, at which 

Nina Zamora was present. Zamora testified at the administrative hearing. She first met 

respondent when they were teenagers. Zamora, a math teacher, provided mentoring 

and support as respondent’s Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) consulting teacher. 

Zamora became the Assistant Principal at Bowman in Fall 2017 and has been the

Principal at Bowman since December 2020. 

14 

12. 

During the meeting, Zeevi asked respondent whether she had shared 

personal information with students. Respondent admitted that during break-time she 

had told a student that she was struggling financially, could not afford to purchase an 

item her son wanted, and was concerned she was not a good mother. 

13. 

Zeevi reminded respondent of the importance of boundaries and 

professionalism. He told respondent that teachers should not share their personal 

problems with students because Bowman students are often fragile and students 

should not be considered friends or confidants. Respondent agreed and apologized, 

stating that she was seeing a therapist and it would not happen again. Zeevi felt that 

respondent understood the concerns about professionalism and boundaries. He 

offered respondent the opportunity to teach an early morning intervention math class 

to earn additional income and respondent agreed to do so. 

MAY 3, 2018 INCIDENT

14.  On May 3, 2018, respondent told her class that she was shocked and 

upset because she had just learned that her 11-year-old son had been assaulted at his 

school by a substitute teacher. During this class period, three students engaged in 

misconduct. Jose A. and Omari B. roughhoused; the back of Jose A.’s earring was

pushed into his earlobe; and Oliva W. called Omari B. names. Olivia W. ran out of the 

classroom in tears and was sent to the front office by campus security. None of these 

students testified at the administrative hearing.

15. 

Respondent did not inform Administration of her students’ misconduct. 

When Administration learned that all three students were from respondent’s class, she 

was called into the office to discuss the matter. During the meeting with then-Principal 

Geissler and Zeevi, respondent was informed again of the importance of professional 

15 

behavior and that it was not appropriate for her to share personal issues with students. 

At the meeting, respondent acknowledged her responsibility for the student 

misconduct and for sharing personal issues with students. She stated that she should 

have taken the rest of the day off after learning of the assault.

MAY 17, 2018 INCIDENT

16. 

Campus Supervisor Desmond Carter, science teacher Shonna August, and 

student A

 C. testified at the administrative hearing. On May 17, 2018, August told 

A

 C. in the early morning that he needed to turn in some paperwork by the end of 

the day to graduate. A

 C. had left the paperwork at home and did not want to take 

the bus home to get it because the bus trip would take about one hour each way. 

A

A

 C. returned with the assignment about one hour later. When August asked 

 C. how he had retrieved the paperwork from his home so quickly, he told her he 

“took a Lyft” (Administrative Hearing Transcript (Hearing Tr.), 1189:9 – 1191:9.)

17. 

A

 C. was not truthful in his response. Respondent had driven student 

A

 C. to his home and back to Bowman in her personal car to pick up the 

assignment. She did so without informing Administration and without first obtaining 

District authorization. This was contrary to training received in Orientation. Campus 

supervisors, who are responsible for student safety at Bowman, reported the incident 

to Administration. 

18. 

A

 C. was not respondent’s student that semester. He was present in 

respondent’s classroom immediately before she drove him home. Respondent’s 

classroom was next to the rear parking lot where her car was parked. Rather than walk 

with respondent to the rear parking lot, A

 C. walked off campus to be picked up. 

Respondent then drove off-campus to pick up A

 C. and drive him home. Upon 

16 

their return, respondent let A

 C. out of her car off-campus and then drove to the 

parking lot and parked. Respondent’s conduct indicates that she was aware that 

driving A

 C. in her vehicle without District authorization was contrary to District 

policy and she was acting deceptively in an attempt to avoid detection. 

19.  When Zeevi and Geissler met with respondent on May 23, 2018, to 

discuss the May 17, 2018 incident, respondent acknowledged she had made an “idiotic 

mistake” in driving A

 C. in her car without authorization from the District. Geissler 

and Zeevi reminded respondent about her duties and responsibilities as a teacher, 

including the importance of professionalism and maintaining boundaries between 

teachers and students. They admonished her for driving the student without District 

authorization and sent respondent home for the remainder of the day. 

SEPTEMBER 17, 2018 MEETING 

20.  On September 17, 2018, then-Principal Zeevi met with respondent. 

Zamora and teachers’ union representative Michael Coombe were also in attendance. 

Zeevi expressed his concern that respondent was engaging in a pattern of behavior by 

becoming emotionally involved with students from the campus (including having 

students call her “mom”) and getting immersed in students’ personal lives. Zeevi 

directed respondent to be more aware of her actions and how they are perceived.

21. 

During the September 17, 2018 meeting, Zeevi also discussed 

respondent’s plan to foster then 17-year-old G

 C. who had been in respondent’s 

class at Bowman in 2016 and had attended Bowman during the 2017-2018 school 

year. G

 C. had lived in many foster homes over the years. He had previously been 

fostered for three months by Kathy Reiche, a teacher who taught at another high 

17 

school in the District. Reiche testified at the administrative hearing. She and her 

husband had fostered and adopted two other children prior to fostering G

 C. 

22.  Other Bowman teachers had told union representative Coombe that they 

were uncomfortable with respondent’s plan to foster G

 C. In May 2018, G

 C. had 

entered a drug rehabilitation program. At the time of the September 17 meeting, G

 

C. was a run-away, there was a warrant out for his arrest, and respondent had sent her 

own young son to live with his grandparents. 

23. 

Zeevi told respondent that she should be aware of how a single woman 

taking a former student who was a 17-year-old male into her home might be 

perceived. He cautioned respondent that if G

 C. made accusations against her in 

the future, it could harm her career.

24. 

Respondent chose to proceed with fostering G

 C. and the Los Angeles 

County Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) placed him in her home on 

September 19, 2018. 

OCTOBER 4, 2018 TELEPHONE CALL 

25.  On October 4, 2018, the Bowman registrar received a telephone call from 

Samuel D., a former student who had attended Bowman during the 2017-2018 school 

year. Samuel D. asked to speak with respondent. School had finished for the day. 

When the registrar determined that respondent was not in her classroom and asked 

the caller for a message, Samuel D. hung up. Samuel D. testified at the administrative 

hearing and established he made the telephone call to respondent because he wanted 

to return an algebra book he had borrowed from her when he was a student. 

18 

OCTOBER 11, 2018 INCIDENT 

26.

On October 11, 2018, as a reward, respondent allowed her students to 

play Uno and Playdough during an early-morning intervention math class she taught. 

Bowman students voluntarily chose to attend intervention classes for extra credit. 

When he became aware of this, Zeevi advised respondent to restrict rewards such as 

this to the last five minutes of class and she complied with this directive.

STUDENTS T

 W. AND B

 T. 

27A.  B

 T. was a Bowman student in respondent’s class during the 2017-

2018 school year. T

 W. was a Bowman student in respondent’s class during the 

2018-2019 school year. T

 W. testified at the administrative hearing. 

27B.

In September 2018, respondent learned via a Facebook posting that T

 

W. was a “runaway” and that there was a warrant out for her arrest because B

 T. 

and T

 W. allegedly had broken into, and stolen items from, the home of T

 W.’s 

grandmother. At the time T

 W. was on the run, respondent followed T

 W. on 

Instagram. Respondent knew T

 W. was 17 years old, pregnant, and was B

 T.’s 

girlfriend.

enforcement. 

28. 

T

 W.’s mother called Bowman and reported to Zeevi that her daughter 

was staying with B

 T. at respondent’s home while they were on the run. However, 

the District failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that respondent allowed 

minor T

 W. to stay at her house while she and B

 T. were on the run from law 

29.

B

 T., a friend of G

 C., stayed overnight at respondent’s home five 

to 10 times on unspecified dates between September and December 2018, after she 

19 

began fostering G

 C. B

 T. was no longer a Bowman student at this time. While 

this encompasses the period when B

 T. was subject to an outstanding arrest 

warrant, the District did not present sufficient evidence to establish that he stayed 

overnight at respondent’s home while on the run. 

30. While T

 W. was on the run, G

 C. asked respondent to meet T

W.’s sister at Valencia High School to pick up T

 W.’s purse. Respondent did so and 

then gave the purse to G

 C. Respondent did not contact law enforcement, the 

District, or T

 W.’s parents about this request. The purse was a 12 by 10-inch 

backpack-style purse. A few days later, T

 W. retrieved the purse from respondent’s 

home after turning herself in to authorities. 

31. 

After B

 T. left Bowman, he and respondent became co-owners of 

Break-In Entertainment, a rap music venture. Respondent represented to others that 

she was B

 T’s “music manager.” Respondent wore a tee shirt to school, promoting 

Break-In Entertainment. The logo consists of a ski mask with holes cut out. Respondent 

posed for a photo at school in which she is embracing a female student who is 

wearing the same tee shirt. Respondent was also observed at Bowman standing next 

to another student; they were texting with each other and sharing items from their cell

phones.

Alleged Repeated Intrusions Into Students’ Personal Lives and 

Involvement In Respondent’s Personal Issues 

32. 

Respondent and each of the students who testified at the hearing denied 

that respondent repeatedly intruded into the personal lives of her students or 

repeatedly told students about, and involved them in, her own personal issues. 

20 

Accordingly, the District failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that 

respondent did so. 

FOSTERING OF G

 C. 

33. 

Despite the concerns raised by Zeevi and some of respondent’s 

colleagues, respondent took G

 C. in as a foster child during the 2018-2019 school 

year. DCFS Social Worker Randolph M. Gracia testified at the administrative hearing. 

He was G

 C.’s caseworker for six months to one year, before retiring in March 2019. 

Gracia recognized that a single woman with a child taking in a 17-year-old boy “could 

create problems.” Nevertheless, DCFS vetted and approved G

 C.’s placement with 

respondent after considering Zeevi’s input. 

34. 

Respondent arranged for G

 C. to attend a traditional District high 

school (Golden Valley), rather than Bowman to avoid any conflict due to respondent 

being a teacher at Bowman. G

 C. failed all his classes at Golden Valley. 

35. 

In late November 2019, Bowman student JC told Zeevi that G

 C.’s 

fraternal twin brother M

 C. had stated that respondent and G

 C. were in an 

intimate relationship. Zeevi immediately reported this information to DCFS. M

 C., 

who testified at the administrative hearing, denied telling anyone that respondent and 

G

 C. were in an intimate relationship and respondent denied this assertion. The 

District failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that respondent and G

 C. 

had an intimate relationship.

36.

On November 29, 2018, a Deputy Sheriff and DCFS representatives came 

to respondent’s home. Respondent was asked whether she was having a sexual 

relationship with G

 C., if she allowed students to stay at her house, and if she had 

21 

given G

 C. a ride the prior week to assault Bowman student JC. Although 

respondent denied these assertions, G

 C. was removed from respondent’s home. 

37. 

Respondent drove G

 C. to a court appearance on December 28, 2018, 

following his arrest for an alleged robbery in June 2018. The court permitted G

 C. 

to return to respondent’s home. On June 3, 2019, G

 C. was taken into custody and 

placed in a group home. He later was sentenced to serve time in jail. 

38. 

In January 2020, DCFS placed G

 C. with respondent as a non-minor 

dependent and he continues to reside in respondent’s home. According to Gracia, 

DCFS saw no evidence of a sexual or inappropriate relationship between respondent 

and G

 C. DCFS was not concerned about G

 C’s placement although ammunition, 

a loaded weapon, and drugs had been found in his bedroom at respondent’s 

residence during the execution of a search warrant. Respondent contended at the 

hearing that the District was behind the search warrant. However, the District 

established that the Santa Clarita Sheriff’s Department obtained and executed the 

search warrant based on alleged criminal behavior by G

 C. and B

 T. in Santa 

Clarita, California, disproving respondent’s assertion. 

RESPONDENT’S SOCIAL MEDIA POSTS

39.  When respondent was teaching at Bowman, her Instagram account was 

not private, and she allowed “everyone” to have access. (5/17/21 Hallen Deposition 

(Hallen Depo.), 24:12 – 25:2.) Respondent also advertised her Instagram account on 

her homepage for students. 

40. 

Zamora was on the executive board of the teachers’ union. The union 

emphasized the importance of teachers maintaining a private Instagram account and 

22 

recommended that teachers who wish to be on social media maintain both a 

professional account students may access and a private account for personal posts. 

41. 

S

 Z. attended Bowman during the 2016-2017 school year. She 

graduated in May 2017. She did not testify at the administrative hearing. In October 

and November 2017, S

 Z. lived with respondent. Respondent posted the following 

on social media in September 2018:

To my beautiful (symbol) on her 19th birthday. I (love 

symbol) you more than words can say. In many ways, you 

saved me. You have given me so many incredible gifts. 

S

, without you my life would not be complete (heart 

symbol) Our love has fueled my passion and purpose - I 

give you all the credit for helping me discover my greatest 

gift (100 symbol) You are and will always be my hero. You 

(sic) talents are never-ending. Creative, beautiful, visionary 

but most if (sic) all you can laugh at yourself (laughing 

symbol) Not to mention you are an amazing trail runner!! 

(Ex. 10.) 

///

///

/// 

///

/// 

23 

42.  On September 4, 2018, respondent posted on social media that several 

Bowman students are her “sons from another mother.” (Exhs. 7 & 20.) These students 

referred to respondent as “mom.” One of respondent’s posts stated:

You girls make my life sweeter (emojis) I cherish everyday - 

to my sons from another (emoji) you are the stars in my sky 

and I’m blessed just to know you.

(Ex. 7.) 

43.  On June 4, 2018, respondent referred to two of her students on social 

media, stating: “Miss my Babygirl and The Plug!!!” (Ex. 14.) Respondent also posted a 

sign in her classroom proclaiming, “my name is: Erika the Plug.” (Ex. 8.) A “plug” can be 

slang terminology for a drug dealer. 

SOCIALIZING WITH STUDENTS

44. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, respondent was placed on paid 

administrative leave pending the District’s investigation of allegations of misconduct. 

The District alleged, but failed to establish, that respondent socialized with current 

Bowman students during that time period. 

Evidentiary Issues Regarding the Assault on Student JC 

45. 

The District alleges that respondent aided and abetted, facilitated, 

condoned, and/or encouraged her foster son, G

 C., to assault student JC. 

46. 

JC conveyed a contemporaneous, consistent, and detailed account of the 

November 26, 2018, assault to his father, to Zeevi, and to Sergeant Jason A. Viger with 

24 

the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department (Assault Notes, Ex. 47; Sheriff Report, Ex. 

71.) Sergeant Viger testified at the administrative hearing. 

47. 

During separate interviews soon after the assault, JC provided details of 

the assault to Sergeant Viger and Zeevi. He identified G

 C. as his attacker and 

respondent as the driver who saw the assault. JC stated to them that respondent sped 

off after the assault with G

 C. and another man in the car. 

JC’S STATEMENT TO SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT

48.  On December 2, 2018, Sergeant Viger interviewed JC in person about the 

assault. He observed bruising and abrasions on JC’s face. JC provided a detailed 

account and identified G

 C. as his attacker and respondent as the driver. Sergeant 

Viger memorialized this interview in a Sheriff Incident Report. (Ex. 71.)

49. 

At the time of the interview JC did not appear to be under the influence 

of drugs or alcohol. Sergeant Viger observed the following about JC. He was: “Shaken. 

Scared. Intimidated.” (Sergeant Viger, Hearing Tr., 1525:22-24.) “[I]t was fairly obvious 

he was in fear of the person that assaulted him, shooken [

]. And this was days after 

the event. Intimidated by the people involved.” (Sergeant Viger, Hearing Tr., 1528:22 –

1529:3.)

JC’S STATEMENT TO ZEEVI

50. 

In November 2018, JC’s father contacted Cindy Takamoto, a Bowman 

social worker, about the assault on JC (who was then a Bowman student), and the 

social worker reported the matter to Zeevi. In Fall 2018, G

 C.’s brother, M

 C., 

was living with his friend JC in Agua Dulce at the home of JC’s father. Both M

 C. 

and JC were Bowman students during the 2018-2019 school year. 

25 

51.  On November 28, 2018, Zeevi and social worker Takamoto initiated a 

telephone call to JC’s father, who provided them with an overview of the November 

26, 2018 assault. JC’s father then put his son on the telephone and JC provided a 

detailed account of the assault which was consistent with the account he had given to 

Sergeant Viger. JC again identified G

 C. as the person who assaulted him and 

respondent as the driver of the car. 

52. 

Zeevi took notes during the telephone call. During the call, JC stated: 

JC went to look for M

 C. after JC’s father demanded that M

 C. move 

out. There is only one plaza in Agua Dulce. As JC was walking, G

 showed up in a car 

driven by “the lady he lives with” who has “short curly hair” and “wears flats.” She was 

driving a gray four-door car with license plate 3XLY066 [6XLV066 is the correct license 

plate number for respondent’s gray Audi.] G

 and another “bigger man” got out of 

the car. The “bigger man” did not participate in the assault. G

 C. hit JC in the nose, 

driving JC’s nose ring into his septum. JC fell to the ground, but G

 C. kept hitting 

him. The “gray car was across the street and saw the whole thing.” The car slowed 

down and came by JC as he was on elevated ground higher up. G

 C. was “throwing 

up gang signs” and JC saw the woman driving. G

 told JC to “call the Feds and see 

what happens.” M

 C. told JC that G

C. and respondent are in an intimate 

relationship. JC saw respondent talking to M

C. (Ex. 47.)

JC’S DEPOSITION TESTIMONY 

53. 

The District deposed JC on April 21, 2021. At his deposition, JC admitted 

he had been assaulted in Agua Dulce, but claimed he did not recall who assaulted him 

or who drove the car. (JC Depo., 8:20 – 9:5, 14:22 – 15:1, 24:15-23.) 

/// 

26 

54. 

At his deposition, JC asserted:

He had never seen respondent before his deposition. (JC Depo., 8:20 – 

9:5.) 

Depo., 8:20 – 9:5.) 

  He did not know whether respondent was a teacher at Bowman. (JC 

  When asked to recount the details of the assault, JC could not recall 

anything that happened. (JC Depo., 13:23 – 14:9.) 

  He did not recall the name of the person who assaulted him. (JC Depo., 

14:5-6.) 

  He did not know who assaulted him. (JC Depo., 20:10-12.) 

  He did not get a look at the driver or assailant. (JC Depo., 14:7-9.) 

  He did not recall a call with the District about the assault or recall 

providing the District with information about the assault. (JC Depo., 

32:10-14, 27:23 – 28:4.) 

  He did not recall whether he remembered a license plate. (JC Depo., 

37:24 – 38:5.) 

32:15-17.) 

  He did not recall conveying a license plate to the District. (JC Depo., 

  He did not recall the color of the car. (JC Depo., 34:17-19.) 

  He did not recall whether a woman was driving or what she looked like. 

(JC Depo., 36:9-19.) 

27 

He did not see the car. (JC Depo., 54:17-23.)

He never called the police. (JC Depo., 24:15-23.) 

  He does not know anything about who assaulted him. (JC Depo., 24:15-

23.) 

52:14 – 53:4.) 

55. 

During his deposition, JC acknowledged that he would have had a better 

recollection of the assault closer to the time that it occurred. (JC Depo., 34:22 – 34:24, 

56. 

During his deposition, JC specifically requested that the “message should 

be passed on” that he never contacted law enforcement about the assault, and he 

harbors no animosity for any participants at the deposition. Respondent attended the 

deposition. (JC Depo., 16:16-22, 20:21:2- 28.) 

57. 

Respondent’s counsel cross-examined JC at his deposition. He was 

provided an opportunity to explain the prior inconsistent statements he had made to 

Sergeant Viger and the District but professed a total inability to recall anything other 

than the fact that he had been assaulted. JC’s asserted total failure of recollection at 

his deposition constitutes a denial of all the particulars of the assault which JC had 

conveyed to Zeevi and Sergeant Viger.

JC’S FAILURE TO APPEAR AT THE HEARING 

58. 

Despite exercising reasonable diligence, the District was unable to 

procure JC’s attendance as a witness at the hearing. The District served JC with a 

subpoena to appear, as well as an Order to Appear issued by the ALJ. However, JC 

refused to testify at the hearing. Respondent’s counsel conveyed the message that JC, 

who has suffered a felony conviction, would rather go to jail than testify at the hearing.

28 

statement was made and evidence that the witness's failure to confirm the 

identification arises from fear or intimidation. In this matter, Sergeant Viger testified at 

the hearing and JC’s demeanor when speaking to Sergeant Viger and at the deposition 

suggests his claimed forgetfulness was driven by fear and intimidation. 

74. 

Respondent asserts that the Greening evidence should be disallowed

because JC did not testify at the hearing, and his deposition testimony in lieu of 

testimony at the hearing cannot be used as a basis for Greening; respondent did not 

have the Sheriff’s Incident Report at the time of the JC deposition and therefore had 

no opportunity to question JC about the contents of the Sheriff’s Incident Report; and

JC was not confronted about his prior inconsistent statements at his deposition. These 

arguments are not persuasive. 

75A.  As discussed above, as an unavailable witness, JC’s deposition testimony 

could be used as if he were testifying at the hearing. In addition, respondent had 

ample opportunity to cross-examine JC about the assault at his deposition, whether 

through her own knowledge of the events, through her own investigation and 

communications with JC, by deposing Zeevi, or by procuring the Sheriff’s Incident 

Report and Zeevi’s notes on the assault. 

75B.  The District established that: 

  Respondent spoke with the DCFS on two occasions, at which time she 

was provided all the details of the assault. (5/11/21 Hallen Depo, 56:12-

13, 20-25; Hallen Hearing Tr., 969:2-13, 970:24 – 971:2, 978:22 – 979:13, 

1026:16-25.) 

  The Sheriff spoke with respondent and G

 C. about the assault. (Ex. 

48; 372: 7-22; 

Hallen Hearing Tr., 973:16 – 974:18.) 

33 

Respondent spoke with G

 C. about the details of the assault. (Hallen

Hearing Tr., 978:22 – 981:7.) 

  The District timely disclosed Zeevi’s notes on the assault prior to JC’s 

deposition. (See Ex. 47.) 

  Respondent examined Zeevi at his deposition about his notes on the 

assault. (Complainant’s Counsel, Hearing Tr., 16:24 – 18:2.) 

  The District produced the Sheriff’s Incident Report shortly after 

obtaining it via subpoena. (Complainant’s Counsel, Hearing Tr., 1509:7-

9.) 

matter. (Ex. 537.)

Respondent requested and obtained police records relating to this 

The Sheriff’s Incident Report was equally available to both parties. (ALJ 

Ruling, 1510:15 – 1512:7.)

The contents of the Zeevi notes and Sheriff’s Incident Report are 

consistent. (Sheriff Report, Ex. 71, Assault Notes, Ex. 47.)

Respondent’s counsel spoke by telephone with JC prior to his 

deposition. (JC Depo., 49:21 – 49:25.) 

Respondent examined JC at deposition and communicated with JC 

during the hearing. (Respondent’s Counsel, 15:9-14.)

76. 

Cross-examination can be effective in shedding light on the reliability 

and veracity of an out-of-court identification. Respondent had a full opportunity to 

question JC at his deposition as to the circumstances surrounding his prior statement 

34 

to Sergeant Viger and the District. Respondent was able to elicit from JC an 

explanation for the inconsistencies in his prior statements and his subsequent inability 

to recall any details of the assault. Through such questioning, the panel could assess 

the credibility of JC’s deposition testimony in comparison to his earlier detailed 

accounts to Sergeant Viger and Zeevi. 

77.

JC explained his inconsistent statements at his deposition by asserting 

that he had suffered physical injuries during the assault that could have impaired his 

ability to recall details from that time period. He also claimed that he had been using 

controlled substances during the time period of the assault. However, while this might 

be a viable explanation for a failure to recall any details of the assault, it would not 

explain why JC initially was able to provide a detailed account to Sergeant Viger and 

Zeevi immediately after the assault but was unable to recall any details of the assault 

later, at the time of his deposition. Therefore, JC’s explanation for his claimed failure to 

recall any details of the assault was not convincing. 

78. 

The panel found JC’s detailed, out-of-court statements to Sergeant Viger

and Zeevi to be credible. JC’s prior inconsistent statements to Sergeant Viger and 

Zeevi are admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule as prior inconsistent statements 

to prove the truth of the matters asserted by JC to Sergeant Viger and Zeevi.

79. 

Even if JC’s statements to Sergeant Viger and Zeevi were admitted solely 

as administrative hearsay, JC’s out-of-court statements supplement and explain 

respondent’s and other’s accounts of what transpired on the date of the assault. 

Respondent testified that she drove G

 C. to and from Agua Dulce on the date and 

time of the assault and that G

 C. got out of the car in the area where JC was 

walking. In addition, M

 C. testified that G

 C. admitted to him that JC and G

 

35 

C. had an “altercation” and “something went down” between G

 C. and JC that 

might have related to M

 C. (M

 C., Hearing Tr., 888:7 – 889:4, 889:23-25.) 

Details of Assault on JC 

80. 

In Fall 2018, M

 C. was homeless and was staying overnight three to 

four times per week with JC at the home of JC’s father in Agua Dulce, California. JC’s 

father testified at the administrative hearing but was a reluctant witness. JC’s father 

wanted M

 C. and JC to find employment and move into an apartment in Santa 

Clarita. JC got angry and announced that he did not want to do that, and JC’s father 

then told M

 C. that he could no longer stay in his home. 

81.  M

 C. told G

 C. what had transpired. G

 C. “was not happy” that 

his brother had to move out of JC’s father’s house. (M

 C., Hearing Tr., 888:7 – 

889:4, 889:23-25.) M

 C. never spoke to JC again after that day and has “blocked” 

JC. 

funeral.

82.  On November 26, 2018, the day of the assault, respondent attended a 

funeral for a former District student in La Crescenta, California. The funeral began at 

noon and lasted approximately one hour. G

 C. did not know the student who had 

died. He waited in respondent’s car, a silver Audi, while respondent attended the 

83.  When the funeral ended, respondent drove G

 C. to Agua Dulce, a 

one-hour drive. Respondent testified that they went to Agua Dulce for G

 C. to give 

$40 to M

C. However, this assertion is questionable in that M

 C. had a debit 

card and an app on his cellphone to electronically receive money. 

36 

84. 

Agua Dulce is a small town with only one main street. M

 C. told G

 

C. to meet him at Sweetwater Farms Market, which was “one long block” from the 

home of JC’s father. M

 C. waited for G

 C. and respondent in front of the market 

with all his “bags.” Respondent claims that, somehow, they failed to find him. M

 C. 

saw respondent’s car “coming and leaving,” but respondent and G

 C. did not see 

him. M

 C. later obtained the $40 from G

 C. when respondent drove back to 

Agua Dulce one or two hours later. 

85. 

Thirty minutes after M

 C. left JC’s house on November 26, 2018, JC 

walked southbound on Agua Dulce Canyon Road to find M

 C. At approximately 

2:30 p.m., JC was approached by a silver, four-door vehicle. JC identified the license 

plate as “3XLY066.” The license plate for respondent’s gray Audi is 6XLV066. JC stated 

that the vehicle was driven by an adult white female with short curly hair whom he 

identified as the Bowman teacher who lives with G

 C. 

86. 

G

 C. exited the front right passenger door, approached JC, and in an 

angry tone asked where M

 C. was. G

 C. hit JC 15 to 20 times in the head and 

chest, JC’s nose ring was ripped from his nose, G

 C. kicked JC, and JC fell to the 

ground. After assaulting JC, G

 C. ran back into the vehicle, got in the car, and said 

“go, go, go.” JC stated that the car was across the street and saw the whole thing. 

(Exhs. 71 & 47.) Respondent then drove away. JC called 911. 

Dishonesty 

87. 

In November and December 2018, DCFS provided respondent with “all 

the details about what had happened with JC” including that “G

 was accused of 

assaulting JC and that it happened in Agua Dulce.” (5.11.21 Hallen Depo., 56:12-13, 20-

25; Hallen, Hearing Tr., 969:2-13, 970:24 – 971:2, 978:22 – 979:13, 1026:16-25.) 

37 

Respondent then told the DCFS “exactly what happened, but [the DCFS Supervisor] did 

not believe [her] at all.” (Hallen, Hearing Tr., 979:8-23.) Respondent also discussed with 

G

 C. all the “details” of what DCFS had told her. (Hallen, Hearing Tr., 978:22 – 

981:7.) Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputies Stowers and Maxcy interviewed 

respondent and G

 C. soon after the assault and told Zamora that their “stories did 

not match and their relationship seemed ‘odd and inappropriate’.” (Ex. 49.) 

88. 

Dr. Vierra subsequently met with respondent on January 24, 2019, 

regarding the allegations of possible misconduct. The District asserts that respondent 

was dishonest in that she: denied knowing who JC is; denied that G

 C. had hit JC; 

denied knowing whether G

 C. had been in a fight with any person in the prior year; 

and denied knowing that there had been a warrant out for T

 W.’s arrest at any time. 

Respondent admitted at the hearing that she did know about the outstanding arrest 

warrant before T

 W. turned herself in to authorities. 

89. 

At the meeting with Dr. Vierra, respondent also denied using words to 

the effect that S

 Z. “completes” her or that she had posted that she “can’t describe 

[her] love” for S

 Z, despite the fact that respondent had posted these sentiments 

on social media. (Exs. 10,16, & 52.) 

90. 

Respondent represented to Dr. Vierra that she did not follow students on 

Instagram until they had graduated. However, respondent’s Instagram account 

reflected that she did follow several current students, including T

 W. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

91. 

Respondent was a highly effective math teacher and valued coach for the 

Santa Clarita SOAR running club which prepares individuals to participate in the Los 

Angeles Marathon. Respondent asserts she was loved by Bowman students and 

38 

exemplified the Bowman vision by forming strong, positive connections with her 

students. She describes herself as a very nurturing person who embraced the 

challenge of helping students with their academic and personal issues. Respondent 

asserts that she listened to students and tried to show them through words and deeds 

that she cares and that they can trust her. 

92. 

These assertions were supported by 10 former Bowman students who 

testified at the administrative hearing. No student testified that respondent had 

intruded into their personal lives or had shared too much information about her own 

life and problems. 

93. 

Respondent concedes that some of the allegations against her are true 

but asserts that they do not warrant discipline. She offers explanations and 

justifications for her actions and asserts that the District did not give her sufficient 

notice as to what she had done wrong or the opportunity to improve. 

94. 

Respondent admits that she drove A

 C. home without District 

authorization; allowed her students to play games during class on one occasion; wore 

a tee-shirt with the Break-In Records logo, posted on social media as alleged; used the 

nicknames alleged for students and referred to herself as “E

 the Plug”; was 

addressed as “mom” by some of her students; chose to foster G

 C.; picked up T

 

W.’s purse when respondent knew there was a warrant out for her arrest; and allowed 

S

 Z. and B

 T. to stay at her home overnight at certain times after they had left 

Bowman. 

him or others. 

95. 

Respondent admits that there may have been minor discrepancies in the 

responses she gave to Dr. Vierra, but denies that she was intentionally dishonest with 

39 

96. 

Respondent admits that she drove G

 C. to and from Agua Dulce at the 

date and time of the assault on JC, but denies any knowledge of, or role in, the assault.

She did not discuss the assault with G

 C. because she “did not want to know.” 

97. 

The District does not dispute that respondent was a “strong teacher,” but 

asserts that she lacks the ability to exercise sound judgment in her role as an educator, 

minimized her misconduct, was dishonest and attempted to cover up her actions, and 

failed to demonstrate she has gained insight into her behavior. 

WHISTLEBLOWER DEFENSE 

98. 

Respondent asserts that the District is seeking her dismissal because she 

is a “whistleblower” who faced retaliation by Zeevi after she came into possession of a 

44-second video taken with a cellphone involving Zeevi and another person engaged 

in sexual acts (Video) (Ex. 501). Zeevi’s voice is heard but his face is not seen in the 

99.  On December 4, 2018, respondent contacted the Los Angeles County 

Sheriff’s Department and met with Deputy Tom Drake, a school resource officer 

assigned to the District. Respondent provided the Video to Deputy Drake, claiming she 

had received it via an anonymous text message. Deputy Drake discussed the Video 

with Zeevi who was “dumbfounded” as to how a student would have gotten the Video 

since the Grindr dating app is for adults only. 

Video. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

40 

100. 

In May 2020, respondent submitted a declaration to the California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC), asserting that Zeevi had knowingly sent 

the Video to a Bowman student. In her declaration, respondent states: 

I did not engage in any misconduct; rather, the District 

falsely accused me in order to discredit me because I 

reported my principal’s sexual misconduct toward an 

underage student. 

(Ex 4.) 

101.  Bowman teachers Jamie Herrington and Shonna August testified at the 

administrative hearing. On March 30, 2018, they attended a happy hour after school at 

a restaurant with respondent and seven other Bowman teachers. Respondent held up 

her phone to show the Video to everyone at the table and told them that a student 

had sent her the Video. August testified that she does “not understand how a student 

would feel comfortable sending something like that to a teacher.” 

102.  Respondent “excitedly” told the teachers at the happy hour that two 

underage students, including Omari B., had been “trying to set [Zeevi] up” and had 

successfully tricked Zeevi into responding to them on Grindr. Respondent told them 

that Zeevi sent the Video to a student because they “catfished” Zeevi into believing 

that he was sending the Video to an adult on the dating app. Herrington asked 

respondent why she was keeping the Video, and respondent replied, “in case I need it 

someday.” (Herrington, Hearing Tr., 1160:17 – 1165:12; August, Hearing Tr., 1190:17 –

1194:9.) Herrington advised respondent that it was “not appropriate” to “encourage” 

this behavior by the students. 

41 

103.  At the hearing, respondent denied that she ever said anything about 

students “catfishing” Zeevi and claimed she had never heard anything about students 

obtaining the Video in that way. This assertion was not convincing in light of the 

credible, detailed testimony of teachers August and Herrington and her own shifting 

narrative as to when and how she obtained the Video. 

104A.  At various times, respondent claimed the Video was sent to her iPhone 

from a blocked number, a number she did not recognize, or from a student. She 

initially claimed she had not told anyone about the Video until December 2018 when 

she reported it to Deputy Drake. However, after teachers August and Herrington 

testified, respondent admitted that she had shown the Video to others on March 30, 

2018. 

104B.  Respondent also provided conflicting information as to when she first 

received the Video. In December 2018, she told Dr. Vierra she received it in September 

2018. In May 2020 and May 2021, respondent claimed she received the Video in May 

2018. At the hearing, after August and Herrington’s testimony, respondent admitted 

she received the video on March 30, 2018. 

105.  Respondent asserted that Zeevi had knowingly sent the Video to 

underage student Omari B. When Dr. Vierra interviewed Omari B. in September 2020 

about the Video, Omari B. claimed “he did not know what [Dr. Vierra] was talking 

about” and stated that it was not true that Zeevi had sent the Video to him. 

106.  Respondent’s whistleblower claim was not persuasive. Respondent’s 

attempt to deflect attention from her own misconduct by shifting the focus to Zeevi 

reflects poorly on her. Respondent did not act as a good role model when she tacitly 

condoned the students’ actions in deceiving Zeevi and then attempted to use the 

42 

Video for her own benefit. Her conduct in regard to the Video establishes that

respondent has a propensity for dishonesty, lacks good judgment, and has failed to 

accept responsibility for her own actions. 

FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PROFESSIONAL BOUNDARIES WITH STUDENTS 

107. Respondent admits that she referred to some of her students as 

“fambam [family]” and “sons from another mother” and used nicknames for students 

including “Babygirl” and “the Plug.” She also admitted that she called individual 

students “beautiful” and told certain students that she loves them. Respondent 

allowed students to call her “mom” even after she was counseled against doing so on 

May 23, 2018. Respondent continues to believe her conduct was appropriate. (Ex. 13; 

5/17/21 Hallen Depo., 71:5-14.)

108.  At the hearing, respondent denied knowing that the terms “the plug” or 

“the bag chaser” might have drug connotations or that references like “gang gang” are 

inappropriate despite having completed a course on gangs at the University of 

LaVerne. 

109.  Respondent insists that Bowman teachers were “encouraged to call the 

kids by their nicknames if they wanted us to.” (Hallen Depo., 73:21 – 74:6, 76:2 – 77:11.) 

110.  Zamora credibly testified that while a nickname such as “Danny” for 

“Daniel” would be perfectly acceptable, nicknames such as the Plug or the Bag Chaser 

are improper because they reference drug or gang terminology or encourage a level 

of informality that is outside the scope of a student-teacher relationship. 

111.  Respondent never asked students to call her “Mom.” However, 

respondent does not believe it is inappropriate for students to do so. 

43 

112.  When asked what respondent would do differently if she were allowed to 

return to teach at the District, respondent stated, “I don’t even know.” She testified 

that she does not know “how to be a different person,” is “a nice and kind person” and 

does “not know what to do with that.” 

113.  Herrington confirmed that District policy forbids allowing students to 

friend teachers on social media unless the teacher maintains a separate professional 

social media account. 

114.  Respondent testified that she was unaware of the District’s social media 

policy. When respondent was asked whether she would do anything differently as to 

social media if she returned to the District, she replied, “I guess I just don’t have it; 

then, I don’t have to worry about it.” (Hallen, Hearing Tr.,1547:19-26.) Respondent did 

not indicate that she would maintain separate professional social media accounts 

accessible to students and private accounts to which students would not be privy, in 

accordance with District policy. 

S

 Z. 

115.  Respondent maintained a relationship with Bowman graduate S

 Z., 

as a friend and mentor. S

 Z. was on the SOAR running team respondent coached. 

After S

 Z. graduated from Bowman in May 2017, she lived with respondent in 

October and November 2017. S

 Z. was an adult at all times referenced in the 

Statement of Charges. No District rule or policy precludes District staff from socializing 

with former students who have reached adulthood. 

/// 

/// 

44 

DISHONESTY ALLEGATIONS

116. Respondent denied that she was dishonest when she met with Dr. Vierra

in January 2019 asserting that her responses to his questions were consistent with her 

hearing testimony. Respondent had almost no information as to the specific 

accusations leveled against her when she went into the interview. She asserts that any 

minor discrepancies in her responses were inadvertent and attributable to her failure 

to understand the context of the questions posed. 

117.  Respondent replied “no” when Dr. Vierra asked her whether G

 C. at 

any time hit J

 B. Respondent contends that her response was not dishonest as she 

did not know JC, did not know that “J

 B.” is also known as JC, and had no personal 

knowledge of G

 C. getting into a fight or hitting anyone named “J

.”

118.  On November 29, 2018, the District placed respondent on paid 

administrative leave and provided written notice she was not to destroy any evidence 

relating in any way to the conduct at issue. Respondent failed to retain any electronic 

evidence relating to the charges. She claims that she lost her iPhone after being placed 

on administrative leave by leaving it on a bench outside a Baskin Robbins; she did not 

restore her lost iPhone; she does not know whether her iPhone was backed-up; she 

lost the computers that she had before she was placed on administrative leave; and 

she deleted her Instagram account right after she was placed on administrative leave, 

though respondent knew her Instagram account could be made private.

FEBRUARY 12, 2018 INCIDENT 

119.  Both respondent and student Jaret R. denied that respondent ever “broke 

down to a student” while discussing her personal life or that she sounded depressed 

and suicidal in front of students. Zeevi believed that the student involved in the 

45 

February 12, 2018 incident was named “Jared” but Zeevi could not recall the student’s 

last name. 

120.  At the hearing, respondent denied that she had any meeting with Zeevi 

and Zamora on February 12, 2018. However, Zeevi and Zamora testified that they met 

with respondent on that date and the meeting was memorialized in the PAR 

Communication Log (Ex. 72) and counseling memos. At the meeting, respondent 

acknowledged that students are not teachers’ friends or confidantes and told Zeevi 

and Zamora that she is seeing a mental health therapist. 

MAY 3, 2018 INCIDENT

121.  On May 3, 2018, respondent was on a telephone call with her son’s 

school which ended as the bell sounded for class to begin. She was upset at learning 

that a substitute teacher had assaulted her son at his school, but respondent denied 

that she inappropriately discussed that with the class or provided her students with 

independent work instead of instruction.

122.  During her deposition, respondent testified that she could not remember 

whether she told students that she was having a “bad day” on May 3, 2018: “I don’t 

know . . . I may have.” (5.11.21 Hallen Depo., 191:23 – 192:4.) At hearing, however, 

respondent denied telling students that she was having a bad day.

123.  Respondent testified at the hearing that she took proper steps to address 

an incident that occurred in her classroom on May 3, 2018 involving three of her 

students: Jose A.’s earlobe was bleeding, Omari B. called Olivia W. names, and Olivia 

W. ran out of the classroom. Respondent testified that the incident was not a “big 

deal.” (Hallen, Hearing Tr., 1266:27 – 1267:12.)

46 

124.  However, respondent previously admitted that “[a]fter reflecting I realize 

I should have taken the rest of the day off . . . .” (Response to Letter of Reprimand, Ex. 

45, p. 1.) This was consistent with the District’s assertion that respondent was having a 

bad day and did not properly manage her class after receiving the telephone call 

about her son. 

MAY 17, 2018 INCIDENT 

125.  Respondent admits that she drove student A

 C. home during the 

school day to pick up worksheets for his science teacher so he could graduate. 

Respondent stressed that she drove A

 C. home during her preparation period and 

she returned in time to teach her next class. 

126. Respondent denied that she was trying to avoid detection while 

transporting A

 C. She claims that she picked A

 C. up off-campus at a nearby 

driveway because that is where students get picked up, and then dropped him off-

campus on their return because he told her to do so. Both Zeevi and August testified 

that this did not make sense logistically as both respondent’s and August’s classrooms 

were located close to the rear parking lot.

127.  Respondent asserts that she was justified in driving A

 C. home that 

day because he had the Administration’s permission to leave campus that morning, 

respondent had his mother’s permission to drive him home to get his worksheets, and 

she had previously driven him in her car in her role as a SOAR coach. 

128.  When A

 C. returned with his worksheets, he told August that he 

“took a Lyft.” Respondent asserts that the evidence presented did not establish he 

meant “Lyft” the rideshare, as opposed to getting a “lift” in someone’s car. 

47 

129. 

In May 2018 respondent told Geissler and Zeevi she made an “idiotic 

mistake” in driving A

 C. in her car. (Zeevi, Hearing Tr., 205:2-28.) At the hearing, 

respondent testified that it was not a mistake to drive the student home without first 

obtaining authorization from the District. Rather, she stated that her “idiotic mistake” 

was failing to inform Geissler and Zeevi that she had his mom’s permission to do so. 

(Hallen, Hearing Tr., 744:22-27.) Only after respondent was issued a Written Reprimand 

in November 2018, did she produce a handwritten note from A

’s mother, stating 

that respondent had her permission to drive A

 C. home that day. (Ex. 45.) 

OCTOBER 2018 INCIDENT

130.  Respondent admitted that she rewarded her students for a period of 

intense work by allowing her early morning intervention class to play Uno and 

Playdough on a single occasion on October 11, 2018. She was a new teacher and once 

Zeevi advised her that such a reward should be limited to the last five minutes of class, 

rather than an entire class period, respondent thanked him for his feedback and 

implemented his directive. 

CONDUCT REGARDING B

 T. 

131.  B

 T. is a friend of respondent’s foster son, G

 C. Between 

September and December 2018, respondent allowed B

 T. to visit G

 C. at her 

home and he stayed overnight five to 10 times. Respondent notes that no District 

policy or rule precludes District staff from allowing their children’s minor friends to 

spend the night. B

 T. was no longer a District student at this time. However, this 

time frame includes the period when B

 T. was on the run from law enforcement.

132.  Respondent admits that she wore a tee-shirt promoting B

 T.’s Break-

In records rap logo shortly after the burglary of the home of T

 W.’s grandmother. 

48 

Respondent was photographed with a student who was wearing the same shirt. 

Zamora took the photo and Zeevi included it in the school newsletter, indicating that 

neither of them saw anything wrong with respondent wearing the tee-shirt. 

Respondent asserts that she wore B

 T.’s Break-In Records shirt displaying a black 

ski mask at school to show that she was “supporting students.” (5/11/21 Hallen Depo., 

10:22 – 14:12.) However, she posted the picture on her Instagram account in October 

25, 2018, when B

 T. was no longer a student. 

133. 

In March 2018, respondent posted a photo on Instagram of herself and 

B

 T. In the photo, he is making a gang sign with his hand. 

FOSTERING G

 C. 

134.  Respondent asserts that fostering G

 C. does not constitute an 

improper emotional involvement or immersion in students’ personal lives. She noted 

that District employees, including Principal Geissler, were actively involved in trying to 

secure a foster placement for G

 C. and DCFS approved his placement with her.

135.  G

 C. surrendered to authorities on September 19, 2018. Respondent

had told him she would accept him as a foster child if he turned himself in. She 

“decided not to back out on him” despite Zeevi’s misgivings and her concern that she 

would draw the District’s ire by fostering G

 C. (Ex. 4.)

136.  Respondent asserted that she would have preferred to have G

 C. 

remain at Bowman where she could better oversee his academic progress. However, 

the Court ordered DCFS to use its best efforts to assist her to enroll G

 C. at Golden 

Valley High School. The District preferred to avoid any possible conflict created by 

having G

 C. attend the same school where respondent was a teacher and it 

approved G

 C.’s transfer from Bowman to Golden Valley High School.

49 

137.  DCFS Social Worker Rene Obando testified at the administrative hearing. 

In July 2019 he was assigned to be G

 C.’s social worker. Since February 2020, G

 

C. has been in a supervised independent living placement (SILP) in respondent’s home. 

In a SILP, DCFS determines only whether G

 C. is physically safe where he is residing. 

Obando has no safety concerns about G

 C.’s placement with respondent and has 

no evidence suggesting an inappropriate relationship between G

 C. and 

respondent. If DCFS had concerns, Obando would not have placed G

 C. with 

respondent as a nonminor dependent.

ASSAULT ON JC 

138.  Respondent testified that on November 26, 2018, she attended a 

student’s funeral while G

 C. waited in the car. She then drove to Agua Dulce, 

approximately one hour away, so that G

 could give M

 $40.

139.  Respondent testified that they did not see M

 C., so they continued to 

drive around looking for him. According to respondent, G

 opened the car door and 

jumped out while the car was moving. Respondent then pulled into a strip mall 

parking lot, looked in her rearview mirror, and “saw no one.” 

140. When G

 C. returned to the car 60 seconds later, respondent asked 

him if he had found his brother, M

 C., and G

 C. said “no.” Respondent told 

G

 C. they had to leave so she could get to her 3:30 p.m. therapy appointment. 

Respondent testified that G

 C. asked her to drive around the shopping center once 

more, she did so without success, and they then left Agua Dulce. Respondent testified 

that she drove G

 C. back to Agua Dulce again later that same day and G

 gave 

M

 $40 at that time.

50 

141.  Respondent’s account is not persuasive. It strains credulity that 

respondent did not inquire what G

 C. had seen that induced him to jump out of a 

moving car or that respondent calmly parked in a strip mall and glanced in her 

rearview mirror but did not get out of her car to see where G

 C. had gone.

Respondent offered no explanation as to how G

 C. would have found her once she 

pulled into a strip mall and parked the car. 

142.  M

 C. saw respondent’s car coming towards him and then driving 

away, but he was not able to get their attention. It is not credible that respondent and 

G

 C. did not find M

 C. despite the fact that they had arranged to meet him at 

Sweetwater Farms Market on the single main plaza in town, where he was waiting for 

them with all his bags. 

143.  Respondent told DCFS “exactly what happened [in Agua Dulce], but [the 

DCFS Supervisor] did not believe [her] at all.” (Hallen, Hearing Tr., 979:8-23.) Sergeant 

Viger interviewed respondent and G

 C. about the assault. He told Zamora that their 

stories did not match and their relationship seemed odd and inappropriate.

144.  Respondent admits that she drove G

 C. to Agua Dulce on the day and 

time of the assault on JC. Yet she took no action to assist student JC nor did she take 

any action to cooperate with the District or law enforcement in investigating the 

assault upon a Bowman student. 

145.  Respondent never talked to or questioned G

 C. about the assault 

“because it was – all I know is that not everybody is – hold on. Let me think. I guess I 

didn’t want to know.” (5.11.21 Hallen Depo., 57:08-17.) 

146.  At her deposition, respondent stated she does not know what happened 

to giving M

 $40 because she can’t worry about everything (5.11.21 Hallen Depo., 

51 

service' connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt 

of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 

district.” (

)

 

C. In this case, the District established by a preponderance of the 

evidence that Respondent is evidently unfit for service pursuant to Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(6). Respondent’s misconduct is the result of a fixed character 

trait and her actions are part of a larger pattern. Despite counseling, respondent has 

had continued difficulty maintaining a professional relationship with students. She 

aided and abetted T

 W. and G

 C., or facilitated or condoned their actions, when 

they were the subjects of criminal investigations. While some of respondent’s mistakes 

can be attributed to her relative inexperience in teaching at the time these events 

occurred, respondent minimized her misconduct, failed to take responsibility for her 

actions, placed blame on others, and characterized herself as a wronged whistleblower. 

She fails to show insight into her misconduct and has not demonstrated a willingness 

or capability to remedy her mistakes. Accordingly, the Commission concludes it is 

highly likely that Respondent will repeat her misconduct in the future.4 (Factual 

Findings 6-146.) 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF SCHOOL LAWS

6. 

A. Certificated employees are subject to dismissal for persistent violation 

of, or refusal to obey, the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed 

4 As explained below, the Commission also analyzed the factors set forth in the 

 

case of 

1 Cal.3d at 227–230 in determining whether respondent is fit 

for service as a teacher for purposes of Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

55 

must be established that a teacher’s misconduct relates to her fitness, within the 

meaning of 

1 Cal.3d at 227–230. The 

 analysis does not apply 

to a cause for dismissal of persistent violation of school rules, laws or policies, because 

this cause, by definition, has a direct nexus with teaching. (

, pp. 227-230.)

 

B. As noted above, the Commission considered the 

 factors in 

determining whether respondent is fit to serve as a teacher within the meaning of 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). That analysis is discussed below. However, not 

all 

 factors need be present for the 

 test to be satisfied. (

(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Moreover, the 

analysis need not be 

conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can be applied to the 

accumulated facts established collectively. (

2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.) 

Here, it is concluded that the 

factors demonstrate respondent is not fit to 

serve as a teacher. (Factual Findings 6-147.)

 

C. The District presented sufficient evidence to establish that respondent 

inappropriately crossed the boundary between her professional role as a teacher and 

that of a friend or confidant of the students she was assigned to instruct, despite 

repeated warnings and admonitions; was deceptive when driving student A

 C. in 

her car without District approval; assisted T

 W. while knowing the student was 

wanted by law enforcement; and facilitated or condoned G

 C.’s assault of student 

JC. 

 

i. The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow 

teachers. Respondent’s failure to maintain a professional relationship with students 

had an adverse impact in that it impaired her ability to serve as an educator and role 

model. Her failure to exercise sound judgment by condoning or facilitating G

 C.’s 

assault on JC adversely impacted student JC. Similarly, respondent’s lack of sound 

57 

judgment was demonstrated by her willingness to help T

 W., a pregnant minor, 

remain on the run from law enforcement by picking up her purse, rather than 

attempting to persuade T

 W. to turn herself in to authorities. Taking an action that 

could assist T

 W. to remain on the run, rather than alerting law enforcement, the 

student’s parents, or the District, was contrary to student T

 W.’s interests. 

 

 

 

ii. The degree of such adversity. JC was physically injured and T

 W. 

could have been seriously impacted by remaining on the run. 

iii. The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s 

misconduct is relatively recent. It occurred during the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 

school years. Respondent was placed on administrative leave two days after the 

November 26, 2018, assault on JC. 

iv. The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved. 

Respondent held two preliminary credentials: a single subject credential in 

foundational level mathematics that expired in April 2020 and a multiple subject 

credential that expired in December 2019.

v. The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 

surrounding the conduct. Respondent established that there were extenuating 

circumstances to explain why she crossed the boundary between respondent’s 

professional role as a teacher and that of a friend or confidant to Bowman’s students. 

Respondent was a relatively new teacher, wanted to be supportive of and establish 

good rapport with her students, and Bowman encouraged a certain level of informality 

between students and teachers. In aggravation, respondent acted deceptively in 

regard to transporting A

 C. in her car and condoned or facilitated the actions of 

T

 W. and G

 C. in situations involving allegations of criminal conduct. 

58 

ORDER 

Respondent Erika Hallen is dismissed as a permanent certificated employee of 

the William S. Hart Union High School District. 

DATE: 

DATE: 

DATE: 

 

NICHOLAS ABRUZZO

Commissioner 

MARIA JACKSON 

Commissioner

LAURIE PEARLMAN 

Commissioner 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

60 

