BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  ADMINISTRATIVE  HEARDINGS  AND  A 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE  FOR  THE 
COMPTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

MELISSA  RIVERA, 

A  Permanent  Certificated  Employee, 

Respondent 

OAH  No.  2020010711 

DECISION 

A  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (Commission)  heard  this  matter  by 

videoconference  on  September  14  through  18,  2020.  The  Commission  members  were 

Mark  Hill,  Ed.D;  Davina  Keiser;  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Thomas  Heller,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  who  presided. 

Barrett  K.  Green,  Esq.,  and  James  A.  Becerra,  Esq.,  Littler  Mendelson,  P.C., 

represented  the  Compton  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Esq.,  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  represented  respondent 

Melissa  Rivera.

The  parties  presented  oral  and  documentary  evidence.  At  the  end  of  the 

hearing,  the  record  was  held  open  for  the  submission  of  redacted  copies  of  three 

exhibits  and  a  list  of  names  of  students  to  be  kept  confidential.  The  District  timely 

submitted  those  items  and  the  record  was  closed  on  September  21,  2020. 

Thereafter,  the  ALJ  ordered  the  District  to  lodge  the  transcripts  for  the  first 

three  days  of  the  hearing.  The  District  did  so  and  filed  a  Notice  of  Lodging  of  the 

transcripts  on  December  1,  2020.  By  order  dated  December  4,  2020,  the  ALJ  reopened 

the  record  for  the  notice  and  lodging  of  the  transcripts,  and  then  reclosed  the  record 

and  deemed  the  matter  submitted  for  decision. 

SUMMARY 

The  District  seeks  to  dismiss  respondent,  a  high-school  mathematics  teacher,  on 

grounds  of  immoral  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service.  Respondent  allegedly 

posted  lewd  and  lascivious  messages  and  other  inappropriate  content  on  social  media, 

dressed  provocatively  and  inappropriately  for  class,  called  students  “stupid”  and 

repeatedly  used  profanity  in  class,  repeatedly  yelled  at  and  embarrassed  students,  and 

told  students  she  was  not  qualified  to  teach  their  level  of  math.  Respondent  admits 

she  posted  inappropriate  messages  on  Twitter  but  denies  the  other  allegations  and 

requests  she  be  allowed  to  return  to  teaching. 

The  evidence  established  cause  for  dismissal  for  immoral  conduct  and  evident 

unfitness  for  service  with  respect  to  respondent's  posts  on  Twitter.  Between  late 

August  and  mid-September  2019,  respondent  publicly  posted  messages  that  were 

vulgar  and  sexually  graphic,  glorified  drug  use  and  violence,  demeaned  the  District's 

curriculum,  and  used a  racially  offensive  term.  Students  discovered  respondent's

Twitter  account  and  word  spread  to  other  teachers  and  District  administrators. 

Respondent's  public  posts  demonstrated  a  serious  lapse  in  judgment  and  lack  of 

understanding  of  her  professional  responsibility  as  a  role  model  for  students. 

The  District  did  not  establish  cause  for  dismissal  with  respect  to  the  other 

charges.  But  the  charges  with  respect  to  respondent's  posts  on  Twitter  warrant 

dismissal  on  their  own.  The  Commission  concludes  that  respondent  should  be 

dismissed  from  her  position  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background 

1, 

Respondent  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  foundational-level 

mathematics  with  an  English  Learner  authorization.  She  has  worked  as  a  teacher  for 

the  District  for  about  12  years.  Respondent  first  worked  for  the  District  as  an  AVID 

(Advancement  Via  Individual  Determination)  tutor  when  she  was  18  years  old.  About 

two  years  later,  she  became  a  computer  laboratory  coordinator  for  the  District.  After 

about  one  year  in  that  position,  she  began  working  as  a  full-time  math  teacher. 

2. 

The  District  serves  over  22,000  students  in  all  grade  levels  at  36  sites  in 

South  Los  Angeles.  Respondent  worked  at  Compton  High  School  during  her 

paraprofessional  employment  and  first  10  years  of  teaching.  She  then  worked  as  a 

teacher  at  the  Cesar  Chavez  High  School  (Chavez)  satellite  campus  at  Dominguez  High 

School  (Dominguez).  Chavez  is 

a  continuation  school  that  supports  students  who  are 

credit  deficient  and  at  risk  of  not  finishing  high  school.  Chavez  has  satellite  campuses 

at  Dominguez,  Compton  High  School,  and  Centennial  High  School.

3. 

Respondent  was  born  and  raised  in  the  Compton  community  and 

attended  school  in  the  District  for  most  of  her  childhood.  She  graduated  high  school  in 

the  nearby  Bellflower  Unified  School  District.  After  high  school,  respondent  attended 

Compton  Community  College,  where  she  earned  an  associate's  degree.  Respondent 

then  attended  California  State  University,  Dominguez  Hills,  where  she  earned  a 

bachelor’s  degree  in  2008,  her  teaching  credential  in  2010,  and  a  master’s  degree  in 

2012. 

4. 

As  of  September  2019,  respondent  taught  five  class  periods  totaling 

about  115  students  at  Dominguez/Chavez.  Two  periods  were  math  classes  for  Chavez 

students  and  two  others  were  math  classes  for  Dominguez  students.  Respondent  also 

facilitated  a  class  period  for  online  students.  She  has  no  prior  record  of  disciplinary 

action  with  the  District. 

Report  and  Investigation 

5. 

On  September  20,  2019,  Nora  Valle,  a  teacher  at  Dominguez/Chavez, 

texted  Fredricka  Brown,  Ed.D.,  the  principal  of  the  Chavez  satellite  campuses,  about 

posts  on  respondent's  Twitter  account.  Twitter  is  a  social  networking  site  on  which 

users  post  and  interact  with  messages  known  as  “tweets.”  Ms.  Valle’s  first  text  message 

stated,  “Just  want  to  quickly  share  with  you  that  the  students  showed  me...  (Rivera’s 

twitter  posts)...  I  just  have  a  bad  feeling  this  is  going  to  turn  ugly  for  her.”  (Exhibit 

8A.)  In  several  subsequent  messages,  Ms.  Valle  forwarded  screenshots  of  tweets  and 

“retweets”  (i.e.,  reposted  or  forwarded  messages  from  other  Twitter  users)  from 

respondent's  Twitter  account.  The  tweets  and  retweets  were  from  September  6 

through  September  13,  2019,  and  included  the  following:

e 

e 

“It’s  Friday  the  13th  and  I'm  tryna  get  this  pussy  murdered  [skull 

emoji][knife  emoji]"  (retweet) 

"So  my  hg  [homegirl]  tellin  me  she  got  taken  to  dinner  for  her  bday,  got 

some  nice  ass  flowers,  went  to  the  drive  in  movies  w  her  boo  and  the 

movie  sucked.  [1]  So  I’m  like  so  suck  his  dick  y‘all  at  the  drive  ins.  [1]  She 

like  no  it’s  MY  bday  [emoji]” 

e 

“She  goes  on  to  tell  me  she  enjoys  sucking  dick  but  prefers  not  to.  [1] 

And  she  loves  this  man!!  Got  spoiled  on  her  damn  bday  [1]  Talking  bout 

the  clean  up  is  hard.  I  was  like  oh  u  don’t  swallow?  [emoji]  [1]  Anyway if  | 

was  a  nigga  I'd  be  cheating  too  sorry  [emoji]" 

e 

“We  used  to  lay  up  and  then  stay  up  [1]  Have  sex  and  then  blow  dank  [1] 

I  shouldn't  have  played  no  games  with you,  just  leveled  up  my  rank  [1] 

Last  time  I  saw  you  we  ain't  speak  that  was  strange  [1]  Guess  it’s  nothing 

I  can  do,  man  it's  true,  ex's  change,  yeah  [1]  [emojis]” 

6. 

The  District  immediately  began  an  administrative  investigation, 

interviewing  students  and  reviewing  other  posts  on  respondent's  Twitter  account. 

District  administrators  also  questioned  students  about  respondent's  attire  and  manner 

of  speaking  to  students  in  class.  On  September  23,  2019,  Kanika  White,  Ed.D.,  the 

District's  Executive  Director  for  Human  Resources  and  Title  IX  Coordinator,  interviewed 

respondent  and  placed  her  on  administrative  leave  while  the  District  continued  its 

investigation.

Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss 

7. 

On  November  6,  2019,  Dr.  White  notified  respondent  that  the  District 

administration  was  considering  recommending  that  the  Superintendent  and  Board  of 

Trustees  (Board)  terminate  her  employment  and  suspend  her  immediately  without  pay 

for  immoral  conduct  and  evident  unfitness  for  service.  The  written  notice  identified  the 

Twitter  posts  described  above,  additional  Twitter  posts  discovered  during  the  District's 

investigation,  and  respondent's  allegedly  inappropriate  attire  and  statements  to 

students  in  class  as  the  reasons  for  considering  those  actions.  Dr.  White  wrote  that 

respondent  had  a  right  to  respond  to  the  allegations  and  scheduled  a  meeting  for  that 

purpose  on  November  13,  2019.  Respondent  did  not  appear  at  the  meeting. 

8. 

On  November  19,  2019,  Mario  Marcos,  the  District's  Executive  Director 

for  Elementary  Education,  sent  respondent  a  Notice  of  Recommendation  of  Dismissal 

and  Statement  of  Charges  (Statement  of  Charges)  proposing  to  proceed  with  the 

recommendation.  The  Statement  of  Charges  identified  the  Twitter  posts  described 

above  and  the  following  additional  posts  from  between  August  29  and  September  14, 

2019,  as  grounds  for  the  recommendation: 

e 

e 

“If  you  pull  my  face  to  kiss  me  after  I  sucked  your  dick  . 

.  that  just  makes 

me  want  to  suck  it  even  more.”  (a  retweet  with  respondent's  comment 

“Yassssss  [emojis]”) 

“Why  her?  She  don't  fit  the  type  [emoji]  [1]  Yup  cuz  ima  WHOLE  ASS 

VIBE.  [1]  And  yes  Im  like  ya  homie  but  w  good  ass  pussy  and  some  good 

ass  u  know  what  [tongue  emoji]  [1]  And  yes  u  will  seek  that  vibe  in  a 

whole  nother  bitch  [1]  But  u  not  gon  get  that  Melissa  vibe  baby  [emojis]”

“Tain't  gon  lie  I  don't  like  goin  on  vacation  unless  ima  get  some  dick 

[shrug  emoji]  [1]  I  definitely  like  to  take  sand  to  the  beach  [1]  Everything 

else  is  fun  too  but  idk  I  like  fuckinn  away  from  home  [crying  laughter 

emojis]  [1]  I  can  only  take  so  many  bitch  trips” 

"It's  Friday,  let's  get  this  pussy  popping.” 

"I  gave  you  top  of  the  line  I  know  you  miss  it  baby  [tongue  emoji]" 

“Titty*  cuz  [ain't  got  no  ass  [emojis]”  [in  response  to  “I  just  wanna  send 

you  good  night  booty  pics"]. 

A  video  of  two  persons  having  sex  on  a  couch. 

“Y’all  ever  get  high  and  go  eat  up  all  the  kids  snacks  [emojis]" 

“Damn  [f]  Beats  [emoji]  Brunch  [emoji]  Blunts  [emoji]  BBQ  [emoji],  & 

Booze  [emoji]  ...  .” 

“How  come  these  bitches  eyelashes  don’t  be  less  towards  the  inside...  .” 

“Did  this  nigga  jus  bang  706  on  my  timeline  [emojis]  ...  .” 

"T  like  continuation  students  cuz  they  don’t  hesitate  to  offer  to  beat 

somebody  ass  for  you  [crying  laughter  emojis]” 

“Fuck  #commoncore.” 

9. 

The  Statement  of  Charges  also  alleged  respondent  dressed  provocatively 

and  inappropriately  for  class,  called  students  “stupid,”  repeatedly  yelled  at  and 

embarrassed  students,  and  told  students  she  was  not  qualified  to  teach  their  level  of 

math.

10. 

Mr.  Marcos  advised  respondent  that  the  Board  would  consider  the 

recommendation  at  a  meeting  on  December  11,  2019,  and  that  respondent  could 

address  the  Board  at  the  meeting  before  it  acted.  On  December  3,  2019,  respondent's 

counsel  wrote  to  Mr.  Marcos  denying  that  the  evidence  warranted  dismissal  but 

declining  the  opportunity  to  address  the  Board.  On  December  11,  2019,  the  Board 

voted  to  suspend  respondent  immediately  without  pay  and  give  her  notice  of  its 

intention  to  dismiss  her  within  30  days  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the  Statement  of 

Charges.  On  December  12,  2019,  Dr.  White  gave  respondent  written  notice  of  the 

Board's  action,  and  respondent  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  notice  and  requested  a 

hearing. 

11. 

The  District  filed  the  Notice  of  Intent  to  Dismiss  with  the  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings  (OAH)  on  January  22,  2020,  and  OAH  originally  scheduled  the 

hearing  for  April  2020.  OAH  continued  the  hearing  until  September  2020  and  held  it 

by  videoconference  due  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic. 

Hearing 

DISTRICT'S  CASE 

12. 

The  District  presented  screenshots  of  the  Twitter  posts  listed  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges,  except  for  the  tweet  allegedly  stating,  “It's  Friday,  let's  get  this 

pussy  popping,”  which  did  not  appear  in  the  screenshots.  The  video  described  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges  as  two  persons  having  sex  on  a  couch  was  the  subject  of 

testimony,  but  the  video  itself  was  not  moved  into  evidence.  The  District  called  seven 

witnesses  to  testify  and  played  excerpts  from  respondent's  videotaped  deposition.

Kanika  White,  Ed.D. 

13. 

Dr.  White  testified  that  upon  learning  of  the  allegations  against 

respondent,  she  directed  Dominguez  Principal  Blain  Watson  to  forward  respondent's 

Twitter  postings  of  concern,  collect  statements,  and  conduct  an  initial  investigatory 

meeting  with  respondent.  Dr.  White  then  met  personally  with  Ms.  Rivera  and  her  union 

representative  on  September  23,  2019,  to  go  over  the  allegations  and  give  her  an 

opportunity  to  respond.  During  the  meeting,  respondent  began  to  call  the  students 

who  found  her  Twitter  account  “nosy”  and  said  she  was  an  adult  and  had a  right  to 

discuss  the  matters  in  the  posts.  When  asked  if  using  the  “N”  word  in  the  posts  was 

appropriate,  respondent  replied  it  was  okay  because  she  was  black.  Dr.  White  was 

concerned  about  respondent's  lack  of  remorse  because  an  employee  can  only  correct 

behavior  if  the  person  first  acknowledges  wrongdoing  and  is  open  to  making  a 

correction. 

14.  |  Dr.  White  also  testified  about  her  concerns  regarding  respondent's 

Twitter  messages,  Dr.  White  testified  that  the  post  stating,  “I  like  continuation  students 

cuz  they  don’t  hesitate  to  offer  to  beat  somebody's  ass  for  you”  is  particularly 

concerning  because  it  seems  to  encourage  violence  by  students  that  are  already  at  risk 

and  attempting  to  recover  from  whatever  circumstances  caused  them  to  become 

credit  deficient.  Respondent's  use  of  the  “N”  word  in  the  messages  Is  also  highly 

offensive  and  in  direct  contradiction  to  District  policy  that  speaks  to  employees 

maintaining  the  highest  ethical  standards  and  supporting  the  integrity  of  the  District. 

The  post  stating,  “Fuck  #commoncore”  is  problematic  because  the  District  teaches  the 

common  core  curriculum,  and  the  post  evidences  the  attitude  of  a  teacher  who  may 

not  be  looking  to  have  a  true  impact  on  the  livelihood  of  students  who  need  It  most. 

The  references  to  drug  use  in  the  posts  are  also  inappropriate  in  a  community  where

there  have  been  past  issues  with  drug  abuse.  In  addition,  the  lewd  content  of  many  of 

the  posts  is  inappropriate  for  a  teacher  and  role  model  for  impressionable  students. 

Nora  Valle 

15. 

Ms.  Valle  has  been  a  teacher  for  16  years  and  is  in  her  third  year  of 

teaching  at  Dominguez/Chavez.  She  teaches  United  States  history,  government,  and 

economics.  She  described  the  student  body  at  Chavez  as  a  group  of  challenged 

students  who  need  help  from  teachers  to  get  their  course  credits  and  graduate. 

16. 

In  September  2019,  Ms.  Valle  heard  a  group  of  students  in  her  class 

talking  about  whether  they  had  each  seen  respondent's  posts  on  Twitter.  Ms.  Valle 

does  not  have  a  Twitter  account  and  had  another  teacher,  Heidi  Bolling,  show  the 

posts  to  her.  Ms.  Valle  then  looked  up  respondent's  Twitter  account  on  her  own  phone 

and  forwarded  screenshots  of  some  of  the  posts  to  Dr.  Brown.  Ms.  Valle  made  her  best 

efforts  not  to  spread  the  information  around  the  school. 

R.A. 

17. 

RA.  is  currently  a  student  at  Dominguez/Chavez.  In  September  2019, 

respondent  was  a  substitute  teacher  in  one  of  his  classes  for  about  a  week.  R.A.  was  in 

class  with  a  group  of  friends,  one  of  whom  asked  if  R.A.  knew  respondent  had  a  Twitter 

account.  The  group  of  friends  included  four  other  students.  R.A.  replied  he  did  not, 

and  the  other  student  showed  R.A.  her  Twitter  profile  picture.  Later  R.A.  looked  up 

respondent's  Twitter  account  himself  and  “was  just,  like,  whoa.”  While  sexual  content  is 

everywhere  online  now  and  is  “not  really  a  big  deal,”  he  was  surprised  to  see  it  coming 

from  a  teacher.  R.A.  told  Ms.  Bolling  about  respondent's  Twitter  account  and  showed 

Ms.  Bolling  his  phone.  He  did  not  talk  to  any  other  students  about  the  account. 

10

18. 

R.A.  cannot  recall  noticing  anything  in  particular  about  respondent's 

clothing  in  the  classroom.  He  also  does  not  recall  respondent  using  profanity  in  class 

or  raising  her  voice. 

Fredricka  Brown,  Ed.D. 

19. 

Dr.  Brown  is  currently  a  principal  on  special  assignment  in  the  District's 

special  education  program.  During  the  2019-20  school  year,  she  was  the  principal  of 

the  Chavez  satellite  campuses  and  Marshall,  which  is  the  independent  study  part  of  the 

District's  continuation  school. 

20. 

Dr.  Brown  first  met  respondent  formally  at  the  beginning  of  the  2019-20 

school  year.  Before  that,  Dr.  Brown  made  some  rounds  of  classrooms  and  observed 

respondent  in  “gym  attire,”  which  was  inappropriate  for  a  classroom  teacher.  Dr. 

Brown  and  Principal  Watson  later  spoke  about  respondent's  classroom  attire,  and  Dr. 

Brown  suggested  it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  pass  out  the  District  dress  code  to  all 

staff.  Dr.  Brown  personally  gave  a  copy  of  the  dress  code  to  respondent,  who  stated 

she  did  not  have  the  money  to  buy  clothes  or  something  to  that  effect.  Dr.  Brown 

asked  respondent  to  do  her  best  to  follow  the  dress  code. 

21. 

|  When  Dr.  Brown  received  Ms.  Valle’s  text  and  the  screenshots  from 

respondent's  Twitter  account,  she  forwarded  them  to  Principal  Watson  because  he  was 

the  person  who  would  investigate  or  take  disciplinary  action  as  the  site  principal. 

Principal  Watson  asked  her  to  come  to  Dominguez  to  assist  with  the  investigation. 

They  interviewed  several  students  as  part  of  the  investigation,  and  Principal  Watson 

also  spoke  to  respondent. 

11

Blain  Watson 

22. 

Principal  Watson  was  the  principal  of  Dominguez  for  three  years.  He  is 

currently  the  principal  of  Locke  High  School  in  the  City  of  Watts.  He  first  met 

respondent  in  the  summer  at  the  beginning  of  the  2019-20  school  year. 

23.  —  Principal  Watson  testified  that  when  Dr.  Brown  alerted  him  to 

respondent's  Twitter  posts,  he  notified  his  superiors  immediately  and  reviewed 

respondent's  Twitter  account  from  his  own  account.  One  of  the  posts  was  a  video  of 

two  silhouetted  figures  where  it  was  clear  a  woman  was  straddling  a  man  and  the 

couple  was  having  sex.  The  video  did  not  show  the  couple's  faces,  just  the  silhouettes 

of  two  bodies  having  sex.  There  were  also  other  graphic  posts  about  “suck[ing]  ... 

dick,”  “get[ting]  this  pussy  murdered,”  and  “blow[ing]  dank”  (i.e.,  smoking  marijuana). 

The  posts  were  concerning  to  Principal  Watson  because  respondent  was  not  modeling 

appropriate  adult  behavior  as  an  educator  with  a  lot  of  influence  over  the  children  that 

she  served. 

24. 

The  same  day  or  thereafter,  Principal  Watson  met  with  respondent  to 

express  his  concerns.  He  asked  respondent  if  she  had  indeed  posted  the  sexually 

explicit  messages  and  the  message  about  “blow[ing]  dank,”  to  which  she  responded, 

“yes.”  Principal  Watson  also  asked  if  she  posted  a  pornographic  video  of  two  people 

having  sex  on  a  couch.  Respondent  replied  she  gets  all  types  of  sex-related  videos  and 

messages  and  video  on  her  feed  and  she  did  indeed  retweet  it.  She  went  on  to  explain 

that  she  was  confused  as  to  why  students  are  “being  nosy”  and  looking  on  her 

personal  page.  She  also  asked  for  the  students’  names  who  reported  the  issue,  and 

Principal  Watson  declined  to  disclose  that  information.  Respondent  continued  by 

stating  that  she  has  a  right  to  post  whatever  she  likes  on  her  personal  page  and  that 

she  enjoys  talking  about  such  topics.  Principal  Watson  was  concerned  by  respondent's 

12

lack  of  concern  for  the  social  emotional  health  of  her  students  or  for  her 

responsibilities  as  a  District  employee. 

25. 

Earlier  in  the  same  school  year,  Principal  Watson  had  a  concern  about 

respondent's  classroom  attire.  Students  had  expressed  some  concern  to  Principal 

Watson  about  revealing  clothing,  and  Principal  Watson  had  noticed  some 

unprofessional  clothing.  Principal  Watson  did  not  feel  comfortable  addressing 

respondent  directly  as  a  male  supervisor,  so  he  asked  Dr.  Brown  to  do  so. 

26. 

Principal  Watson  made  notes  of  his  interviews  with  students,  some  of 

which  were  admitted  into  evidence.  The  admitted  notes  include  responses  from  eight 

students  about  respondent's  attire  and  classroom  behavior.  One  student  reported  that 

respondent  once  wore  a  “see  through  tank  top”  showing  her  undergarments,  and 

another  reported  she  dressed  unprofessionally  like  a  physical  education  teacher. 

Another  student  reported  that  she  dressed  like  students  in  “sweat  pants,  baggy  T- 

shirts,  and  [Air]  Jordans.”  R.A.  also  expressed  concern  about  respondent's  revealing 

attire,  although  he  did  not  repeat  those  concerns  in  his  testimony.  Other  students  did 

not  report  any  concerns  about  respondent's  attire. 

27. 

With  respect  to  respondent's  classroom  behavior,  one  student  reported 

that  respondent  said  “heck”  or  “Like,  what  the  hell”  to  students;  the  others  reported 

she  did  not  use  profanity.  Two  students  reported  hearing  respondent  raise  her  voice  at 

students  and  embarrass  them;  the  rest  reported  she  did  not  yell  or  embarrass 

students. 

K.B. 

28. 

K.B.is  astudent  at  Dominguez.  Respondent  was  her  ninth-grade  math 

teacher.  K.B.  testified  that  respondent  used  the  words  “hell”  or  “heck”  in  the  classroom. 

13

Respondent  also  dressed  casually  while  teaching  in  jeans  (sometimes  ripped),  a  shirt, 

and  Air  Jordans.  Respondent  would  occasionally  raise  her  voice  to  students  when  they 

ignored  respondent's  first  warning  to  change  their  behavior.  K.B.  never  heard  anything 

about  respondent's  social  media  postings. 

L.M. 

29. 

LM.  is 

a  student  at  Dominguez/Chavez.  Respondent  used  to  be  his  math 

teacher  or  substitute.  L.M.  testified  that  in  late  2019,  L.M.  heard  that  respondent  was 

posting  “inappropriate  stuff.”  The  one  thing  he  heard  she  posted  was  “It’s  Friday,  let's 

get  this  pussy  popping.”  L.M.  thought  that  was  inappropriate  because  respondent  was 

a  teacher  at  school.  He  did  not  discuss  the  post  with  anyone  else. 

30. 

 L.M.  also  testified  respondent  also  dressed  inappropriately  for  a  teacher. 

She  would  wear  leggings,  crop  tops,  tank  tops,  and  sports  bras,  revealing  her  cleavage. 

She  would  also  use  words  like  “shit”  and  “fuck.” 

31. 

Principal  Watson  interviewed  L.M.  during  the  investigation  of  respondent 

and  made  notes  of  the  interview.  The  notes  state  that  Principal  Watson  asked  L.M.  if 

respondent  used  profanity,  and  L.M.  stated  “No.” 

Deposition  Excerpts 

32. 

The  District  deposed  respondent  on  September  9,  2020,  shortly  before 

the  hearing.  In  her  deposition,  respondent  testified  she  became  active  on  Twitter 

around  2018.  By  September  2019,  she  had  288  followers  and  was  following  176  other 

users.  She  estimated  that  fewer  than  100  people  that  she  was  following  or  that  were 

following  her  were  personal  friends.  When  respondent  posted  on  Twitter,  she  thought 

she  was  saying  things  to  female  friends  or  followers,  all  of  whom  were  adults.  Her 

14

posts  were  not  meant  for  children  and  the  language  she  used  was  inappropriate  for 

children.  She  would  never  post  or  use  this  type  of  language  in  the  presence  of  children 

or  if  she  knew  children  would  see  it.  It  was  not  appropriate  for  a  teacher. 

33. 

Respondent  never  posted,  “It's  Friday.  Let's  get  this  pussy  popping,”  but 

she  posted  the  other  tweets  and  retweets,  some  of  which  contained  vulgar  and 

obscene  language.  She  testified  she  should  not  have  posted  tweets  or  retweets 

containing  the  word  “nigga,”  which  can  be  viewed  as  derogatory  by  outsiders. 

Respondent  is  African  American  and  Latina,  and  the  term  is  used  for  camaraderie  In 

the  black  community.  She  stated  she  would  no  longer  use  that  term  in  print. 

Respondent  posted  “Fuck  #commoncore”  out  of  frustration  with  the  school  curriculum. 

The  video  she  posted  of  two  persons  having  sex  on  a  couch  was  “like  a  romantic  love 

scene  type  of  video,”  not  “raw  pornography.” 

34. 

|  When  Principal  Watson  confronted  respondent  about  her  Twitter 

account,  she  was  shocked  and  embarrassed.  Her  emotional  response  at  first  was  that 

her  students  were  being  nosy,  and  she  felt  betrayed.  At  the  time,  respondent  felt  she 

was  “off  the  clock”  at  a  certain  hour  and  could  do  what  she  wanted  in  her  personal  life. 

35. 

Respondent  testified  she  did  not  use  profanity  in  the  classroom.  She  also 

stated  she  did  not  yell  at  students  or  embarrass  them.  She  dressed  “a  little  bit  on  the 

casual  side”  but  not  provocatively,  and  she  would  not  call  that  a  concern. 

RESPONDENT S  CASE 

Testimony  of  Respondent 

36. 

Respondent  testified  she  is  33  years  old,  divorced,  and  has  two  young 

children.  She  is  both  African  American  and  Latina  but  was  raised  only  by  her  mother 

15

on  the  African  American  side  of  her  family.  Respondent  opened  her  Twitter  account  in 

2009  and  has  had  the  same  account  settings  since  then.  However,  she  did  not  become 

active  on  Twitter  until  around  2018.  She  used  what  she  considered  an  alias  as  her 

username  (“Meliana1013”),  which  was  a  combination  of  her  first  and  middle  names 

and  date  of  birth.  She  never  gave  out  her  information  about  her  username.  She 

described  herself  as  not  very  sophisticated  on  how  to  use  Twitter. 

37. 

Before  September  2019,  respondent  never  received  any  warnings  about 

the  use  of  her  Twitter  account  or  social  media.  To  her  knowledge,  the  District  did  not 

have  any  rules,  regulations,  or  policies  about  the  use  of  social  media.  In  addition, 

respondent  was  never  warned  about  using  improper  language  at  school,  referring  to 

students  in  a  derogatory  manner,  or  having  improper  attire  or  dress.  She  admitted  she 

dressed  casually  but  denied  dressing  provocatively.  She  also  denied  calling  students 

“stupid,”  using  profanity  in  class,  yelling  at  students,  or  embarrassing  students.  With 

respect  to  the  charge  that  she  told  students  she  was  not  qualified  to  teach  their  level 

of  math,  she  has  said  words  to  the  effect  of  “I  don’t  get  this.  This  isn’t  adding  up” 

during  instruction. 

38. 

Regarding  her  Twitter  account,  respondent  testified  she  feels  remorse 

that  the  bad  language  in  her  posts  made  her  look  unprofessional.  She  also  testified, 

“The  part  I  feel  the  most  remorse  for  is 

if  people  felt  bad  about  the  things  that  I  was 

posting  ...."  She  did  not  want  to  hurt  anyone's  feelings.  It  was  “just  immature  silly 

behavior  between  friends  and  I  didn’t  realize  that  I  had  it  on  display.”  Respondent  did 

not  intend  to  harm  anyone  or  for  her  posts  to  be  viewed  by  people  other  than  her 

friends.  Her  posts  were  written  in  the  way  that  she  and  the  friends  she  grew  up  with 

talked  to  each  other. 

16

39. 

Respondent  identified  some  of  the  tweets  and  retweets  listed  in  the 

statement  of  charges  as  song  lyrics,  including  the  tweet  about  “blow[ing]  dank”  and 

the  tweets  stating,  “I  gave  you  the  top  of  the  line,  I  know  you  miss  it,  baby,”  and 

“Damn  [1]  Beats  [emoji]  Brunch  [emoji]  Blunts  [emoji]  BBQ  [emoji],  &  Booze 

[emoji]  ....”  The  tweet  that  began  “Why  her?  She  don’t  fit  the  type.  Yup  cuz  ima 

WHOLE  ASS  VIBE"  were  words  from  a  music  video  by  the  artist  Cardi  B.,  with 

respondent's  first  name  included  at  the  end.  The  retweet  stating,  “It’s  Friday  the  13th 

and  I'm  tryna  get  this  pussy  murdered  [skull  emoji][knife  emoji]”  was  a  parody  of  the 

Friday  the  13th  horror  movie  series.  Respondent  testified  that  the  retweet  refers  to 

trying  to  have  “really  good  sex.”  The  tweet  asking,  “Yall  ever  get  high  and  go  eat  up  all 

the  kids’  snacks?”  referred  to  a  scene  from  a  television  show  that  respondent  thought 

was  funny. 

40. 

Respondent  also  testified  that  the  retweet  of  a  video  of  two  people 

having  sex  on  a  couch  was  shadowy,  and  a  viewer  could  see  two  silhouettes  of  people 

but  not  genitalia,  body  parts,  or  faces.  Respondent  admitted  her  tweet  stating,  "I  like 

continuation  students  cuz  they  don't  hesitate  to  offer  to  beat  somebody  ass  for  you 

[crying  laughter  emojis]"  was  worded  “very  inappropriately,”  but  testified  it  was  meant 

to  be  a  humorous  post  of  appreciation  about  how  continuation  students  seem  to  have 

more  respect  for  their  teachers  than  other  students.  Respondent's  tweet  stating,  “Fuck 

#commoncore”  was  a  tweet  she  posted  out  of  frustration  as  a  parent,  not  as  a  teacher. 

Respondent's  own  children  were  struggling  with  the  common  core  curriculum. 

41.  | When  respondent  first  met  with  Principal  Watson,  she  was  initially  upset 

because  she  felt  betrayed  that  the  students  with  whom  she  thought  she  was  building  a 

good  rapport  would  want  to  invade  her  privacy.  When  respondent  met  with  Dr.  White, 

she  also  initially  referred  to  the  students  as  being  nosy.  But  respondent  also 

17

acknowledged  to  Dr.  White  that  what  respondent  did  on  Twitter  was  inappropriate  for 

underaged  children  and  inappropriate  for  a  teacher. 

42. 

Since  those  meetings,  respondent  has  had  time  to  self-reflect  and  talk  to 

different  mentors,  including  family  members  who  are  teachers  (there  are  nine  teachers 

in  her  family)  and  a  counselor.  Respondent  testified  she  has  gained  insight  and  would 

have  done  things  differently.  Respondent  learned  that  she  needed  to  be  able  to  accept 

responsibility  for  the  part  she  played  in  accidentally  allowing  the  posts  to  be  accessed. 

She  also  learned  that  though  she  may  not  be  “on  the  clock,”  she  is  still  a  teacher  and  is 

trusted  to  uphold  certain  standards  even  in  her  personal  time. 

43. 

Before,  respondent  never  really  thought  that  students  would  want  to 

look  her  up  on  social  media.  Now,  she  understands  that  being  a  teacher  is  similar  in 

some  respects  to  being  a  celebrity  in  that  all  eyes  are  on  a  teacher  all  the  time. 

Respondent  also  now  understands  that  when  a  person  speaks  the  way  she  did,  there  is 

a  risk  that  other  people  will  misinterpret  what  the  person’s  message  may  be.  She 

would  never  repeat  the  same  mistake  again. 

44. 

If  given  the  opportunity  to  meet  in  person  with  Dr.  White  again,  the  first 

thing  respondent  would  do  is  apologize  for  the  offensive  and  rude  language  that  she 

used  on  Twitter,  including  respondent's  use  of  the  “N”  word.  In  the  beginning, 

respondent  felt  there  was  a  difference  between  the  “N”  word  ending  in  “a”  and  the 

word  ending  in  “er.”  But  after  hearing  and  seeing  Dr.  White's  testimony,  respondent 

thought  about  it  carefully  and  realized  she  does  not  want  to  be  a  part  of  any  type  of 

behavior  that  is  going  to  perpetuate  the  oppression  of  respondent's  African  American 

ancestors.  Therefore,  respondent  will  not  use  the  “N”  word  again. 

18

45. 

Respondent  testified  she  has  not  been  contacted  by  parents,  students,  or 

the  public  about  what  was  on  her  Twitter  account.  Respondent  no  longer  has  a  Twitter 

account. 

Other  Evidence 

46. 

Respondent  presented  her  employment  evaluations  from  2009  through 

2013  and  2019,  all  of  which  stated  that  resoondent  met  or  exceeded  performance 

standards  in  every  category.  She  also  offered  six  certificates  of  appreciation  or 

recognition  that  she  had  received  from  the  District  over  the  years. 

Analysis  of  Evidence 

47. 

The  evidence  proved  that  respondent  sent  the  Twitter  posts  listed  in  the 

Statement  of  Charges,  except  for  the  tweet  allegedly  stating,  “It's  Friday,  let's  get  this 

pussy  popping.”  The  District's  evidence  did  not  include  that  tweet,  and  respondent 

denied  she  sent  it.  The  District  also  did  not  prove  that  the  video  of  two  persons  having 

sex  on  a  couch  that  is  referenced  in  the  Statement  of  Charges  was  explicit.  Respondent 

admitted  she  posted  the  video,  but  the  witness  testimony  indicated  the  video  was  of 

silhouetted  figures. 

48. 

Respondent  testified  that  her  Twitter  posts  were  “just  immature  silly 

behavior  between  friends  and  I  didn’t  realize  that  I  had  it  on  display.”  But  in  other 

testimony,  respondent  admitted  that  her  followers  on  Twitter  were  not  just  personal 

friends.  Nothing  about  respondent's  posts  suggests  she  thought  her  Twitter  account 

was  private.  Respondent  also  was  not  a  new  user  of  Twitter.  She  created  her  Twitter 

account  in  2009  and  became  an  active  user  around  2018.  Her  claim  that  she  was  not 

very  sophisticated  on  how  to  use  Twitter  was  questionable,  given  her  long  history  with 

19

Twitter  and  the  number  of  tweets  and  retweets  between  just  late  August  and  mid- 

September  2019. 

49. 

Respondent  also  testified  that  she  now  realizes  her  posts  were 

inappropriate  and  is  remorseful  for  them.  The  Commission  did  not  find  this  testimony 

entirely  believable.  Respondent  did  not  admit  wrongdoing  or  express  remorse  when 

Principal  Watson  first  questioned  her  about  the  Twitter  posts.  She  also  defended  the 

posts  when  Dr.  White  questioned  her  before  placing  her  on  leave.  Respondent  accused 

students  of  being  nosy  and  claimed  she  had  the  right  to  post  whatever  she  wanted  as 

an  adult.  She  also  did  not  admit  wrongdoing  or  express  remorse  when  given  notice  in 

late  2019  that  the  District  was  considering  firing  her.  Her  admission  of  wrongdoing 

and  expression  of  remorse  at  the  hearing  are  belated,  which  suggests  they  are 

motivated  by  the  hearing  itself,  at  least  in  part. 

50. 

Respondent  deleted  her  Twitter  account  and  promised  not  to  commit  the 

same  misconduct  again,  and  it  is  believable  that  respondent  will  not  post  similar 

tweets  or  retweets  in  the  future.  But  there  is  a  high  likelihood  that  respondent  will 

continue  to  express  herself  in  a  similar  manner  in  other  settings.  Respondent  did  not 

just  a  post  a  single  inappropriate  message.  Instead,  she  posted  over  a  dozen in  just 

over  two  weeks.  The  content  of  the  messages  was  unremarkable  to  respondent,  and 

she  defended  her  right  to  post  them  to  Principal  Watson  and  Dr.  White  even  after 

students  discovered  her  account.  Respondent's  testimony  that  she  now  understands 

the  inappropriateness  of  the  messages  Is  suspect.  Furthermore,  her  testimony  that  she 

will  never  use  the  “N”  word  again  after  listening  to  Dr.  White's  testimony  was  not 

believable.  Respondent's  explanation  that  Dr.  White's  testimony  had  such  a  powerful 

impact  on  respondent  lacked  persuasive  force.  Considering  these  facts,  there  is  a  risk 

20

that  respondent  will  express  herself  in  a  similar  manner  in  other  settings  accessible  to 

students,  teachers,  or  District  administrators. 

51. 

With  respect  to  the  other  charges,  the  evidence  proved  that  respondent 

dressed  too  casually  for  a  classroom  teacher,  but  it  did  not  prove  she  dressed 

provocatively.  The  District's  evidence  that  respondent  dressed  provocatively  was 

limited  to  the  testimony  of  L.M.  and  Principal  Watson's  notes  of  an  interview  of  one 

other  student.  While  both  students  reported  that  some  of  respondent's  outfits  were 

too  revealing,  other  students  (and  Dr.  White)  reported  only  that  she  dressed  too 

casually.  Respondent  denied  dressing  provocatively,  and  the  evidence  as  a  whole  did 

not  prove  otherwise. 

52. 

The  District  also  did  not  prove  that  respondent  called  students  “stupid,” 

repeatedly  used  profanity  in  class,  repeatedly  yelled  at  and  embarrassed  students,  or 

told  students  she  was  not  qualified  to  teach  their  level  of  math.  The  District's  evidence 

about  those  charges  was  too  sparse  to  support  them.  L.M.  testified  respondent  used 

profanity  in  class,  but  L.M.  previously  denied  she  did  when  asked  by  Principal  Watson. 

The  inconsistency  casts  doubt  on  his  testimony  at  the  hearing.  None  of  the  other 

student  witnesses  or  interview  notes  proved  respondent  repeatedly  used  profanity  or 

committed  the  other  charged  classroom  misconduct.  Respondent's  admission  that  she 

told  students,  “I  don't  get  this.  This  isn’t  adding  up”  during  instruction  is  not  proof  of 

misconduct. 

21

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Legal  Standards 

1, 

Education  Code  section  44932  provides  several  grounds  for  the  dismissal 

of  a  permanent  employee  of  a  public  school  district,  including  “[i]Jmmoral  conduct” 

and  “[e]vident  unfitness  for  service.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44932,  subd.  (a)(1),  (6).)'  When  a 

public  school  district  seeks  to  dismiss  a  permanent  employee,  such  as  respondent,  for 

immoral  conduct  or  evident  unfitness  for  service,  a  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  must  hold  a  hearing  to  determine  whether  the  charged  conduct  occurred 

and,  if  it  did,  what  the  proper  remedy  should  be.  (Fontana  Unified  School  Dist.  v. 

Burman  (1988)  45  Cal.3d  208,  220  (Burman).) 

2. 

“The  term  “immoral”  has  been  defined  generally  as  that  which  is  hostile 

to  the  welfare  of  the  general  public  and  contrary  to  good  morals.  Immorality  has  not 

been  confined  to  sexual  matters,  but  includes  conduct  inconsistent  with  rectitude,  or 

indicative  of  corruption,  indecency,  depravity,  dissoluteness;  or  as  wilful,  flagrant,  or 

shameless  conduct  showing  moral  indifference  to  the  opinions  of  respectable 

members  of  the  community,  and  as  an  inconsiderate  attitude  toward  good  order  and 

the  public  welfare.’”  (Board  of Education  v.  Weiland  (1960)  179  Cal.App.2d  808,  811.) 

“Moreover,  the  definition  of  immoral  ...  must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the 

unique  position  of  public  school  teachers,  upon  whom  are  imposed  ‘responsibilities 

and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to  other  callings.’ 

[Citation.]"  (San  Diego  Unitied  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(2011)  194  Cal App.4th  1454,  1466  (Lampedusa).) 

  

'  Undesignated  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

22

3, 

For  purposes  of  teacher  discipline,  conduct  cannot  be  characterized  as 

immoral  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(1)  unless  it  indicates  that  a  teacher  is 

unfit  to  teach.  (Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214,  229 

(Morrison),  Bassett  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1988)  201  Cal. App.3d  1444,  1453  ["[W]here  charges  of  immorality...  are  raised  in 

teacher  discharge  cases,  the  applicable  standard  is  whether  the  person  is  fit  to  teach."]; 

Board  of  Education  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1980)  102  Cal.App.3d 

555,  560  [the  term  “immoral  conduct”  must  be  “given  context  by  reference  to  fitness 

for  the  performance  of  that  occupation’].)  In  Morrison,  the  California  Supreme  Court 

outlined  seven  factors  for  consideration  “to  determine  whether  the  unprofessional 

conduct  demonstrated  unfitness  to  teach:  ....  ‘[1]  the  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may 

have  adversely  affected  students  or  fellow  teachers,  [and]  the  degree  of  such  adversity 

anticipated,  [2]  the  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct,  [3]  the  type  of 

teaching  certificate  held  by  the  party  involved,  [4]  the  extenuating  or  aggravating 

circumstances,  if  any,  surrounding  the  conduct,  [5]  the  praiseworthiness  or 

blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting  in  the  conduct,  [6]  the  likelihood  of  the 

recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct,  and  [7]  the  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action 

may  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 

teacher  involved  or  other  teachers.” 

Wa 

(Broney  v.  California  Commission  on  Teacher 

Credentialing  (2010)  184  Cal.App.4th  462,  474,  citing  Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  pp. 

229-330.)  “'These  factors  are  relevant  to  the  extent  that  they  assist  the  board  in 

determining  whether  the  teacher's  fitness  to  teach,  i.e.,  in  determining  whether  the 

teacher's  future  classroom  performance  and  overall  impact  on  his  [or  her]  students  are 

likely  to  meet  the  [school  district's]  standards.” 

Wa 

(Morrison,  supra,  1  Cal.3d  at  pp.  229- 

230.) 

23

4. 

“Evident  unfitness  for  service”  under  section  44932,  subdivision  (a)(6) 

means  “'clearly  not  fit,  not  adapted  to  or  unsuitable  for  teaching,  ordinarily  by  reason 

of  temperamental  defects  or  inadequacies.’  [Fn.  omitted.]"  (Woodland  Joint  Unitied 

School  Dist.  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1992)  2  Cal.App.4th  1429, 

1444  (Woodlana).)  This  cause  for  discipline  “connotes  a  fixed  character  trait, 

presumably  not  remediable  merely  on  receipt  of  notice  that  one’s  conduct  fails  to 

meet  the  expectations  of  the  employing  school  district.”  (Jb/a.)  On  this  cause  for 

discipline,  the  criteria  for  unfitness  in  Morrison  "must  be  analyzed  to  determine,  as  a 

threshold  matter,  whether  the  cited  conduct  indicates  unfitness  for  service.  [Citation.]  If 

the  Morrison  criteria  are  satisfied,  the  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  the  ‘unfitness’ 

is  ‘evident’;  i.e.,  whether  the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a  defect  in  temperament.” 

(Woodland  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1445.) 

5. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  cause  for  dismissal  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardner  v.  Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

(1985)  164  Cal App.3d  1035,  1038-1040.)  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  means 

“evidence  that  has  more  convincing  force  than  that  opposed  to  it.’  [Citation.]"  (People 

ex  rel.  Brown  v.  Tri-Union  Seafoods,  LLC  (2009)  171  Cal.App.4th  1549,  1567.) 

Analysis 

Immoral  Conduct 

6. 

The  District  proved  that  respondent  engaged  in  immoral  conduct  with 

respect  to  her  posts  on  Twitter.  Respondent's  public  posting  of  messages  that  were 

vulgar  and  sexually  graphic,  glorified  drug  use  and  violence,  demeaned  the  District's 

curriculum,  and  used a  racially  offensive  term  was  conduct  indicative  of  “indecency” 

and  “moral  indifference.”  (Board  of  Education  v.  Weiland,  supra,  179  Cal.App.2d  at  p. 

24

811.)  Analysis  of  the  factors  described  in  Morrison  indicates  that  the  postings 

demonstrate  an  unfitness  to  teach  and  thus  constitute  immoral  conduct  under  section 

44932,  subdivision  (a)(1): 

(1) 

The  likelihood  that  the  conduct  may  have  adversely  affected 

students  or  fellow  teachers,  and  the  degree  of  such  adversity  anticipated. 

  

Respondent's  misconduct  had  an  adverse  effect  on  students,  teachers,  and  District 

administrators.  At  least  two  students  (R.A.  and  L.M.)  expressed  surprise  at  the  posts 

and  thought  they  were  inappropriate  for  a  teacher.  At  least  two  teachers  (Ms.  Valle 

and  Ms.  Bolling)  likely  lost  the  attention  of  students  who  were  viewing  the  posts 

during  instructional  time.  A  teacher's  failure  to  model  appropriate  behavior  is  also 

harmful  to  students.  In  addition,  District  administrators  lost  trust  in  respondent's 

judgment  and  ability  to  teach  students.  Overall,  the  degree  of  adversity  anticipated  is 

moderate. 

(2) 

The  proximity  or  remoteness  in  time  of  the  conduct.  Respondent's 

misconduct  occurred  in  August  and  September  2019,  and  the  Board  voted  in 

December  2019  to  dismiss  respondent  from  employment. 

(3) 

The  type  of  credential  held  or  applied  for  by  the  person  involved. 

Respondent  holds  a  foundational-level  math  credential  with  an  English  language 

authorization.  She  teaches  high  school  students,  including  credit-deficient 

continuation  students,  who  are  at  an  impressionable  stage  related  to  sexual  maturity 

and  appropriate  norms  of  communication. 

(4) 

The  extenuating  or  aggravating  circumstances  surrounding  the 

conduct.  The  District's  lack  of  a  social  media  policy  prior  to  respondent's  misconduct  is 

an  extenuating  circumstance.  Respondent's  lack  of  prior  discipline  and  positive 

25

employment  evaluations  are  additional  extenuating  circumstances.  Respondent  also 

testified  she  grew  up  in  an  environment  where  she  and  her  friends  used  the  type  of 

language  in  the  posts,  which  is  an  extenuating  circumstance  to  some  degree. 

Aggravating  circumstances  include  the  vulgar  and  offensive  language  in 

respondent's  posts,  her  many  posts  over  a  several-week  time  period,  and  respondent's 

belated  admission  of  wrongdoing.  Respondent's  apparent  endorsement  of  violence  by 

continuing  education  students  is  also  an  aggravating  factor.  Respondent  tweeted,  “I 

like  continuation  students  cuz  they  don't  hesitate  to  offer  to  beat  somebody  ass  for 

you  [crying  laughter  emojis].”  While  respondent  described  the  post  as  an  attempt  to 

be  humorous,  the  post  sends  the  wrong  message  to  students  at  risk. 

(5) 

The  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  motives  resulting 

in  the  conduct.  There  was  nothing  praiseworthy  about  respondent's  motives  resulting 

in  the  conduct.  Respondent  testified  she  was  just  talking  with  friends,  but  her  posts 

were not  just  to  personal  friends.  Given  the  graphic  and  vulgar  language  in  the  posts, 

she  appears  to  have  been  motivated  by  a  desire  to  get  attention  and  reaction  from  her 

followers,  which  is  not  praiseworthy.  Her  message  “Fuck  #commoncore’”  is 

a 

blameworthy  attempt  to  criticize  the  curriculum  she  was  required  to  teach.  Nothing  in 

the  posts  was  uplifting  or  positive. 

(6) 

The  likelihood  of  the  recurrence  of  the  questioned  conduct. 

Respondent  deleted  her  Twitter  account  and  promised  not  to  commit  the  same 

misconduct  again,  and  it 

is  believable  she  will  not  post  similar  tweets  or  retweets  in  the 

future.  But  it  is  highly  likely  respondent  will  continue  to  express  herself  in  a  similar 

manner  in  other  settings.  Respondent  posted  over  a  dozen  inappropriate  messages  in 

just  over  two  weeks.  The  vulgar,  sexually  graphic,  and  racially  offensive  content  of  the 

messages  was  unremarkable  to  respondent,  and  she  defended  her  right  to  post  the 

26

messages  even  after  students  discovered  her  account.  Respondent's  testimony  that 

she  now  understands  the  messages  were  inappropriate  is  suspect.  Furthermore,  her 

testimony  that  she  will  never  use  the  “N"  word  again  after  listening  to  Dr.  White's 

testimony  was  not  believable.  Considering  these  facts,  there  is  a  risk  that  respondent 

will  express  herself  in  a  similar  manner  in  other  settings  accessible  to  students, 

teachers,  or  District  administrators. 

(7) 

The  extent  to  which  disciplinary  action  may  inflict  an  adverse 

impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  teacher  involved  or  other 

teachers.  Respondent  did  not  raise  this  issue,  and  the  Commission  does  not  foresee 

that  disciplinary  action  will  inflict  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  the 

constitutional  rights  of  respondent  or  other  teachers.  Public  school  teachers  have 

“responsibilities  and  limitations  on  freedom  of  action  which  do  not  exist  in  regard  to 

other  callings.’  [Citation.]”  (Lampedusa,  supra,  194  Cal. App.4th  at  p.  1466.)  The  court  in 

Lampedusa  held  that  disciplinary  action  against  a  teacher  for  posting  sexually  explicit 

photos  of  himself  with  graphic  text  on  a  public  website  did  not  have  an  adverse  impact 

or  chilling  effect  on  the  teacher's  constitutional  rights.  (Jd.  at  p.  1465.)  Similarly  here, 

disciplinary  action  will  not  have  an  adverse  impact  or  chilling  effect  upon  respondent's 

constitutional  rights. 

Evident  Unfitness  for  Service 

7. 

The  District  also  proved  that  respondent's  conduct  with  respect  to  her 

post  on  Twitter  is  cause  for  dismissal  on  the  grounds  of  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

The  Morrison  criteria  analyzed  above  indicate  unfitness  to  teach,  and  the  Commission 

concludes  that  the  “unfitness”  is  “evident;”  i.e.,  “the  offensive  conduct  is  caused  by  a 

defect  in  temperament.”  (Woodland,  supra,  2  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1445.)  Respondent's 

posts  demonstrated  a  serious  lapse  in  good  judgment.  She  posted  offensive  messages 

2/7

repeatedly  over  several  weeks,  and  no  evidence  suggests  she  would  have  stopped 

absent  District  intervention.  She  failed  to  recognize  the  seriousness  of  her  misconduct 

when  students  discovered  her  account,  and  she  attempted  to  shift  the  blame  to  the 

students  who  viewed  it.  District  administrators  have  lost  confidence  in  respondent's 

ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students  based  on  the  posts.  Respondent's  belated 

admission  of  wrongdoing  and  expression  of  remorse  are  not  entirely  believable.  These 

considerations  evidence  a  defect  in  temperament  that  demonstrates  evident  unfitness 

to  teach. 

8. 

The  District  also  alleges  that  respondent  dressed  provocatively  and 

inappropriately  for  class,  called  students  “stupid”  and  repeatedly  used  profanity  in 

class,  repeatedly  yelled  at  and  embarrassed  students,  and  told  students  she  was  not 

qualified  to  teach  their  level  of  math.  The  District's  evidence  about  those  allegations 

was  sparse  and  did  not  establish  cause  for  dismissal  with  respect  to  those  charges. 

Disposition 

9. 

“The  Commission  has  broad  discretion  in  determining  what  constitutes 

unfitness  to  teach  and  immoral  conduct,  and  whether  dismissal  or  suspension  is  the 

appropriate  sanction.  [Citation.]”  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  State  of  California  (1999) 

20  Cal.4th  327,  343.)  Thus,  even  where  cause  for  dismissal  has  been  established,  the 

Commission  still  has  discretion  to  determine  whether  to  impose  that  discipline. 

(Burman,  supra,  45  Cal.3d  at  p.  222.) 

10. 

The  Commission  concludes  that  dismissal  is  the  appropriate  sanction. 

Respondent  committed  immoral  conduct  and  displayed  evident  unfitness  for  service. 

Her  behavior  negatively  affected  her  relationships  with  students  and  administrators. 

She  has  not  modeled  appropriate  behavior  for  students,  and  the  District  rightfully  has 

28

lost  confidence  in  her  ability  to  serve  as  a  role  model  for  students.  Given  these 

considerations,  respondent  should  not  be  allowed  to  return  to  the  classroom. 

ORDER 

Respondent  Melissa  Rivera  is  dismissed  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

of  the  District. 

DATE: 

Dec  30,  2020 

DATE: 

Dec  30,  2020 

Mark  AM 

DATE: 

Dec  30,  2020 

at.  He. 

THOMAS  HELLER 

Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

lf.  icin 
Devinn 

DAVINA  KEISER 

Commission  Member 

MARK  HILL,  Ed.D. 

Commissioner  Member 

29

