BEFORE  THE 
COMMISSION  ON  PROFESSIONAL  COMPETENCE 
FRESNO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Dismissal  of: 

YOLANDA  SERRATO,  Respondent 

OAH  No.  2020020401 

DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  via  video  conference  before  a  Commission  on  Professional 

Competence  (Commission)  of  the  Fresno  Unified  Schoo!  District  on  August  3  through  7, 

18  through  21,  and  25  through  26,  2020.  The  Commission  members  were  Patricia 

Sandoval,  Larry  Sturm,  and  Administrative  Law  Judge  Heather  M.  Rowan,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California. 

Attorneys  David  Moreno  and  Katy  McCully  Merrill  from  the  law  firm  Fagen, 

Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented  complainant  Fresno  Unified  School  District 

(District). 

Attorney  Joshua  F.  Richtel  from  the  law  firm  Tuttle  &  McCloskey  represented 

respondent  Yolanda  Serrato,  who  was  present  throughout  the  hearing. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  Commission  met  in  executive  session  on  August 

26,  2020,  after  which  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision.

ISSUES 

Whether  the  District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 

respondent's  dismissal  should  be  sustained. 

SUMMARY  OF  DECISION 

Respondent  is 

a  special  education  teacher  in  the  District.  The  District  seeks  to 

terminate  her  employment  due  to  unsatisfactory  performance.  The  District  established 

that,  after  evaluating  respondent  and  giving  her  adequate  assistance  and  opportunity  to 

improve  and  address  identified  areas  of  unsatisfactory  performance,  she  failed  to  bring 

her  performance  up  to  a  satisfactory  level.  The  District's  dismissal  of  respondent  is 

therefore  sustained. 

FINDINGS  OF  FACT 

1, 

Respondent  is 

a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  and  is 

assigned  to  teach  a  Special  Education  (SPED)  special  day  class  (SDC)  at  Birney 

Elementary  School  (Birney).  Respondent's  most  recent  assignment  was  in  a  combined 

fourth  through  sixth  grade  mild/moderate!'  SDC.  She  started  her  teaching  career  at 

Birney  in  2013. 

  

'  SDCs  are  generally  either  mild/moderate  or  moderate/severe,  referring  to  the 

range  of  students’  disabilities.  Mild/moderate  can  include  students  with  intellectual 

disabilities,  autism,  or  specific  learning  disabilities.

2. 

The  District  seeks  to  terminate  respondent's  employment  for  unsatisfactory 

performance,  based  upon  allegations  that  she  failed  to:  (1)  adequately  communicate 

with  her  general  education  peers  including  attending  required  staff  “Accountability 

Community”  (AC)  meetings;  (2)  allow  adequate  wait  time  to  meet  student  needs;  (3) 

ensure  all  students  were  engaged  and  had  access  to  the  curriculum,  including 

appropriate  manipulatives*  or  other  materials;  (4)  employ  the  Direct  Instructional  Model 

of  "I  do,  we  do,  you  do”  and  the  Four  Foundations  of  a  lesson  (discussed  below);  (5) 

differentiate  work  for  students  in  different  grade  or  skill  levels  or  for  students  with 

special  needs  or  English  Learners;  (6)  consistently  give  clear  learning  expectations  or 

criteria  for  success  for  learning;  (7)  submit  lesson  plans  to  the  evaluator  as  requested;  (8) 

organize  instruction  to  meet  required  learning  time;  (9)  implement  CHAMPS  Classroom 

Management  (CHAMPS)  as  needed  through  the  day;  (10)  hold,  affirm,  and  attest  annual 

IEP?  meetings  to  meet  SPED/District  timelines;  (12)  implement  the  Guaranteed  Viable 

Curriculum  (GVC)  the  District  provided  and  expected;  (13)  set  high  expectations  for 

SPED  students;  (14)  adequately  redirect  student  responses  to  re-engage  in  the  learning 

goals;  (15)  check  for  student  understanding  throughout  each  lesson  and  adapt  her 

teaching  to  reflect  the  assessed  academic  and  behavioral  needs  of  all  students;  (16) 

assign  students  to  work  with  partners  or  in  groups  to  ensure  that  students  were  actively 

  

concepts. 

*  Manipulatives  in  this  sense  are  tangible  aids  to  assist  students  in  understanding 

>  IEP  is  an  Individual  Education  Program,  which  is  an  educational  and  behavioral 

plan  developed  for  students  to  support  their  diverse  learning  needs.  They  are  governed 

by  both  state  and  federal  law.

listening  and  participating:  (17)  implement  or  utilize  a  standards-based  learning 

objective;  and  (18)  develop  as  a  professional. 

Evaluation  Standards 

3, 

The  law  requires  school  districts  to  conduct  regular  performance 

evaluations  of  its  certificated  employees.  The  District's  governing  board  adopted  the 

FUSD  Continuum  of  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  (Continuum),  which  provides 

guidelines  for  evaluating  certificated  employees’  performance.  The  revised  Continuum 

that  took  effect  during  the  2010/2017  school  year  provides  the  following  regarding  its 

purpose: 

The  purpose  of  this  handbook  is  to  remove  the  quesswork 

from  knowing  what  makes  an  effective,  inspiring  teacher.  In 

1997  the  State  of  California  first  published  the  California 

Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession  (CSTP}.  Revisions  to 

the  CSTP  (2009),  [sic]  have  been  developed  to  respond  to 

the  changes  in  teaching  and  learning  over  the  past  decade. 

Most  importantly,  the  California  Department  of  Education, 

in  conjunction  with  the  Commission  on  Teacher 

Credentialing  and  California  State  Board  of  Education, 

revised  the  CSTP  to  address  the  following  needs:  an 

increasingly  diverse  student  population,  substantial 

innovations  in  technology  and  its  effects  on  instructional 

practices,  updates  in  K-12  curriculum  frameworks,  the 

implementation  of  the  academic  content  standards,  and  the 

effect  that  globalization  of  our  world  has  had  on  teaching  in 

the  22nd  century  classroom.  The  intended  purpose  of  the 

4

CSTP  is  to  provide  a  “common  language”  for  all  teachers  in 

California.  The  CSTPs  are  organized  around  six  interrelated 

domains  of  teaching  practice.  The  following  are  the 

identified  standards  by  which  California  teachers  are  to  be 

measured: 

Learning 

STANDARD  1:  Engaging  and  Supporting  ALL  Students  in 

STANDARD  2:  Creating  and  Maintaining  Effective 

Environments  for  Student  Learning 

STANDARD  3:  Understanding  and  Organizing  Subject 

Matter  for  Student  Learning 

STANDARD  4:  Planning  Instruction  and  Designing  Learning 

Experiences  for  ALL  Students 

STANDARD  5:  Assessing  Students  for  Learning 

STANDARD  6:  Developing  as  a  Professional  Educator 

4, 

For  each  of  these  six  CSTPs,  the  District  has  developed  a  continuum  of 

professional  standards  upon  which  teachers  are  evaluated,  which  include  multiple 

elements  and  examples  for  each  of  the  CSTPs.  The  District  used  the  following  ratings: 

Not  Observed,  Meets  Standards  —-  Demonstrates  Expertise,  Meets  Standards  —  Growth 

Expected,  and  Does  Not  Meet  Standards. 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  the  District’s  Continuum  of  Standards  for  the  Teaching 

Profession,  the  District  has  Four  Classroom  Foundations  (four  foundations)  that  must  be

present  in  each  lesson  a  certificated  employee  teaches:  (1)  objective  (what  students 

should  know,  understand,  and  be  able  to  do};  (2)  instruction  aligned  to  the  objective 

(how  the  instructional  activities  line  up  with  the  objective}  (3)  assessment  (how  the 

teacher  determines  if  the  students  are  “getting  it”  and  monitors  and  adjusts  the  lesson 

accordingly),  and  (4)  closure  (how  the  teacher  sums  up  and  closes  the  lesson). 

Teacher  Evaluations 

6. 

Kristina  Montez  has  been  the  principal  at  Birney  since  2014.  Prior  to  that, 

she  was  a  vice  principal  at  another  District  school.  She  taught  for  nine  years  in  different 

elementary  levels  including  kindergarten,  first  and  second  grades,  and  as  a  Teacher  on 

Special  Assignment  doing  intervention  for  fourth  and  fifth  graders.  She  has  not  taught 

SPED.  Ms.  Montez  has  training  in  administration  as  well  as  training  for  evaluations.  She 

was  part  of  the  administrative  cohort  in  the  District  to  provide  on-going  training  for 

evaluators. 

7. 

Ms.  Montez  explained  that  teachers  are  evaluated  every  other  year.  Ifa 

teacher  is  consistently  not  meeting  standards,  the  evaluations  may  be  more  frequent. 

There  are  two  evaluations  per  year:  a  formative  evaluation  in  the  fall,  and  a  summative 

evaluation  in  the  spring.  The  summative  pulls  information  from  the  formative  to  provide 

a  complete  picture  of  the  teacher's  performance  for  that  school  year. 

&. 

The  Birney  administration  divides  equally  the  teachers  whose  evaluations 

are  due,  Generally,  the  assignments  are  made  randomly.  The  administrators  meet  weekly 

throughout  the  year  to  discuss  patterns  and  trends  they  see  in  the  classrooms  and  to 

discuss  the  on-going  evaluations.  Evaluations  include  informal  “waik-throughs,"  a 

teacher's  general  performance  outside  the  classroom  (such  as  communication  with 

others  and  AC  meetings),  and  formal,  scheduled,  observations.

9, 

The  CSTPs  apply  to  all  teachers  regardiess  of  the  grade  level,  subject 

matter,  or  department,  such  as  SPED.  Each  CSTP  is  broken  down  into  specific  elernents 

that  allow  the  evaluator  to  look  for  certain  indicators  to  determine  if  the  teacher  is 

meeting  the  standard.  The  elements  take  some  of  the  “subjectivity”  out  of  the  evaluation 

and  ensure  all  evaluations  are  equal. 

10. 

Ms.  Montez  explained  that  if  a  teacher  is  “not  meeting  standards’ 

consistently  over  a  one-and-a-half-year  period,  the  teacher  will  receive  a  "90-day 

Notice,"  which  is 

a  process  in  which  the  District  offers  support  and  provides  weekly 

evaluations  and  feedback.  The  process  aims  to  ensure  the  students  are  in  the  best 

physical,  emotional,  and  educational  environment  they  can  be.  The  goal  is  that  with 

feedback  and  support,  the  teacher's  performance  will  improve  and  obviate  the  need  for 

dismissal, 

Guaranteed  Viable  Curriculum 

11. 

Julie  Wheelock  is  a  SPED  Program  Manager  Il  at  the  District.  She  is  familiar 

with  the  District’s  education  program.  The  District  has  adopted  a  Guaranteed  Viable 

Curriculum  (GVC},  which  is  the  core  curriculum  all  students  receive.  By  adopting  a  GVC, 

the  District  can  ensure  each  student  within  the  District  has  the  same  opportunities.  Since 

the  2015/2016  school  year,  the  GVC  for  English  Language  Arts  is  “Wonders,”  and  for 

math  itis  “GoMath.”  The  curriculum  is  the  same  in  both  SPED  and  general  education, 

and  there  are  supplemental  curricula  and  interventions  provided  for  SPED.  While  SPED 

students  are  not  expected  to  “master”  the  GVC,  they  should  be  provided  access  to  their 

grade-level  curriculum, 

12. 

Initially,  the  SPED  teachers  had  difficulty  implementing  the  GVC,  and 

students  were  struggling.  In  January  2019,  the  District  SPED  department  rolled  out

Wonderworks,  which  is 

a  “partner”  to  the  Wonders  curriculum.  Ms.  Wheelock  and  her 

colleagues  instructed  SPED  teachers  to  replace  Wonders  with  Wonderworks  and  turn  in 

their  Wonders  curriculum,  but  almost  immediately  “pressed  pause”  on  that  instruction. 

Teachers  were  then  instructed  to  keep  both.  Later  that  spring  semester,  the  District 

provided  support  and  training  to  implement  Wonders  for  all  classrooms,  with 

Wonderworks  as  a  supplement.  The  District  focused  on  providing  all  students  with 

access  to  their  grade  level's  curriculum. 

13. 

In  August  of  2019,  Ms.  Wheelock  believed  the  directive  was  clear  that 

Wonders  was  the  GVC  and  SPED  had  Wonderworks  as  a  supplement.  The  District 

provided  a  sampie  calendar  with  a  “seven-day  week”  to  aid  SPED  teachers  in  lesson 

planning.  While  some  SPED  teachers  taught  the  GVC  in  20-minute  lessons,  that  timing 

was  not  a  requirement.  The  District’s  requirement  was  that  SPED  students  were  provided 

access  to  grade-level  GVC  pursuant  to  the  students’  IEPs. 

Lesson  Observations  and  Evaluations  2017/2018 

14. 

Vice  Principal  Gonzalez  performed  respondent's  Fall  2017  observation.  Mr. 

Gonzalez  has  been  a  Vice  Principal  at  Birney  since  the  2016/2017  school  year.  He  was  a 

fifth-grade  teacher  for  15  years  and  taught  fourth  and  sixth  grades  for  one  to  two  years 

each.  He  left  classroom  teaching  to  be  a  language  coach  for  English  Learners  in  the 

District.  He  does  not  have  experience  in  a  SPED  SDC. 

15. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  underwent  16  months  of  training  to  be  a  vice  principal.  One 

of  his  primary  duties  as  a  vice  principal  is  teacher  evaluations.  As  a  vice  principal,  he  has 

monthly  meetings  for  administration  where  his  learning  continues.  His  formal  and 

informal  training  included  conducting  teacher  evaluations.

PALL  2017  FORMATIVE 

16. 

On  November  29,  2017,  Mr.  Gonzalez  conducted  a  formal  observation  of 

respondent's  SPED  classroom.  Respondent  was  notified  before  the  formal  observations. 

She  provided  lesson  plans  for  Mr.  Gonzalez  in  advance.  As  per  his  training  and  practice, 

Mr.  Gonzalez  took  literal  notes  during  his  observation.  After  the  lessons,  he  typed  his 

notes  into  a  format  that  addressed  each  of  the  CSTPs  and  included  data  points 

regarding  his  findings  and  his  conclusions  regarding  respondent's  rating.  After  the 

lesson,  he  met  with  respondent  to  discuss  his  findings. 

17. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  did  not  use  the  elements  that  comprise  each  CSTP  standard 

in  this  evaluation.  Respondent  was  meeting  standards  in  Standards  1, 

2,  3,  and  5. 

Generally,  respondent  was  performing  weil  in  the  classroom.  Specifically,  Mr.  Gonzalez 

noted  respondent  engaged  all  students,  promoted  a  “rigorous  learning  environment," 

and  “reviewfed]  rules  and  expectations  with  her  students  on  a  daily  basis.”  She  also 

differentiated  instruction  based  on  continual  assessments,  and  she  "organize[d]  her 

curriculum  to  meet  the  foundational  skills  that  students  are  missing  but  also  [gave] 

additional  support  in  grade-level  work.” 

18. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  rated  respondent  as  Meets  Standards  —  Growth  Expected  in 

Standard  4  and  Does  Not  Meet  Standards  in  Standard  6.  Under  Standard  4,  he  noted 

respondent  “minimally  interacts  with  mainstream  colleagues  to  communicate  long-term 

instructional  plans/goals  to  support  all  her  students,"  as  a  result,  “students’  learning 

experiences  are  not  aligned  with  IEP  goals  and  objectives.”  Under  Standard  6,  Mr. 

Gonzalez  found  respondent  “does  not  foster  a  culture  with  a  high  degree  of  professional 

integrity  and  professional  conduct.”  Specifically,  respondent  did  not  inform a 

mainstream  teacher  of  a  student's  objectives  for  several  months,  “claimed”  parents  of  a 

SPED  student  did  not  want  him  mainstreamed  cue  to  a  hurt  foot,  and  did  not 

9

consistently  attend  AC  meetings.  As  a  result,  Mr.  Gonzalez  found  respondent's  students’ 

learning  was  “negatively  impacted  from  [respondent's]  limited  collaboration  with 

colleagues  to  support  student  learning.” 

19. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  explained  at  hearing  that  respondent  did  not  communicate 

one  student's  IEP  goals  to  the  student's  general  education  teacher.  The  general 

education  teacher  questioned  why  the  student  was  not  in  her  classroom,  and 

respondent  stated  his  parent*  had  requested  he  stay  in  his  SDC  because  he  hurt  his  foot 

and  could  not  walk  back  and  forth  between  classrooms.  Mr.  Gonzalez  called  one  of  the 

child's  parents  and  learned  the  parent  had  not  given  such a  directive. 

SPRING  2018  SUMMATIVE 

20. 

‘Vice  Principal  Celia  Dominguez  retired  from  the  District  in  2018  after  over 

30  years  of  experience.  Ms.  Dominguez  was  a  Vice  Principal  at  Birney  from  2010  to  2018. 

Prior  to  that  she  was  a  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (TSA)  at  Jackson  Elementary,  a 

kindergarten,  first,  second,  fourth,  and  sixth  grade  teacher,  and  a  reading  coach  for 

fourth  through  sixth  graders.  She  did  not  teach  in  a  SPED  SDC.  Her  training  as  an 

administrator  and  for  teacher  evaluations  was  similar  to  Mr.  Gonzalez’s. 

21. 

Ms.  Dominquez  was  assigned  to  complete  respondent's  summative 

evaluation  in  Spring  2018.  Typically,  one  evaluator  is  assigned  to  a  teacher  for  an  entire 

year.  Respondent  requested  a  new  evaluator  after  the  2017/2018  formative,  however, 

  

“  This  “parent”  may  have  been  the  student's  father’s  girlfriend.  It  was  also  unclear 

whether  Mr.  Gonzalez  and  respondent  spoke  to  the  same  person. 

10

and  Ms.  Dominguez  was  assigned  in  March  or  April  of  the  spring  semester.  The 

summative  was  completed  on  April  29,  2018. 

22. 

At  hearing,  Ms.  Dorninguez  explained  the  importance  of  using  the  four 

foundations  in  each  lesson.  They  orient  the  students  to  what  the  teacher's  intent  is, 

provide  a  model  of  how  and  what  they  learn,  and  provide  for  real-time  assessments  so 

that  a  teacher  can  gather  data  and  use  different  techniques  if  necessary.  At  the  end  of 

each  lesson,  closure  gives  both  teacher  and  student  data  regarding  what  was  learned 

and  what  they  will  learn  next.  These  foundations  are  applied  equally  whether  ina 

general  education  or  SPED  classroom. 

23. 

Ms.  Dominguez  believes  2018  was  the  first  time  the  District's  directive  for 

SPED  was  to  teach  to  students’  grade  levels,  rather  than  an  SDC  teacher  teaching  to  the 

lowest  of  her  grade  levels.  For  exarnple,  respondent  taught  the  fourth-grade  curriculum 

to  her  fourth  through  sixth  graders.  Ms.  Dominguez  testified  she  heard  from  respondent 

that  she  was  not  aware  she  should  have  been  teaching  to  her  students’  grade  levels. 

Respondent  toid  Ms.  Dominguez  her  students  “cannot”  do  the  lessons  when  taught  to 

their  grade  levels.  Ms.  Dominquez  tried  to  provide  feedback  and  encouragement  so  that 

respondent  could  address  her  students’  ability  levels.  Ms.  Dominguez  also  encouraged 

respondent  to  use  the  supports  available  to  her,  including  her  general  education 

colleagues  who  teach  students  at  grade  jeveil,  though  their  students  operate  at  different 

levels.  Ms.  Dominguez  believes  respondent's  teaching  is  based  on  what  she  thinks  her 

students  can  do,  which  sets  a  low  expectation. 

24. 

During  one  of  her  observations,  Ms.  Dominguez  noted  respondent  used 

“nonacademic  language.”  Respondent  used  the  term  “nice  number,”  which  is  a  term  of 

art  in  GoMath,  but  nonacacemic.  Ms.  Dominguez  believes  she  should  have  used 

academic  language  to  explain  “a  nice  number  is  the  same  as  certain  right  numbers." 

14

Teachers  should  use  academic  language  to  explain  the  term.  Ms.  Dominguez  admitted 

respondent  might  have  provided  the  explanation  at  a  different  time,  but  she  did  not  see 

it.  The  students  need  the  academic  language. 

25. 

Like  Mr.  Gonzalez,  Ms.  Dominguez  did  not  specify  the  elements  in  each 

Standard.  She  rated  respondent  “Growth  Expected”  in  all  six  Standards.  Ms.  Dominguez 

explained  at  hearing  that  if  an  evaluator  does  not  complete  three  formal  observations, 

which  she  did  not,  she  cannot  give  a  rating  below  “growth  expected.”  Examples  of  Ms. 

Dominguez's  evidence  for  the  ratings  include: 

Standard  1:  inconsistently  used  instructional  resources  to  meet  student 

needs,  did  not  allow  sufficient  wait  time  for  student  response,  reviewed  the 

acronym  STAR?  but  did  not  use  it  during  instruction,  and  did  not  check  for 

understanding  or  re-engage  students. 

Standard  2:  minimally  provided  students  with  clear  expectations,  did  not 

provide  direction  at  transitions,  did  not  use  small  groups  to  optimize 

learning,  and  did  not  use  time  effectively. 

Standard  3:  allowed  student  to  sit  idly,  used  “non-academic  language,”  did 

not  employ  the  “I  do,  We  do,  You  Do”  Direct  Instructional  Model 

effectively,  did  not  consistently  differentiate  work;  did  not  provide  clear 

instruction  when  students  had  difficulty,  and  did  not  reassess  for 

understanding  throughout  a  lesson. 

  

>  STAR  is  a  classroom  management  technique.  It  stands  for:  Sit  Up;  Track 

Speaking,  Answer  Questions;  Respect  Others. 

12

& 

Standard  4:  did  not  hold  timely  IEP  meetings;  did  not  communicate 

effectively  with  general  education  colleagues,  did  not  consistently  give 

clear  learning  expectations  or  criteria  for  success;  minimally  adjusted 

curriculum  and  instruction  based  on  assessments  of  students,  did  not  re- 

engage  students  in  learning,  and  did  not  differentiate  work. 

Standard  5:  minimally  checked  for  understanding,  provided  minimal 

feedback  or  an  “exit  ticket"  to  assess  understanding,  did  not  provide  time 

for  student  responses  or  adjust  instruction  when  there  was  a  lack  of 

understanding. 

Standard  6:  generally  failed  to  respond  to  email  in  a  timely  manner,  failed 

to  submit  a  lesson  plan,  provide  teaching  materials  and  assessment 

materials  to  evaluator  when  requested,  minimally  planned  or  organized 

efficiently  to  meet  timelines  and  expectations;  poorly  planned  and 

executed  lesson  plans,  failed  to  attend  AC  meetings  as  required. 

Lesson  Observations  and  Evaluations  2018/2079 

FALL  £2078  FORMATIVE 

Mr.  Gonzalez  was  assiqned  to  complete  respondent's  evaluations  in  the 

2018/2019  school  year.  He  found  respondent  was  not  meeting  standards  in  Standards  1, 

4,  and  5,  and  was  growth  expected  in  Standards  2, 

3  and  6.  Examples  of  Mr.  Gonzalez's 

observations  are  as  follows: 

@ 

Standard  1:  resoondent  released  students  to  independent  practice  despite 

their  level  of  understanding  and  students  sit  idly;  she  did  not  consistently 

provide  students  with  resources  such  as  manipulatives  or  graphic 

13

organizers;  and  she  did  not  check  for  understanding  or  ensure  student 

engagement. 

throughout  the  day. 

e 

Standard  2:  respondent  did  not  consistently  provide  students  access  to 

district  adopted  resources  and  did  not  consistently  implement  CHAMPS 

e 

Standard  3:  respondent  did  not  consistently  use  GVC  Wonders  in  ELA®  and 

did  not  provide  students  access  to  grade-level  content;  she  did  not 

consistently  differentiate  for  English  Learner  students. 

e 

Standard  4:  respondent  did  not  adjust  curriculum  for  all  students  or 

address  students  who  struggled,  did  not  incorporate  appropriate  strategies 

based  on  student  strengths,  and  did  not  provide  students  opportunities  to 

work  and  learn  together. 

e 

Standard  5:  respondent  did  not  check  for  understanding  or  provide 

students  an  opportunity  to  self-assess. 

e 

Standard  6:  respondent  did  not  conduct  timely  IEP  meetings  or  attest  on 

time,  she  did  not  provide  a  complete  lesson  plan  prior  to  evaluation  as 

requested,  and  she  “refused”  to  implement  GVC. 

27. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  found  the  result  of  these  observations  was  that  respondent's 

students  were  not  adequately  supported,  did  not  receive  grade  level  curriculum  or 

immediate  feedback,  and  did  not  have  strategies  to  meet  their  individual  needs. 

  

°  English  Language  Arts. 

14

SPRING  2019  SUMMATIVE 

28. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  completed  respondent's  spring  2019  Summative  Evaluation. 

His  evaluation  referred  to  five  occasions  on  which  he  observed  her  classroom,  but  he  did 

not  indicate  which  observations  were  informal  or  formal.  He  rated  respondent  as  not 

meeting  standards  in  Standards  1, 

2,  4,  and  5,  and  growth  expected  in  Standards  3  and 

6.  Unlike  in  prior  evaluations,  Mr.  Gonzalez  gave  the  rating,  data  points  to  support  it, 

and  suggestions  of  how  respondent  could  improve.  Mr.  Gonzalez's  observations  noted 

some  improvements,  but  overall  noted  many  similarities  to  the  observations  in  the  prior 

evaluations.  Examples  of  Mr.  Gonzalez's  observations  are  as  follows: 

Standard  1:  respondent  improved  in  transitioning  to  independent  practice, 

but  was  not  requiring  students  to  use  manipulatives,  checking  for 

understanding,  or  allowing  wait  time  for  student  responses.  Mr.  Gonzalez 

suggested  respondent  allow  students  time  to  discuss  and  process  their 

responses  and  make  connections  between  past  and  present  learning  and 

rely  on  her  veteran  coach  to  find  ways  to  utilize  scaffolding.’ 

Standard  2:  respondent  continued  to  fail  to  use  the  four  foundations  of  a 

lesson,  provide  connections  between  what  students  have  learned  and  are 

learning,  review  CHAMPS  or  behavior  expectations,  differentiate  for 

student  ability.  Mr.  Gonzalez  suggested  respondent  review  behavior 

expectations  (CHAMPS)  prior  to  and  during  lessons,  use  positive 

reinforcements,  and  continue  to  seek  support. 

  

’  Scaffolding  refers  to  techniques  teachers  can  use  to  aid  understanding. 

15

e 

Standard  3:  respondent  began  implementing  GVC  Wonders  curriculum 

midway  through  the  school  year,  but  did  not  consistently  pian  lessons  that 

included  all  three  grade  levels,  provided  instruction  for  15  to  20  minutes  in 

math  and  insisted  the  length  could  not  be  changed.  Mr.  Gonzalez 

suggested  respondent  check  for  understanding  and  provide  scaffolds  in 

real-time. 

e 

Standard  4:  respondent  did  not  adjust  curriculum  for  all  students,  did  not 

ensure  student  understanding  or  engagement,  did  not  give  students 

“multiple  and  diverse  opportunities”  to  work,  share,  and  learn  together,  did 

not  consistently  incorporate  strategies  to  use  student  strengths,  and  did 

not  provide  students  with  clear  expectations.  Mr.  Gonzalez  suggested 

respondent  state  the  learning  objective,  ask  the  students  to  repeat  it  back, 

and  differentiate  lessons  for  grade  levels  and  IEP  goals. 

e 

Standard  5:  respondent  did  not  provide  closure  or  check  for 

understanding,  did  not  use  exit  tickets  to  aid  understanding,  and  did  not 

provide  students  adequate  feedback.  Mr.  Gonzalez  suggested  she  provide 

opportunities  for  self-assessment  and  model  how  to  do  so. 

e 

Standard  6:  respondent  improved  in  hoiding  timely  IEPs,  but  she  cid  not 

provide  adequate  or  timely  lesson  plans  to  the  evaluator  and  did  not 

respond  to  emails  timely;  but  she  was  working  with  a  veteran  coach  and 

was  attending  trainings. 

90-Day  Notice 

29. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44936  and  44932,  on  September  10, 

2019,  the  District  served  respondent  with  a  90-Day  Notice  of  Unsatisfactory 

16

Performance  (90-Day  Notice).  The  90-Day  Notice  stated  it  was  “designed  to  provide 

[respondent]  with  sufficient  information  to  understand  the  nature  of  [her]  unsatisfactory 

performance  and  to  illustrate  specific  instances  of  such  behavior  with  such  particularity 

as  to  provide  [her]  with  an  opportunity  to  correct  these  faults  and  overcome  the 

grounds  for  potential  dismissal  charges.”  Attached  to  the  90-Day  Notice  were  all  the 

Evaluations  noted  above.  To  assist  respondent  in  overcoming  her  performance 

deficiencies,  the  90-Day  Notice  stated  that  respondent  was  expected  to  comply  with  the 

following  directives: 

1. 

Ensure  continuous  student  engagement  and 

participation.  Use  knowledge  of  students  to  engage 

them  in  learning  and  always  hold  students  accountable 

for  their  answers.  Make  sure  students  are  paying 

attention  (not  talking  or  playing)  while  you  give 

directions,  so  they  are  clear  as  to  expectations, 

procedures  and  expected  outcomes. 

Employ  classroom  routines,  procedures,  norms  and 

supports  for  positive  behaviors  to  ensure  a  climate  in 

which  all  students  can  learn.  Provide  students  with 

behavior  expectations  prior  to  and  throughout  each 

lesson,  as  well  as  before  transitions,  utilizing  the 

CHAMPS  poster  or  other  visual  behavior  expectations, 

when  providing  redirects  to  students  always  connect  the 

behavior  back  to  CHAMPS.  Always  ensure  the  behavior 

expectations  provided  to  students  align  with  the  lesson 

and/or  activity  you  intend  to  present. 

17

  . 

}
A
k

Create  and  maintain  effective  environments  for  student 

learning,  including  a  rigorous  learning  environment  with 

high  expectations  and  appropriate  support  for  all 

students,  and  one  which  fosters  consistent  participation 

and  good  behavior.  Use  a  variety  of  instructional 

strategies,  resources  and  technologies  to  meet  students’ 

diverse  learning  needs.  Connect  learning  to  students’ 

orior  knowledge  and  provide  students  with  meaningful 

examples  to  prior  learning  and  real-life  contexts. 

Give  students  time  for  critical  thinking. 

Effectively  utilize  direct  instruction.  Do  not  omit 

modeling,  practice  and  checking  for  understanding 

before  releasing  students  to  independent  practice. 

Plan  lessons  with  multiple  opportunities  to  check  for 

understanding  and  make  sure  you  are  ready  to  respond 

to  student  needs  with  adjustments  to  instruction.  This 

should  include  planning  both  long-  and  short-term 

goals  that  are  attainable  within  an  instructional  period. 

Incorporate  the  four  foundations  into  each  lesson.  Every 

lesson  must  have  a  clearly  stated/written  objective  and  a 

closure.  Be  sure  to  verbalize  the  learning  target  for 

students  throughout  each  lesson  and  at  the  end. 

Students  should  be  aware  of  how  to  meet  the  objective, 

and  each  closure  should  include  a  way  to  check  for 

18

Student  understanding.  Plan  instruction  and  design 

learning  experiences  with  appropriate  strategies  to  meet 

the  ilearning  needs  of  all  students.  For  instance,  provide 

objectives  that  include  a  criteria  (sid  for  success  so 

students  can  ascertain  whether  the  objectives  have  been 

met. 

manner. 

8. 

Ensure  that  instruction  is  differentiated  to  address  grade 

level  and  IEP  student  needs. 

9. 

Hold,  complete,  attest  and  affirm  IEPs  in  a  timely 

10.  Submit  lesson  plans  in  a  timely  manner. 

Observations  and  Evaluations  During  90-Day  Notice  Period 

30. 

During  the  90-Day  Notice  period,  respondent  had  weekly  observations,  a 

formal  observation,  and  a  formative  evaluation.  Mr.  Gonzalez  observed  respondent's 

lessons  on  September  20  and  27,  October  11,  and  November  6,  2019.  Ms.  Montez 

observed  respondent's  classroom  on  October  18,  and  November  22,  2019.  Following 

each  observation,  respondent  met  with  the  observer  to  discuss  the  evaluation  and 

directives.  Mr.  Gonzalez  completed  the  formal  and  formative  evaluations.  Respondent 

was  given  the  opportunity  to  respond  in  writing  to  the  formal  evaluations. 

31. 

In  each  weekly  observation,  Mr.  Gonzalez  and  Ms.  Montez  provided 

ratings,  observations,  and  directives.  Each  also  included  a  rating  (without  comment)  for 

each  of  the  six  elements  of  each  Standard.  Generally,  respondent  was  rated  as  growth 

expected  or  not  meeting  expectations  throughout  the  90-Day  Notice  period. 

19

32. 

In  Mr.  Gonzalez’s  week-two  observation,  however,  he  rated  respondent  as 

“meets  standards”  in  Standards  1  through  5.  He  commented  she:  engaged  students,  set 

expectations,  created  an  effective  learning  environment  (though  she  did  not  use 

CHAMPS  during  the  observation),  incorporated  the  four  foundations  into  the  lesson 

plan,  and  conducted  assessments  throughout  lessons  and  checked  for  understanding  at 

the  end.  Mr.  Gonzalez  rated  respondent  growth  expected  in  Standard  6  because  he  did 

not  observe  ner  using  CHAMPS  and  was  therefore  not  implementing  all  directives  in  the 

90-Day  Notice. 

33. 

The  remaining  weekly  observations  generally  found  respondent  was  not 

meeting  standards  or  growth  was  expected.  The  comments  throughout  were  similar. 

Examples  from  the  weekly  observations  (save  week  two)  included: 

Week  One  (MR.  GONZALEZ) 

e 

Respondent  did  not  complete  a  new  daily  schedule  on  time  as  evaluator 

requested;  she  wanted  to  consult  with  her  veteran  support  coach  first. 

e 

e 

® 

e 

e 

Respondent  did  not  review  CHAMPS  throughout  the  lesson. 

Respondent  did  not  assess  students  or  use  the  four  foundations. 

Respondent  did  not  use  transitions  between  lessons  or  activities. 

Respondent  did  not  provide  access  to  grade-level  curriculum. 

Direct  instruction  was  limited  to  three  of  seven  students. 

20

WEEK  Four  (Mr.  GONZALEz)® 

Respondent  did  not  incorporate  the  four  foundations. 

Respondent  used  visuals  to  support  transition,  but  did  not  refer  to  the 

visuals. 

Respondent's  instruction  was  limited  to  three  of  seven  students. 

Respondent  did  not  refer  to  CHAMPS. 

Respondent  did  not  provide  closure  or  clear  transitions.  She  did  not 

incorporate  the  four  foundations  into  her  lesson  plans. 

Respondent  was  “meeting  standards”  in  Standard  4.  She  developed  a 

lesson  plan  for  her  direct  instruction  and  her  paraprofessional  provided 

instruction  in  the  supplemental  curriculum. 

Respondent  did  not  assess  students’  new  learning. 

Evaluator  requested  a  lesson  plan  and  respondent  did  not  comply.  She 

stated  she  wanted  her  veteran  support  coach  to  review. 

WEEK  FIVE  (Ms.  MONTEZ) 

Respondent  read  a  story  and  then  asked  “what  did  Ron’s  little  sister  do 

with  the  socks?”  Student  J2  responded:  “the  shells.”  Rather  than  create  an 

expectation  for  answers  to  be  in  complete  sentences,  respondent 

answered:  “Yes,  he  puts  the  shells  in  her  sock.” 

  

8  No  Week  Three  evaluation  was  submitted. 

21

Not  all  students  were  engaged. 

WEEK  SEVEN  (MR.  GONZALEZ)? 

Respondent  reminded  students  of  STAR  behavioral  expectations. 

Respondent  was  not  planning  and  designing  instruction  to  grade  levels. 

Not  all  students  were  engaged.  For  example,  student  J1’s  head  was  down 

and  he  “[appeared]  to  fall  asleep  for  the  majority  of  the  lesson;”  student  N 

sat  at  a  nonworking  tablet  for  15  minutes. 

Respondent  was  not  using  CHAMPS  on  a  consistent  basis.  Mr.  Gonzalez 

suggested  respondent  refer  to  the  CHAMPS  book  and  establish  the 

expectations  for  the  students,  especially  at  transitions  and  during 

independent  study. 

objectives  and  closure. 

Respondent  was  not  using  the  four  foundations,  especially  providing 

Respondent  was  not  using  the  GVC  and  was  not  differentiating  among 

grade  levels.  Respondent  should  teach  core  curriculum  and  her 

paraprofessional  should  teach  the  supplemental  curriculum. 

Respondent  was  not  adhering  to  the  directives  including  attending  all  AC 

meetings. 

  

2  No  Week  Six  evaluation  was  submitted. 

22

WEEK  EIGHT  (VIS.  MONTEZ) 

e 

Not  all  students  were  engaged.  For  example,  one  student  was  playing  and 

talking  during  independent  study  and  another  was  not  doing  the  lesson  on 

the  laptop  or  tablet. 

e 

Respondent  was  not  using  the  four  foundations,  especially  regarding 

objectives  and  closure,  and  was  not  consistently  using  CHAMPS  or  another 

behavioral  expectation. 

e 

® 

Respondent  did  not  respond  when  a  student  asked  if  it  was  time  for  lunch. 

Respondent  was  not  differentiating  for  grade  levels  or  providing  different 

manipulatives  for  different  students. 

e 

Respondent  did  not  manage  the  classroom  by  checking  on  students  in 

independent  study.  She  continued  not  to  allow  time  for  student  responses. 

e 

Respondent  mainstreamed  several  students  to  math  but  did  not  bring  data 

regarding  these  students  to  a  meeting  with  the  administration  and  SPED 

Regional  Instructional  Manager  as  requested. 

® 

Respondent  allowed  her  student  with  behavioral  issues  to  attend  a  field 

trip  without  appropriate  behavioral  support. 

FORMATIVE  (VIR.  GONZALEZ) 

34. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  completed  respondent's  formative  evaluation  on  December 

6,  20719.  Much  of  this  evaluation  was  pulled  from  the  weekly  and  formal  evaluations. 

Some  data  points  included: 

23

¢ 

Respondent  did  not  provide  opportunities  for  her  students  to  engage  in 

discourse; 

She  allowed  students  to  sit  idly: 

Students  were  not  provided  clear  expectations: 

® 

e 

e 

Respondent  was  directed  to  use  CHAMPS,  but  chose  to  use  STAR,  though 

did  not  use  STAR  consistently,  especially  in  group  instruction; 

® 

Respondent  “does  not  maximize  her  understanding  of  differentiated 

instruction  to  support  the  individual  needs  of  her  students;”  and 

e 

She  does  not  use  the  four  foundations. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  also  noted  that  respondent  had  mainstreamed  five  of  nine  students  for 

math.  There  were  no  updated  IEPs.  Respondent  had  parent  approval  for  mainstreaming, 

but  she  did  not  consult  with  site  administration  or  the  SPED  department.  By  November 

13,  2019,  respondent  only  held  two  IEPs.  Additionally,  student  CC's  mother  reported  to 

Mr.  Gonzalez  that  CC  was  stressed,  nervous,  and  did  not  want  to  go  to  class.  She 

belleved  respondent  was  not  “welcoming.”  CC’s  mother  filed  a  complaint. 

Teacher  Supports 

35. 

To  support  respondent  in  the  90-Day  Notice  period,  respondent  had 

access  to  a  veteran  support  coach,  a  SPED  Regional  Instructional  Manager,  a  Teacher  on 

Special  Assignment  from  either  the  SPED  Department  or  Birney,  the  schoo! 

administration,  and  her  colleagues. 

REGIONAL  INSTRUCTIONAL  MIANAGER 

36. 

Deanna  Hoffman  has  been  a  Regional  Instructional  Manager  for  the 

District's  SPED  Department  for  three  years.  Sne  taught  SPED  for  15  years  prior  to  this 

24

assignment.  As  the  Regional  Instructional  Manager,  she  monitors  IEP  compliance  within 

the  eight-school  region  to  which  she  is  assigned,  works  with  teachers  and  parents 

regarding  the  IEPs,  and  provides  instructional  support  in  SPED  SDCs,  She  tries  to  walk 

through  SPED  classrooms  in  her  region  on  a  weekly  basis. 

37. 

Ms.  Hoffman  explained  that  most  elementary  school  SDC  classes  are 

combined  grade  levels  and  it  is  common  to  cornbine  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  grade 

classes.  In  her  opinion,  while  it  is  challenging  to  teach  to  three  grade  levels  and  provide 

appropriate  instruction,  with  planning  and  support,  it  is  possible.  There  is  no  reason 

mild/moderate  students  should  not  be  exposed  to  the  GVC  at  their  grade-levels. 

38. 

She  explained  she  supports  the  SPED  teachers  in  teaching  the  GVC  of 

Wonders,  supplemented  by  Wonderworks  and  a  supplemental  corrective  reading 

program,  and  GoMath,  supplemented  by  NumberWorid.  The  District  adopted  this 

curriculum  that,  "if  used  to  fidelity,”  will  teach  to  all  the  required  educational  standards. 

The  GVC  is  used  in  SPED  as  well  as  general  education,  but  in  SPED,  the  program  is 

tailored  to  the  “strengths  and  struggles  of  each  student.”  SPED  teachers  provide  access 

to  the  same  curriculum  their  grade-level  peers  receive.  SDCs  are  smaller  classrooms, 

which  allow  teachers  more  time  with  the  students. 

39. 

In  the  2016/2017  school  year,  ail  teachers  were  trained  in  the  new  GYC, 

and  the  District  considered  the  Wonders  curriculum  “experimental”  for  SPED  to  allow 

teachers  to  see  what  worked.  The  SPED  teachers  received  the  curriculum  for  all  three 

grade  levels  they  taught  so  their  students  would  be  provided  access  to  their  grade-level 

GVC.  As  an  example,  Ms.  Hoffman  suggested  a  teacher  might  read  a  story  to  all 

students,  but  then  differentiate  instruction  in  grade-level  groups. 

25

40. 

Tn  talking  with  Ms.  Hoffman,  respondent  repeatedly  stated  her  "kids  can't 

do  the  work."  Respondent  did  not  want  to  attempt  to  differentiate  instruction  because  it 

was  “too  hard”  for  her  students.  Ms.  Hoffman  explained  that  many  students  have 

struggles,  but  the  SPED  teacher’s  “craft  is  looking  at  the  gaps  the  kids  have  and  finding 

strategies  to  meet  the  expectations.” 

44, 

Ms.  Hoffman  worked  with  respondent  on  the  timeliness  of  her  IEPs.  She 

had  email  communications  with  respondent  wherein  respondent  stated  she  could  not 

hold  a  timely  IEP  meeting  because  a  necessary  party,  such  as  a  school  administrator, 

parent,  or  general  education  teacher,  did  not  attend.  Ms.  Hoffman  works  with  30  to  40 

SPED  teachers;  of  those,  respondent  had  the  most  difficulty  completing  timely  IEPs. 

42. 

Ms.  Hoffman  explained  the  process  to  mainstream  a  student  is  generally  to 

provide  the  data  to  show  the  student’s  progress  to  support  the  change.  An  IEP  meeting 

is  held  to  make  adjustments  and  ensure  all  parties  understand  and  agree  with  the 

change.  Respondent  did  a  “trial  mainstreaming”  in  math  for  all  her  students  for  two 

weeks  in  the  fall  of  2019.  Some  remained  in  the  general  education  math  class  after  the 

trial,  but  their  IEPs  were  not  updated,  which  is  contrary  to  the  law. 

VETERAN  SupPpoRT  COACH 

43. 

Respondent  was  offered  and  accepted  the  assistance  of  a  Veteran  Support 

Coach  in  December  2018.  Jodi  Saldivar  was  respondent's  coach.  She  did  not  testify  at 

nearing,  out  the  District  provided  a  log  of  the  time  she  spent  as  respondent's  coach.  Ms. 

Saldivar  spent  a  total  of  20  hours  in  the  2019  Spring  semester.  Her  coaching  time 

included: 

collaborating  with  administrators  and  respondent, 

observing  respondent's  SDC,  instructing  and  supporting 

26

44. 

—_  Tn  the  fall  sernester,  Ms.  Saldivar  spent  20  hours  coaching  respondent.  Of 

those  hours,  more  than  five  focused  on  differentiation.  Her  coaching  included: 

respondent's  differentiation  lessons  and  plans,  assisting 

with  behavior  supports  and  whole  class  behavior 

ranagement,  implementing  student  assessments,  planning 

for  and  debriefing  after  formal  observations,  and  advising 

regarding  transitions.  Respondent  was  unavailabie  for  two 

of  their  scheduled  meetings. 

Email  correspondence,  meeting  with  Mr.  Gonzalez  and  Ms. 

Montez,  observing  respondent's  SDC,  planning  jessons, 

supporting  respondent  in  differentiation,  inclusion,  and 

student  behaviors,  meeting  with  administration  and 

respondent  to  determine  the  focus  of  support,  and 

observing  the  classroom.  Respondent  was  not  present  for  at 

least  one  scheduled  meeting,  which  occurred  by  telephone. 

OTHER  SUPPORTS 

45. 

Ms.  Hoffman  arranged  for  her  peer,  Alberto  Landeros,  to  model  a 

differentiated  math  lesson  for  respondent.  Mr.  Landeros  has  been  a  teacher  on  special 

assignment  for  the  District  for  five  years  providing  curriculum  instruction,  Prior  to  that, 

ne  was  a  mid  to  moderate  SPED  teacher  in  a  fourth  to  sixth  grade  SDC.  He  testified 

regarding  the  District's  GVC  and  support  he  provided  respondent. 

46, 

Mr.  Landeros  explained  SPED  teachers  have  access  to  curriculum  and 

supplemental  curriculum.  If  a  teacher  is  teaching  more  than  one  grade  level,  she  is 

provided  material  for  all  grade  levels  and  is  expected  to  provide  students  access  to 

of

grade  level  learning:  “out  of  grade  level  is  out  of  compliance.”  He  believes  the  District's 

mandate  has  always  been  that  students  are  taught  to  their  grade  level,  rather  than,  for 

example,  a  fourth  through  sixth  grade  SPED  teacher  only  teaching  to  the  fourth-grade 

level.  He  also  explained  that  differentiation  occurs  throughout  a  lesson  and  should  be 

incorporated  into  lesson  plans  as  well  as  instruction.  Differentiation  involves  consistent 

checking  for  understanding  and  adapting  the  lesson  or  technique  in  reai  time. 

Differentiation  does  not  mean  that  a  teacher  may  teach  out  of  grade  level  if  a  student  is 

having  difficulty  with  a  lesson. 

47. 

Mr.  Landeros  was  asked  to  work  with  respondent  in  Fall  2019.  He  explained 

that  sometimes  veteran  teachers  expressed  resistance  to  new  curriculum  or  methods. 

When  he  began  working  with  respondent,  she  told  him  her  students  could  not  do  grade 

level  work.  He  understood  her  concern  and  agreed  to  an  extent.  He  explained  that  if  the 

student  could  master  grade-level  work,  the  student  would  not  be  in  SPED.  A  SPED 

teacher's  job  is  to  bridge  the  gaps  the  student  may  have  and  provide  access  to  GVC. 

48. 

Respondent  told  Mr.  Landeros  she  wanted  to  focus  on  differentiated 

lessons  in  math.  They  scheduled  a  meeting,  but  respondent  had  also  scheduled  an  IEP 

meeting  at  the  same  time,  giving  her  only  ten  minutes  with  Mr.  Landeros.  They  had  no 

other  in-person  meetings.  He  invited  her  to  a  math  department  meeting  regarding 

grade  level  lessons  and  scaffolding.  Respondent  signed  up  but  did  not  attend. 

RESPONDENT $  COLLEAGUES 

49, 

Corinna  Rubio  was  a  general  education  sixth-grade  teacher  at  Birney  from 

2015  to  2018.  She  now  teaches  at  Norseman  Elementary  in  the  District.  She  testified  as 

to  her  communications  and  interactions  with  respondent. 

28

50. 

Inthe  2017/2018  school  year,  Birney  had  three  sixth-grade  teachers.  All 

were  expected  to  attend  AC  meetings.  Meeting  schedules  for  each  school  year  are 

distributed  by  email  and  hardcopy  and  posted  on  the  Birney  website.  SPED  teachers 

with  sixth-grade  students  were  also  expected  to  attend  the  meetings.  Ms.  Rubio 

recollected  respondent  came  to  "a  select  few”  meetings,  though  when  she  did  attend, 

she  was  engaged. 

51. 

Ms.  Rubio  is  aware  respondent  complained  she  was  not  told  of  meetings 

or  was  not  receiving  the  inforrnation  from  the  meetings.  Ms.  Rubio  noted,  however,  that 

the  meeting  schedule  is  set  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  and  the  agenda 

and  minutes  are  available  online.  Whenever  respondent  requested  hardcopies,  they 

were  provided. 

52. 

In  the  2017/2018  school  year,  respondent  mainstrearned  student  S  to  Ms. 

Rubio's  class.  The  two  teachers  had  a  conversation  about  it,  but  respondent  did  not 

provide  materials  that  contained  S's  IEP  goals.  Respondent  did  not  provide  5's  IEP  goals 

until  mid-October.  S  was  absent  from  Ms.  Rubio's  classroom  for  a  long  period.  She  later 

learned  S  hurt  his  foot  and  was  staying  in  his  SDC  until  he  could  walk  better. 

53. 

Susanna  Tzun-Tzin-Lopez  is  starting  her  seventh  year  as  a  fourth-grade 

teacher  at  Birney.  She  testified  that  the  AC  meetings  are  generally  attended  by  the 

general  education  teachers,  SPED  teachers,  sometimes  administrators  and  teachers  on 

special  assignment,  and  teachers  in  the  resource  specialist  program.  The  meetings  are 

generally  on  Tuesdays.  Materials  were  available  at  the  meeting,  online,  and  through  the 

group's  “TEAMS*  program  that  allows  document  sharing.  Ms.  Tzin-Tzun-Lopez  believes 

that  if  the  AC  group  did  not  share  materials  with  respondent,  it  was  not  intentional. 

Respondent  did  not  attend  the  meetings  regularly.  Ms.  Tzin-Tzun-Lopez  recalls 

respondent  saying  the  GVC  was  too  hard  for  her  students. 

29

Respondent's  Responses  to  Evaluations  and  Lesson  Observations 

WRITTEN  REBUTTAL  TO  NOVEMBER  2017  FORMATIVE  EVALUATION 

54. 

In  her  written  response  to  the  November  2017  formative  evaluation, 

respondent  disputed  that  she  did  not  collaborate  with  her  general  education  colleaques. 

Respondent  sent  Ms.  Rubio  emails  regarding  her  mainstreamed  students  and  copied  the 

school  administration  to  keep  them  informed.  Ms.  Rubio  “refused  to  meet”  with 

respondent  to  discuss  the  mainstreamed  siucent’s  goals. 

55. 

Regarding  student  S,  respondent  presented  Ms.  Montez  and  Mr.  Gonzalez 

with  a  note  from  her  paraprofessional  who  witnessed  the  conversation  with  S’s  parent. 

Respondent  stated  she  always  had  a  witness  when  speaking  to  a  parent  so  there  is  no 

ambiguity.  The  note  confirmed  the  parent  toid  respondent  5  was  not  to  go  to  recess  or 

walk  back  and  forth  between  the  SDC  and  Ms.  Rubio's  class  until  his  foot  was  better. 

Respondent  requested  the  note  be  attached  to  her  evaluation;  the  request  was  denied. 

56. 

Respondent  admitted  she  missed  two  full  AC  meetings  due  to 

appointmenis  with  her  workers’  compensation  doctor.  She  explained  the  AC  meetings 

are  broken  down  into  half  SPED  meetings  and  half  general  education.  She  attended  the 

SPED  portion,  but  was  not  always  able  to  attend  the  general  education  portion  due  to 

the  doctor  appointments.  She  also  stated  the  general  education  AC  groups  did  not  send 

her  meeting  minutes  if  she  did  not  attend  an  entire  meeting. 

WRITTEN  REBUTTAL  TO  THE  SPRING  2018  SUMMATIVE  EVALUATION 

57. 

Respondent  wrote  that  her  students  take  time  to  calm  down  after  recess 

and  if  there  is  a  schedule  change  (such  as  an  observation},  she  allows  more  time  for 

them  to  calm  down.  Regarding  the  math  lesson  observed,  respondent  was  teaching 

30

three  different  models  in  the  general  education  math  curriculum.  The  lessons  in  her 

classes  “always  go  longer  than  expected”  during  observations,  which  she  noted  in  her 

lesson  plan.  Respondent  breaks  the  class  into  small  groups  after  whole  group 

instruction.  She  wrote  the  administration  wanted  to  see  “open  and  close  of  lesson  in  one 

lesson  and  not  two  like  we  normally  take.”  She  explained  she  had  not  responded  to 

emails  in  a  timely  manner  because  her  laptop  had  been  replaced  and  when  it  was 

returned,  it  had  a  virus.  She  responded  to  the  emails  when  she  was  able. 

WRITTEN  REBUTTAL  TO  SPRING  2019  SUMMATIVE  EVALUATION 

58. 

Respondent  provided  a  written  response  to  the  data  points  in  each  CSTP 

Standard: 

« 

Standard  1:  Respondent  used  different  behavior  modification  tools  to 

encourage  students  to  use  their  accommodations,  however  some  students 

chose  not  to  use  them.  She  also  showed  students  how  to  use  their 

rnanipulatives,  though  did  not  make  the  students  use  them.  She  believed 

students  were  “making  progress  with  their  intervention  curriculum’  and 

she  gave  therm  time  to  discourse  with  their  peers. 

® 

Standard  2:  respondent  taped  a  CHAMPS  mini-poster  to  each  student's 

desk  and  on  each  table.  She  reviewed  the  rules  when  necessary.  She 

explained  that  the  students  wanted  their  SDC  to  look  like  other  classrooms 

that  did  not  have  the  CHAMPS  poster  on  the  walls.  Respondent  held  a 

weekly  classroom  meeting,  a  restorative  counselor  met  with  the  class 

monthly,  and  respondent  had  “check-ins”  when  necessary. 

e 

Standard  3:  respondent  provided  students  exposure  to  grade-level 

curriculum.  The  SPED  Department's  instruction  was  that  GVC  is  20  minutes, 

31

and  the  intervention  curriculum  is  30  to  45  minutes  long.  The  lessons  take 

seven  days  or  more  to  complete  and  they  continue  from  day  to  day. 

Standard  4:  Students  performing  three  or  more  years  behind  grade  level 

will  and  do  struggle  with  grade  level  content.  Students’  IEP  needs  are 

addressed  in  the  intervention  curriculum. 

Standard  5:  Per  the  SPED  Department,  the  GVC  groups  are  20  minutes  long 

and  intervention  curriculum  is  30  to  45  minutes.  The  students  pick  up  the 

lesson  on  one  day  where  they  ended  the  day  before.  The  evaluator  took 

the  students’  written  exit  tickets  and  did  not  return  them.  Respondent 

adjusted  her  lesson  plan  based  on  the  exit  tickets.  She  reiterated  she  used 

different  behavior  modification  tools  to  encourage  students  to  use  their 

accommodations,  but  some  students  continued  to  choose  not  to. 

Standard  6:  TEP  meetings  are  scheduled  a  month  in  advance  and  are 

planned  with  administration  and  the  Regional  Instructional  Manager. 

Respondent  believes  she  should  not  be  “penalized”  if  general  education 

teachers  or  the  parents  do  not  attend.  Respondent  takes  many  steps  to 

complete  the  IEP  meetings  and  cannot  control  the  outcome.  Regarding  the 

lesson  plans,  respondent  wrote:  “due  to  unforeseen  events  lesson  plans 

have  to  be  changed  and  resubmitted.  Lesson  plans  are  complete  but  did 

not  always  meet  the  [evaluator’s]  expectations  and  had  to  be  redone  with 

the  correct  format.” 

32

Testimony  from  Respondent  and  Respondent's  Witnesses  at  Hearing 

RESPONDENT §  TESTIMONY 

59. 

Respondent  began  working  at  the  District  in  1994  In  technology  support 

and  has  been  a  classroom  teacher  since  2013.  In  the  2015/2016  school  year,  Ms.  Montez 

began  as  Birney’s  principal.  Ms.  Montez  evaluated  respondent  in  2015/2016  and  found 

she  was  meeting  standards. 

60. 

Respondent  believes  that  in  the  2016/2017  schooi  year,  Ms.  Montez’s  bias 

against  respondent  began  after  respondent  started  questioning  administrative  decisions 

and  a  “more  outspoken  teacher”  retired.  For  example,  respondent's  position  as  “lead 

teacher"  of  SPED  was  reassigned  and  her  classroom  aide  with  whom  the  students  were 

familiar  was  switched.  Respondent  was  then  assigned  an  aide  with  known  issues. 

61. 

When  respondent  complained  about  the  new  aide,  she  recalled  being  told 

“the  other  class  deserves  an  education,”  and  respondent  “had  ahold  of  [her]  class”  and 

would  be  fine.  The  aide  caused  class  disruption,  yelled  at  respondent  during  class,  and 

students’  negative  behaviors  returned.  Respondent  was  “talked  to”  after  the  yelling 

incident  because  she  did  not  let  the  aide  apologize.  Respondent  believed,  however,  it 

was  inappropriate  to  address  the  situation  during  class. 

62. 

Respondent  saw  Ms.  Montez’s  bias  in  different  ways.  Respondent  believes 

that  when  training  programs  were  available,  Ms.  Montez  only  offered  attendance  to  new 

teachers.  Some  Birney  teachers’  requests  for  materials  or  resources  were  granted,  but 

generally  only  if  Ms.  Montez  liked  them.  Respondent  was  moved  from  her  classroom  to 

a  smaller  classroom  that  did  not  have  a  sink,  which  canceled  the  coffee-program 

respondent  started  with  her  students.  The  program  allowed  her  students  to  make  coffee 

and  deliver  it  to  teachers  who  ordered. 

33

63. 

In  April  2017,  respondent  injured  her  knee  at  work.  In  April  2018,  she 

underwent  surgery.  Respondent  believes  Ms.  Montez  called  her  surgeon  frequently  and 

harassed  his  office  staff  and  the  surgeon  was  pressured  into  releasing  respondent  back 

to  work  earlier  than  expected.  Once  she  returned  to  work,  she  had  physical  restrictions 

regarding  elevating  her  foot  and  sitting  frequently.  Respondent  recalled  Ms.  Montez 

calling  her  into  Ms.  Montez’s  office  several  times  in  the  first  day  she  was  back,  which 

forced  her  to  walk  from  her  classroom  to  the  principal's  office  while  on  crutches. 

64. 

In  January  2019,  Ms.  Montez  informed  respondent  she  would  not  be  able 

to  attend  sixth  grade  camp  because  of  her  physical  restrictions  due  to  her  injury.  If 

respondent  did  not  attend  camp,  she  believed  some  of  her  students’  parents  would  not 

let  their  children  attend.  Respondent  got  a  note  from  her  surgeon  to  clear  her  for  this 

event  and  Ms.  Montez  rejected  it,  saying  tt  was  not  from  her  worker's  compensation 

doctor.  Respondent  got  a  note  from  her  worker's  compensation  doctor  and  Ms.  Montez 

allowed  her  to  go  to  camp. 

65. 

Respondent  felt  the  administration,  especially  Ms.  Montez  and  teachers 

who  were  aligned  with  Ms.  Montez,  were  “against”  SPED  classes  and  teachers.  SPED 

students  were  left  out  of  field  trios  and  graduation  ceremonies,  respondent  was  left  out 

of  important  information  to  the  detriment  of  her  students,  and  the  administration  did 

not  support  the  SPED  classes. 

AC  Meetings 

66. 

The  AC  meetings  were  set  up  for  SPED  teachers  to  have  their  AC  meeting 

for  the  first  hour  of  two  hours,  and  then  attend  the  general  education  grade  levels  for  20 

minutes  each.  Consequently,  SPED  teachers  were  never  able  to  attend  a  full  AC  meeting. 

Respondent  believes  when  she  attended  AC  meetings,  general  education  teachers  were 

34

not  welcoming  and  were  “disgruntled”  because  she  came  in  late  and  left  early.  When 

she  did  not  attend  a  full  AC  meeting,  the  lead  teachers  would  count  her  as  absent  and 

not  provide  her  with  meeting  materials. 

67. 

Respondent  also  disputed  the  number  of  meetings  missed  as  noted  in  her 

evaluation  because  the  total  number  of  meetings  was  misrepresented.  Ms.  Dominguez 

found  respondent  did  not  attend  all  fifth  grade  AC  meetings,  but  respondent  did  not 

have  any  fifth  graders  at  that  time  and  did  not  have  to  be  at  the  meeting. 

68. 

Respondent  continues  to  be  treated  through  worker's  compensation  for 

her  knee  injury.  She  explained  that  getting  appointments  with  worker's  compensation 

doctors  is  difficult  and  “you  take  what  they  give  you.”  Consequently,  when  her  doctor 

appointments  were  scheduled,  she  did  not  reschedule  and  missed  some  AC  meetings. 

69. 

Additionally,  respondent  prioritized  IEPs  over  the  AC  meetings.  On  one 

occasion  noted  in  an  evaluation,  respondent  informed  the  fourth  and  sixth  grade  lead 

teachers  that  she  had  to  complete  IEP  amendments  and  would  be  late  to  the  meeting. 

Ms.  Montez,  Mr.  Gonzalez,  and  Ms.  Dorninguez  carne  to  her  classroom  during  the  AC 

meeting  and  inquired  as  to  why  she  was  not  at  the  meeting  and  whether  she  had 

informed  the  lead  teachers.  Respondent  explained,  but  the  data  point  in  the  evaluation 

siated  she  missed  the  meeting  because  she  had  “two  back  to  back  IEP  meetings”  and 

there  were  no  IEP  meetings  scheduled  that  day. 

Communication  with  Colleagues 

70. 

Regarding  communicating  and  collaborating  with  other  teachers, 

respondent  provided  Mr.  Gonzalez  with  emails  of  her  attempts  to  communicate  with  Ms. 

Rubio.  Her  efforts  to  communicate  were  not  acknowledged  in  her  evaluation  and  she 

was  blamed  for  Ms.  Rubio's  unresponsiveness.  Additionally,  she  provided  Ms.  Rubio 

35

hardcopies  of  student  [EP  goals  in  her  rnailbox.  She  also  provided  each  student  with  a 

binder  that  contained  the  student’s  IEP  goals,  accommodations,  and  manipulatives  they 

needed.  The  students  brought  those  binders  when  they  mainstreamed  to  general 

education  classrooms. 

71. 

Respondent  missed  a  pre-evaluation  meeting  because  a  doctor 

appointment  was  changed  and  conflicted  and  she  had  registered  for  a  SPED  training. 

She  emailed  Mr.  Gonzalez  that  sne  would  have  to  reschedule  but  she  did  not  hear  back 

from  him.  She  did  not  attend  the  SPED  training.  She  believes  she  missed  one  such 

meeting  and  it  appeared  on  three  different  evaluations. 

Guaranteed  Viable  Curriculum 

72. 

Prior  to  the  2018/2019  school  year,  respondent  taught  the  fourth-grade 

curriculum  to  her  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  graders.  in  August  of  that  school  year,  the  SPED 

Department  provided  training  regarding  the  directive  that  all  students  should  be  taught 

at  their  grade  level.  In  August  of  2018,  however,  respondent  did  not  have  curriculum  for 

all  grade  levels,  so  she  continued  to  teach  at  the  fourth-grade  level.  She  provided  some 

differentiation  for  the  grade  levels  in  her  small  groups. 

73. 

In  2019,  she  received  the  Wonderworks  curriculum  and  was  told  to  return 

the  Wonders  curriculum.  That  directive  was  reversed  and  teachers  heid  both  Wonders 

and  Wonderworks.  Respondent  understood  Wonderworks  was  the  GVC  for  the  SDC 

rather  than  Wonders.  She  began  using  this  scripted  curriculum.  She  also  used 

supplements  for  reading  and  vocabulary.  She  did  not  learn  until  hearing  that  Wonders  is 

the  GVC. 

74, 

Respondent's  understanding  of  the  SPED  Department's  directive  is  that 

GVC  is  taught  for  20  minutes  as  a  group,  and  for  one  hour  to  grade  levels.  Respondent's 

36

lesson  plan  provided  for  a  20-minute  full-group  lesson,  and  then  one  hour  split  into  20- 

minute  intervals  for  each  grade.  For  example,  she  would  provide  20  minutes  of 

instructions  at  a  table  for  just  fourth  graders  while  the  paraprofessional  provided 

supplemental  curriculum  instruction  to  fifth  graders,  and  sixth  graders  were  doing  a 

lesson  on  their  tablets.  Every  20  minutes,  this  would  rotate. 

75. 

Respondent  understood  Mr.  Gonzaiez’s  comments  to  mean  her  students 

were  expected  to  “master  grade  level  material.”  At  one  point,  she  recalls  he  said  if  her 

students  did  not  master  the  material,  she  would  not  pass  the  evaluation.  Respondent 

followed  the  SPED  directive  to  spend  20  minutes  providing  students  access  to  grade 

level  material,  whereas  general  education  was  spending  90  minutes  on  the  same  lesson. 

Mr.  Gonzalez  told  her  she  was  behind  and  should  be  “on  pace"  with  general  education. 

Respondent  stated:  "Mr.  Gonzalez  wanted  me  to  make  sure  they  knew  the  content 

before  we  moved  on.”  But  if  she  took  too  long  and  deviated  from  her  lesson  plan,  she 

was  found  to  not  use  her  time  wisely.  She  was  told  not  to  use  modifications  because 

moditied  lessons  were  not  to  grade  level  standaras. 

Student  Engagement 

76. 

One  of  the  data  points  in  Mr.  Gonzalez’s  weekly  evaluation  was  that 

respondent  was  only  engaging  two  of  her  10  students  during  a  lesson.  Respondent 

stated  this  is  misleading  because  her  students  are  not  all 

in  the  classroom  at  the  same 

time.  They  leave  for  speech  or  occupational  therapy,  mainstreaming,  or  counseling. 

7?, 

Respondent  explained  there  is  a  difference  between  cognitive  and 

behavioral  engagement.  Behavioral  engagement  means  a  student  appears  engaged  by 

his  behavior.  Cognitive  engagement  means  the  student's  mind  is  engaged.  Many  of 

respondent's  evaluations  commented  not  all  students  were  engaged,  and  in  particular, 

37

student  J1  spent  the  better  part  of  the  lesson  with  his  head  down  on  his  desk  and 

appeared  to  fall  asleep.  J1  had  many  problematic  behaviors  that  respondent,  J1’s 

parents,  and  a  behavioral  coach  were  addressing.  The  behavioral  coach  was  gathering 

data  and  developing  a  plan.  J1's  IEP  allowed  him  to  put  his  head  down  on  his  desk  when 

he  was  overwhelmed.  Respondent  recalled  one  instance  where  she  asked  a  question  and 

received  several  wrong  answers.  J1  picked  up  his  head  and  gave  the  right  answer.  J1  was 

cognitively  engaged. 

78. 

 J2is  a  student  whase  IEP  allows  for  up  to  five  minutes  of  processing  time. 

Lessons  take  her  longer  to  complete.  J2  also  spoke  in  one-word  sentences  and  hac 

extreme  anxiety.  Respondent  was  aware  of  this  in  all  her  encounters  with  J2.  Her  IEP 

provided  teachers  would  model  complete  sentences,  which  is  why  when  J2  responded 

with  the  word  “shells”  to  respondent’s  question:  “What  did  Ron’s  little  sister  do  with  the 

socks?,”  respondent  knew  J2  comprehended  the  story  and  the  question,  so  respondent 

modeled  a  complete  sentence. 

79, 

When  respondent  teaches  her  small  group  lessons,  other  students  are 

working  with  the  paraprofessional  or  independently.  The  students  know  to  ask  “Three 

Before  Me."  (See  below.)  If  a  student's  tablet  is  not  working  or  he  cannot  log  on,  the 

student  should  ask  another  student  for  help  rather  than  just  sit  idly.  Respondent  could 

not  see  the  students’  screens  from  her  smail  group  table  and  expressed  it  was  an 

unreasonable  expectation  in  the  data  point.  One  of  the  data  points  regarding  a  student 

sitting  at  a  blank  tablet  referred  to  J2  who  was  staring  at  the  tablet  and  occasionaily 

touching  the  keyboard.  Respondent  could  not  see  the  screen  and  assumed  the  tablet 

was  on  during  the  two  20-minute  lessons. 

38

Behavior  Management 

80. 

Respondent  explained  she  had  behavioral  expectations  in  place  and  all  her 

students  were  aware  of  them.  One  was  “Ask  Three  Before  Me."  If  students  had  a 

question,  they  knew  to  ask  a  classmate,  then  the  paraprofessional,  and  then  the  teacher. 

Occasionally,  she  put  three  fingers  up  to  the  student  as  a  reminder.  She  also  reviewed 

STAR  with  her  students  in  individual  grade-level  groups,  not  in  the  full  group  lessons,  as 

was  the  expectation  in  several  evaluations.  Her  students  were  familiar  with  CHAMPS  and 

the  poster  reminders  were  available  in  the  classroom.  Respondent  reviewed  the  points 

at  the  end  of  the  small  group  lessons  without  saying  the  word  "CHAMPS"  because  J1  felt 

it  was  condescending  and  caused  him  to  have  outbursts. 

81. 

Respondent  was  told  at  the  90-Day  Notice  meeting  that  she  could  use  any 

behavior  management  method,  including  STAR.  She  was  told  to  remind  the  students  in 

some  way  throughout  the  lesson  and  the  day. 

Four  Foundations 

S2. 

Respondent  explained  she  was  following  the  Wonderworks  curriculum  in 

January  of  2019.  Wonderworks  was  a  scripted  plan  that  did  not  use  the  term  “objective” 

at  the  beginning  of  the  lesson  and  instead  used  the  term  “essential  question.”  Mr. 

Gonzalez  told  respondent  he  expected  to  hear  her  read  out  the  objective  verbatim.  For 

example,  respondent  would  start  the  lesson  with:  “We  are  learning  standard  4.2.  At  the 

end  of  this  lesson,  you  will  be  able  to  [____].”  Respondent  countered  that  the  essential 

question  provided  in  the  curriculum  is  synonymous  with  the  objective. 

83. 

Respondent  explained  that  some  lessons  included  exit-tickets  that  check 

for  understanding.  It  was  built  into  the  interactive  texts.  An  observer  may  not  have 

noticed  a  student  was  completing  an  exit  ticket  in  these  instances. 

39

84. 

At  one  point,  respondent  stated  she  did  not  provide  closure  daily  because 

some  lessons  span  five  to  seven  days.  She  provided  closure  “in  [her]  way”  and  Mr. 

Gonzalez  did  not  recognize  she  was  doing  closure.  At  another  time  in  hearing, 

respondent  testified  her  students  “always  get  closure,”  but  if  a  student  is  called  away 

from  the  classroom  to  go  to  speech  therapy,  for  example,  he  leaves  right  away. 

Respondent  takes  time  later  in  the  day  to  address  lesson  closure. 

85. 

Respondent  explained  that  many  of  Ms.  Montez’s  criticisms  meant  she  did 

not  understand  the  lesson  or  did  not  recognize  the  scaffolding  respondent  was  putting 

into  place.  Ms.  Montez  also  found  respondent  did  not  say  or  post  a  lesson  objective, 

which  meant  she  cid  not  appreciate  respondent  was  stating  the  essential  question  as 

scripted  in  Wonderworks.  The  scripted  lesson  did  not  contain  an  objective  and 

respondent  began  the  lesson  with  the  essential  question. 

Mainstreaming 

86. 

Inthe  Spring  2019  semester,  respondent  began  working  with  Ms.  Saldivar. 

Respondent  found  Ms.  Saldivar  to  be  helpful  and  enjoyed  working  with  her.  Ms.  Saidivar 

reviewed  respondent's  lesson  plans  and  was  surprised  to  learn  Mr.  Gonzalez  did  not 

approve  of  them.  Ms.  Saldivar  was  known  as  the  “inclusion  guru,”  and  helped 

respondent  mainstream  some  of  her  students  for  math.  Inclusion  would  allow 

respondent's  students  to  discuss  content  with  their  peers  and  foster  relationships 

among  grade  level  students.  Respondent  arranged  a  trial  period  for  early  in  the  fall  of 

2019  wherein  her  students  would  go  to  the  general  education  classroom  for  the  first  30 

minutes  of  the  math  lesson  and  then  return  to  the  SDC.  After  the  trial,  resoondent  would 

hold  IEP  amendment  meetings.  Mr.  Gonzalez  agreed  to  this  plan  but  had  concerns 

about  the  IEPs.  Respondent  stated  she  had  parental  consent  and  intended  to  amend  the 

IEPs.  She  was  told  sne  could  not  “do  an  amendment,  she  had  to  nave  an  IEP." 

AQ

87, 

After  the  students  mainstrearned,  respondent  attended  a  meeting  with  Mr. 

Gonzalez,  Ms.  Montez,  and  Ms.  Hoffrnan.  The  purpose  was  to  discuss  the  students  in  the 

rnainstreaming  trial.  Respondent  felt  attacked  at  the  meeting.  She  was  asked  to  provide 

data  for  students  who  were  not  the  subject  of  the  meeting,  questioned  regarding  the 

general  education  teacher's  grading  practice,  and  asked  why  the  IEPs  had  not  been 

updated  and  what  permission  she  had  from  parents.  She  began  to  get  anxious.  Her 

biood  pressure  and  heart  rate  elevated,  and  she  went  to  the  school  nurse. 

88. 

While  respondent  was  with  the  nurse,  Mr.  Gonzalez  walked  into  the  nurse’s 

office  and  “questioned  whether  [respondent's]  heart  rate  was  really  that  high.” 

Respondent  felt  intimidated.  The  nurse  instructed  Mr.  Gonzalez  to  leave  as  she  was 

providing  medical  care.  Respondent  left  for  the  day  and  took  the  following  day  off. 

Other  Issues 

89. 

Respondent  disputed  the  data  point  in  her  evaluation  regarding  S,  who 

hurt  his  foot.  The  student  had  been  scheduled  to  mainstream  for  part  of  the  day,  which 

would  require  him  to  walk  back  and  forth  between  his  SDC  and  the  general  education 

classroom.  His  father’s  girlfriend  told  respondent  in  person  that  the  student  should  not 

go  to  recess  and  stay  in  his  SDC  until  his  foot  healed.  Respondent's  aide,  Ortencia 

Banuelos,  was  present  for  the  conversation  and  submitted  a  note  regarding  what  she 

heard.  Additionally,  respondent  received  a  note  from  S's  doctor,  which  she  turned  in  to 

the  administration  office.  Mr.  Gonzalez  informed  respondent  he  spoke  with  S's  father's 

girlfriend  who  said  she  never  spoke  with  respondent.  Respondent  provided  Mr. 

Gonzalez  with  her  aide’s  note  about  the  interaction  the  day  after  she  received  the 

formative  evaluation. 

4A]

90. 

Respondent  believed  some  of  the  remarks  in  Ms.  Dominguez’s  evaluation 

were  unfair.  For  example,  Ms.  Dominguez  stated  respondent  was  unprepared  during  an 

IEP  meeting  and  left  the  roorn  to  print  documents,  which  should  not  occur  during  a 

meeting.  Respondent  explained  the  parents  had  signed  the  IEP  in  black  ink  and 

respondent  left  the  room  to  re-print  the  IEP  so  the  parents  could  sign  in  blue  ink. 

91. 

After  the  2018  surnmative,  respondent  and  Ms.  Dominguez  met. 

Respondent  believes  Ms.  Dominguez  marked  respondent  as  “growth  expected”  because 

respondent  “wasn't  teaching  the  way  [Ms.  Dominguez]  understood  for  [respondent]  to 

teach."  Respondent  explained  new  teachers  had  a  meeting  with  Ms.  Dominguez  and 

were  instructed  to  teach  students  to  their  grade  level,  but  respondent  was  not  a  new 

teacher  and  was  not  given  this  directive.  The  first  time  she  learned  of  this  expectation 

was  in  her  Spring  2078  summative. 

92. 

Manipulatives:  Respondent  provided  her  students  with  manipulatives  and 

demonstrated  how  to  use  them.  Some  students  used  them,  some  modified  them  or 

made  their  own,  and  some  did  not  use  the  manipulatives.  She  did  not,  however,  “make” 

them  use  a  particular  too!  because  that  would  result  in  a  power-strugglie. 

93. 

Scaffolding:  Respondent  told  one  student  that  it  would  be  helpful  for  him 

to  number  the  lines  of  the  story  in  the  margin.  She  did  not  prevent  the  other  students 

frorn  hearing  or  using  the  same  scaffolding.  Mr.  Gonzalez  concluded  respondent  was 

not  differentiating  because  all  students  were  given  the  same  scaffolding.  Respondent 

found  this  data  point  unreasonabie. 

94, 

Field  Trip.  Sorne  of  respondent's  students  require  support  to  attend  field 

trips  due  to  behavioral  issues.  When  she  is  aware  of  field  trips,  respondent  ensures 

either  she  or  a  parent  attends.  The  trip  identified  in  her  evaluation  was  one  about  which 

Ad

she  was  not  aware.  She  was  not  copied  on  the  email  with  the  information  and  did  not 

see  a  parent  permission  slip. 

95. 

Parent  complaint:  Student  C's  mother  accused  respondent  of  not  being 

welcoming,  causing  her  daughter  anxiety,  and  making  itso  C  did  not  want  to  go  to 

school.  The  school  psychologist,  Mr.  Gonzalez,  Ms.  Montez,  and  Ms.  Hoffman  ail 

observed  C  in  respondent’s  classroom  and  did  not  see  evidence  of  anxiety,  crying,  or  C 

not  wanting  to  be  at  school.  Respondent,  Mr.  Gonzalez,  and  C's  mother  had  a  meeting 

that  turned  heated  and  aggressive.  Rather  than  engage  with  C’s  mother,  respondent 

excused  herself  back  to  her  classroom  where  her  students  waited.  Mr.  Gonzalez’s 

evaluation  included  that  respondent  failed  to  address  a  parent  complaint. 

96. 

When  respondent  received  her  90-Day  Notice,  she  was  called  to  a  meeting 

with  Ms.  Difilipoo  from  Human  Resources,  Ms.  Montez,  and  Mr.  Gonzalez,  and  her  union 

representative.  Ms.  Difilippo  provided  respondent  with  information  regarding 

counseling  and  told  her  this  can  be  a  stressful  process.  Respondent  felt  Ms.  Difilippo 

was  accusing  respondent  of  “naving  mental  problems,”  though  sne  admitted  at  hearing 

Ms.  Difiligpo  may  have  been  trying  to  help.  At  the  meeting,  respondent  requested  the 

new  vice  principal,  Ms.  Kusch,  be  her  evaluator  because  she  has  SPED  experience;  she 

was  told  she  could  not  choose  her  evaluator. 

97, 

Respondent  always  attempted  to  comply  with  District  and  administration 

directives.  She  does  not  recall  refusing  to  implement  any  directives,  even  those  with 

which  she  did  not  agree. 

General  Responses 

98. 

Respondent's  overall  view  of  the  evaluations  was  that  they  were  “unfair 

critiques”  of  her  teaching.  The  data  points  did  not  give  a  full  and  accurate  view  and 

43

skewed  the  information.  For  example,  Mr.  Gonzalez  noted  respondent  was  teaching  to 

two  of  10  students,  but  not  all  10  students  were  in  the  classroom,  or  respondent  was 

addressing  a  grade-level  group  while  her  paraprofessional  addressed  another  grade 

level,  and  the  last  was  doing  a  lesson  on  their  tablets. 

99. 

She  belleves  the  evaluators  did  not  understand  the  manipulatives  or 

scaffolding  she  used,  and  therefore  found  the  lessons  confusing.  The  evaluators  were 

looking  at  her  SDC  through  a  “general  education  lens.”  She  does  not  believe  the 

evaluations  were  accurate  because  they  expected  her  students  to  behave  like  a  general 

education  class  would. 

100. 

Regarding  Ms.  Dominguez’s  summative  evaluation,  respondent  believed 

the  agreement  with  the  administration  and  the  union  in  reassigning  an  evaluator  was 

that  Ms.  Dominguez  would  not  include  Mr.  Gonzalez's  formative  evaluation  in  her  data 

points.  Ms.  Dominguez's  summative,  however,  included  data  from  the  entire  year. 

Respondent  believed  she  followed  the  given  directives,  but  Ms.  Dominguez  did  not 

include  the  positive  aspects  of  respondent's  instruction  in  her  evaluation.  Respondent 

opined  that  Ms.  Dominguez  did  not  want  her  to  succeed. 

101. 

Overall,  respondent  agreed  with  the  positive  points  in  her  evaluations,  and 

found  the  negatives  to  be  “unfair  critiques.”  She  admitted  the  evaluations  were  accurate 

observations,  but  they  did  not  consider  her  students’  needs  and  behaviors.  She  does  not 

believe  Ms.  Montez,  Mr.  Gonzalez,  Ms.  Dorninguez,  Ms.  Rubio,  or  Ms.  Tzin-Tzun-Lopez 

were  completely  truthful  in  their  testimony. 

102. 

When  asked  what  her  weaknesses  are  as  a  teacher,  respondent  stated  her 

weakness  in  GoMath  is  “getting  [her]  students  the  concepts  in  20  minutes  and  being 

Ad

expected  to  move  on  the  next  day.”  When  asked  if  she  bears  any  responsibility  for  the 

“not  meeting  standards"  ratings,  she  responded:  “In  my  opinion,  no.” 

RESPONDENT S  WITNESSES  TESTIMONY 

Parent  Testimony 

103. 

Letisha  Juarez’s  son  A  has  autism  and  was  moved  to  respondent's  class 

when  he  was  in  third  grade  because  of  behavioral  problems,  including  running  out  of  his 

classroom.  Ms.  Juarez  was  called  to  the  school  almost  daily.  Respondent  bullt  a  rapport 

with  A  and  established  boundaries.  He  began  staying  in  the  class  and  engaging.  He 

completed  third  grade  with  respondent.  In  fourth  grade,  Ms.  Juarez  never  received  a  call 

from  Birney.  Her  son  was  learning  math  and  reading  above  his  grace  level.  He 

graduated  successfully  from  sixth  grade  in  2018.  In  Ms.  Juarez’s  opinion,  respondent  ts 

the  best  person  to  address  her  son's  educational  and  behavioral  needs.  Respondent 

“opened  the  world  of  education”  for  A. 

104. 

Ms.  Juarez  believes  the  Birney  administration  “ignored”  the  SDCs.  For 

example,  they  did  not  attend  classroom  evenis,  as  past  administration  had.  In  20178,  the 

SDC  was  left  out  of  the  graduation.  Ms.  Montez  concluded  the  ceremony  and  did  not 

notice  respondent's  class  was  missing.  The  SDC  was  eventually  called  to  the  ceremony. 

105. 

Sonia  Johnson's  daughter  E  graduated  from  respondent's  sixth  grade  class 

in  2018.  E  was  failing  her  classes  prior  to  transferring  to  respondent's  class.  Respondent 

worked  with  E  and  she  began  learning,  getting  A’s  in  her  classes,  and  enjoying  school. 

Ms.  Johnson  credits  resoondent  with  providing  her  daughter  an  educational  foundation. 

106. 

In  Ms.  Johnson's  opinion,  the  Birney  administration  left  the  SDCs  out  of  “a 

lot  of  things.”  Respondent's  SDC  was  left  out  of  the  2018  graduation  ceremony,  and 

AS

when  they  did  eventually  arrive,  the  graduates  did  not  get  the  jeis  that  were  given  to  the 

other  sixth  graders.  She  also  recalled  the  SDC  was  left  out  of  a  field  trip  and  a  school 

“water  day,”  which  Ms.  Montez  thought  would  be  “too  much”  for  the  SDC  students. 

107. 

Crystal  Silva's  son  J1  was  in  respondent's  SDC.  He  has  a  learning  disability, 

severe  mood  disorder,  anxiety,  depression,  and  a  “speech/learning  problem.”  He  has 

recently  been  referred  for  testing  related  to  bipolar  and  schizophrenia.  Prior  to  being  in 

respondent's  class,  J1’s  school  called  Ms.  Silva  daily  to  pick  him  up.  Occasionally  he  was 

so  aggressive  and  violent  the  school  called  the  police. 

108. 

After  he  was  moved  to  Birney  and  into  respondent's  SDC,  J1's  learning 

improved,  he  mainstreamed  in  math,  and  the  only  calls  Ms.  Silva  received  from  Birney 

were  respondent  telling  her  J1  had  a  good  day.  J1's  behavioral  coach  worked  to  improve 

J1’s  behaviors  in  the  classroom.  They  found  that  if  J1  were  permitted  to  put  his  head 

down  and  have  “quiet  time,”  he  could  control  and  prevent  his  outbursts. 

109. 

Ms.  Silva  does  not  believe  respondent  would  have  sent  J1  on  a  field  trip 

without  support.  Respondent  always  coordinated  with  Ms.  Silva  for  field  trips  or  other 

activities.  She  believes  respondent  was  not  aware  of  the  field  trip.  Though  Ms.  Silva 

admitted  there  “must  have  been”  a  permission  slip,  she  did  not  initiate  a  conversation 

with  respondent  about  the  trip. 

110. 

The  day  after  respondent  was  placed  on  administrative  leave,  J  got  into  a 

fight,  was  physical  with  a  teacher,  and  went  through  an  expulsion  hearing.  Because  in- 

person  school  was  cancelled  due  to  the  pandemic,  J  was  not  expelled. 

171. 

Bereniz  Martinez’s  son  F  has  autism  and  was  in  respondent’s  SDC  until  he 

graduated  in  2018.  Prior  to  being  in  respondent's  SDC,  F  could  not  read  sentences,  did 

not  like  school,  and  ran  from  his  classroom.  With  respondent,  F  started  reading,  doing 

AG

rath,  counting,  and  enjoying  science  lessons.  F  was  unable  to  tolerate  loud  noises  and 

elevators.  Respondent  worked  with  him  and  F  rode  the  elevator  on  a  field  trip  and  chose 

to  play  the  trombone  in  the  school  band. 

112. 

In  Ms.  Martinez’s  opinion,  Birney's  administration  tried  to  exclude 

respondent  from  F’s  IEP  meeting.  They  did  not  tell  respondent  about  the  meeting,  sent  a 

physical  education  teacher  in  her  place,  and  when  she  did  arrive,  Ms.  Martinez  felt  she 

was  prevented  from  participating.  Ms.  Martinez  also  believed  respondent  identified  an 

autism  program  that  would  have  benefitted  F,  but  the  administration  resisted  the 

transfer. 

113. 

Patricia  Carter's  son  W  was  in  respondent's  class  in  2019/2020  and  was  one 

of  the  students  who  mainstreamed  for  math.  While  in  respondent's  SDC,  W  was  more 

engaged,  willing  to  go  to  school,  and  was  “Student  of  the  Month”  one  month. 

114. 

Ms.  Carter  gave  respondent  written  consent  to  mainstream  because  she 

heard  the  Birney  administration  cid  not  support  mainstreaming.  Sne  understands  there 

needs  to  be  an  IEP  meeting  for  changes  to  the  IEP  to  take  effect,  but  believes  she  has 

the  final  say,  and  once  the  administration  received  her  written  consent  to  mainstrearn, 

they  could  have  held  an  IEP.  Ms.  Carter  recalled  learning  after  respondent  was  placed  on 

leave  that  W  was  removed  from  mainstreaming.  Mr.  Gonzalez  told  her  respondent  had 

mainstreamed  too  many  students  and  “had  too  much  free  time.” 

115. 

About  one  week  after  respondent  was  placed  on  leave,  W  began  acting  out 

in  school.  Ms.  Carter  asked  the  Phoenix  School,  an  elementary  school  that  focuses  on 

behavioral  issues,  to  intervene.  She  observed  W's  SDC  with  the  principal  and  vice 

principal  of  Phoenix  and  described  it  as  “chaos.”  The  principal  and  vice  principal  worked 

to  speed  up  the  transfer  process  to  remove  W  from  that  SDC. 

Af

116. 

Tony  Rodriguez  was  on  the  Birney  Parent/Teacher  Association  (PTA).  In 

that  role,  he  ordered  leis  for  graduation.  Mr.  Rodriguez  heard  a  rurnor  respondent's 

class  would  be  left  out  of  the  graduation  ceremony;  he  went  to  the  principal's  office 

three  times  to  ensure  he  had  the  right  number  of  students  for  whom  to  order  leis.  He 

ordered  the  leis  based  on  the  principal's  numbers.  At  graduation,  however,  there  were 

not  enough  leis  for  respondent's  sixth  graders. 

Colleagues 

117. 

Sandy  Green  was  a  Resource  Librarian  at  Birney  until  2019.  In  the 

2017/2018  school  year,  Ms.  Green  was  tasked  with  making  photocopies  of  materials  for 

the  AC  meetings.  When  she  was  given  the  documents  and  the  list  of  teachers  who 

should  receive  them,  she  made  the  copies  and  placed  them  in  the  listed  teachers’  boxes. 

She  recalled  Ms.  Rubio  and  Ms.  Tzin-Tzun-Lopez  never  included  respondent. 

Respondent  asked  Ms.  Green  to  provide  her  with  the  fourth-grade  materials  even  if  her 

name  was  not  on  the  list.  In  the  2018/2019  school  year,  Ms.  Green  started  seeing 

respondent's  name  listed  more  often.  Ms.  Green  also  recalled  respondent  was  the  “go- 

to”  teacher  if  students  had  difficult  behaviors. 

118. 

Ortencia  Banuelos  was  respondent's  paraprofessional  for  about  five  years. 

She  is  now  retired.  She  was  present  when  student  S’s  stepmother  told  respondent  S 

broke  his  toes  and  gave  respondent  a  doctor's  note.  She  heard  S's  stepmother  say  S 

should  not  go  to  the  general  education  classroom  because  it  was  too  much  walking. 

119. 

Ms.  Banuelos  accompanied  students  who  were  mainstreaming. 

Respondent  consistently  prepared  her  students  with  a  notebook  containing  their  work, 

goals,  and  accommodations.  In  the  SDC,  respondent  provided  students  with 

Ag

manipulatives  and  encouraged  their  use.  Ms.  Banuelos  opined  respondent  is  a  “very 

good  teacher”  who  cares  about  her  students. 

120. 

Sarena  Lopez  was  a  substitute  aide  in  respondent's  classroom  for  “a  few 

months”  in  the  2017/2018  and  2078/2019  school  years.  Prior  to  being  a  substitute  aide, 

Ms.  Lopez's  only  classroom  experience  was  from  volunteering  in  a  classroom  when  she 

was  in  high  school,  After  high  school,  she  had  an  attestation  to  work  in  the  District  and 

began  substituting.  She  is  currently  a  permanent  certificated  employee  with  the  District. 

121. 

Ms.  Lopez  witnessed  respondent  teaching  grade  level  math  and  ELA.  Ms. 

Lopez  worked  with  students  in  small  groups  and  addressed  grade  level  lessons.  Ms. 

Lopez  belleved  she  and  respondent  worked  well  together  in  the  classroom,  and  she 

believed  it  would  be  a  “long  term"  assignment.  One  morning  she  reported  for  work  and 

there  was  another  substitute  in  respondent’s  classroom.  She  talked  to  Ms.  Montez,  who 

initially  said  Ms.  Lopez  should  apply  for  reassignment  and  that  respondent  complained 

about  her  and  did  not  want  her  back.  Ms.  Montez  added  that  Ms.  Lopez  “wasn't 

knowledgeable  enough  and  the  kids  were  not  safe  with  [her].”  Ms.  Lopez  was  tald  she 

needed  more  training  and  certification. 

122. 

Marilyn  Baker  worked  in  the  first  through  third  grade  SDC  at  Birney  in  the 

2017/2018  and  2018/2019  school  years.  In  her  first  year  at  Birney,  she  recalled  the 

expectation  was  that  GoMath  and  Wonders  would  be  taught  at  one  grade  level  to  ail 

three  grades.  As  the  year  went  on,  she  learned  in  new-teacher  trainings  that  she  should 

be  teaching  to  each  grade  level. 

123. 

Because  she  was  a  new  teacher,  part  of  her  training  included  observing 

other  classrooms.  She  went  to  another  elementary  school  in  the  District,  and  those 

classes  were  not  teaching  to  individual  grade  levels. 

AY

124. 

Inthe  Fall  2018  semester,  Ms.  Baker  attended  a  training  with  both  new  and 

veteran  teachers  conducted  by  Ms.  Hoffman,  the  Regional  Instructional  Manager.  The 

direction  at  that  meeting  was  that  ail  SDC  teachers  should  be  teaching  to  each  grade 

level  using  the  GVC. 

125. 

When  Ms.  Baker  began  working  at  Birney,  she  noted  what  she  referred  to 

as  a  “polarizing”  environment.  The  SPED  teachers  were  not  supported  by  the 

administration  and  the  SDCs  were  seemingly  held  to  general  education  classroom 

standards.  There  were  personality  conflicts  among  teachers  and  between  teachers  and 

the  administration.  Additionally,  Ms.  Baker  felt  the  expectations  were  not  clear  and  kept 

changing. 

126. 

Prior  to  her  SPED  position  at  Birney  in  2017/2018,  Ms.  Baker  was  a  general 

education  teacher  for  five  years.  She  had  always  “met  standards"  in  her  evaluations. 

When  Ms.  Montez  evaluated  her,  she  received  a  mixture  of  “growth  expected”  and  “not 

rneeting  standards”  ratings.  Ms.  Baker  cid  not  agree  with  Ms.  Montez’s  conclusions  and 

found  the  evaluations  “shocking.”  Ms.  Montez  told  her  she  would  be  more  suited  to a 

Resource  Specialist  Program  (RSP).  Ms.  Baker  now  works  in  an  RSP  position  at  Thomas 

Elernentary  in  the  District. 

PRINCIPLES  OF  LAW 

127. 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  respondent’s  unsatisfactory 

performance  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.  (Gardener  v.  Commission  an 

Professional  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal  App.3d  1035,  1040.)  Evidence  that  is  deemed  to 

preponderate  must  amount  to  “substantial  evidence.”  (Weiser  v.  Board  of  Retirement 

(1984)  152  Cal App.3d  775,  783.)  And  to  be  “substantial,”  evidence  must  be  reasonable 

50

in  nature,  credible,  and  of  solid  value.  Un  re  Teed''s  Estate  (1952)  112  Cal App.2d  638, 

644.) 

128. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  {a}(5),  a  school 

district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for  unsatisfactory  performance. 

When  reviewing  a  school  district's  dismissal  action  against  a  certificated  employee 

based  solely  upon  unsatisfactory  performance  under  Education  Code  section  44932, 

subdivision  (a}(5),  there  is  no  need  to  apply  the  standards  of  fitness  to  teach  set  forth  in 

Morrison  v.  State  Board  of  Education  (1969)  1  Cal.3d  214.  (ferez  v.  Commission  on 

Professional  Competence  (1983)  149  Cal App.3d  1167,  1175-1176.) 

129. 

Education  Code  sections  44660  through  44665  set  forth  the  requirements 

with  which  a  school  district  must  comply  when  evaluating  certificated  employees. 

Education  Code  section  44662,  in  relevant  part  provides: 

a... 

(b)  The  governing  board  of  each  school  district  shall 

evaluate  and  assess  certificated  employee  performance  as  it 

reasonably  relates  to: 

(1)  The  progress  of  pupils  toward  the  standards  established 

pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  and,  if  applicable,  the  state 

adopted  academic  content  standards  as  measured  by  state 

adopted  criterion  referenced  assessments. 

(2}  The  instructional  techniques  and  strategies  used  by  the 

employee. 

(3)  The  employee's  adherence  to  curricular  objectives. 

51

(4)  The  establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  suitable 

learning  environment,  within  the  scope  of  the  employee's 

130. 

Education  Code  section  44664,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

responsibilities. 

a...  7] 

(o}  The  evaluation  shall  include  recommendations,  if 

necessary,  as  to  areas  of  improvement  in  the  performance 

of  the  employee.  If  an  employee  is  not  performing  his  or 

her  duties  in  a  satisfactory  manner  according  to  the 

standards  prescribed  by  the  governing  board,  the 

employing  authority  shall  notify  the  employee  in  writing  of 

that  fact  and  describe  the  unsatisfactory  performance.  The 

employing  authority  shall  thereafter  confer  with  the 

employee  making  specific  recommendations  as  to  areas  of 

improvement  in  the  employee's  performance  and  endeavor 

to  assist  the  employee  in  his  or  her  performance.  If  any 

permanent  certificated  employee  has  received  an 

unsatisfactory  evaluation,  the  employing  authority  shall 

annually  evaluate  the  employee  until  the  employee  achieves 

a  positive  evaluation  or  is  separated  from  the  district. 

131. 

Before  a  school  district  may  dismiss  a  permanent  certificated  employee  for 

unsatisfactory  performance,  it  must  comply  with  Education  Code  section  44938, 

subdivision  (b),  which,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

52

(1)  At  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing, 

the  board  or  tts  authorized  representative  has  given  the 

employee  against  whom  the  charge  is  filed,  written  notice 

of  the  unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  the  nature 

thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with 

such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity 

to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for 

the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the  evaluation 

made  pursuant  to  Article  17  (commencing  with  Section 

44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee. 

ANALYSIS 

132. 

The  District  evaluated  respondent  in  accordance  with  Education  Code 

sections  44660  through  44665.  Its  evaluations  included  recommendations  as  to  areas  of 

improvement  in  respondent's  performance.  It  notified  respondent  that  she  was  not 

performing  her  teaching  duties  in  a  satisfactory  manner  according  to  the  District's 

standards  and  described  her  unsatisfactory  performance.  The  District  thereafter 

conferred  with  respondent  and  made  specific  recommendations  as  to  areas  of 

improvement  in  her  performance.  It  endeavored  to  assist  respondent  in  her 

performance.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44664,  subd.  (6).  Findings  14  through  28.) 

133. 

Atleast  90  days  before  it  served  a  notice  of  intent  to  dismiss,  the  District 

gave  respondent  written  notice  of  her  unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  its  nature 

with  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  particularity  as  to  furnish  her  with  an  adequate 

opportunity  to  correct  her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charges.  (Findings 

29  through  34} 

53

134. 

Respondent  had  four  evaluations  prior  to  the  90-Day  Notice  wherein  the 

same  data  points  were  continuously  raised.  The  90-Day  notice  was  “designed  to  provide 

lrespondent]  with  sufficient  information  to  understand  the  nature  of  [her]  unsatisfactory 

performance  and  to  illustrate  specific  instances  of  such  behavior  with  such  particularity 

as  to  provide  [her]  with  an  opportunity  to  correct  these  faults  and  overcome  the 

grounds  for  potential  dismissal  charges.”  In  the  90-Day  Notice,  the  District  set  out  a  list 

of  10  directives  respondent  was  expected  to  implement.  The  list  was  clear  and  concise, 

and  respondent  had  an  opportunity  to  clarify  if  needed. 

90-Day  Notice  Directives 

135. 

Despite  the  administration's  efforts,  respondent  could  not  or  would  not 

comply  with  the  directives.  The  first  directed  her  to  “ensure  continuous  student 

engagement  and  participation.”  Several  evaluations  noted  students  were  left  staring  at 

blank  tablets,  resoondent  was  not  engaging  and  re-engaging  students  during  lessons, 

and  students  were  not  given  opportunity  for  discourse.  Respondent  explained  she  could 

not  see  their  screens  and  faulted  the  students  for  not  telling  her  their  tablets  did  not 

work.  Her  explanation  highlights  a  fundamental  problem  with  respondent's  classroom 

rnanagement.  Rather  than  arrange  desks  during  independent  study  to  ensure  she  had 

eyes  on  the  whole  room,  for  example,  she  allowed  students  to  sit  idle  for  up  to  20 

minutes. 

136. 

The  next  directive  encompassed  two  points,  the  first  of  which  respondent 

showed  competence  in.  She  was  to  employ  classroom  routines  and  supports  for  positive 

behaviors.  Respondent  knew  her  students’  behaviors,  they  knew  to  “ask  three  before 

me,"  for  example,  and  she  supported  their  needs.  Respondent  provided  ample  evidence 

throughout  hearing  that  she  is  intimately  familiar  with  her  students  and  their  behavioral 

needs.  She  adjusted  for  J2  based  on  J2’s  body  language,  she  did  not  say  “CHAMPS”  so 

54

as  not  to  set  J1  off,  she  had  class  meetings  so  her  students  could  be  heard,  and  she 

adeptly  observed  whether  students  were  cognitively  if  not  behaviorally  engaged.  The 

administration  recognized  this  in  evaluations  and  even  placed  a  third-grade  stucent  in 

respondent's  class  because  they  knew  she  would  be  the  best  behavioral  fit. 

The  second  part,  however,  directed  respondent  to  “provide  students  with 

behavior  expectations  prior  to  and  throughout  each  lesson,  as  well  as  before  transitions, 

utilizing  the  CHAMPS  poster  or  other  visual  behavior  expectations.”  (Emphasis  added}  In 

the  90-Day  Notice  meeting,  she  was  told  she  could  use  STAR  instead  of  CHAMPS,  but 

she  had  to  use  something.  Mr.  Gonzalez  consistently  noted  respondent  did  not  use 

CHAMPS,  which  was  a  misieading  critique.  It  was,  however,  confusing  that  respondent 

had  CHAMPS  taped  to  students’  desks  and  on  the  white  board,  but  stated  her  behavior 

ranagement  plan  was  STAR.  Over  and  over,  her  evaluators  noted  they  wanted  to  see 

the  behavioral  expectation  specifically  referred  to  throughout  the  day  and  at  transitions. 

Respondent  stated  she  addressed  behaviors  in  her  small  groups.  The  directive  was  clear, 

respondent  did  not  comply. 

137. 

The  third  directive  was  to  maintain  an  environment  for  student  learning 

and  set  high  expectations  with  appropriate  support.  Respondent  was  not  exposing  her 

students  to  the  GVC  and  admitted  she  did  not  know  Wonder  was  the  District's  GVC  until 

hearing.  She  was  teaching  her  students  the  supplemental  material.  Additionally,  several 

witnesses  testified  respondent  repeatedly  said  her  students  “could  not”  do  the  work  in 

the  GVC.  Respondent's  stucents  were  not  required  to  “master”  the  curriculum,  despite 

respondent's  understanding  of  Mr.  Gonzalez’s  directive.  Rather,  they  needed  access  to 

the  curriculum  at  their  grade  levels.  If  they  could  master  the  grade  level  curriculum,  they 

would  not  be  in  an  SDC. 

55

138. 

Respondent  was  directed  to  give  students  time  for  critical  thinking.  At 

times,  respondent  did  not  give  sufficient  wait  time.  She  knew  her  students  weil,  however, 

and  it 

is  possible  her  timing  was  appropriate  for  her  students. 

139. 

Next,  respondent  was  directed  to  use  direct  instruction,  modeling,  practice, 

and  to  consistently  check  for  understanding.  Regarding  modeling  and  the  specific  point 

that  respondent  did  expect  more  than  a  one-word  answer  from  a  student,  respondent's 

testimony  was  persuasive.  J2  spoke  in  one-word  sentences,  and  her  IEP  stated  her 

teachers  should  model  complete  sentences,  which  respondent  did.  Several  witnesses 

testified  that  “checking  for  understanding”  is  an  integral  part  of  every  lesson. 

Respondent  was  not  observed  assessing  her  students’  understanding  throughout  the 

lesson  or  at  the  end. 

140. 

Respondent  was  directed  to  “plan  lessons  with  multiple  opportunities  to 

check  for  understanding  and  make  sure  you  are  ready  to  respond  to  student  needs  with 

adjustments  to  instruction.  This  should  include  planning  both  long-  and  short-term 

goals  that  are  attainable  within  an  instructional  period.”  Respondent's  lesson  plans  were 

not  provided  at  hearing,  and  though  there  was  testimony  regarding  checking  for 

understanding  during  the  lesson,  there  was  not  clear  evidence  whether  she  made 

progress  on  this  point  or  not. 

1471. 

The  next  directive  was  addressed  in  many  evaluations: 

Incorporate  the  four  foundations  into  each  lesson.  Every 

lesson  must  have  a  clearly  stated/written  objective  and  a 

closure.  Be  sure  to  verbalize  the  learning  target  for  students 

throughout  each  lesson  and  at  the  end.  Students  should  be 

aware  of  how  to  meet  the  objective,  and  each  closure 

56

should  include  a  way  to  check  for  student  understanding. 

Plan  instruction  and  design  learning  experiences  with 

appropriate  strategies  to  meet  the  learning  needs  of  all 

students.  For  instance,  provide  objectives  that  include  a 

criteria  (s/o  for  success  so  students  can  ascertain  whether 

the  objectives  have  been  met. 

Respondent  did  not  seem  to  understand  or  appreciate  the  four  foundations. 

Rather  than  state  an  objective,  she  gave  the  scripted  “essential  question.”  She  did  not 

seem  to  understand  the  difference.  She  did  not  continually  assess  and  check  for 

understanding.  She  was  rarely  observed  providing  closure,  despite  numerous  reminders 

in  evaluations.  Respondent  insisted  she  did  provide  closure  and  did  it  “her  way."  She 

also  insisted  she  did  not  provide  closure  at  the  end  of  the  day,  but  did  so  at  the  end  of 

the  lesson,  which  might  be  days  later.  Several  witnesses  testified  that  checking  for 

understanding  and  closure  should  be  integral  and  can  be  accomplished  in  seconds. 

142. 

The  next  directive  stated:  “Ensure  that  instruction  is  differentiated  to 

address  grade  level  and  IEP  student  needs.”  Week  after  week,  resoondent  was  directed 

in  the  evaluations  to  differentiate  for  grade  levels  and  student  needs.  Initially, 

respondent  understood  that  only  new  teachers  were  teaching  to  grade  levels.  Later  she 

was  instructed  that  this  was  the  District’s  directive.  She  insisted  she  could  not  do  that.  At 

hearing,  she  said  she  was  differentiating  and  the  observers  did  not  see  or  appreciate  it. 

Respondent  also  provided  the  same  scaffolding  to  all  students,  and  did  not  offer  them 

individual  ways  to  use  the  techniques.  She  testified  that  if  she  gave  one  student  a 

rnanipulative  or  aid,  she  did  not  withhold  the  instruction  from  the  other  students.  While 

this  is  reasonable,  respondent  had  multiple  opportunities  to  demonstrate  differentiation, 

and  did  not  do  so  consistently. 

57

143. 

Respondent  was  directed  to:  “Hold,  complete,  attest  and  affirm  IEPs  in  a 

timely  manner.”  All  witnesses  who  spoke  on  this  topic  stated  that  holding  IEP  meetings 

can  be  difficult  because  of  the  amount  of  people  who  have  to  attend  and  the  scheduling 

involved.  But  the  IEPs  are  governed  by  legal  standards.  They  must  be  held  annually  and 

when  changes  are  made  to  the  student's  instruction.  Respondent  did  not  hold 

amenament  IEP  meetings  when  she  mainstreamed  her  students,  and  instead  spoke  to 

the  parents  for  consent.  She  also  stated  the  late  IEPs  were  because  the  parents  did  not 

show  up  for  the  meeting  or  there  were  other  scheduling  issues.  There  was  no  reliable 

direct  evidence  regarding  how  many  IEPs  were  late  and  when.  But  the  District 

established  respondent's  willingness  to  operate  outside  the  IEP  process. 

144. 

Finally,  respondent  was  to  submit  lesson  plans  in  a  timely  manner.  Several 

evaluations  commented  respondent  turned  in  lesson  plans  late.  Based  on  the  wording 

and  timing  of  the  evaluations,  however,  this  data  point  seemed  to  be  repeated  when  it 

may  not  have  applied.  What  was  apparent  through  testimony  is  this  was  another 

situation  in  which  respondent  had  excuses  for  not  meeting  an  expectation.  In  this 

instance,  it  was  a  computer  virus  and  deciding  she  wanted  her  coach  to  review  the 

lesson  before  she  submitted  it.  The  90-Day  Notice  period  was  a  time  for  respondent  to 

show  the  administration  she  could  meet  the  District's  expectations.  She  did  not  take  the 

opportunity. 

Conclusion 

145. 

Respondent  presented  some  evidence  to  support  her  argument  that  the 

administrators  made  some  unfair  and  unfounded  findings.  She  did  not  establish  Ms. 

Montez,  Mr.  Gonzalez,  and  Ms.  Dominguez  were  biased  against  her,  but  she  did  show 

they  had  mace  mistakes  in  their  evaluations,  including  duplicative  data  points,  data 

points  based  on  misunderstandings,  and  data  points  based  on  hearsay.  Overall, 

58

however,  respondent  demonstrated  that  she  did  not  understand  and  therefore  could 

not  implement  the  District's  directives. 

146. 

When  all  the  evidence  Is  considered,  the  District  established  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that,  notwithstanding  the  assistance  and  opportunity  it 

provided  to  respondent  to  correct  her  faults  and  address  the  grounds  for  the 

unsatisfactory  performance  charges  against  her,  respondent  did  not  improve  her 

performance  to  a  satisfactory  level.  Respondent  did  not  dernonstrate  at  the  hearing  that 

she  had  adequate  insight  into  the  District's  concerns  about  the  quality  of  her  teaching 

to  provide  sufficient  assurances  that,  if  she  were  returned  to  the  classroom,  her  teaching 

would  improve  to  a  satisfactory  level.  Especially  concerning  is  respondent's  blanket 

statement  that  she  bears  no  responsibility  for  her  consistent  sub-par  evaluations  or  the 

90-Day  Notice.  The  District's  dismissal  must  be  upheld. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSION 

147. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  District  established  that  respondent  should  be 

dismissed  frorn  her  ernployment  as  a  teacher  with  the  District  for  unsatisfactory 

performance  under  Education  Code  section  44932,  subdivision  (a){5}. 

ff 

ff 

if 

f/f 

ff 

59

ORDER 

Respondent  Yolanda  Serrato  is  DISMISSED  as  a  permanent  certificated  employee 

of  the  Fresno  Unified  School  District. 

DATE:  September  24,  2020 

DocuSigned  by: 

Patricia  Sandoval 

D24  CDF  1FSs4D40c... 

PATRICIA  SANDOVAL,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

(tary  fl.  Shum 

BFEO2FOSF31C490... 

LARRY  STURM,  Member 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence 

DocuSigned  by: 

Heater  Ma.  Rowan. 

FOB CTAC1TSC3B4DA. .. 

HEATHER  M.  ROWAN,  Chairperson 

Commission  on  Professional  Competence

60 

