BEFORE A COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
GRIDELEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Proceeding to Dismiss: 

MATTHEW REED, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent 

OAH No. 2021040523 

ORDER REOPENING RECORD AND DISMISSING STATEMENT OF 

CHARGES AND ACCUSATION 

This matter was pending hearing on July 19 through 23, 2021, before an 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) of the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of 

California, in Sacramento, California. Robert E. Thorbon, Attorney at Law, represents 

the Gridley Unified School District (District). Eric Lindstrom, Attorney at Law, represents 

respondent Matthew Reed. 

The District filed and served its Written Charges, Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 

Accusation against respondent on February 17, 2021 (Charges). Prior to hearing, on 

July 13, 2021, the District filed with OAH and served on respondent its Withdrawal of 

Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Dismissal of Administrative Proceedings (Withdrawal 

Notice). The Withdrawal Notice stated: 

1) Matthew Reed should not be dismissed, California 

Education Code Section 44944 subdivision (c)(1). 

2) The Governing Board shall pay the expenses of the 

hearing and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by Matthew 

Reed, California Education Code Section 44944 subdivision 

(e)(2). 

law. 

3) The amount of reasonable attorney’s fees shall be 

determined by mutual agreement of the parties or by way 

of duly noticed motion filed in accordance with governing 

Respondent did not file a response. OAH closed the matter and the 

administrative hearing did not commence as scheduled. On July 19, 2021, respondent 

filed his Motion for Reconsideration and Response to the Withdrawal Notice objecting 

to closure of the record and requesting an order of dismissal and opportunity to 

address the issue of reasonable attorney’s fees. A telephonic status conference (TSC) 

was held on July 19, 2021, before Presiding ALJ Dian Vorters to discuss resolution of 

this matter consistent with Boliou v. Stockton Unified School District (2012) 207 

Cal.App.4th 170. 

Education Code section 44944, subdivision (f)(2) states:  

If the Commission on Professional Competence determines 

that the employee should not be dismissed or suspended, 

the governing board of the school district shall pay the 

expenses of the hearing, including the cost of the 

administrative law judge, any costs incurred under 

paragraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision (e), the reasonable 

expenses, as determined by the administrative law judge, of 

 

2 

the member selected by the governing board of the school 

district and the member selected by the employee, 

including, but not limited to, payments or obligations 

incurred for travel, meals, and lodging, the cost of the 

substitute or substitutes, if any, for the member selected by 

the governing board of the school district and the member 

selected by the employee, and reasonable attorney's fees 

incurred by the employee. 

As stated in the July 13, 2021 Withdrawal Notice and at the July 19, 2021 TSC, 

the District unilaterally withdraws the Statement of Charges and Accusation against 

respondent. The District declines to present evidence in support of the charges at a 

hearing on the merits. Absent the requisite proof, respondent should not be dismissed 

as a certificated employee of the District. The District agrees to pay respondent’s 

reasonable attorney’s fees. The issue of reasonable attorney’s fees is pending. 

The motion for reconsideration is GRANTED. The record is reopened. 

On July 13, 2021, the District withdrew its Notice of Intent to Dismiss Matthew 

Reed from his position as a certificated employee of the Gridley Unified School District 

and requested the Commission dismiss the Administrative Proceedings. The Gridley 

Unified School District declines to present evidence in these proceedings. 

Absent proof, there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that the charges 

against respondent Matthew Reed are true, and he should not be dismissed or 

 

 

 

 

ORDER 

3 

suspended from his position as a certificated employee of the Gridley Unified School 

The governing board of the Gridley Unified School District shall pay costs 

including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by respondent. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. 

By July 23, 2021, at 5:00 p.m., respondent will transmit to the District his 

accounting and invoice for reasonable attorney’s costs/fees incurred and anticipated 

through resolution of this matter. 

The parties shall confer on the issue of reasonable attorney’s costs/fees to be 

paid by the District to respondent. 

If any issues arise regarding the matter of reasonable attorney’s fees, the 

concerned party may file a written motion with points and authorities and request an 

opportunity to present oral argument. 

If no further requests or motions are filed by the parties by Friday, August 20, 

2021, at 5:00 p.m., OAH will close the record in this matter. 

DATE: July 20, 2021

Dian M. Vorters

Dian M. Vorters (Jul 20, 2021 09:48 PDT)

 

DIAN M. VORTERS 

Presiding Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

District. 

(f)(2).) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

