BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
FOR THE FALLBROOK UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 
DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

JENNIFER HUMPHREYS, Respondent 

OAH No. 2021110369 

DECISION 

On March 29 and 30, 2022, a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) heard this matter by videoconference. The Commission consisted of the 

following members: Administrative Law Judge Adam L. Berg, Paola Flores, and Karen 

Schuett. 

Jonathan A. Pearl, Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented complainant, Brian Morris,

Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, Fallbrook Union Elementary School 

District (district).

Jon Y. Vanderpool, Smith Steiner Vanderpool, APC, represented respondent, 

Jennifer Humphreys. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record was closed, and the 

matter submitted for decision on March 30, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Procedural Background 

1.

Respondent is a certificated elementary school teacher employed by the 

district as a third-grade teacher at William H. Frazier Elementary School. 

2. 

On September 28, 2021, the district placed respondent on paid 

administrative leave after she indicated she would not comply with the district’s 

requirement that she either obtain a COVID-19 vaccination or undergo weekly testing.

3. 

By letter dated October 11, 2021, complainant notified respondent that

on October 4, 2021, a Statement of Charges for Dismissal and Immediate Suspension 

(Statement of Charges) had been filed with the district’s governing board, at which 

time complainant recommended respondent’s dismissal and immediate suspension.

Complainant wrote that the district’s governing board (board) had approved his 

recommendation and given respondent 30 days to request a hearing.

4. 

The Statement of Charges was signed and dated on October 11, 2021. 

Contrary to complainant’s statement in the October 11, 2021, letter, no statement of 

charges was filed on October 4, 2021. 

5. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing before a Commission, and on 

November 16, 2021, she filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension with the 

2

Office of Administrative Hearings. Respondent’s motion was denied on December 10, 

2021.1 

6. 

The Statement of Charges alleges the following two causes for dismissal: 

(1) evident unfitness for service; and (2) “persistent violation of or refusal to obey the 

school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 

the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district 

employing him or her.” (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. (a)(6) & (a)(8).)2 Complainant also 

alleges respondent was subject to immediate suspension based on “willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 

rules and regulations of the employing school district.” (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 

7. 

In support of the above causes for discipline and the request for 

immediate suspension, the Statement of Charges alleges the following: On August 11, 

2021, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) issued a Public Health Order, 

requiring all workers performing services at Kindergarten through 12th grade (K-12) 

schools submit proof of vaccination against COVID-19 or undergo weekly diagnostic 

testing. District policy required all district employees submit proof of vaccination or 

undergo weekly testing by September 3, 2021. Respondent refused to provide the 

district with proof of vaccination or weekly testing. On October 4, 2021, respondent 

1 That decision “shall not be considered by the commission in determining the 

validity of the grounds for dismissal, and shall not have any bearing on the 

commission’s determination regarding the grounds for dismissal.” (Ed. Code, § 44939.) 

2 All future statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

indicated.

3

 
informed complainant that she would not participate in any form of COVID testing. 

Complainant alleges respondent violated Board Policy 4119.21 “Professional 

Standards,” Board Policy 4000 “Concept and Roles,” and Administrative Regulation 

4112 “Appointment and Conditions of Employment.”

The District’s Evidence

8. 

The underlying facts are largely undisputed. The following findings are

based on the relevant testimony of witnesses and documentary evidence. 

CDPH PUBLIC HEALTH ORDER

9. 

On August 11, 2021, the CDPH Director issued a Public Health Order 

(CDPH Order) requiring all public and private K-12 schools to require verification of 

vaccination status for school workers (defined as all adults serving in the school 

setting) and establish diagnostic screening testing of unvaccinated workers. The CDPH 

Order required unvaccinated workers to undergo diagnostic testing at least weekly.

While the order was effective August 12, 2021, it provided a compliance date for 

facilities of October 15, 2021. 

THE DISTRICT’S COMMUNICATIONS REGARDING THE ORDER 

10. 

Complainant has been the district’s Assistant Superintendent for Human 

Resources since July 1, 2021. In this position, he is responsible for all district personnel 

issues. 

11. 

At the beginning of the school year in August 2021, COVID-19 continued 

to have a significant impact on the district’s operations. Despite vaccinations, social 

distancing, and mask requirements, there was an increase in staff and student 

absences. At that time, the district only offered in-person learning. Staff frequently 

4

were absent because of exposure, sickness, or the need to care for other individuals. 

These circumstances caused a staffing shortage within the district. At the time, most 

elementary school aged children were not authorized to receive the COVID-19 vaccine. 

In sum, there was great concern in the community about COVID-19 and the impact it 

was having on the educational environment.

12.  Neither the district nor its governing board promulgated any written 

regulations, rules, or policies regarding the implementation of the CDPH Order. 

Complainant testified that it was his responsibility to implement the CDPH Order to 

ensure compliance. His intent was to immediately institute the CDPH Order, but he 

provided a three to four-week grace period before he would begin holding staff 

accountable. He wanted to provide an opportunity for staff to obtain the vaccine and 

make sure they were aware of how to upload their vaccine information. 

13.  On August 11, 2021, complainant notified all district staff of the 

requirements of the CDPH Order, and that all staff, regardless of vaccine status, would 

have to wear masks on school campuses while indoors. Additionally, complainant 

wrote, “I will be providing follow up communication with unvaccinated employees re: 

the weekly testing protocols and schedule in our District.” Complainant also reminded 

certificated staff that they should have uploaded their vaccination cards by that date. 

Complainant concluded by providing his phone number for any questions or concerns.

The email did not specify a date by which individuals without proof of vaccination 

would be required to begin testing. 

14. 

Complainant provided all staff with a testing schedule for unvaccinated 

individuals, which allowed them to test at their school site on Wednesdays during their 

regular workday. They were then required to upload their test results online. 

5

Complainant also provided staff with information about other testing locations in the 

community and permitted staff to leave their school to test at another school site. 

15.  On September 7, 2021, complainant emailed respondent with the subject 

“8/30-9/3 Proof of COVID Test.” In the email, which was addressed to respondent by 

name, complainant wrote that the district records did not indicate that respondent had 

submitted proof of vaccination or undergone a COVID-19 test for the previous week. If 

respondent had submitted this documentation, and there was an error in the database, 

complainant requested respondent inform her school principal so the error could be 

corrected. Otherwise, complainant requested respondent “communicate her plan” to 

him and her school principal regarding the submission of proof of her COVID-19 test 

for that week. Complainant concluded by providing his cell phone number should 

respondent have any questions. 

Respondent did not respond to this email or take any action. 

16. 

Two days later, on September 9, 2021, complainant resent to respondent 

the September 7, 2021, email. He copied Arica Rainey, respondent’s school principal. 

Respondent did not respond to this second (i.e., resent) email or take any 

action. 

17.  On September 20, 2021, complainant sent a third email to respondent, 

again copying Ms. Rainey. The email stated that respondent had not submitted proof 

that she had had a COVID-19 test for the week of September 13 through 17. 

Complainant requested respondent let him know if she had completed the test and to 

submit the test result through the district’s portal. Complainant also requested 

respondent communicate with him and Ms. Rainey as to her plan to be tested that 

week. 

6

Respondent did not respond to this third email or take any other action.

18. 

Aside from sending these emails, neither complainant nor Ms. Rainey 

attempted to call, speak to, or otherwise communicate with respondent about 

compliance with the district’s directive prior to the events described immediately 

below. 

The September 28, 2021, Meeting 

19.  On Tuesday, September 28, 2021, at 8:25 a.m., complainant sent 

respondent an email, copying Ms. Rainey, stating that respondent had not submitted 

proof of vaccination or weekly testing, and he would be meeting with her and 

Ms. Rainey at 10:00 a.m. at respondent’s school, to discuss respondent’s plan to be 

tested. Complainant advised respondent she could have union representation at the 

meeting. 

A meeting was held with complainant, respondent, Ms. Rainey, and 

respondent’s union representative, Lukas Smith. At the meeting, complainant told 

respondent that according to his records, she had not submitted proof of having taken 

a COVID-19 test. He asked if this information was correct, to which she declined to 

answer. Complainant handed respondent a copy of the CDPH Order and explained 

that staff were required to either be vaccinated or submit proof of a negative COVID-

19 test. Respondent said she was unvaccinated. Complainant told respondent that the 

district’s testing team was testing at various schools throughout the day, and he would 

allow respondent to take paid administrative leave to test at any location. She could 

return to the classroom that day or the next if she tested negative. Respondent said 

she had no intention of being tested by the district’s testing team. Complainant said 

there were other places where she could test such as hospitals, clinics, or the fire 

7

department. He told her she could go wherever she wanted, but a self-test would not 

be accepted. Respondent reiterated that she would not undergo testing but provided 

no explanation. Complainant told respondent that if she refused to test that day or at 

some time during the week she would be placed on an unpaid leave of absence and 

charges would be drafted to terminate her employment. Respondent said nothing. 

Based on her statement that she would not test, complainant placed her on paid 

administrative leave and informed her she would have to leave the campus 

immediately. He allowed Mr. Smith to escort her to her classroom to retrieve personal 

items before leaving campus. As they were walking out of the building, complainant 

again informed respondent that Kaiser and California State University, San Marcos,

were accepting walk-in appointments for testing.

RESPONDENT’S ACCOMMODATION REQUEST 

20.  On Thursday, September 30, 2021, respondent submitted to the district a 

request for a ”religious exemption” for a COVID-19 vaccination or testing. 

Respondent’s request was almost entirely directed at the vaccination, and she did not 

address testing, except to claim that there are false positive rates up to 16.7 percent, 

which is likely higher, and based on “guidance from the Holy Spirit and the Holy Bible, 

I cannot conscientiously take the Covid-19 tests and/or shots under these 

circumstances.” 

21.

On Monday, October 4, 2021, the district convened an interactive 

accommodation meeting to address respondent’s request. Present at the meeting 

were respondent; complainant; Lindsay Tatnall, a representative from the California 

Teachers Association; Jennifer Mariucci, president of the Fallbrook Elementary 

Teachers Association (FETA); Dale Leonard, an FETA representative; and the district’s 

counsel, Mr. Pearl. At the meeting, complainant explained the district’s obligation to 

8

comply with the CDPH Order and asked respondent if she had any recommended 

accommodations. Respondent said she would go to her doctor for a weekly health 

screening in lieu of weekly testing. However, complainant stated that this would not 

comply with the CDPH Order. Ms. Mariucci inquired whether there was a virtual 

teaching assignment available, but complainant said the CDPH Order applied to all 

staff. Complainant reiterated that staff could test wherever they wished, except that 

home tests were not acceptable. He suggested that a saliva test (oral swab) would also 

be acceptable. However, respondent stated that she would not submit to any form of 

COVID testing. Mr. Leonard asked if an unpaid leave of absence was possible. 

Complainant responded that, due to the current labor shortage, this was not possible. 3 

An unpaid leave of absence was not acceptable to the district because of the indefinite 

period, which would require the district to find substitute teachers. Complainant 

confirmed that respondent had been on paid administrative leave since September 28. 

Complainant informed respondent that he would be recommending to the board at its 

meeting later than evening that respondent be dismissed. He said he would contact 

her the next day to discuss the next steps. 

22. 

Complainant believed respondent exercised poor judgment by 

continuing to come to work without testing, which he believed jeopardized the health 

and safety of her students. Complainant had received a previous report from 

Ms. Rainey that respondent was not enforcing the district’s mask mandate. Ms. Rainey 

3 Complainant testified that his concern was to ensure consistency in the 

classroom, and it was not in the students’, or the district’s best interest to proceed in 

this manner. Although complainant’s reasons for declining this request are not 

relevant to these proceedings, they were reasonable under the circumstances. 

9

 
had observed an incident where a student was not wearing a mask and respondent did 

not address the situation. 

On September 21, 2021, Ms. Rainey emailed respondent. The email informed 

respondent that Ms. Rainey had observed a student not wearing a mask during a visit 

to respondent’s classroom. Ms. Rainey added that on September 8, she had emailed 

respondent and expressed the same concern, as two of respondent’s students had not 

been wearing a mask on that date. Ms. Rainey also noted respondent did not reply to 

the September 8 email. Ms. Rainey reiterated that respondent must enforce the 

district’s protocol. 

Other school staff had informed Ms. Rainey on several occasions that they had 

seen respondent enter the office without wearing a mask. which was required while 

indoors on campus. Ms. Rainey also observed occasions where respondent’s mask was 

not completely covering her nose. Ms. Rainey did not speak (i.e., verbally) to 

respondent on such occasions, but, as was her practice with other employees, she 

would point to the nose to indicate it needed to be covered. Although there were 

instances of non-compliance with the mask mandate on the part of other school 

employees, Ms. Rainey noticed that this occurred more frequently with respondent. 

23.  Ms. Rainey had evaluated respondent’s performance since she became 

principal in 2017. Ms. Rainey testified respondent had previously been responsive to 

feedback. 

Respondent’s Testimony 

24. 

Respondent has taught for the district for 21 years. She holds a 

bachelor's degree in elementary education and a master's degree in educational 

administration. She holds a multitude subject teaching credential in elementary 

10 

education and a preliminary administrative services credential she has never used. She 

has taught first through sixth grades. She has never received a performance evaluation 

with less than a satisfactory rating in any metric. Her last evaluation indicated she was 

“effective” in all categories. During her career, she has participated in multiple school 

committees and has served as a FETA site representative and was a member of the 

bargaining team. 

25.

During the second half of the 2020-2021 school year, the district 

returned to in-person learning. The district implemented COVID-19 protocols such as 

requiring everyone to wear masks indoors and performing temperature checks. 

Respondent complied with all protocols and recognized her responsibility to protect 

the health and safety of her students and coworkers. Respondent complied with all of 

the safety requirements, including wearing a mask.

26.

During the 2020-2021 school year, respondent developed a sore throat. 

At the time, the district was instructing teachers to quarantine and stay home if they 

were sick. Respondent wanted to return to the classroom, so she went to one of the 

district’s COVID-19 drive-in testing sites at a community center where she underwent a 

nasal swab. Respondent thought it concerning that the tester asked respondent for an 

email address to send the “negative results,” suggesting that the results were 

“predetermined.” Respondent was uncomfortable that this was not a medical facility, 

and she did not know who employed the testers or where her information was being 

sent. 

27. 

Respondent decided she would not obtain the COVID-19 vaccine. She 

explained that she is not an “anti-vaxxer.” Her mother had polio, so she understands 

the importance of vaccinations. However, respondent’s sister was born with brain 

damage that respondent attributed to her mother being prescribed certain medication 

11 

during pregnancy. Consequently, respondent is very reluctant to take anything without 

being sure that it is safe. Respondent has always obtained a tuberculosis test as 

required by the district. 

28.

The 2021-2022 school year began in August 2021. At the start of the 

school year, there was an indoor mask requirement. Respondent was not aware of any 

complaints by parents about masks. Her class attendance was excellent, which 

compared favorably with that of some other classrooms. Ms. Rainey never told 

respondent that parents had been concerned about masking in her class. Respondent 

did not recall seeing specific emails from Ms. Rainey about masks until the September 

20, 2021, email. Respondent thought it was odd that Ms. Rainey would send an email 

instead of speaking to her directly. To respondent, it seemed like a non-issue because 

the child in question pulled up his mask. Instead, it felt to respondent that it was a 

“gotcha” email because others, including complainant, were copied. 

29. 

Respondent admitted that she did not comply with the directive to 

vaccinate or begin weekly testing. Regarding her decision not to test, respondent did 

not feel comfortable with the testing locations (such as in dirt lots) or with sharing her 

health data with others. Respondent was hoping that there could be an alternative to 

testing, which would be as good as, or better than, testing. She believed that a health 

check by her doctor would reveal if she had a temperature or other symptoms of 

COVID-19, which she believed was similar to the screening methods the district 

previously employed earlier in the pandemic. 

30. 

Respondent admitted that she did not respond to complainant’s emails 

or otherwise make her position known. Respondent was not trying to be disrespectful. 

She ignored the emails because she did not know what to say or how to say it. She did 

not know if complainant would understand or attempt to accommodate an alternative. 

12 

When asked why she did not request a meeting to discuss her concerns, respondent 

said complainant’s emails seemed “canned” or were mass emails to other people. To 

respondent, it felt like the emails were just part of the district’s “protocol,” as if the 

district was “going through the motions” and not necessarily something it was actively 

attempting to enforce. Respondent’s belief at the time was that if the district was 

concerned, Ms. Rainey or someone would reach out to her. There was nothing in the 

emails referencing consequences for failure to comply. Respondent hoped that the 

situation would “just go away,” but she now regrets taking that approach and admits it 

was a mistake not to reach out to Ms. Rainey at the time she received the emails. 

Similarly, respondent did not contact anyone in the union. She did not think she 

needed representation, because the emails never set forth any consequences for non-

compliance. Respondent reiterated that she made a mistake in failing to respond to 

the emails, but she did not know that her failure to respond would subject her to 

dismissal. 

31. 

Respondent did not see complainant’s email on the morning of 

September 28, 2021, advising her of a meeting later that morning. Instead, Ms. Rainey 

asked her if she saw the email and told her she needed to go to the meeting with 

complainant. Ms. Rainey asked if respondent wanted Mr. Smith present, which she did. 

At the meeting, complainant asked her if she was vaccinated or if there was a mistake 

in their records. Respondent said she did not feel comfortable answering. Complainant 

told her that if she did not get tested, she would be terminated. He asked her if she 

would get tested, and she responded that she would not. He asked her if she had any 

personal belongings in her classroom and said Mr. Smith would escort her to her 

classroom and then off campus. Respondent went to her classroom and told her 

teaching teammate she had just been terminated. Respondent believed she had just 

13 

been fired. She never saw her class again and never received any written 

communications from the district.

32.

The following day, respondent texted Ms. Mariucci, who told respondent 

that she had not been terminated. Ms. Mariucci asked respondent if she wanted to 

obtain a medical exemption and take the rest of the year off, which interested 

respondent. Ms. Tatnall reviewed the exemption request she wrote and made some 

suggestions of things to include. 

33. 

At the October 4, 2021, accommodation meeting, respondent shared her 

request to undergo a weekly health assessment by her physician in lieu of testing. The 

union representatives inquired about online learning or taking an unpaid leave of 

absence, which complainant rejected. Complainant did reiterate that respondent could 

test at any location (but could not take a home test) and even suggested she could 

test in a “dirt lot” across from a cemetery. This served to reinforce respondent’s 

concerns about the testing that it was not being performed at a medical facility. 

However, respondent was “crystal clear” at the meeting that she did not want to test. 

She did not tell complainant the reasons for her concerns because she felt that the 

meeting was not interactive as she was the only one making suggestions for 

accommodation. She did not feel complainant was open to hearing what she wanted,

and she was worried that anything she said could be used against her. At the end of 

the meeting, complainant told her that he would be going to the board that evening 

seeking her dismissal. Respondent had no experience with the disciplinary process and 

thought this was the proper procedure.

34. 

Respondent does not believe she put her students or colleagues at risk. 

She felt by doing temperature checks and visual screening she could accomplish the 

same goal. If the district believed she was a danger, she questions why it did not 

14 

remove her from the classroom earlier. She would never hurt her students and 

disagreed that she was putting her personal interests ahead of their safety. She was 

willing to take a leave of absence from her position to support her belief. She believes 

she has consistently complied with all the district’s COVID-19 protocols. 

35. 

After receiving notice of her dismissal, respondent had a COVID-19 test 

on October 25, 2021, at a medical clinic in Temecula. She went to this clinic because 

she trusted it to provide accurate results. She provided this test result and results from 

two more weekly tests to complainant, without response. She was paying for these 

tests, and because she was receiving no response from the district, she stopped 

testing. 

36. 

Respondent agreed that the district provided her with the option to take 

a COVID-19 test anywhere she wished. However, she did not just want to go 

“anywhere,” but wanted to go to a medical facility. She found the clinic in Temecula 

after some research. At the time when all this was happening, she “didn’t know what 

she didn’t know,” and only after research, did she find somewhere she would be 

comfortable with. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

The standard of proof in a teacher disciplinary proceeding is a 

preponderance of the evidence. (

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) “Preponderance of the evidence” means 

evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it. If the evidence is so 

evenly balanced that one is unable to say that the evidence on either side of an issue 

15 

preponderates, the finding on that issue must be against the party. (

(2000) 92 Cal.App.4th 654, 663.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (§§ 44932, 44934, & 44944.) 

3. 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, one may only 

vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking 

dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (§ 44944, subd. (d)(1).) 

4. 

A permanent certificated teacher may be dismissed for “evident unfitness 

for service,” and “[p]ersistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 

or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her.” (§ 

44932, subds. (a)(6), (a)(8).) 

5. 

Upon the charge of “willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing school district,” a district may immediately suspend the employee from his 

or her duties. (§ 44939, subd. (b).)

Applicable District Policies 

6. 

Board Policy 4119.21, titled, “Professional Standards” provides: 

The Governing Board expects district employees to 

maintain the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional 

behavior, follow district policies and regulations, abide by 

16 

 
state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment when 

interacting with students and other members of the school 

community. Employee conduct should enhance the integrity 

of the district, advance the goals of the district's 

educational programs, and contribute to a positive school 

climate.

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Inappropriate employee conduct includes, but is not limited 

to: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Engaging in any conduct that endangers students, staff, or 

others, including, but not limited to, physical violence, 

threats of violence, or possession of a firearm or other 

weapon . . . 

7. 

Board Policy 4000, titled “Concepts and Roles” provides in relevant part: 

The Governing Board recognizes that the success of district 

students and programs hinges on effective personnel. The 

Board desires to establish safe and supportive working 

conditions that will attract and retain staff members who 

are highly qualified and dedicated to the education and 

welfare of students. The district's personnel policies and 

related regulations shall be designed to ensure a 

supportive, positive climate and shall be consistent with 

17 

collective bargaining agreements and in conformance with 

state and federal law and regulations. . . . 

8. 

Board Policy 4118, titled “Dismissal/Suspension/Disciplinary Action,” 

provides in relevant part: 

The Governing Board expects all employees to exhibit 

professional and appropriate conduct and serve as positive 

or inappropriate conduct in accordance with law, the 

district's collective bargaining agreement, Board policy, and 

administrative regulation. 

9. 

Administrative Regulation 4112, titled “Appointment and Conditions of 

Employment,” requires staff to comply with certain conditions, including that they 

“[f]ulfill any other requirements as specified by law, collective bargaining agreement, 

Board policy or administrative regulation.” 

Evaluation 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION/REFUSAL

10.

The district alleges that respondent is subject to dismissal for persistent 

violation of, or refusal to obey, laws or the district’s regulations. (§ 4492, subd. (a)(8).) 

As grounds for dismissal, the Statement of Charges alleges the following: respondent 

violated the CDPH Order; respondent violated district policy requiring compliance with 

the CDPH Order by September 3, 2021; and respondent violated three board policies 

and an administrative regulation. 

11. 

The district must first establish that respondent’s refusal to follow district 

policy was “persistent.” Courts interpreting this provision have focused on whether 

18 

there has been a pattern of refusal to obey rules and whether an employee was 

intentionally insubordinate. For example, in 

 (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82 (

), the Court of 

Appeal reversed a judgment for a school district in an action for dismissal where a 

teacher requested a leave of absence to accompany her husband abroad to study 

foreign special education programs. The district never responded to her request, and 

she returned to school a month after the school year started. The court held that 

under the circumstances, the teacher's violation of the school's regulations was not 

“persistent.” (

at p. 82.) In doing so, the court rejected as “specious” the district's 

argument that every day she was absent was a separate violation and demonstrated 

the “persistent” requirement of the statute. Instead, the court referenced the dictionary 

definition of “persistent,” to mean “refusing to relent; continuing, especially in the face 

of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly repeated,” and to judicial 

decisions, where the word has been interpreted to mean “continuing or constant.” 

(

) The court noted, “The Legislature undoubtedly intended that opportunity for 

correction be available and refrained from providing for dismissal for a single violation 

of regulations, or until repeated violations could be considered persistent.” (

citing 

(1946) 29 Cal.2d 13, 18). The court also noted that the 

teacher had been employed by the district for eight years, and there was no evidence 

in the record to prove that she ever violated a school law or a regulation of the 

governing board prior to the incident in question. (

) 

In contrast, in 

 (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 278 also concerned whether cause 

existed to dismiss a teacher for persistent violation of or refusal to obey school rules. 

In that case, over a four-year period, the teacher was absent 21 percent of the time 

and she failed to supply lesson plans to substitute teachers numerous times, 

19 

despite having received several written and oral communications instructing her to 

provide thorough lesson plans when she planned to be absent. The appellate court 

concluded that “[w]ithout question a persistent refusal to prepare lesson plans for 

substitute teachers, viewed in light of the number of absences Harris [the teacher] was 

experiencing, might be sufficient to constitute ‘persistent violation . . . of school rules’ 

within the meaning of Education Code section 44932, . . .” (

at p. 287-288.) 

12.  On August 11, 2021, the district notified all staff that it would be 

immediately implementing the CDPH Order issued the same date, requiring all staff to 

either obtain a COVID-19 vaccination or submit to weekly testing. The district’s board 

did not promulgate a policy or regulation; rather, complainant was tasked with 

implementing the CDPH Order.4 The same day, complainant notified staff that he 

would be reaching out to unvaccinated staff regarding the weekly testing protocols. 

On September 7, 2021, complainant emailed respondent directly requesting that she 

“communicate” to him and Ms. Rainey “her plan” to submit proof of the COVID-19 test 

that week. Respondent did not respond to the email, and two days later, complainant 

resent it, this time copying Ms. Rainey. Again, respondent did not respond. 

Approximately two weeks later, on September 20, 2021, complainant again emailed 

respondent. The email noted that respondent had not uploaded the test results for the 

previous week. The email requested that she communicate her plan to submit the test 

4 In this regard, the district’s allegation that respondent violated the CDPH 

Order is misplaced. On its face, the order is applicable to school institutions, not 

individual employees. Moreover, the order did not require compliance until October 

15, 2021. Finally, the CDPH Order is neither a state school law, nor a district or 

Department of Education regulation. 

20 

 
results through the portal and to inform Ms. Rainey of her plan to test that week. 

Again, respondent did not respond to the email.

On Tuesday, September 28, 2021, complainant met with respondent and 

Ms. Rainey in person for the first time to discuss her failure to test. At this meeting, 

respondent (for the first time) conveyed her intention not to comply with the district’s 

requirements to test. Complainant then informed respondent that her refusal would 

result in her dismissal. Complainant placed her on administrative leave based on her 

failure to submit to the district’s testing requirements, although respondent believed 

she had been immediately terminated.

After learning from the union president that she had not been terminated, 

respondent submitted an accommodation request to the district two days later. The 

district then scheduled an interactive meeting on Monday, October 4, 2021. At the 

meeting, the district rejected respondent’s requested accommodation to undergo a 

health check in lieu of testing, because this was not in compliance with the CDPH 

Order. The district also rejected a suggestion that respondent be placed on unpaid 

leave. Complainant informed respondent that he would be seeking the board’s 

approval later that evening to dismiss respondent, which apparently occurred. 

13.  On these facts, it cannot be concluded that respondent’s failure to 

undergo weekly testing constituted “refusing to relent,” “continuing, especially in the 

face of opposition,” “stubborn,” “persevering,” or “constantly repeated,” such that it 

satisfies the statutory meaning of “persistent.” It is true that the district sent 

respondent three emails inquiring about her test results – two within a two-day period 

and the third two weeks later - to which respondent did not respond. However, these 

emails did not contain any direction other than to advise complainant if there was an 

error in the database, upload the results of her negative test, and communicate with 

21 

Ms. Rainey about her plan to get tested. The emails lacked a compliance deadline or 

any statement suggesting to respondent that failure to comply would result in 

disciplinary action. When respondent did not respond or comply with the first two 

emails, the only follow-up by the district was to send a third (almost duplicate) email 

to respondent two weeks later. 

To be clear, and as she conceded at hearing, respondent should have 

responded to the emails and expressed her concerns about testing, rather than simply 

ignoring complainant’s request. However, respondent’s failure to respond to 

complainant’s initial three emails cannot reasonably be viewed as “persistent refusal”

to comply with district policy. Not until the face-to-face meeting did the district first 

inform respondent that she would be subject to disciplinary action if she failed to test. 

At this point, respondent willfully refused to comply, which was unreasonable given 

the numerous options provided to her to obtain a COVID test at a location of her 

choosing. Moreover, she made it clear, and under no uncertain terms, that she would 

not comply with the policy. But this was 

instance that respondent indicated she 

was refusing to comply with the policy and the first instance the district learned of this 

refusal. Also, for the first time, the district placed respondent on notice that her failure 

to comply would result in disciplinary action. This is significant because the district had 

no written policy regarding testing that respondent could have consulted, and 

nowhere in any of the district’s communications had it informed her or staff that

failure to comply would result in disciplinary action, including dismissal.

At her interactive meeting several days later, respondent again confirmed that 

she would not test, but the purpose of the meeting was to address her 

accommodation request, which the district declined. Even if her failure to agree to 

undergo testing at that meeting constituted a separate act of refusal or defiance of the 

22 

board’s policy, these two refusals, within the span of one week, are not sufficient to 

establish that her refusal to test was persistent. 

In sum, while respondent was insubordinate at the October 28, 2021, meeting 

when she refused to comply with the directive, this was the first instance of 

respondent conveying to the district that she would not comply. It is true that 

respondent was unequivocal in her refusal and appeared determined not to comply 

with the policy. This begs the question as to how many more opportunities would the 

district have to have provided before the refusal could be deemed “persistent.” 

However, as highlighted by the 

court, the Legislature intended that a district 

cannot proceed with dismissal until a teacher is provided the opportunity for 

correction of a single violation of regulations, or until repeated violations could be 

considered persistent. In this case, the district did not provide respondent with such an 

opportunity. Instead, it placed respondent on leave, and within a week, had dismissed 

and suspended her without pay. 

The commission is sympathetic to the district’s position. There is no question 

the district was required to comply with the CDPH Order. Moreover, the district’s belief 

that immediate implementation of the order was required to abate the impact COVID-

19 was having on the district’s operations is not questioned and entirely within the 

district’s prerogative. The district was more than reasonable in attempting to 

accommodate its unvaccinated employees by providing on-site testing during work 

hours, time-off to test at other locations, and almost unfettered choice about the 

manner and location where they received their tests. Complainant’s written 

correspondence with respondent was nonconfrontational and conducive to dialogue. 

In contrast, respondent failed to communicate to the district her concerns, and instead 

ignored the requests to get tested. During the first face-to-face meeting, respondent 

23 

was insubordinate and her proffered rationale for refusing to test was objectively 

unreasonable given the multitude of locations available for her to test. 

However, in seeking respondent’s immediate dismissal, the district is attempting 

to force a square peg into a round hole by arguing that respondent’s refusal was 

“persistent.” The 

court highlighted this point: 

We do not quarrel with [the district’s] contention that the 

school district board had the right to adopt rules governing 

the conduct of its employees and to require the employees 

to observe the rules. We hold, only, that a single violation of 

a school board's rules is not of itself cause for the dismissal 

of a permanent teacher . . . . The subsection pertains to 

unintentional as well as intentional transgressions, and 

hence the Legislature, apparently to allow opportunity for a 

correction, has decreed that a single violation is not 

sufficient to warrant dismissal; “it is the persistent 

disregard” of school rules that the subsection is designed to 

regulate. [Citation]. 

We have limited our discussion in this case to the only 

charge which was made against appellant and to the 

evidence actually presented; we do not consider innuendos 

as to evidence which conceivably could have been 

presented by the district. Also, in reversing the judgment, 

we do not suggest that a single willful act of disobedience 

is never cause for the dismissal of a permanent school 

employee. Common sense, alone, tells us that a blatant 

24 

defiance of lawful school authority which attacks effective 

school administration cannot be tolerated; such conduct, 

obviously, is unprofessional and grounds for dismissal . . . . 

(

at p. 84.)

The court then highlighted that the school district had not alleged unprofessional 

conduct, only persistent refusal. This statutory scheme reflects the legislative intent to 

provide sufficient time for a teacher to remediate his or her conduct before dismissal. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS 

14. 

Section 22932, subdivision (a)(6), authorizes dismissal for “evident 

unfitness for service.” Evident unfitness for service is established by conduct 

demonstrating that the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted or suitable for teaching, 

ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (

(1969) 2 

Cal.App.4th 1429,1444.) 

In this case, assuming arguendo that after application of the factors outlined in 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 respondent’s refusal to 

comply with the district’s testing directive evidences an unfitness to teach, as it 

reasonably could impact the health, safety, and welfare of her students and coworkers, 

the district failed to establish that respondent has a temperamental defect making her 

ill-adapted to teaching. As previously noted, upon further reflection following her 

dismissal, respondent did submit to testing for several weeks in an attempt to show 

the district that she would remediate her behavior. This, and respondent’s sincere 

testimony at hearing, reflect her understanding that compliance with the district’s 

testing policy, as mandated by the CDPH Order, is a condition of her employment with 

25 

which she should have and now will comply. Moreover, respondent’s failure to abide 

by the district’s requirement must be weighed against her 21 years with the district – 

which by all evidence, was at least satisfactory. Instead, respondent made a mistake 

based on an erroneous belief that she should not have to abide by the district’s testing 

requirements or that the district was required to provide an alternative to testing. 

Respondent repeatedly expressed contrition about her interactions with the district, 

and the record as a whole does not establish that she is temperamentally unfit to 

teach. That Ms. Rainey observed several of respondent’s third-grade students (or 

respondent herself) not wearing masks appropriately does not alter this conclusion or 

suggest that respondent was defiant of, or hostile to, the district’s COVID-19 policies.

The district’s arguments that respondent’s failure to comply with the district’s 

policy put her children at risk are slightly exaggerated. While respondent ignored the 

district’s directive to test for over three weeks, the district could have removed her 

from the classroom if it felt she posed a danger to students. Additionally, the CDPH 

Order did not require compliance by institutions until October 15, 2021. While 

respondent exercised, among other things, poor judgment and a lack of 

professionalism by failing to respond to the emails and comply with the district’s 

mandate, she is not “evidently unfit” to teach.

Conclusion 

15. 

Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent pursuant to Section 44932, 

subdivisions (a)(6) and (a)(8). Moreover, the Commission is vested with discretion not 

to dismiss an employee even if grounds for dismissal exist. (

 (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 219-223.) In that case, the California Supreme Court 

explained, “nothing in the statutory scheme indicates that the commission must be 

bound by the district’s choice to the extent that it is required to approve an 

26 

employee’s dismissal if it is not persuaded, in the exercise of its discretion, that an 

offense is serious enough to warrant that step . . . . We thus cannot accept the 

proposition that discipline 

 be imposed, when a finding is made that cause for 

discipline exists.” (

at p. 219.) 

In this case, within 

of informing respondent that it would not agree to her 

accommodation request, the board authorized respondent’s dismissal. Considering the 

district failed to comply with the procedural requirements of Section 44934, 

subdivision (b),5 it is quite evident that the district rushed to dismiss respondent, which 

5 That provision provides: “Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and 

verified by the person filing them, with the governing board of the school district, or 

upon a written statement of charges formulated by the governing board of the school 

district,” charging that there exists cause to dismiss the employee, the board may, 

upon majority vote, give notice of its intention to dismiss the employee at the 

expiration of 30 days, unless the employee requests a hearing. In this matter, 

complainant signed and served the Statement of Charges 

the board purportedly 

authorized respondent’s dismissal. While the district violated the procedural 

requirements of Section 44934, subdivision (b), this was a nonsubstantive, 

nonprejudicial procedural error. (§ 44944, subd. (d)(2) [the Commission’s decision that 

an employee should not be dismissed “shall not be based on nonsubstantive 

procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board of the school 

district unless the errors are prejudicial errors”]; 

 (2014) 228 Cal.App.4th 568 [violation of requirement to 

consider written charges before giving notice of intent to dismiss teacher did not 

invalidate his dismissal].) 

27 

 
is contrary to the legislative intent embodied in the statutory scheme and deprived 

respondent a meaningful opportunity to remediate her behavior. Under these 

circumstances, the Commission would also reject dismissal in its exercise of discretion. 

16. 

In this case, the grounds for immediate suspension do not mirror the 

charges for dismissal. A preponderance of the evidence established that respondent 

willfully refused to “perform regular assignments without reasonable cause,” based on 

her refusal to submit to COVID-19 testing without reasonable cause when instructed 

to do so on September 28, 2021. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) Although there were grounds to 

suspend respondent without pay pending a hearing, the Commission is only 

authorized to suspend an employee if suspension proceedings were authorized 

pursuant to Section 44932, subdivision (b). (§ 44944, subd. (d)(3). In other words, the 

immediate suspension without pay is predicated upon upholding dismissal. Therefore, 

respondent is entitled to be made whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 

compensation from the time she was suspended without pay. 

17. 

Any other assertions advanced by the parties not addressed above and 

inconsistent with this decision, have been considered and are found to be either moot 

or unpersuasive. 

ORDER 

The appeal by respondent Jennifer Humphreys is granted. The Fallbrook Union 

Elementary School District’s decision to dismiss respondent and immediately suspend 

her without pay is reversed. The district shall provide respondent back pay for any lost 

wages, benefits, and compensation from the time she was suspended without pay. 

28 

 
DATE:

ADAM L. BERG

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings 

PAOLA FLORES 

Commission Member 

KAREN SCHUETT

Commission Member 

