BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
LOMA PRIETA JOINT UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

DAVID KISSNER, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2021050291 

DECISION 

A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by 

videoconference on October 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 25, and 28, 2021. The 

Commission’s members were Katherine Everett, Santa Clara County Office of 

Education; Scott Guagliardo, Downtown College Prep (San Jose); and Administrative 

Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings, who 

presided.

Joint Union School District.

Attorneys Brian D. Bock and Amanda S. Georgino represented the Loma Prieta 

Attorneys William J. Becker, Jr., and Jeremiah D. Graham represented

respondent David Kissner, who was present throughout the hearing.

The Commission received oral opening statements, testimonial and 

documentary evidence (including audio and video recordings), and oral closing 

arguments. The record was held open to permit the Commission to review evidence 

and to deliberate in executive session. The record closed and the matter was 

submitted for decision on November 10, 2021, at the conclusion of the Commission’s 

deliberations. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

Respondent David Kissner holds a clear single subject credential 

authorizing him to teach mathematics.

2.

The Loma Prieta Joint Union School District is a small school district in 

the Santa Cruz mountains, between Los Gatos and Santa Cruz. It includes two schools 

on a single campus: Loma Prieta Elementary School and C.T. English Middle School.

The District serves about 500 students and employs about 30 teachers.

3.

Respondent began teaching mathematics and physical science in the 

District in fall 2012. Except for the assignment described below in Finding 46, 

respondent taught in the District’s C.T. English Middle School. 

4.

In February 2021, the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) received a 

statement of charges against respondent from District superintendent Lisa Fraser, and 

voted to seek respondent’s dismissal from employment. Respondent timely requested 

a hearing.

5.

In June 2021, the Board approved an amended statement of charges

against respondent. The amended statement of charges alleges numerous incidents 

involving respondent and bearing on his fitness for continuing service. The District 

characterizes these incidents, separately or together, as cause under the Education 

2

Code to dismiss respondent from employment for immoral conduct, for evident 

unfitness for service, and for persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws 

of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public 

schools. 

Respondent’s Education and Professional Experience

6. 

Respondent grew up in the San Jose area. After graduating from high 

school in San Jose, respondent attended the United States Naval Academy. 

7. 

Respondent graduated from the Naval Academy in 2002, and served five 

years in the United States Marines.

8. 

After completing his military service, respondent traveled extensively. He 

then decided to pursue a teaching career, and obtained the credential described 

above in Finding 1.

9.

Respondent started his teaching career with the Santa Clara County 

Office of Education. He taught mathematics in an alternative community school, and 

as a long-term substitute in Santa Clara County juvenile incarceration facilities. 

10.

In the District, respondent’s initial assignment was to teach mathematics 

and science in sixth grade. He also has taught mathematics to seventh-grade students.

The evidence did not establish respondent’s science assignments for the District in 

detail, but did establish that he taught at least one middle school science class each 

school year except for the 2018–2019 school year. Respondent coached C.T. English 

Middle School’s wrestling team.

3

Timeline of Investigations and Related Events

11.

In March and April 2018, respondent and the District garnered regional 

and national media attention because of conflict within the District and the community 

over a nationwide political event to draw attention to gun violence in schools.

12. 

Some witnesses testified that they respected respondent’s position in this 

conflict. Respondent testified, however, that most of his teaching colleagues disagreed 

with his position, and that several became very unfriendly to him as a result of the 

conflict and media attention. Respondent’s visibility in the news media on this issue 

also caused him to receive hostile criticism through social media, both from people he 

knew in the community and from strangers.

13. 

The District conducted an investigation into the conflict described in 

Findings 11 and 12. After this investigation, the District took no disciplinary action 

against respondent for his actions relating to this conflict. 

14. 

Also in late March or early April 2018, the Board received an anonymous 

letter making several serious allegations about respondent’s behavior outside the 

school setting. Respondent believes that he knows who wrote the letter. He testified, 

plausibly although without corroboration, that the author is a community member

who wished to damage his career and his reputation because of the conflict described 

above in Findings 11 and 12.

15. 

Regardless of the author’s motive, the allegations stated in the 

anonymous letter warranted investigation by the District. As described in greater detail 

in Findings 28, 29, and 71, below, the District’s investigation of these allegations 

revealed evidence supporting some of the allegations. The investigation did not 

substantiate the letter’s most serious allegations. 

4

16.

At the end of the 2017–2018 school year, the District’s former 

superintendent, Corey Kidwell, retired. Fraser became the District’s superintendent 

beginning July 1, 2018, and Karren Zook became principal of the District’s two schools. 

17. 

District administrators did not conclude that the investigation described 

in Finding 15 had revealed misconduct warranting respondent’s dismissal from 

employment. In October 2018, Fraser delivered a letter to respondent summarizing 

what the investigation had shown, and warning respondent that further behavior 

similar to the substantiated allegations would result in disciplinary action. 

18. 

Respondent pressed Fraser during the 2018–2019 school year for further 

action or communication about the conflict described above in Findings 11 and 12, but 

Fraser told respondent that the District’s Board members and administrators preferred 

not to “re-hash” that conflict. The evidence did not show that any District 

administrator raised further concerns with respondent about his on-campus or 

off-campus conduct during the 2018–2019 school year. In April 2019, however, 

respondent began an effort to obtain detailed public records from the District 

regarding the investigations described above in Findings 13 and 15, and this effort 

continued throughout the summer. 

19.  On May 9, 2012, the Board adopted Board Policy 4119.21, concerning 

professional standards for employees. This policy, which was in evidence, was in effect 

during most of respondent’s tenure with the District. In February 2020, the Board 

adopted revisions to Board Policy 4119.21, but the policy as revised was not in 

evidence. 

20. 

Zook retired as principal of the District’s schools on June 30, 2020. Billy 

Martin replaced Zook as principal beginning July 1, 2020. 

5

21.

The Board placed a local tax measure (Measure N) on the ballot for the 

November 2020 election. In December 2019, respondent had informed Fraser that he 

intended to oppose any such tax measure. Respondent was prominent in the 

campaign against Measure N, including by debating the measure in social media and 

by recording videos and releasing them through social media channels explaining his 

opposition to the measure. In mid-December 2020, certified election returns 

confirmed that Measure N had failed. 

22. 

Respondent’s advocacy against Measure N drew negative reactions from

some community members, including from at least one member of the Board. 

Respondent experienced these reactions chiefly through social media and through 

gossip. As described below in Findings 76 and 77, however, the District also received 

some complaints about respondent’s teaching performance during this time from 

parents whom respondent understood to disagree with his position on Measure N. 

23. 

Respondent’s wife ran for the Board in the November 2020 election. She 

was not elected. 

24. 

Soon after the November 2020 election, a Board member who had won 

re-election resigned. The remaining Board members voted to appoint a replacement, 

but respondent and some other members of the community advocated in early 2021 

for the District instead to conduct a special election to replace the Board member.

25.  On February 22, 2021, because the Board had voted to seek respondent’s 

dismissal from employment, District administrators notified respondent’s students’ 

families that respondent would be on leave for the rest of the 2020–2021 school year.

26. 

In early March 2021, the District received statements in writing regarding 

the events described below in Findings 30 through 44. After investigation, the District 

6

amended the statement of charges against respondent to allege those events as 

additional grounds to dismiss respondent from employment. 

Alleged Grounds for Dismissal 

27. 

As amended, the District’s statement of charges against respondent 

includes allegations spanning about three years. The evidence at hearing did not 

address some allegations at all, and was not conclusive as to others. Any allegations 

that were in dispute at the hearing but that the Commission has not addressed 

explicitly in this decision were not proven by a preponderance of evidence, and did not 

affect the Commission’s decision. 

FURNISHING ALCOHOL TO TEENS

28. 

The anonymous letter described above in Finding 14 stated that 

respondent had served alcohol to at least three teenage boys during camping trips.1 It 

also stated that respondent had “admitted to doing it one time.” 

29.

During the investigation described above in Finding 15, respondent 

repeated his admission that he had served alcohol to a teenage boy during a camping 

trip. The letter described above in Finding 17 referred to this admission, and warned 

respondent that “any further report of providing alcohol to a minor will result in 

1 The letter described some such trips as having been “through CT English.” This 

description was false. For many years, but never as a District activity, respondent has 

organized camping trips that sometimes include teens who attend without parents. 

 

7

further corrective action up to and including criminal charges and/or possible 

termination of your employment.”

30.

In April 2019, respondent organized a week-long group camping trip to 

Death Valley. About 30 people in total were in the group. Some participants were adult 

friends of respondent’s family, who attended with their children. Ten or twelve of the 

participants were teens who attended without their parents.2 

31. 

The group had organized into several cars and trucks, with a trailer to 

haul food, water, and cooking and sleeping gear. In Death Valley, the trailer suffered 

serious damage to a “leaf spring” (part of its suspension). Respondent decided that he 

needed to obtain a replacement spring, and to repair the trailer, as soon as possible. 

32. 

Respondent asked four unaccompanied teens, all boys, to come with him 

on this errand, while the rest of the group continued on to a campsite in the remaining 

cars and trucks. These boys were M

 C

 (age 16), B  F

 (age 15), 

A

 P

 (age 17), and J

 V

 (age 17).

33.

Earlier in the trip, before the trailer damage, respondent had chastised 

P

 and V

 for walking away from the rest of the group to smoke cannabis. They 

had brought cannabis on the trip despite respondent’s explicit pre-trip instruction to 

2 Respondent stated that he maintains a “mailing list” about his trips, and 

 

several witnesses used the term “advertise” to describe how respondent distributed 

information about upcoming trips. The District does not allege that the trips 

themselves or respondent’s general practices in organizing them (such as financial 

arrangements, insurance, safety protocols, or parental communications and 

permissions for unaccompanied minors) are cause for his dismissal.

8

them not to bring alcohol or other recreational drugs. Respondent waited until after 

the group had returned from Death Valley to tell P

’s and V

’s parents about 

their sons’ misbehavior. 

34. 

Respondent explained several reasons for having chosen to take these 

boys along on the trailer repair mission, including that the remaining vehicles would 

not have space for them, and that he thought he might need their labor to make the 

repair. He also noted that because P

 and V

 already had disobeyed his 

reasonable instructions (as described in Finding 33), he did not want to foist 

responsibility for supervising them onto the trip’s other adults. 

35. 

After making several telephone calls, respondent determined that the 

closest place to obtain a replacement leaf spring for the trailer would be in Las Vegas. 

He also learned, however, that the store would close for the day before he and the 

boys would be able to get there. Respondent decided to drive with the four boys to 

Las Vegas, spend the night in a hotel, buy the spring as soon as the store opened the 

next morning, and then return to Death Valley to repair the trailer. 

36. 

Respondent did not speak personally to any of the four boys’ parents 

about their new itinerary. He testified that he asked the boys to call their parents on 

the way, to tell their parents where they were going. 

37. 

The group arrived in Las Vegas after dark. Respondent had reserved a 

single room for the group at a hotel on the Las Vegas Strip. Before they checked into 

the hotel, respondent stopped at a convenience store and bought a bottle of whiskey. 

38. 

The evidence did not establish that respondent purposely alerted any of 

the boys that he had stopped at the convenience store for alcohol. At the same time, 

P

 and V

 understood correctly that respondent had bought alcohol. 

9

39. When the group arrived in the hotel room, respondent took a shower. 

The boys took turns showering after respondent. Meanwhile, respondent served 

himself some whiskey and began either to watch television or to read from bed. 

40. 

After showering, C

 and F

 got into sleeping bags and 

went to sleep. P

 and V

 did not go to bed right away, but neither C

 

nor F

 testified to having seen or heard what P

 and V

 did after showering 

and before going to bed. 

41. 

P

, V

, and respondent gave conflicting testimony about what they 

did next. According to P

 and V

, respondent allowed them to share his whiskey, 

and told them that they could leave the room to see the Las Vegas Strip as long as 

they returned within 30 minutes. According to respondent, he neither offered the boys 

whiskey nor left it where they could access it, and told them that they should not leave 

the room. None of this testimony is completely credible. 

42. 

P

 and V

 drank some of respondent’s whiskey. The evidence did 

not establish that respondent encouraged them to drink it, or even that he knew that 

night that they had taken some. Nevertheless, after bringing whiskey to the hotel 

room, respondent took no effective steps to stop P

 and V

 from consuming it. 

43. 

P

 had never visited Las Vegas before. He and V

 told respondent 

that they intended to leave the hotel room whether or not respondent approved. They 

did leave, and spent between two and four hours exploring the Las Vegas Strip on 

foot. The evidence did not establish that respondent encouraged or even approved 

their leaving the room. Nevertheless, respondent did not inform P

’s or V

’s 

parents of their sons’ plan, and he did not stop P

 and V

 from going out. 

10 

44.

P

 and V

 returned to the hotel room before dawn. In the morning, 

the group left the hotel, bought the leaf spring, returned to Death Valley, and repaired 

the trailer. 

45. 

P

 told his father a few days after returning from the trip that 

respondent had taken the boys to Las Vegas, and that P

 and V

 drank whiskey 

and then walked around the Strip unsupervised at night. P

’s and V

’s mothers 

later discussed the matter with one another and among their friends, and eventually 

brought it to the District’s attention as described above in Finding 26. 

2020–2021 7TH GRADE ALGEBRA COURSE 

46. 

During the 2018–2019 school year, the District assigned respondent to 

teach mathematics to fifth-grade students who were ready for more challenging 

mathematics instruction than the rest of their classmates. He taught these students 

during their regular class times, in groups separate from the rest of their classes. 

47. 

During the 2019–2020 school year, respondent continued teaching 

above-grade-level mathematics to some of his sixth-grade students, most or all of 

whom were the students he had taught in fifth grade during the previous school year. 

Until mid-March, respondent offered this enrichment through a combination of 

before-school meetings and work during their regular class, sometimes with a parent 

volunteer.

48.

In mid-March 2020, the District began using videoconference learning 

because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Respondent concluded that because remote 

11 

learning severely limited his instructional time with students,3 and also interfered with 

his ability to separate students into small groups for focused work, he could not 

continue offering different in-class instruction to subsets of his sixth-grade 

mathematics students. Instead, until the end of the 2019–2020 school year, respondent 

taught these students in a separate videoconference class period. 

49. 

Remote instruction continued for the 2020–2021 school year. 

Respondent and some of these accelerated students’ parents made several proposals 

to Martin and Fraser about how to serve these students in a videoconference setting 

without neglecting respondent’s other students. Martin and Fraser deemed these 

proposals either impractical or inadvisable. The District began the 2020–2021 school 

year by placing these students in respondent’s regular seventh-grade math course 

(Math 7, a pre-algebra curriculum), but encouraging them to undertake additional 

extracurricular math enrichment activities to prepare them to “test into a year-long 

Geometry course” for eighth grade. 

50.  With respondent’s assistance, a Los Gatos High School student who had 

been respondent’s student during middle school set up a videoconference 

mathematics tutoring program for the 2020–2021 school year. They called this 

program the Mountain Math Initiative (MMI), and announced that respondent would 

teach an algebra course through MMI to interested students beginning August 31. 

3 Before the COVID-19 pandemic, respondent spent 270 in-person minutes each 

 

week with a class, over five sessions. Remote learning offered him and each class only 

70 videoconference minutes together per week, in two sessions. 

12 

51. Many if not all of respondent’s accelerated seventh-grade students 

signed up for the MMI algebra course. Respondent did not use the District’s 

videoconferencing or virtual classroom services for the MMI course, and he did not 

use students’ District email addresses for day-to-day communication about the MMI 

course. He taught the course in the mid- to late afternoon, after the C.T. English 

Middle School instructional day had ended.

52. 

Respondent told students who were in his C.T. English Middle School 

Math 7 course, and who also had signed up for the MMI after-school algebra course, 

that they did not need to attend both class sessions. He told these students, and their 

parents, that he would treat the students as having attended their videoconference 

C.T. English Middle School Math 7 class, even if they had not, if they attended the 

videoconference MMI class instead. He also told parents and students that students’ 

participation and performance in the MMI algebra course would qualify them for full 

Math 7 credit at C.T. English Middle School. 

53.  Martin struggled at the beginning of the 2020–2021 school year to 

communicate clear remote-learning attendance requirements to parents and students, 

and attendance-taking protocols to teachers. By mid-September 2020, however, 

Martin learned that respondent had given his students and their parents the messages 

summarized above in Finding 52. 

54.  On September 9, 2020, Martin stated to respondent by email, “Students 

are still expected to adhere to school attendance policies set by current CDE [California 

Department of Education] guidance and are not to be directed to ‘skip’ their CT math 

courses if participating in MMI outside of school.” On September 14, 2020, Martin told 

respondent by email, “A parent contacted me concerned that their student was told 

they do not have to attend their CT class if they are participating in the MMI program. 

13 

You and I talked in person about this. I just wanted to make sure this isn’t a reocurring 

issue.” 

55. 

The issue recurred. On October 8, 2020, Martin told respondent by email 

that Martin had met with several parents about “current attendance/participation 

concerns,” and had explained to those parents that 

1. All students are required to attend the CTE [C.T. English] 

courses in which they are enrolled following current CDE 

guidelines; 

classes; 

2. All students are required to complete the work assigned 

to them by their CTE teachers during the course of their CTE 

3. Only work and assessments assigned through the course 

of CTE classes may count toward grades received at CTE; 

4. Students intending to enroll in Geometry 8 are still 

required to receive an A/A- in Math 7 as a prerequisite; 

5. Mountain Math Initiative is enrichment and cannot in any 

way supplant/replace CTE math courses; 

6. Attendance in Mountain Math Initiative does not count as 

attendance for a student’s CTE courses. 

Martin also directed respondent to send Martin “a list of students with whom 

attendance at CTE may have been communicated as optional or who believe 

14 

participation in Mountain Math Initiative counts as attendance/participation for their 

CTE classes.” 

56. 

Respondent did not send Martin any such list. Instead, he sent Martin a 

complete roster of his Math 7 students. Respondent also sent Martin a lengthy email 

response explaining why he intended to continue treating his MMI algebra class as 

equivalent to the C.T. English Middle School Math 7 class. 

57.  Martin replied by reiterating to respondent on October 14, 2020, “I have 

been informed by several parents that their child has been told by you that they are 

not required to attend their CT math course if they are participating in Mountain Math 

Initiative and that the work done and the grade earned for that after school 

enrichment course will be applied to their CT math course. . . . This is the action I need 

to make clear is not acceptable practice.” 

58. 

In mid-October 2020, respondent stopped teaching the after-school MMI 

algebra course. He continued teaching this course to the same students during the 

C.T. English Middle School instructional day. Rather than teaching these students 

during the regular twice-weekly Math 7 time period, however, respondent taught this 

algebra course three days per week, during a time the District had designated as 

“office hours” for teachers to meet with students individually or in small groups. He 

began using a District virtual classroom; but he did not use his District 

videoconference account for the class sessions, and he continued to communicate 

with students about the class using personal rather than school email addresses. 

59. 

Later in 2020, the District offered some seventh-grade students the 

opportunity to switch from respondent’s Math 7 class into a C.T. English Middle School 

algebra class with a different teacher. Some, but not all, of the students to whom 

15 

respondent had been teaching algebra through MMI and later during his office hours 

made this switch. 

60. 

Respondent testified, credibly but tangentially, that he “was never 

directed to stop teaching algebra.” As described above in Findings 54 through 57, 

however, Martin directed respondent clearly and repeatedly in fall 2020 to stop telling 

parents and students that respondent’s extracurricular algebra course was a credit 

alternative to Math 7, and to stop treating the course as a Math 7 alternative. 

Nevertheless, until the District placed respondent on leave in February 2021, 

respondent continued to communicate to students and their parents that his office 

hours algebra course was equivalent, and alternative, to Math 7.

REMOTE TEACHING DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC

61.  On August 26, 2020, Fraser received a report by email suggesting that 

respondent was conducting in-person teaching for District students at one or more 

locations outside the District’s schools. The email to Fraser stated, 

For older kids (usually 10+ unless accompanied by a 

parent), Kissner is organizing 3 Remote Wilderness School 

camps this fall . . . . “We will provide a structured time and 

place for school on each school day during school hours, 

with electrical power. All locations have strong verizon 

signal for hotspots. Plenty of outdoor activities for after 

school and on the weekends. We will also provide the food, 

shelters, evening campfire routine, opportunity for activities, 

etc. Priority is work and school during these trips—but it is 

16 

nice to work in these beautiful places and have so many 

cool things to do when the homework is done!”

62. 

Respondent acknowledged at the hearing having written and circulated 

the description that appeared within quotation marks in the email Fraser received. He 

testified that the remainder of the report to Fraser paraphrased his announcement, 

rather than quoting it. When Fraser received this report, however, she had no way, 

other than by asking respondent, to clarify what his announcement had said or what 

his remote teaching plans might be.

63. 

Fraser emailed respondent to ask these questions. Her email noted that 

respondent appeared to be planning group travel “in conflict with regular school hours 

for kids and contracted hours of employment for you, which could pose a variety of 

complex issues if this is accurate.” She asked respondent promptly to “provide a 

description of the proposed activities you have planned during school hours such that 

we can properly evaluate the legality of your proposition from a district standpoint 

and to provide you with advice and counsel such that you are protected from personal 

liability as well.”

64. 

In answer, respondent did not provide any such description. Instead, he 

stated simply that he would not “share details” about his “private life” with Fraser.

65. 

Fraser provided a further memorandum to respondent regarding this 

issue on August 28, 2020. Her memorandum advised respondent that the Board’s 

pandemic school plan gave him “no permission nor the authority to conduct an out-

of-area, in-person learning cohort which violates state and public health department 

regulations.” She also stated that “[t]aking some students out of the state during 

school hours for unsanctioned learning activities that are clearly inaccessible to your 

17 

other students creates a whole host of instructional inequities that the district will not 

endorse” (emphasis original). 

66.  On November 3, 2020, Fraser and Martin received a further report by 

email to the effect that respondent was “planning another lengthy (3 week) trip in 

November.” Fraser sent respondent another memorandum on November 5, 2020, 

about these activities. It stated that the District was “not requiring you to cease such 

activities, but rather to closely review and provide written responses to the issues 

raised herein.” The memorandum listed 20 questions about respondent’s plans, and 

asked him “to promptly provide us with information” answering the questions. The 

questions were detailed, and reflected then-common public health anxiety about 

COVID-19. In substance, however, the questions were reasonable. 

67. 

Respondent did not answer any of Fraser’s questions clearly. Instead, his 

response by email on November 7, 2020, stated, 

Thank you for your email outlining your concerns. I am 

confident that 

 

I have been—and will continue to—fully meet (and exceed) my 

professional obligations equitably to all my students. 

  Nothing about my physical location or the people that happen to be in 

my vicinity have any impact on my performance of my professional 

duties. 

  There is nothing about my physical location or the people that happen 

to be in my vicinity that has anything to do with the district. 

 

I am not in violation of any laws or district policies. 

18 

68.

Respondent testified to the Commission that he organized three group 

camping trips during fall 2020 during which he taught his District classes from a tent. 

Each trip included one or more other families, and two of the three trips included high 

school students who attended without any parent. Respondent testified that no trip 

included any District students who attended without their parents, but that at least 

one trip included District students who traveled with one or both of their parents. 

During the school day, respondent’s wife and other adults on the trip supervised and 

assisted any students in their school activities. 

69. 

Respondent also testified that he regrets having given Fraser such terse 

answers to her questions, and believes in hindsight that he should have been more 

forthcoming in addressing her concerns. He also testified, however, that at the time he 

considered his remote teaching plans to be “none of Ms. Fraser’s business.” 

70. 

The evidence did not establish that respondent’s camping trips caused 

him to neglect or to fail in any of his duties as a District employee. The evidence also 

did not establish that respondent taught any District student in person on any 

camping trip, while teaching other students by videoconference. Finally, the evidence 

did not establish that respondent represented to anyone, or that anyone actually 

believed, that the District had endorsed his trips or that he was offering supervision to 

children in his capacity as a District employee. 

RESISTANCE TO SUPERVISION

71. 

The October 2018 letter described above in Finding 17 advised 

respondent that some of the allegations the District had investigated and found true 

19 

reflected “either a lack of professional boundaries or questionable teaching practices.”4

It also advised respondent to be mindful of the possibility that parents or children 

could misperceive his mentorship as inappropriate sexual interest, and offered “a list 

[from the National Education Association] of common-sense pointers for avoiding 

false allegations which you may be wise to review and consider in your future 

interactions with youth.” 

72. 

Respondent himself testified, credibly and reasonably, that he took great 

offense to the implication that his commitment to teaching and mentoring teens 

reflects sexual interest. Yet rather than considering Fraser’s advice about avoiding even 

the appearance of impropriety, respondent answered her October 2018 letter with a 

four-page, single-spaced memorandum insisting that he always maintained 

appropriate boundaries, that he intended to change nothing about his behavior, and 

that every aspect of the anonymous letter and the District’s resulting investigation was 

“the very definition of a witch hunt.” 

73. 

After October 2018, respondent repeatedly invoked the spring 2018 

political controversy and anonymous letter, and the resulting investigations, in 

response to Zook’s, Martin’s, and Fraser’s efforts to investigate complaints or concerns 

about his activities. For example, 

 

4 Respondent admitted, for example, having offered a “binder clip” to a middle 

school boy who had asked permission to leave class to use the restroom. Respondent 

did not say that he had told the boy directly to put the clip on his penis, but 

acknowledged that he had intended “subtle innuendo.” 

20 

a.

Respondent relied on these past conflicts in declining to provide 

information to Fraser relating to the complaint described below in Finding 81. He 

reiterated these objections in a memorandum on April 3, 2020, stating 

“Superintendent Fraser did not have the benefit of hearing from me on this matter 

because I refused to participate in her inquiry.” 

b. 

Respondent relied on these past conflicts in declining to provide 

information to Zook relating to the complaint described below in Finding 82. He 

reiterated these objections in a memorandum on April 3, 2020, stating “Principal Zook 

did not have the benefit of hearing from me on this matter because I refused to meet 

with her to discuss it.” 

c. 

On January 19, 2021, respondent answered email from Martin 

asking again about respondent’s office hours algebra class by stating “I do not 

participate in any district-led investigations or inquiries based on the district’s history 

of abusing this process and failure to address the issue. Your inquiry fits in this 

category.”

74. 

In fall 2020, respondent recorded and released on social media a 

37-minute video urging viewers to vote against Measure N. He spent much if not most 

of the video’s duration explaining his continuing unhappiness about the spring 2018 

political controversy, the anonymous letter, and the resulting investigations, and 

reiterating his unwillingness to put those conflicts to rest. 

75. 

The matters stated in Findings 42, 43, 52, 56, 58, 60, 64, 67, 69, and 72 

through 74, as well as respondent’s presentation to the Commission, confirmed that 

neither respondent’s behavioral patterns nor his views about the District’s authority to 

advise or supervise him have changed since October 2018.

21 

PANDEMIC GRADING

76.

During fall 2020, some of respondent’s students’ parents complained to 

him and to Martin that respondent had not provided timely feedback to students on 

their class performance. 

77. 

At the hearing, respondent characterized all of these parents as 

community members who disagreed with his political positions, and in particular with 

his position on Measure N. No non-hearsay evidence either corroborated or refuted 

respondent’s belief about these parents’ political opinions, or his belief that political 

disagreement rather than educational concern had motivated their complaints.

78. 

Respondent replied to some of these parents about their concerns. He 

told one parent that he was “tardy” in updating students’ grades because he also was 

busy “answering insane amounts of emails, and [doing] other time-consuming admin 

tasks like attendance that take all day.” He also blamed some students’ poor work 

habits for his inability to give the students timely feedback. These answers were 

unprofessional in tone, because they deflected parents’ concerns about respondent 

onto students and onto District administrators. 

79.  Many of respondent’s colleagues also struggled somewhat to adapt to 

remote learning, particularly during the first half of the 2020–2021 school year. The 

evidence did not establish that respondent’s grading timeliness during this period was 

notably worse than that of his colleagues. 

OTHER EVENTS ALLEGED AS GROUNDS FOR DISMISSAL 

80.  On September 8, 2020, respondent sent email to his students through 

their school email accounts, giving notes and tips about how he planned to use 

22 

remote learning resources during that school year. The email included an 

announcement about an “online after school homework center,” with a link to a 

website describing MMI. Respondent had not shown this announcement to Martin 

before sending it, and had not received permission to send information to students 

through their school email accounts about a service the District had not screened or 

approved. 

81. 

In November 2019, a parent complained to Fraser that respondent had 

referred, in front of her child and a few other students, to an Asian-ancestry student’s 

“slitty eyes.” Fraser investigated this complaint; but as noted above in Finding 73.a, 

respondent refused to speak to her about it. Respondent denied at the hearing ever 

having used this phrase, and no non-hearsay evidence established that the parent’s 

report was accurate. 

82. 

In March 2020, a school staff member reported to Zook that a student 

had complained about respondent to the staff member. The staff member understood 

that respondent had displayed anger to the student, in front of other students, by 

pounding a table with his fist and using profanity. Zook investigated this complaint; 

but as noted above in Finding 73.b, respondent refused to speak to her about it. 

Respondent acknowledged at the hearing having criticized the student on this 

occasion, but denied having pounded his fist or used profanity. Because the 

Commission received no other first-hand testimony about the incident, the evidence 

was inconclusive as to whether respondent’s behavior on this occasion was or was not 

professionally appropriate. 

83. 

In late January 2021, one of respondent’s students’ parents sent email to 

respondent, Martin, and Fraser about stories respondent had told, and that the parent 

feared respondent might continue to tell, to the parent’s son. The parent, an officer in 

23 

the United States Air Force, was preparing for an overseas deployment, and wished to 

avoid having his son hear stories about “Afghanistan, combat, or the military” at 

school. Although the parent’s email stated that the parent had spoken with 

respondent during fall 2020 about respondent’s “sharing stories of his personal 

experience with Afghanistan combat fatalities in the classroom,” respondent testified 

that he had not told his class any such stories. The evidence did not establish whether 

respondent had told his students stories during the 2020–2021 school year about 

military fatalities in any country, or if so in what context and with what detail. 

84.  When the District initiated the investigation described above in Finding 

15, it directed respondent to “maintain the confidentiality of both the fact of and 

information concerning” the investigation. Although many community members 

became aware of the investigation, the evidence did not establish that respondent 

violated the District’s confidentiality directive. 

Additional Evidence 

85. 

The Commission heard evidence about several matters that were material 

to its decision, although the District did not allege them as grounds for respondent’s 

dismissal.

FALSE STATEMENTS AND TESTIMONY 

86. 

The District does not allege that the incidents summarized above in 

Findings 28 and 29 and below in Findings 87 through 93 constitute cause for 

respondent’s dismissal. Respondent volunteered testimony about these incidents, 

however. This testimony was emphatic, detailed, and in key respects false. 

24 

87.

The incident in which respondent admitted having given alcohol to a 

minor occurred during a camping trip in July 2016 that respondent had organized 

through his church. Fifteen-year-old A

 W

 participated in the trip. Neither of 

W

’s parents accompanied him. 

88.  W

 had been respondent’s student, and he also had gone on one or 

more previous camping trips with respondent. W

’s mother, H

 O

, is a 

teacher with the District. 

89. 

During the trip, respondent and several teenage participants took an 

overnight backpacking excursion. Respondent testified that he asked W

 to lead 

some of the other, younger hikers and that W

 did so successfully. W

 testified 

that he did not take any special role during the hike. 

90.  When the backpacking group arrived at its campsite, most of the group 

decided after the evening meal to walk a short distance away to explore a nearby 

abandoned cabin. Respondent and W

 stayed behind. 

91. 

Respondent testified that as he and W

 relaxed at the campsite near 

a campfire, respondent poured himself a modest amount of whiskey. He congratulated 

W

 on his leadership during that day’s hike, and offered W

 a sip of whiskey 

from his cup as a toast. W

 accepted it, and respondent did not offer W

 more, 

either that night or on any other occasion. 

92.  W

 testified that as he and respondent relaxed at the campsite near a 

campfire, respondent poured himself some whiskey and also offered to pour some 

into W

’s own cup. W

 accepted the whiskey and drank it. Respondent then 

offered W

 a refill, which W

 accepted and drank. When respondent offered 

W

 a second refill, W

 declined, and excused himself to sleep. 

25 

93. W

 also testified that later in the same trip, at a different campsite in 

the morning, respondent added something “minty” to W

’s hot chocolate. W

 

believed the addition included alcohol, in part because respondent told W

 not to 

let the other youths know that respondent had added the substance to W

’s cup. 

94.  When W

 returned home from the trip, he did not immediately 

mention the campfire whiskey or the spiked hot chocolate to his parents. Later, when 

he discussed the matter with his mother, he downplayed the incidents. 

95.  O

 also testified. She stated that she heard first from respondent’s 

pastor about the possibility that respondent had offered her son alcohol during the 

July 2016 camping trip. 

96.  O

 spoke to W

 about the pastor’s report, and understood W

 

to have told her that respondent had offered him only a sip of alcohol. Later, without 

W

’s knowledge, O

 attended a meeting involving respondent and the pastor 

in which they discussed the incident. According to O

, respondent grudgingly 

endorsed her description of her son’s account, agreeing that he had given W

 a sip 

of alcohol as they sat by a campfire and apologizing for his poor judgment. O

 

does not recall respondent’s offering any independent account of the incident during 

that meeting. 

97.  O

 considered the matter closed after her meeting with respondent 

and the pastor. During the District’s investigation into the spring 2018 anonymous 

letter described above in Finding 14, however, the investigator contacted her for 

information about her son’s July 2016 experience. O

 confirmed the information 

she had learned in 2016 from her son and from respondent. She and W

 both 

26 

testified that W

 was in poor mental health during 2018 and that he did not wish 

to offer further information to the District’s investigator at that time. 

98. 

Respondent contends that W

’s testimony to the Commission 

embellished the incident, and that discrepancies between W

’s testimony in 2021 

and the stories he told his mother in 2016 confirm that W

’s earlier description was 

true. Rather than undermining W

’s credibility, however, these discrepancies reflect 

W

’s improved mental health and his adult maturity. The evidence did not 

establish that W

 spoke to any adults outside his family in either 2016 or 2018 

about respondent’s offering him alcohol in July 2016, and it did establish that he felt 

conflict and shame about the incident when it occurred and for some time afterward. 

As between W

’s testimony about this incident and respondent’s, W

’s 

testimony is more credible. 

99. 

Respondent also contends that O

 exaggerated his culpability in this 

incident, and encouraged her son and others to give false information to District 

administrators and to the Commission, because of her extreme animosity toward him 

arising from the political conflict described above in Findings 11 and 12. O

 

testified, in contrast, that she holds no special animosity toward respondent because 

of that political conflict. Instead, her dislike for respondent stems from her 

understanding that he offered alcohol to her vulnerable son in July 2016, and from her 

perception that respondent continues to minimize this conduct’s wrongfulness. 5 In 

5 On several occasions, including in his testimony to the Commission, 

 

respondent has characterized his error with respect to W

 as a mistake akin to a 

traffic infraction. 

27 

light of all the evidence in this matter, O

’s testimony about her own motivations is 

credible, and respondent’s is not. 

100.  Respondent gave W

 more than a single sip of whiskey at the 

campfire, and he also gave W

 alcohol on a later morning. On neither occasion did 

respondent offer W

 alcohol to celebrate a milestone or an unusual success. 

Instead, respondent served W

 alcohol casually, as if W

 were an adult peer. 

Respondent’s testimony, as summarized in Finding 91, is false. 

101. 

In response to the District letter described in Finding 14, respondent 

stated falsely that he had given a minor “a single sip of an alcoholic beverage as a 

toast after a significant outdoor achievement.” Likewise, several witnesses aside from 

respondent testified that respondent had told them about giving W

 alcohol in 

July 2016, in terms that were essentially identical to his false statement to the District 

and his false testimony to the Commission. Some of these witnesses testified 

specifically that the incident, as they understood it, did not reflect poorly on 

respondent because it seemed so minimal. 

102.  Respondent testified that W

 was the only teen to whom respondent 

ever has offered alcohol during a camping trip. The Commission heard additional 

evidence to the effect that respondent had served alcohol to a second teen during the 

same July 2016 trip. This evidence was inconclusive. 

BOARD POLICY 4119.21 

103. During her tenure as District superintendent, Fraser caused the Board to 

amend and update many of its adopted Board Policies. She did so generally to ensure 

that these policies reflected current professional norms. 

28 

104. As adopted on May 9, 2012, Board Policy 4119.21 called for District 

employees to behave in a manner that would “enhance the integrity of the district and 

advance the goals of the district’s educational programs.” It required employees to 

“exercise good judgment and maintain professional standards and boundaries when 

interacting with students both on and off school property.” As examples of 

inappropriate conduct, Board Policy 4119.21 listed “engaging in harassing or 

discriminatory behavior” and “furnishing tobacco, alcohol, or other illegal or 

unauthorized substances to a student.” 

105.  At its meeting on February 12, 2020, the Board considered and adopted 

amendments to Board Policy 4119.21. The Board’s printed agenda summarized this 

action item as, “review the current Board policy to align with current California School 

Boards Association board Policy.” The Board adopted the revised policy, but the 

evidence did not establish whether the revisions affected any of the statements 

summarized above in Finding 104. 

106.  At the same February 12, 2020, meeting, the Board also adopted or 

revised several other policies that revised Board Policy 4119.21 cross-referenced, 

including a “Code of Ethics” and policies about “Firearms on School Grounds,” 

“Employee Security,” and “Bullying.” These other policies were not in evidence. 

TEACHING SKILL 

107.

The Commission received testimony from several parents who stated 

credibly that respondent taught and mentored their children very effectively. Some of 

these parents’ children were among the accelerated mathematics students who 

respondent taught beginning in fifth grade. One parent testified, however, that her 

child was in the same grade as the accelerated mathematics students but was not 

29 

Adverse Impact on Students and Fellow Teachers

11.

The matters stated in Findings 33, 36, 42 and 43 threatened adverse 

impact to C

, F

, P

, and V

, and especially to the latter two. In 

addition, the matters stated in Findings 52 through 60 threatened significant adverse 

impact to students, who risked missing credit for a key course. The matters stated in 

Findings 61 through 69 confirm that respondent brushed off warnings from Fraser 

regarding potential adverse effects on students from his ”remote wilderness school 

camps.” Finally, the matters stated in Findings 11, 12, 21, 22, 24, 25, 45, 74, and 78 

show that respondent became notorious in the District’s small community because of 

his behavior, undermining his ability to cooperate with fellow teachers and with 

District administrators to serve students. 

12. 

Although the evidence did not show actual, serious harm to students 

from respondent’s behavior, the evidence overall showed that respondent created 

serious risks of such harm. Moreover, the rancor evident before the Commission did 

reflect damage to the District’s educational community, and the matters stated in 

Findings 11, 12, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 74, and 78 show that respondent’s conflict-seeking 

behavior was a significant cause of that damage.

Proximity or Remoteness in Time 

13. 

The matters stated in Findings 30 through 44, 51 through 69, 71 through 

75, 78, and 98 through 101 confirm that conduct showing respondent’s unfitness 

continued until and even after his suspension from duty.

33 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances

14.

The COVID-19 pandemic was both an extenuating and an aggravating 

circumstance in this matter. On the one hand, and as shown in Findings 48, 49, 53, and 

79, the pandemic disrupted previous teaching practices and forced the entire District 

community to adapt and compromise. On the other hand, and as shown in Findings 51 

through 69, respondent’s steadfast refusal to share information with Fraser and to 

follow Martin’s instructions exacerbated uncertainty and anxiety for Fraser and Martin 

as well as for parents and students. 

15. 

Respondent’s dishonesty, as summarized in Findings 91, 100, and 101, is 

a significantly aggravating circumstance in this matter. 

Respondent’s Motives 

16. 

The matters stated in Findings 46 through 50 confirm that respondent 

established his 2020–2021 algebra course with praiseworthy motives. More generally, 

the matters stated in Findings 46 through 50, 107, and 108 revealed respondent’s 

sincere interest in teaching well, and also in mentoring adolescents outside the 

classroom.

17.

The matters stated in Findings 18, 52, 56, 58, 60, 64, 67, 69, and 72 

through 75, however, reflect respondent’s insistence on prolonging conflicts, and his 

refusal to accept partial victories. These motives are blameworthy.

Likelihood of Recurrence 

18. 

The matters stated in Findings 72 through 75 confirm that if the District 

retained respondent as a teacher, respondent would continue to stoke conflict within 

34 

the District and to resist any efforts by District administrators to control or supervise 

his teaching. 

Temperament 

19. 

As summarized in Findings 69, 72, 100, and 101, respondent expressed 

minimal remorse before the Commission for any of the conduct showing his unfitness 

for service. To the contrary, and as summarized in Findings 14, 56, 74, 77, 98, and 99, 

and in Legal Conclusions 20 through 23, respondent presented himself to the 

Commission as someone who deserves respect for his moral courage but who instead 

faces persecution. These matters, all together, make respondent’s unfitness evident. 

Retaliation for Constitutionally Protected Activities 

20. 

Respondent contends that the District’s effort to dismiss him from 

employment constitutes unlawful retaliation against him for exercising his rights under 

the California and United States Constitutions to express his personal views and to 

participate in his community’s political life.

21.

Respondent contends specifically that the Board revised Board Policy 

4119.21 in February 2020 to target him for dismissal. The matters stated in Findings 19 

and 103 through 106, and in Legal Conclusion 6, do not support this contention.

22.

As additional support for his retaliation defense, respondent identified 

many examples that he characterized as acts by community members and by fellow 

District faculty members arising from their hostility to respondent’s views and political 

positions. Because such examples, if true, might undermine these people’s credibility, 

the Commission has addressed credibility where relevant. Such examples would not 

establish unlawful retaliation against respondent by the District itself, however, 

35 

because every community member and District faculty member has the same personal 

rights respondent has to state opinions and to petition government agencies for 

action. Whether wise or unwise, respondent’s neighbors and colleagues have the right 

to express disagreement or disrespect to respondent on social media or to his face; to 

ignore or even to criticize him in faculty meetings; and to ask the District to dismiss 

him because of real or imagined deficiencies in his performance or his character. 

23. 

Respondent also contends that Board members and administrative staff 

have displayed animus toward respondent because of his political opinions and 

activities, and that this animus proves that his dismissal from employment would 

constitute unlawful retaliation against him for exercising his right to free speech and 

political participation. This contention ignores two key protections the Education Code 

gives respondent. 

a. 

First, the District cannot dismiss respondent unilaterally. Rather, 

under Education Code sections 44943 and 44944, because respondent requested a 

hearing, this Commission—comprising by law persons who have no prior relationship 

with respondent, with the District’s administrators and elected officials, or with the 

events at issue—must decide whether or not the District should dismiss respondent 

from employment. 

b. 

Second, under Education Code section 44932, this Commission 

may direct the District to dismiss respondent only if statutory cause exists to dismiss 

him, and not otherwise. As with community members and fellow faculty members, 

Board members’ and administrators’ animus toward respondent, if proven, might have 

affected their credibility before the Commission. Any such animus did not prevent the 

Commission’s finding cause to dismiss respondent, however. 

36 

