BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SAN JOSE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

MICHAEL JACOBS, Respondent. 

OAH No. 2022080655 

DECISION 

A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by 

videoconference on December 5 through 9, 2022, and March 20, 2023. The 

Commission’s members were Amy Irwin, Torrance Unified School District; Nico 

Sandoval, Tracy Unified School District; and Administrative Law Judge Michael C. 

Starkey, State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings, who presided. 

Attorney Ingrid A. Meyers represented the San Jose Unified School District. 

Attorney Joseph A. Cisneros represented respondent Michael Jacobs, who was 

present. 

The matter was submitted on March 20, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

The San Jose Unified School District (District) is a large school district in 

Santa Clara County. 

2. 

At all relevant times, respondent was a permanent certificated employee 

of the District. 

3. 

On March 8, 2022, the District served a six-page Notice of Unsatisfactory 

Performance upon respondent, summarizing numerous “Does Not Meet Standard” 

evaluations of his teaching performance in the 2020–21 and 2021–22 school years, 

directing him to improve his teaching performance in numerous specific ways, and 

warning him that continued unsatisfactory performance would subject him to further 

disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 

4. 

On June 16, 2022, the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) received a 

statement of charges against respondent from District Assistant Superintendent J. 

Dominic Bejarano and voted to seek respondent’s dismissal from employment. 

5. 

On June 16, 2022, the District attempted to personally serve respondent 

with notice of its intention to dismiss him and a copy of the statement of charges. On 

June 28, 2022, respondent’s counsel accepted service of these documents on 

respondent’s behalf. It is undisputed that June 28, 2022, was after the instructional 

year of the school site where respondent is physically employed. 

6. 

In the statement of charges, the District alleges that over the past few 

years, respondent performed unsatisfactorily as a teacher, specifically that he 

2 

consistently failed to perform his duties as a teacher in a satisfactory manner; failed to 

meet the fundamental expectations of the District; interfered with students’ ability to 

learn and succeed; failed to meet state standards for the profession; and undermined 

the goals of the District. The District further alleges that respondent has demonstrated 

an evident unfitness for service; has repeatedly violated Board policies and regulations, 

state laws, and other rules governing his employment; and that all these alleged facts 

constitute cause for his dismissal. 

7. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing and this proceeding followed. 

Relevant District Policies 

8. 

District Board Policy No. 100, “Philosophy, Goals, Objectives and 

Comprehensive Plans,” sets forth the District’s fundamental principles and philosophy 

and specifically provides that: 

It is the philosophy of the district that: 

1. All students can learn and succeed. 

2. Every student in the district, regardless of gender, special 

needs, or social, ethnic, language or economic background 

has a right to a high-quality education that challenges the 

student to achieve to his/her fullest potential. 

3. The future of our nation and community depends on 

students possessing the skills and personal goals necessary 

for lifelong learning, productive employment, competition 

in the global economy, and contributions as members of 

society. . . . 

3 

9. 

District Board Policy No. 4119.21, “Code of Ethics,” sets forth the District’s 

expectation that all certificated employees “maintain the highest ethical standards, to 

follow district policies and regulations, and to abide by the state and national laws. 

Employee conduct should enhance the integrity of the district and the goals of the 

educational program.” 

10.  District Board Policy No. 4119.3, “Duties of Personnel,” provides that, “All 

employees shall fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in their job descriptions 

and shall comply with Board policies, administrative regulations, applicable employee 

agreements, and local, state and federal laws.” 

11. 

Pursuant to District Board Policy No. 4100, “Certificated Personnel,” “Each 

certificated staff member shall be held accountable for duties assigned to him/her and 

shall undergo regular performance evaluations in accordance with law and negotiated 

agreements.” 

12. 

Article 16000, “Evaluation,” of the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) 

between the District and the San Jose Teachers Association, along with the Education 

Code, sets forth the evaluation system for certificated employees at the District. 

13. 

After the second year of permanent status, each certificated employee 

(also referred to as a “teacher”) of the District is evaluated by an administrator once 

every three years. 

14. 

The evaluating administrator gathers evidence from observing partial 

lessons and at least two full lessons (defined as an observation of at least 45 minutes). 

The evaluator provides feedback to the teacher after each observation. The evaluator 

then presents a written evaluation (known as a winter evaluation) to the teacher no 

later than the last workday in January. 

4 

15. 

If the teacher receives an overall rating of “Meets Standard” in the winter 

evaluation, the evaluation cycle is concluded. 

16. 

If the teacher receives an overall rating of “Does Not Meet Standard” in 

the winter evaluation, (1) the teacher and evaluating administrator jointly develop a 

support plan, (2) the teacher may request a Consulting Teacher (CT) (a teacher 

released full-time to gather evidence to inform and validate evaluations) with similar 

grade and curricular experience if possible, and (3) the evaluating administrator and CT 

(if requested) independently gather further data and independently issue new 

evaluations based upon the new data (spring evaluation). 

17. 

If the teacher receives an overall rating of “Meets Standard” from all 

evaluators in the spring evaluation, the evaluation cycle is concluded. 

18. 

If the teacher receives an overall rating of “Does Not Meet Standard” 

from all evaluators in the spring evaluation, the teacher is moved into the Teacher 

Assistance Program (TAP). 

19. 

TAP provides coaching and support to these teachers in the following 

year. In TAP, the teacher is assigned a TAP mentor, a new evaluating administrator, and 

a new CT, and is evaluated in three new periods. If the teacher continues to receive 

overall ratings of “Does Not Meet Standard” in the TAP year, the teacher is typically 

dismissed from employment. 

20. 

The District issued a Teacher Evaluation System Handbook (Evaluation 

Handbook), which contains guidance and sample reports to assist evaluators. 

21. 

Pursuant to the Evaluation Handbook, teacher evaluations in the District 

are based on the following five (5) performance standards: 

5 

Standard I. Teachers create and maintain effective 

environments for student learning. 

Standard II. Teachers know the subjects they teach and how 

to organize that subject matter for student learning. 

Standard III. Teachers design high-quality learning 

experiences and present them effectively. 

Standard IV. Teachers continually assess student progress, 

analyze the results, and adapt instruction to promote 

student achievement. 

Standard V. Teachers continually improve and develop as 

professional educators. 

These standards were developed by members of the Teacher Quality Panel (TQP), 

which is made up of administrators and representatives of the San Jose Teachers 

Association (Union). Generally, evaluators make several claims related to each 

standard, cite observations supporting the claims, and then conclude with a statement 

of the impact the claimed behavior had (or would be expected to have) on the 

teacher’s students. 

22. 

In response to the transition to distance learning associated with the 

COVID-19 pandemic, the District and the Union executed a Memorandum of 

Understanding (“MOU”), in which they agreed that teachers would not be evaluated 

under Standards II, III, and V during the 2020–21 and 2021–22 school years. Therefore, 

new evaluations during this period (including respondent’s) were based upon 

performance in Standards I and IV only. 

6 

23. 

Respondent’s classes were taught via remote learning (also known as 

distance learning) for almost all of the 2020–21 school year—students stayed home 

and attended classes virtually. Class periods were lengthened to 97 minutes. A small 

percentage of his students returned to campus on a hybrid basis for the last six weeks 

of school. Respondent’s classes were taught in person throughout the 2021–22 school 

year. 

24. 

Remote learning in the District, including respondent’s classes, was 

conducted using an online platform called Canvas, which contains a syllabus; work 

assignments; and tools for students to submit work and communicate with the 

teacher. Teachers (including respondent) taught classes in real time using WebX (a 

videoconferencing platform similar to Zoom). The teacher of each class could control 

students’ access to a chat platform, and students’ ability to virtually raise their hands 

or unmute themselves. Teachers could share their computer screen with the students 

and the students could simultaneously work on the Canvas platform. 

Respondent’s Background 

25. 

Respondent holds a clear single subject teaching credential authorizing 

him to teach English and social sciences. Respondent began teaching in the District in 

August 2006. He taught social studies and language arts at the District’s John Muir 

Middle School (John Muir), except for teaching summer school at different locations. 

26. 

Respondent was evaluated at least twice in his first two years with the 

District and thereafter once every three years. Prior to the 2020–21 school year, 

respondent received a rating of “Meets Standard” in each of these evaluations. 

27. 

In the 2020–21 and 2021–22 school years, respondent was assigned to 

teach eighth grade social studies and sixth grade language arts classes. 

7 

Respondent’s 2020–21 Performance Evaluations 

28. 

Anessa Amer is currently the assistant principal of instruction at Willow 

Glen Middle School. For the previous three years she was the assistant principal of 

discipline at John Muir. She holds credentials in administrative services and multiple 

subject teaching. She taught second and third grade classes from 2012 through 2016. 

29. 

Amer’s training in evaluating teachers includes a course in her credential 

program, as well as training specific to the District. The District-specific training lasted 

seven days, was provided by the creators of the District’s evaluation system, and 

included practice observations and review of the Teacher Evaluation Handbook. The 

2019–20 school year was the first year she evaluated teachers. 

30. 

In the 2020–21 school year, Amer evaluated five teachers, including 

respondent, all assigned to her by Jeanette Harding, John Muir’s principal. Amer 

reports that she had no conversations with Harding about previous evaluations of 

respondent, nor regarding how to evaluate respondent. Amer reports that prior to her 

evaluation of respondent she had little interaction with respondent and she felt no 

animosity towards him. 

31. 

Amer opines that an evaluator does not need to have taught the same 

grade level or subject matter as the teacher being evaluated because the evaluation 

system is based on universal teaching standards. 

32. 

Amer’s observations of respondent were all virtual, through the WebX 

and Canvas platforms. She was able to see him teaching, see the students’ screens, 

and sometimes was able to see the chat platform. 

8 

33. 

In the winter evaluation period, Amer conducted three “full” observations 

of 45 minutes or longer (on October 19, and November 3 and 6, 2020) and five “drop-

in” observations of 10 to 30 minutes each (on September 17, October 16, November 

24, December 17, 2020, and January 5, 2021). 

34. 

Amer reports that she observed limited opportunities for students to 

participate in respondent’s classes; limited ways that he collected or reflected on data 

in order to reteach; and limited opportunities for students to build community in 

respondent’s classes. Overall, she opined that his classes were not positive learning 

environments. 

35. 

Amer reports that when she offered respondent support and coaching, 

he became defensive and frustrated. When she told respondent that she had concerns 

about whether he would “pass” the evaluation, their professional relationship quickly 

deteriorated. In a November 12, 2020, email respondent primarily blamed distance 

learning for issues identified by Amer and accused Amer of bias against him. Shortly 

thereafter, in a videoconference with Amer to discuss an observation, respondent 

refused to turn on his audio or video and insisted on communicating with Amer only 

through the WebX chat feature. He explained that this was to show Amer the 

difficulties of teaching remotely. Eventually Amer ended the meeting. In a subsequent 

email, respondent demanded an apology from Amer for ending the meeting. 

36. 

Amer reports that respondent told her that the Canvas and WebX 

platforms were a struggle for him, but he did not attend office hours or coaching that 

she offered to him to address those struggles. 

37.  On or about January 14, 2021, Amer completed respondent’s Winter 

Evaluation Report based on the three full-lesson observations and five drop-in 

9 

observations and their debriefing conversations. Despite many attempts to schedule 

an evaluation conference, respondent refused to meet with Amer. 

38. 

Respondent also refused to sign the Winter Evaluation Report, despite 

the fact that it states that such a signature only indicates that “the teacher has read 

and reviewed the final evaluation report, not necessarily that the teacher concurs with 

the contents” and that the teacher may attach comments or submit a separate 

response to the TQP. 

2020–21 WINTER EVALUATION REPORT 

39. 

In the 2020–21 Winter Evaluation Report, Amer assigned respondent an 

overall rating of “Does Not Meet Standard” and the same rating for Standards I and IV 

(the only two used that school year). In summary, Amer reported that respondent: 

has not satisfied the requirements to meet standard for this 

evaluation period. He makes excuses for student 

performance, is unwilling to look critically at his own 

instructional decisions, and has not built classroom culture 

to support students. He uses limited assessment formats, 

cannot show evidence of data analysis and/or the impact of 

data-driven decisions on lessons or units. 

40. 

Under Standard I (Teachers create and maintain effective environments 

for student learning), Amer reported several claims to support the Does Not Meet 

Standard rating. 

41. 

Amer reported that respondent “does not take responsibility for 

academic growth and achievement of all students.” She cited numerous instances in 

10 

which respondent only called on volunteers to answer questions. She cited examples 

of respondent blaming the gender distribution of classes; stating of “unresponsive” 

students “If that is the path they’ve chosen, I don’t keep pushing it . . . I don’t have an 

answer for the unresponsive ones, but I can try with the others”; blaming a student’s 

inability to speak English well; describing poor-performing students as “seat warmers”; 

and blaming the remote learning paradigm. Amer opined that as “a result some 

students believe it is acceptable or even inevitable that they will not succeed.” 

42. 

Amer reported that respondent “does not use opportunities to build 

interpersonal relationships with students.” She cited several examples in which 

respondent began class with little or no personal interaction with students. She also 

reported that respondent did not have “set” office hours, but instead required 

students to schedule a time for such interaction. Amer reported that as “a result, not 

all students feel comfortable taking risks in class.” 

43. 

Amer reported that respondent provides “limited support to students 

that are identified as needing additional support.” Among the examples cited were: 

very few of respondent’s comments on student work consisted of more than “not 

complete,” “more,” “what?” or the like; respondent rejected the suggestion that he use 

technological tools to help English Learner students as too time-consuming to learn, 

and also rejected the idea of allowing a student with a disability to retake assessments 

as an accommodation, stating that he did not allow others to do so, “so I don’t think 

giving it to one student would make sense.” At hearing, Amer explained that this 

practice is a common accommodation for special education students and legally 

required if included in a student’s individualized education plan (IEP). Amer reported 

that as a result of respondent’s limited support, “students that need additional support 

11 

are more likely to struggle or fall behind than students that do not need additional 

supports.” 

44. 

Under Standard IV (continually assess student progress, analyze the 

results, and adapt instruction to promote student achievement), Amer reported several 

claims to support the Does Not Meet Standard rating. 

45. 

Amer reported that respondent “uses a limited variety of formal and 

informal assessment formats and/or techniques.” She cited respondent’s heavy 

reliance on formal assessments such as true/false, multiple choice, and fill-in-the blank 

questions, his failure to have students interact with each other during class 

discussions, and his heavy reliance on volunteers to answer questions in class. Amer 

opined that this makes it likely that only some students can show mastery of the 

curriculum. 

46. 

Amer reported that respondent “does not analyze and use data to adapt 

instruction or lesson plans after assessments.” She cited respondent’s failure to 

mention the results of formal assessments in the subsequent classes on two occasions, 

and respondent’s own admissions that he does not use any objective measures to 

determine when his instruction was insufficiently effective. He explained “I looked at 

the data in the class you brought up [on 10/22/2020] and I didn’t see the problem in 

the other 2 classes, and again I look at the demographic of that group I have and 

again I don’t mean to be dismissive of them, but I don’t see the cause for alarm. I don’t 

think there is a need to redo a lesson since it wasn’t an issue in all the classes.” Amer 

reported that, as “a result, students that do not master the content are moved forward 

in the curriculum without the skills they need to be successful.” 

12 

SUPPORT PLAN 

47. 

Because respondent received an overall rating of Does Not Meet 

Standard, he was placed on a support plan. 

48. 

The support plan addressed the areas in which he received a Does Not 

Meet Standard rating and included specific examples of actions to improve in these 

areas. For example, to better “use opportunities to build interpersonal relationships 

with students,” respondent was advised to incorporate at least one such opportunity 

to learn more about his students in each class, such as making a connection between 

material and student context, including interests, current events and student 

experiences. To provide additional support to students that need it, respondent was 

advised to complete two trainings, identify one or two students to use as a case study, 

and add support structures to his lesson plans, including sentence frames, chunking, 

and questions aimed at different levels of knowledge. 

49. 

Amer reports that it was “incredibly difficult” to get respondent to 

participate in the preparation of the support plan. Respondent again declined an offer 

of coaching. Respondent also refused to sign or participate in the finalization of the 

support plan. Amer also reports that she checked the electronic history of support 

materials provided to respondent on March 22, 2021, and again at the time of 

reevaluation, and respondent had not accessed them. 

2020–21 SPRING EVALUATION REPORT BY AMER 

50. 

In the 2020–21 spring evaluation period, Amer conducted two full 

observations (on April 1 and 5, 2021) and three drop-in observations (on March 29, 

and April 9 and 19, 2021). 

13 

51.  On the Spring Evaluation Report, Respondent again received an overall 

rating of Does Not Meet Standard and the same rating for Standards I and IV.  

52. 

Under Standard I, Amer again reported that respondent did not take 

responsibility for academic growth and achievement of all students and that, as “a 

result, some students believe it is acceptable or even inevitable that they will not 

succeed.” Amer cited examples of respondent relying primarily on two volunteers to 

answer most oral questions in a class, respondent failing to provide a rubric (blueprint 

for success on assignment) or providing a rubric that was incomplete or insufficiently 

specific. 

53. 

Amer again reported that respondent “does not use opportunities to 

build interpersonal relationships with all students,” resulting in not all students “feeling 

comfortable taking risks in class,” citing examples of such missed opportunities such as 

starting class without a welcome routine and respondent not having set office hours, 

but instead requiring students to make an appointment to speak with him. 

54. 

Amer again reported that respondent “provides limited support to 

students that are identified as needing additional support,” citing examples such as 

respondent leaving less comments on the work of English-learner students, failing to 

encourage such students to finish a final project, and refusing to allow students to 

retake assessments or daily assignments. 

55. 

Under Standard IV, Amer again reported that respondent “uses a limited 

variety of formal and informal assessment formats and/or techniques.” She cited 

respondent’s heavy reliance on formal assessments such as true/false, multiple choice, 

and fill-in-the blank questions, his infrequent use of informal methods to check for 

14 

understanding, and his heavy reliance on volunteers to answer questions in class. Amer 

reports that as a result, “students are unable to show mastery in a variety of ways.” 

56. 

Amer again reported that respondent “does not analyze and use data to 

adapt instruction or lesson plans after formal or informal assessments,” citing 

examples of respondent’s inability to articulate how he was assessing student learning 

to shape his lesson planning, an example where he only mentioned the previous 

assessment once in 36 minutes, and an example where, after a student answered a 

question incorrectly, respondent stated ”oh ok. [Student’s name] what did you put for 

when this chapter is happening? Yes—great 4th grade“ and failed to return to this 

student that answered incorrectly. Amer reports that, as “a result, students that do not 

master the content are moved forward in the curriculum without the skills they need to 

be successful.” 

57. 

Amer summarized her 2020–21 Spring evaluation: 

[Respondent] still has not satisfied the requirements to 

meet standard for this evaluation period. He continues to 

make excuses for student performance, is unwilling to look 

critically at his own instructional decisions, and has not built 

classroom culture to support all students. He uses limited 

assessment formats, cannot show evidence of data analysis 

and/or the impact of data-driven decisions on lessons or 

units. 

15 

2020–21 SPRING EVALUATION REPORT BY CT JAHRMAN 

58. 

After receiving Amer’s Winter Evaluation Report, respondent requested a 

CT evaluator, and the TQP assigned Ryan Jahrman to evaluate him in that role in 

spring 2021. Jahrman testified at hearing. 

59. 

Jahrman is currently the assistant principal of curriculum instruction at 

San Jose High School. Prior to the current school year, he served as a CT for six years 

at multiple sites in the District. Prior to that he taught English to grades 9 through 12 

at San Jose High School. Jahrman holds a single subject teaching credential in English 

and an administrative services credential. He holds a master's degree in urban 

education. 

60. 

Jahrman reports that he never saw Amer’s evaluations of respondent or 

spoke with her during the process of his evaluation of respondent. Nor did he ever 

speak about respondent with the other individuals who evaluated respondent the 

following year. He views his role as a CT evaluator as acting like a “second set of eyes” 

to agree or disagree with the administrator evaluator. In addition to an initial 

seven-day training, Jahrman received yearly evaluation training. Jahrman reports that 

he was trained to include teacher statements from reflecting conferences in his 

evaluation reports, as well as direct observations of teaching and student work. 

Jahrman believes that he evaluated respondent in the same manner as any other 

teacher. 

61. 

Like Amer, Jahrman opines that an evaluator does not need to have the 

same teaching experience as the teacher being evaluated. He reports that he has 

evaluated Spanish and physical education teachers, and that the expectations are the 

same regardless of subject matter or grade level. 

16 

62. 

Jahrman’s evaluation report of respondent is dated April 28, 2021. He 

conducted one full observation (on April 1, 2021) and six drop-in observations (on 

March 23 and 29, and April 5, 7, 20, and 23, 2021). Jahrman reported an overall rating 

of Does Not Meet Standard. He summarized his evaluation as follows: 

[Respondent] does not take responsibility for the academic 

growth and achievement of all students. This is apparent 

both in the lack of support for students who might be 

struggling, and in remarks by [respondent] in which he 

explicitly places blame on his students. [Respondent] does 

not provide opportunities for students to collaborate or 

interact with one another. Instead, the overwhelming 

majority of class time is dedicated to students working 

independently in silence, and/or students (usually 

volunteers) sharing answers with the class. [Respondent] 

also does not sufficiently assess student progress before, 

during and after instruction; he does not assess students’ 

readiness for activities before releasing students to work, he 

does not meaningfully assess students as they are working, 

and his assessment after instruction consists primarily of 

calling on volunteers. 

On the other hand, [respondent] does positively affirm 

students’ responses. He has also attempted to implement 

some of the feedback given during this round. For example, 

he called on some volunteers, attempted using a Webex 

poll question, and gave students an outline that they could 

17 

use for a project. Nevertheless, these strategies were not 

used consistently or effectively, and the overall pattern of 

this evaluation round is that [respondent] does not take 

responsibility for all students, does not provide 

opportunities for peer collaboration or interaction, and 

does not sufficiently assess students. 

63. 

Under Standard I, Jahrman reported several claims to support the Does 

Not Meet Standard rating. Jahrman reported that respondent “does not take 

responsibility for the academic growth and achievement of all students. Instead, he 

takes the approach: ‘If they didn’t learn it, it’s their fault.’” Jahrman cited multiple 

examples of respondent failing to provide scaffolding for reading or textbook work 

and failing to check for understanding; and examples of respondent blaming his 

students for failing to participate or complete assignments. Jahrman noted that on one 

occasion respondent provided sentence frames to his students, but concluded: 

“[n]evertheless, the overall pattern in this round is that [respondent] does not take 

responsibility for the academic growth and achievement of all students, but instead 

places blame on students. As a result, students who need additional support may not 

be successful in his class.” 

64. 

Jahrman reported that respondent “does not give students opportunities 

to positively interact with one another,” citing numerous examples. Jahrman concluded 

that, “[i]n this way, students may not have the opportunity to develop as collaborative 

21st century learners.” 

65. 

Jahrman also noted that respondent “does positively affirm students’ 

efforts” and cited several examples. He observed that “In this way, students might feel 

safe to take academic risks. However, these positive affirmations are undermined by 

18 

the lack of supports for students who are struggling . . . and the lack of formative 

assessment.” 

66. 

Under Standard IV, Jahrman also reported several claims to support the 

Does Not Meet Standard rating. Jahrman reported that respondent “does not 

sufficiently assess student progress before, during and after instruction,” citing 

examples in which respondent called only on volunteers to answer questions, released 

students to work independently without first checking for understanding, or otherwise 

did not assess whether most of his students understood the course material. Jahrman 

reported that, in this way, respondent “may not know if students are ready for an 

activity, and he may not know which students need extra support.” 

67. 

At hearing, Jahrman reported that his overall observation of respondent 

was that he failed to take responsibility for his students, struggled in many ways, 

blamed students, did little to support them, failed to provide students the opportunity 

to collaborate, and failed to adequately assess students during class. Jahrman 

observed respondent make some attempts to improve, but opines that respondent’s 

failure to significantly improve demonstrates that he is not able to do so. 

2021–22 School Year Performance Evaluations 

68. 

Throughout the 2021–22 school year, classes were in person and reverted 

to 56 minutes in length. A mask mandate was in effect through March 2022, and many 

students continued to wear masks through the end of the school year. 

19 

ASSIGNMENT TO TEACHER ASSISTANCE PROGRAM, SUPPORT PLAN, AND THE 

“TEN ARENAS” 

69. 

Because respondent had received ratings of Does Not Meet Standard on 

both of his 2020–21 spring evaluations, he was assigned to TAP (see Factual Findings 

18 & 19). Sheila Billings was assigned as his TAP Mentor for the 2021–22 school year. 

Michelle Reghitto was assigned as his administrative evaluator. Kara Hafner was 

assigned as his CT evaluator. 

70. 

Respondent was also provided a support plan addressing the areas 

marked “Does Not Meet Standard,” with strategies and support structures to help him 

improve in these areas. This plan contain several specific goals for respondent, such as 

welcoming students as they enter the classroom; making connections between the 

course materials and students’ experiences; providing clear feedback, sentence frames, 

and questions of an increasing depth of knowledge; performing one “check for 

understanding” every 10 minutes, using informal and formal assessments with a 

variety of formats; providing assessment feedback to students within two school days; 

and using formal and informal data to plan instruction, including reteaching content 

for which students did not demonstrate 80 percent mastery. Because respondent’s 

2020–21 evaluations and 2021–22 support plan were based only on Standards I and IV, 

his 2021–22 evaluations were likewise based only on those two standards. 

71. 

The support plan and the evaluations that followed frequently reference 

the “10 Arenas” (10 Arenas), which were alternatively referenced as the “Ten Arenas for 

Communicating High Expectations” and the “10 Arenas of everyday verbal interactions 

with students.” The 10 Arenas are: 

20 

1. 

Calling on students: Aspects include: calling students by name, 

demands, persistence, frequency of interaction, and feedback. 

2. 

Responding to students’ answers: Aspects include 

acknowledging/affirming, sticking with a student, wait time, asking a 

student to elaborate, giving praise. 

3. 

Giving Help: Whether or not a student requests help. 

4. 

Changing Attitude Toward Errors: (persevere and return)—Does 

the teacher view it as lack of ability/weakness or opportunity for 

learning/growth. The teacher may say ”You can do this!” 

5. 

Giving and Negotiating Tasks and Assignments: Explain why 

students are doing assignments (the purpose and objective). 

6. 

Giving feedback according to criteria of success: Giving verbal or 

written feedback. 

7. 

Positive framing or reteaching: Possibly differentiating, frequent 

follow ups. 

8. 

Tenacity: The teacher conveys an ”I won't give up on you” 

message. 

9. 

Grades, Retakes, and Redos: Grading practices. 

10. 

Grouping: Students are grouped to provide additional support. 

This may include flex grouping. 

21 

72. 

The 10 Arenas come from a training textbook called The Skillful Teacher, 

which was the primary reference book used in the seven-day evaluation training the 

District provides to evaluators. Hafner reports that evaluators in the District have been 

using the 10 Arenas in teacher evaluations for at least 10 years, but the 10 Arenas are 

not mentioned in the Teacher’s Evaluation Handbook because the handbook does not 

delve into all the details of ways teachers can communicate with students. Reghitto 

also reports that she learned about the 10 Arenas in the District’s evaluation training. 

2021–22 EVALUATIONS BY REGHITTO 

73. 

Reghitto is the manager of student services for the District. She works 

with at-risk students, supports principals, and manages school-wide systems related to 

student behavior and families that need additional services at home. Reghitto has 

worked for the District for approximately 20 years, in various administration positions, 

primarily as principal or assistant principal of several middle schools. Reghitto holds a 

California administration services credential, and previously held a California 

preliminary multisubject credential. Prior to joining the District, she taught middle 

school math, science, and social studies in California, Utah, Idaho, and Maryland. She 

evaluates teachers in the District yearly as an administrator. Pursuant to the TAP 

program, Reghitto evaluated respondent three times in the 2021–22 school year. She 

reports that she never discussed her evaluations of respondent with Hafner or any 

District administrator during the process. 

November 29, 2021, Evaluation Report by Reghitto 

74.  During the first round of TAP, Reghitto conducted six full-lesson 

observations (October 11, 13, 21, and 26 and November 4 and 10, 2021) and two 

22 

drop-in observations (on September 15 and 22, 2021) of respondent, and regularly 

met and communicated with him following each observation. 

75. 

Reghitto issued an evaluation report of respondent dated November 29, 

2021. She reported an overall rating of Does Not Meet Standard. She rated respondent 

as Does Not Meet Standard on both Standard I and IV. Under Standard I, Reghitto 

claimed that respondent (1) does not take responsibility for academic growth and 

achievement of all students, (2) does not use opportunities to build interpersonal 

relationships with students, and (3) provided limited intervention to students that are 

identified as needing additional support. Under Standard IV, Reghitto claimed that 

respondent (1) uses a limited variety of formal and informal assessments formats 

and/or techniques, and (2) does not analyze and use data to adapt instruction or 

lesson plans after assessments. Using the 10 Arenas as a framework, Reghitto provided 

numerous examples to support these claims, also noting instances in which 

respondent showed improvement. 

76. 

She summarized her evaluation as follows: 

While [respondent] has shown progress in Standard 1 and 

Standard 4, he does not meet expectation. 

In Standard 1 - Problem 1 [does not take responsibility for 

academic growth and achievement of all students] - 

[respondent] does not use the 10 arenas of daily verbal 

interactions with students. While he does ask a lot of 

questions to check for understanding and he does extend 

student answers and/ or ask more questions to provide 

clarity, he typically does not call the students by name and 

23 

does not acknowledge, give feedback, or praise. 

[Respondent] provides feedback via Canvas, but does not 

provide students with clear feedback verbally or in writing. 

While he provides students rubrics, sentence frames and 

exemplars, he does not reference them, or consistently 

model use of tools during direct instruction, thus the 

students do not utilize the tools as a part of their practice. 

On 10/26, I saw a shift in his use of the 10 arenas. While 

there was an increase in name usage, a slight increase in 

giving help, and an increase in grouping, [respondent] still 

needs to be specific with feedback provided, adjust his 

rubric, frame the reteaching, and address errors. 

[Respondent] stated, ”I understand you[r] point on a couple. 

Some of it disagree with. I use students’ names all of the 

time. You make it seem as if I do not know my students’ 

names. I learned their names faster this year.” He continued, 

”We talked about this before. You have your perception of 

things I have mine.” 

While I have seen an increase in the use of the 10 arenas 

starting on 10/26, my recommendation is that [respondent] 

post a visual of ELA and Social Studies rubrics for students 

to reference. [Respondent] has posters around the room 

that are teacher centered. He should review and post what 

an exemplar prompt looks like and display it during class or 

on the wall. I also suggest he change his rubric to be more 

24 

closely linked to the San Jose Unified rubric. For example to 

get a 10 on a Social Studies prompt, [respondent’s] rubric 

states, ”Responds well in relevant manner with examples to 

topic.” What does ”well“ mean? How many examples? San 

Jose Unified sample rubrics provide a more clear definition 

of what ”well“ means and definition the number of 

examples that would be considered exemplar. I also 

recommend, [respondent] plan time to incorporate the 10 

[arenas] until it becomes ”organic“ for him. 

[Respondent] stated, ”I’m not doing full blown essays. It's 

for history.” This statement was regarding the rubric. 

In Standard 1 - Problem 2 [does not use opportunities to 

build interpersonal relationships with students] - 

[respondent] does not use opportunities to build 

interpersonal relationships with students. While 

[respondent] consistently begins each class welcoming his 

students at the door. After this interaction [respondent] 

does not consciously incorporate opportunities to learn 

more about his students. 

There is also no connection between the material, student 

context, and current events. During all lessons [respondent] 

spent approximately 45 minutes covering material. 

[Respondent] stated, “I am going to start incorporating 

warm ups, which was something I did with my students 

25 

prior to COVID to build interpersonal relationships with 

students.” 

I agreed and recommended he use the warm up as a way to 

integrate content with [students’] current life experience. 

In Standard 1 - Problem 3 [provided limited intervention to 

students that are identified as needing additional support] - 

[respondent] does not provide intervention to students that 

are identified as needing additional support. [Respondent] 

tends to teach lessons [to the] whole class. For 33% of the 

lessons observed, students were given the opportunity to 

collaborate while working on in class assignments. 

[Respondent] stated, ”Students are heterogeneously 

grouped. This helps those students that need additional 

support.” I feel [respondent] could take this a step further. 

My recommendation is that [respondent] take advantage of 

opportunities, when students are in collaborative groups, to 

work with students that are in need of more help and 

provide more one on one support or accommodations. For 

example, invite specific students to utilize the sentence 

frames as needed. I also recommend he provide more rigor 

by giving students the opportunity to find their own 

passages during ELA lessons. 

[Respondent] agreed and stated, “I agree with you. When I 

have a substitute the students usually find their own 

26 

passages. As a class, we also tend to find the same 

passages.” 

In Standard 4 - Problem 1 [uses a limited variety of formal 

and informal assessments formats and/or techniques] - 

While still not effective, [respondent] has made the most 

progress in this area as he has made attempts to 

incorporate sentence frames in his lessons and model 

usage. [Respondent] also asks a lot of questions during his 

lesson to check for understanding. [Respondent] has also 

started incorporating opportunities for collaboration. But 

does not provide small group opportunities for 

intervention. While he has started incorporating these 

strategies he does not provide students with consistent 

feedback, acknowledgement, or praise. 

[Respondent] stated, ”I don't know what you want. Have 

you looked at all on Canvas?” . . . .  

My recommendation is that [respondent] will provide all 

students with verbal or written detailed feedback that 

support each student mastering the learning objective. 

In Standard 4 - Problem 2 [does not analyze and use data 

to adapt instruction or lesson plans after [a]ssessments] - 

[respondent] plans his lessons based on the scope and 

sequence. He does not reteach information based on 

student formal or informal assessments. For example. On 

27 

November 10th, [respondent] gave a Chapter 7 quiz the 

average score on the quiz was 61%. While he does offer 

regrades, he does not reteach content. He moved on to the 

next topic. 

[Respondent] stated, ”I think you made an assumption here 

as you are not here to see the next lesson or two. This is 

clearly an assumption and not fact.” 

My recommendation is that [respondent] use the data from 

his assessments to determine which objective he will 

reteach. [Respondent] also has an objective posted for 

multiple days thus giving me the impression that he is 

posting a standard versus an objective. Thus possibly 

making it difficult for him to determine the skills or content 

he will reteach. Therefore I also suggesting he post daily 

objectives with student outcomes versus the unit standard. 

Thus he can utilize the results of his informal/formal 

assessments to determine what he will teach the following 

day. 

[Respondent], ”I don’t necessarily have the same objective. 

In History today it was what it is and tomorrow it will be 

something different. In Language Arts it may be [the] same. 

The outcome I do not feel it will be explicitly expressed on 

the board.” 

28 

77. 

At hearing, Reghitto reported that respondent did not seem receptive to 

her feedback, mostly getting defensive or “upset.” 

78.  On December 16, 2021, Reghitto, Hafner, and Billings attended a support 

plan meeting with respondent and issued a revised Support Plan Meeting Outcome 

document. Respondent refused to sign this document. 

February 18, 2022, Evaluation Report by Reghitto 

79.  During the second round of TAP, Reghitto conducted six full-lesson 

observations (January 12 [two classes], 19, and 27 and February 10 [two classes], 2022) 

of respondent, despite the fact that he was absent nine school days in January and 

February of 2022. Reghitto met with respondent via teleconference at the end of most 

weeks to provide feedback and discuss his teaching. 

80. 

Reghitto issued an evaluation report of respondent dated February 18, 

2022. She reported an overall rating of Does Not Meet Standard. She rated respondent 

as Does Not Meet Standard on both Standard I and IV. Under Standards I and IV, 

Reghitto made the same claims as in her previous evaluation report, except that for 

the second claim, she acknowledged that respondent had improved by using “daily 

warmups to provide opportunities to build interpersonal relationships with students,” 

but also reported that “he does not provide consistent opportunities for the rest of 

class.” She again recommended that he plan one time during each lesson to “build 

interpersonal relationships until it becomes ‘organic’ for him.” 

81. 

In her evaluation and testimony at hearing Reghitto reported that 

respondent also showed improvement in calling on students and acknowledging and 

clarifying answers, but opined that he “still needs to focus on giving help, changing 

attitude toward errors, feedback according to criteria, and tenacity when students do 

29 

not meet expectation.” She and respondent “had a discussion around improving in 

these areas on January 26, 2022,” but reports that “due to his absences and lack of 

evidence, I was unable to see growth” in this area. 

82. 

Reghitto reported that respondent still provided limited intervention to 

students identified as needing additional support. Specifically, she reports that when 

students were given the opportunity to collaborate, respondent never provided 

individualized support or attention. She reports that from February 8 through 11, 2022, 

respondent identified 16 students to whom he was providing additional support, but 

of 22 students receiving failing grades, only 6 received additional support from 

respondent. 

83. 

Reghitto also reported that respondent’s performance under the first 

claim under Standard IV (uses a limited variety of formal and informal assessments 

formats and/or techniques) further regressed, in that he stopped incorporating 

sentence frames into his lessons and “model usage.” She credited him with starting to 

“acknowledge and praise student answers.” 

84. 

Under the second claim under Standard IV (does not analyze and use 

data to adapt instruction or lesson plans after assessments), Reghitto reported that 

respondent regularly posted a goal for three to five classes, but that this goal was 

more of a standard than an objective because it was not updated or changed and 

therefore he was not incorporating data in determining what skills or content he 

should reteach to students. 

85. 

Respondent refused to meet with Reghitto to discuss her February 18, 

2022, evaluation report, or to submit comments on or sign the report. 

30 

April 29, 2022, Evaluation Report by Reghitto 

86.  During the third round of TAP, Reghitto conducted five full-lesson 

observations on March 15, 22, and 28 and April 22 (two classes), 2022. Respondent 

was absent 11 school days during this evaluation period. 

87. 

Reghitto met with respondent via teleconference at the end of most 

weeks to provide feedback and discuss his teaching. 

88. 

Reghitto issued an evaluation report of respondent dated April 29, 2022. 

She again reported an overall rating of Does Not Meet Standard and ratings of 

respondent as Does Not Meet Standard on both Standard I and IV. Under Standards I 

and IV, Reghitto made the same claims as in her previous evaluation report. 

89. 

Reghitto reported that respondent’s performance regarding taking 

responsibility for academic growth and achievement of all students declined in this 

evaluation period, in particular a decline in his use of the 10 Arenas, specifically 

grouping (temporarily putting students together in small groups for the purpose of 

learning a specific skill or achieving a specific learning goal). Reghitto reported that 

she did not observe respondent use grouping during any of the observation period, 

and that respondent was resistant to using this arena. She also reported a decline in 

respondent’s giving help, and changing attitudes towards errors. 

90. 

Regarding building interpersonal relationships with students, Reghitto 

again credited respondent in this area for his daily warmups, but again reported that 

respondent did nothing more to build interpersonal relationships during the rest of 

each class. At hearing, Reghitto reported that respondent never told her that students’ 

wearing of face masks was an obstacle to building interpersonal relationships with 

them. 

31 

91. 

Reghitto reported that respondent did not provide intervention to 

students that are identified as needing additional support in any of the classes she 

observed. 

92. 

Under Standard IV, regarding respondent’s use of a limited variety of 

formal and informal assessments formats and/or techniques, Reghitto credited him for 

incorporating sentence frames and modeling usage in one lesson and acknowledging 

and praising student answers, she nonetheless found him deficient in this area for 

failing to provide clear feedback to students. 

93. 

Under the second claim under Standard IV (does not analyze and use 

data to adapt instruction or lesson plans after assessments), Reghitto again reported 

that respondent regularly posted a goal for three to five classes, but that this goal was 

more of a standard than an objective because it was not updated or changed and 

therefore he was not incorporating data in determining what skills or content he 

should reteach to students. Reghitto also cited an instance where respondent simply 

played a video and did not show his students how to do an assignment. She reports 

that 59 percent of respondent’s class received an F on the assignment. 

94. 

Reghitto expressly cited respondent’s numerous absences as a factor in 

multiple categories of this evaluation. Essentially, she reported that his absences made 

it difficult for him to show progress, or in some cases resulted in a regression, in his 

teaching performance. 

2021–22 EVALUATIONS BY HAFFNER 

95.  Hafner evaluated respondent in her role as a CT during the 2021–22 

school year. She did not consult with Reghitto during this process except to schedule 

one joint observation in each round of evaluation. 

32 

96.  Hafner is the assistant principal of Franklin High School in Seattle, 

Washington. For the eight years prior to July 2022, she worked for the District as a CT 

and as an in-district trainer on the District’s evaluation system. Prior to that Hafner 

taught middle school English and history for the District. For the three years prior to 

that she was a teacher in Phoenix, Arizona. Hafner holds a California K-8 multiple 

subject teaching credential, with a certification in elementary education and an art and 

reading specialist supplement. In addition to her job as assistant principal in Seattle, 

she currently leads online training for the District on a short-term contract. 

97.  Hafner’s understanding is that respondent asked for the CT with the most 

similar experience and she believes that is why she was assigned to evaluate him 

because of her experience teaching middle school English and history for the District. 

November 28, 2021, Evaluation Report by Haffner 

98.  During the first round of TAP, Hafner conducted four full-lesson 

observations (October 13 and November 2, 15, and 23, 2021) and one drop-in 

observation (on October 25, 2021) of respondent, and regularly met and 

communicated with him following each observation. She also attempted to observe 

respondent’s teaching on four other dates, but he was absent. 

99.  Hafner issued an evaluation report dated November 28, 2021. Hafner 

reported an overall rating of Does Not Meet Standard. She rated respondent as Does 

Not Meet Standard on both Standard I and IV. 

100.  Under Standard I, Hafner reported that respondent failed to consistently: 

(1) take responsibility for academic growth and achievement of all students; (2) plan 

for and provide “differentiation and scaffolding for students that are identified 

through IEP/504/SST/EL process and/or class data as needing additional support”; and 

33 

(3) build interpersonal relationships with students each class period. Under Standard 

IV, Hafner reported that: (1) respondent “inconsistently uses a variety of informal and 

formal assessment formats and/or techniques at varying depth of knowledge levels 

and in a variety of learning styles to assess students’ mastery of daily objectives tied to 

unit assessments” and (2) respondent analyzes data from informal and formal 

assessments, however, she did not observe him using that data to determine and plan 

for instruction. 

101.  Under Standard I, Hafner observed that respondent primarily called on 

volunteers, except in one class. She reported that when a student answered incorrectly, 

respondent typically moved on to other volunteers until he received the right answer 

instead of working to ensure that each student understood the material. Hafner 

reported that she did not observe respondent attempt to change student attitudes 

towards errors or show tenacity towards student learning. 

102.  Under Standard IV, Hafner observed respondent failing to regularly check 

for student understanding, then improve on this measure for one class period, then 

regress again. She did not observe respondent use a variety of formal assessments or 

“techniques that span and multiple [depth of knowledge] levels and learning styles.” 

Respondent did not provide her with any collected data and she observed multiple 

times that the identified objective for the lesson had not changed since the previous 

class and thus there was not a new learning objective for each class. 

103. 

In her report, Hafner stated that on October 13, 2021, she observed only 

five checks for understanding. Under this statement she wrote four bullet points, each 

with sub-bullets. Each bullet point addresses a topic reviewed by respondent, with 

sub-bullets listing specific questions on the topic, some of which were asked to more 

than one student. On cross examination, Hafner was asked why she claimed to have 

34 

observed only five checks for understanding when Reghitto reported more than 17 

questions from the same period observed. Hafner was unable to explain. Moreover, 

the text of her report states that more than five questions were asked. It was not clear 

from the evidence whether a “check for understanding” is limited to one question. 

104.  At hearing, Hafner reported that respondent, at times seemed receptive 

to her suggestions for improvement, but often expressed that he did not feel he was 

being evaluated fairly, and as the evaluations progressed, he expressed the opinion 

that he did not need to change any aspect of his teaching. She does not recall 

respondent ever explaining to her why he thought he was being treated unfairly. 

105.  Respondent refused to sign this evaluation or the second support 

meeting outcome document. Respondent declined training on the 10 Arenas, stating 

that he did not need it. 

February 14, 2022, Evaluation Report by Haffner 

106.  During the second round of TAP, Hafner conducted four full-lesson 

observations (January 18 and 19, and February 9 and 11, 2022) and one drop-in 

observation (on January 24, 2023) of respondent, and regularly met and 

communicated with him following each observation. She also attempted to observe 

respondent’s teaching on four other dates, but he was absent. 

107.  Hafner issued an evaluation report of respondent dated February 14, 

2022. Hafner again reported an overall rating of Does Not Meet Standard, again rating 

respondent as Does Not Meet Standard on both Standard I and IV. Hafner identified 

the same claims that she identified in the previous evaluation. 

35 

108.  Hafner reported that respondent initially called on more non-volunteers, 

but quickly regressed and did not follow her suggestion to use cards to randomize the 

students questioned. 

109.  Hafner reported that on January 18 and 19, and February 9, 2022, 

respondent “did not plan or incorporate at least one opportunity to learn more about 

his students within the structure of the day.” In Reghitto’s February 18, 2022, 

evaluation report, she noted that on January 19, 2022 (a joint observation period in 

which respondent was showing the class the film 12 Angry Men), respondent asked at 

least five students what it means to be biased. A student answered "I think it means 

against a religion or race." On cross examination, Hafner was asked about this and she 

reported that she did not remember respondent’s question or the students’ responses. 

However, it does not appear that respondent’s question about bias in this context was 

an “opportunity to learn more about his students” and therefore this questioning did 

not impeach the credibility of Hafner’s reports or testimony. 

110.  Hafner observed respondent fail to redirect a student who wrote nothing 

for an assignment and fail to follow up with another student who failed to write 

anything after one prompt to do so. 

111.  Hafner did not observe respondent reteaching during this round of 

evaluation. Hafner explained that reteaching means to teach again in a different way, 

not just repeating prior instruction. Nor did she observe respondent demonstrate 

tenacity towards each student’s learning. 

112.  Respondent offered a “retake” of a test during lunch if a student received 

less than 70 percent. Only 7 of 18 students retook the test, with three others verbally 

36 

committing to do so. Hafner opined that she would expect all 18 students to retake 

the test. 

113.  Hafner reported an incident on January 18, 2022, in which she observed 

that one of respondent’s students had been sitting by herself on the side of the room, 

facing a window, with her back to the rest of the class. This had been the student’s 

assigned seat since September 2021. The student reported: “At the beginning of the 

year, I was being disrespectful and by December break I was being more respectful but 

he didn't move me back” and “he low key kind of treats me different from others and 

so I sit over there.” Hafner spoke with respondent about ways to get this student back 

to the rest of the class. He stated: 

The young lady you are talking about, she is demonstrating 

some of the worst behaviors I have ever seen - she’s 

probably #1 or #2 in all the years I’ve been teaching. I think 

I moved her there at the end of September beginning of 

October. It’s not ideal to still have her there but her 

behavior has not improved. Usually she can’t go more than 

a day without being problematic. She causes class wide 

disruptions and impedes teaching from happening; 

profoundly disrespectful. She has cursed me out in Spanish, 

I've had a conference with parents, divorced home; chaotic 

situation with not a lot of stability. We are in a different 

situation at Muir now. [W]e had [an] RC [resource 

counselor] when she was a 6th grader. Some of our more 

problematic 8th graders need a place where they can have 

a time out. We don’t have that anymore and the admin has 

37 

not provided any good alternatives and we need to deal 

with it in the classroom. She’s been my #1 challenge this 

year. Again the moving to the side has been: you earn it 

through good behavior to come back and she doesn’t do it. 

I’ve told her I need a sustained period of time, give me 10 

days and she can’t go 3. It’s a pretty extreme situation with 

her. In 18 years I haven’t had a worse student. I hope she’s 

paying attention to the lessons about her rights because 

she will have to invoke them someday - she has a mouth on 

her that is going to get her in trouble. A lot of conflict in 

life. I feel sorry for her and would like to help her but when 

someone is that venomous in your efforts to help and try to 

reach them. We don’t even have any counselors. I would 

have had her referred to within the first week they cut the 

position and she’s at Lincoln HS and she used to work 

wonders with people like this. A special little group for 

individuals like this we don’t offer the service. 

114.  At hearing, Hafner reported that respondent’s use of the word 

“venomous” gave her “pause, as a fellow educator.” 

115.  Hafner recommended to respondent that he speak to his mentor and 

email this student’s other teachers to identify strategies that have been found that are 

working. Respondent responded, “I understand what you’re saying but I’m hesitant to 

reward behavior; she really stirs the crap in the class. I’ve never seen anything quite 

like that.” 

38 

116.  Hafner also observed on February 9, 2021, a male student sitting facing 

the back of class, whom Hafner previously observed sitting this way in November 

2021. She asked respondent what had worked or not worked with this student and he 

reported:  

Nothing’s worked. Again I’m working on doing the 6th 

grade new seating charts and will bring him back over but 

not immediately next to other people but I want to 

moderately get him in the right direction. I want to stick a 

carrot out there to see if I can light a fire that will somehow 

. . . he’s just one of those that’s dug in his heels. Within the 

next week. I’m caught up on my grading for the moment 

and should be able to do 6th grade seating charts and get 

that implemented hopefully by mid-week next week. 

117.  During a debrief on February 10, 2022, respondent reported to Hafner 

regarding the female student discussed in Factual Findings 113 through 115:  

I emailed other teachers, almost all got back to me except 

PE and one other. She has all female teachers except for me 

and gets along better with them. [They] understood my 

challenges with her and were sympathetic - gave me some 

suggestions. I created a new seating chart for 8th grade 

Social Studies when I got back on Tuesday and I 

incorporated her back with the rest and let her know we’re 

trying it and reminded her of the rules and she’s three days 

in and she’s compliant. Still not the most pleasant person 

39 

but giving her a shot at redemption and again I’m mindful 

of what my colleagues said and will take it from there. 

118. 

In three observations, respondent did not assess students at the end of 

the class to identify whether 80 percent had mastered the learning objective. In five 

observations, respondent did not give a formal assessment with a variety of formats or 

techniques that spanned multiple depths of knowledge. Respondent consistently 

checked for understanding less often than the goal of once per every 10 minutes. 

Hafner did not see any evidence that respondent analyzed data to plan for instruction. 

Hafner reports that respondent’s performance in the second round of observation was 

very similar to the first round of evaluation and did not meet standard. 

April 26, 2022, Evaluation Report by Haffner 

119.  During the third round of TAP, Hafner conducted five full-lesson 

observations (March 17 and 28, and April 7, 18, and 21, 2022) and no drop-in 

observations of respondent, and regularly met and communicated with him following 

each observation. She also attempted to observe respondent’s teaching on three other 

dates, but he was absent. 

120.  Hafner issued an evaluation report of respondent dated April 26, 2022. 

Hafner again reported an overall rating of Does Not Meet Standard, again rating 

respondent as Does Not Meet Standard on both Standard I and IV. Hafner again 

identified the same claims that she identified in the previous evaluations. 

121.  Hafner reported that respondent showed improvement in taking 

responsibility for academic growth and achievement of all students, by calling on more 

non-volunteers and coming back to and providing positive encouragement to 

students who answered questions incorrectly. However, she reported that even this 

40 

progress was inconsistent as he did not provide support to students in some classes, 

did not provide a criteria for success in four classes observed, did not demonstrate 

positive reframing or tenacity. 

122.  Hafner reported that respondent was inconsistent in planning to build 

interpersonal relationships in lessons and connecting material to student context. On 

three dates, she did not observe clear feedback or sentence frames. In four of the five 

classes she observed, respondent did not assess the students at the end of class to 

determine whether 80 percent had mastered the lesson. In four of the five classes, 

respondent did not use a variety of assessment formats, or questions of varied depth 

of knowledge. Respondent again checked for understanding less than once per 10 

minutes of class time. Hafner did not observe evidence that instruction was 

consistently modified to meet the needs of students. 

123.  At hearing, Hafner reported that respondent never told her that he was 

incorporating analyzed data into his lesson plans. 

2021–22 MENTORING BY BILLINGS 

124.  Sheila Billings holds a multisubject teaching credential and teaches sixth 

grade language arts at a District middle school. She has worked in the District for 12 

years and previously also taught middle school social studies classes. Prior to her 

current position, she worked as an instructional coach at various middle schools in the 

District, including John Muir. She received training for this position each year and her 

duties included supporting teachers and working with new teachers. She has never 

been an evaluator. 

125.  Billings was respondent’s TAP Mentor for the 2021–22 school year. She 

observed respondent’s teaching and discussed her observations with him, as well as 

41 

those of the evaluators. Billings reports that she had a positive rapport with 

respondent and saw that he attempted to implement some of her suggested 

strategies. However, she reported that in the first round of TAP respondent was 

meeting only some of the goals of the program. For example, she observed that he 

still primarily called on volunteers to answer questions. Billings reported that by the 

end of round two, she did not observe significant improvement because respondent 

was still only willing to implement some of her coaching strategies. Billings reported 

that she observed consistent effort from respondent in only some of the identified 

areas of concern. Billings reported essentially the same observations in the third and 

final round of TAP. She reported that respondent always listened to her suggestions 

but did not always implement them. Billings reports that respondent was challenged 

by students who did not show effort in their learning. 

Other District Evidence 

126.  There are no allegations or evidence that any parent or student 

complained about respondent’s teaching. The District did not submit evidence that 

respondent’s students performed worse than average on standardized tests, or 

generally received worse grades than similar students taught by other teachers. The 

District did not submit evidence that respondent violated the requirements of any 

student’s IEP or 504 plan. 

Respondent’s Additional Evidence 

127.  Respondent testified at hearing. 

128.  Respondent reports that the first time he ever heard of the 10 Arenas 

was in a 2021 support plan prepared by Amer, but that the 10 Arenas really just 

describes teaching practices that he was familiar with throughout his career. 

42 

129.  Respondent never used a remote learning platform, as a teacher or a 

student, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic school closures. He reports that the District 

did not provide a training on the Canvas system until shortly before the 2020–21 

school year and he only had two and one-half days to load his entire curriculum into 

that system. Respondent experienced many problems with Canvas and reports that it 

had many software bugs and had to be updated routinely. Other history teachers at 

respondent’s school also had difficulties with Canvas. 

130.  The District used WebX to host videoconference classes. However, 

respondent reports that neither students nor teachers were trained on WebX. 

Respondent also reports that many students would log into WebX for a class, but 

never turn on their video or audio, or use the chat feature. He reports that this 

problem got worse throughout the school year as students came to understand that 

the District would not require them to turn on their video or audio. 

131.  Respondent reports that Amer joined John Muir as an administrator in 

the 2019–20 school year and one of her first actions was to remove him from the 

Positive Behavioral Intervention Support team, of which he had been the lead for the 

previous two years. He believes that Amer wanted to replace him with another person, 

“her own type.” 

132.  Respondent reports that for this reason, he was apprehensive when Amer 

was assigned to evaluate him for the 2020–21 school year. But he was “floored” when 

Amer first told him he was failing the evaluation. Respondent understood that the 

evaluation process was supposed to be collaborative, to help teachers improve their 

teaching and best serve students. He feels that he was making honest, dedicated 

efforts to learn the remote learning platforms and that it was unfair for Amer to hold 

him to the same teaching standard as if classes were being held normally in person. 

43 

133.  Respondent admits that he refused to use his video or audio in a debrief 

videoconference meeting with Amer and would only respond to her via the chat 

feature. He is unapologetic for this conduct and appears to feel that this was a 

reasonable way for him to show Amer the challenges he was facing as a teacher at that 

time. 

134.  Respondent opines that an experienced evaluator would have provided 

him “specific concrete examples” and “honest discourse” regarding areas that needed 

improvement, but with Amer, “everything was vague” and generic. Respondent reports 

that instead of providing specific feedback, Amer told him to consult with the “site 

coach,” but respondent told Amer that it was “well documented” that the site coach 

did not “like him.” 

135.  Respondent feels like he was honest with Amer in the debriefing 

conversations, but she used that candor against him. 

136.  Respondent reports that he often called on a small group of volunteers 

because those were the only students who would participate. The other students 

“wouldn’t work with him.” 

137.  Regarding his statement to Amer that about unresponsive students “If 

that is the path they've chosen, I don't keep pushing it . . . I don't have an answer for 

the unresponsive ones but I can try with the others,” respondent opines that pushing 

for students to be more responsive “borders on harassment.” His view is that 

eighth-graders “have the responsibility to show up to class.” 

138.  Regarding a student that spoke almost no English, at hearing respondent 

echoed his statements to Amer that he alerted the administration that the student was 

44 

“misplaced” in his class, but they did not transfer the student. Respondent did not 

report any further efforts to help this student. 

139.  Respondent reports that he was trying to build interpersonal 

relationships with his students, but it was challenging during remote learning. He 

defends his refusal to set regular office hours as “not contractually required” and 

providing greater flexibility for students. He also reports that he told students they 

could “linger after class ended” to speak with him and numerous students did just that. 

140.  Respondent reports that many of the accommodations afforded to IEP 

and 504 students were inapplicable in the remote learning environment, but he always 

tries to follow those plans and understands that he could be personally liable if he 

does not. 

141.  Regarding a lack of variety in formal assessments, respondent reports 

that because of bugs in the Canvas software, he was unable to use short answer or 

essay questions and was forced to rely on multiple choice or true/false questions 

throughout the 2020–21 school year. He explained that his 29 formal assessments 

sounds like “a lot,” but included 22 “mini quizzes” of 10 questions each. 

142.  Regarding Amer’s criticism that respondent only provided a model with 

three of ten slides for an assignment involving ranking the first seven presidents, 

respondent stated that he disagrees with this criticism; one can “twist data however 

you want” and he believes that was what Amer was doing, and “you don’t hand kids all 

the answers, she hasn’t taught this doesn’t know what she’s talking about.” 

143.  Regarding Amer’s claim that he was not able to explain, in an April 23, 

2021, debrief session, how he planned purposeful differentiation and lesson planning 

to meet the needs of ESL, IEP and 504 students, respondent contends this was a 

45 

“complete fabrication” and that he provided sentence frames and graphic organizers, 

coordinated with the Special Education caseload managers, and “did everything 

possible to help those students be successful.” 

144.  Respondent suggests that Amer’s report that he utilized no or few checks 

for understanding was a result of her observing less than the full class period, pointing 

out that a “full” observation is defined as 45 minutes but classes during the 2020–21 

school year were 97 minutes long. 

145.  Regarding his March 23, 2021, comment “Yes—great 4th grade” when a 

student answered a question incorrectly, respondent reports that the main character in 

the novel the class was reading was in the fourth grade. 

146.  Respondent reports that he thinks that he refused to meet with Amer to 

discuss his Winter Evaluation Report because she gave him short notice and he was 

unavailable. 

147.  Regarding Jahrman’s claims that respondent does not take responsibility 

for the academic growth and achievement of all students, instead taking the approach: 

“If they didn’t learn it, it’s their fault,” respondent opines that starting with such a claim 

is “incredibly unfair” to respondent because it “sets a mindset of negativity.” He also 

opines that the claim seems to have been taken from Amer’s evaluation, suggesting 

collusion between the evaluators. Respondent also claims that Jahrman’s reports of 

respondent’s statement were out of context, that Jahrman did not understand remote 

teaching because he had not been a regular teacher for five years and had taught high 

school, not middle school. Respondent multiple times opined that Jahrman tried to 

“twist” positives of respondent’s teaching into negatives. 

46 

148.  Respondent reports that when he was placed into TAP after the first year 

of evaluations, he was “terrified, because nobody passes TAP.” 

149.  Respondent reports that Hafner was dressed very inappropriately during 

her first observation and he initially did not think she could be a teacher. However, he 

described his interactions with her as respectful and reports that she was very 

personable and “seemed” at times very genuine. 

150.  Regarding Hafner’s criticism that respondent did not return to students 

who answered questions incorrectly, respondent claims that Hafner took the 

information out of context and “twisted it for her purposes.” He claims that he had 

divided the class in half and had a competition in answering questions with the 

winning side getting pencils as a prize. He did not explain why he did not tell Hafner 

this or report this in his evaluation in the space provided for comments. 

151.  Respondent testified that he submitted a written response to his initial 

evaluation in the “false hope” that the TQP “might actually review the material,” but he 

believes the speed of their decision when he applied for a new evaluator shows that 

the panel was “rubber-stamping” all of the evaluations. Respondent did not produce 

any evidence to corroborate his claim that he submitted a document to the TQP. 

152.  When asked about his understanding of Hafner’s report that under the 

seventh Arena, “Positive Framing for Reteaching,” she did not observe reteaching, 

respondent testified that per Hafner’s testimony he believes that means that he must 

reteach only if a certain number of students failed an assessment. 

153.  Regarding the claims that he did not consistently plan and use 

opportunities to build interpersonal relationships with students each class period, 

respondent reports that he is “confounded” by all four evaluators and considers these 

47 

to be “ridiculous statements.” He rhetorically asks “what are they watching?” and 

reports that he has conversations with students “all the time,” including before, during, 

and after class, and engages in small talk. He opines that the evaluators were ”not 

doing their job thoroughly, because if they were, I pass.” 

154.  Regarding the claim that he “inconsistently plans for and provides 

differentiation and scaffolding for students that are identified through IEP/504/SST/EL 

process and/or class data as needing additional support,” respondent reports that 

Hafner never asked to see his students’ IEP’s or other support plans and therefore 

“can’t use the number of people identified as such,” because a “504” might be “an 

allergy” and an IEP can simply be that a student “needs to sit in front.” Respondent did 

not explain why he did not tell this to Hafner and the other evaluators. 

155.  Regarding the lower depth of knowledge of questions respondent asked 

in class, he reports that students can demonstrate a deeper knowledge in response to 

discussion prompts or essay questions on tests, but quick checks for understanding in 

class need to be lower-level questions. 

156.  Regarding the claim that respondent was not observed to use 

assessment data to “determine and plan for instruction,” he reports that he uses a 

template that he has had “for decades,” but he revises and “adds things” to it. He 

emphasizes that the evaluators never reviewed his lesson plans and only observed a 

few hours of his teaching. He reports that he reflects each day about what he needs to 

adjust for the next class, and claims that he “looks at assessments” to see if he needs 

to “make a readjustment.” He does not explain why, if true, he did not provide 

examples of this practice to the evaluators. 

48 

157.  Regarding students who receive failing grades on assignments, 

respondent reports that the District implemented a new grading system in the 2021–

22 school year, under which a student never receives less than 50 percent, even if 

absent. Respondent reports that students “know they need to complete” the 

assignment to get more points and he might remind them if they don’t make up the 

assignment, remind them that “life did go on when you weren’t here,” and that all the 

assignments are available to the students in Canvas. 

158.  Regarding not responding to students’ incorrect answers, respondent 

reports that there is a technique where a teacher wants several students to answer 

before revealing the correct answer, to allow the students to “engage and think in 

depth,” but other than that, his common practice is to respond to the student’s 

answer. He reports that circling back to the student “depends on context” and “if the 

student is paying attention,” then they heard the correct answer. 

159.  Regarding the female student who respondent seated on the side of the 

room, facing a window for several months, he reports that she was the most “poorly 

behaved” student he ever had, and was frequently suspended by the school for 

fighting outside the classroom and for possessing drug paraphernalia. He reports that 

he initially tried to talk to her alone and emphasize expectations, but she yelled at him 

“every time we had an issue” and she had “no empathy.” He reports that he attempted 

to communicate with her parents, but they were divorced, had poor availability, and he 

had to communicate with them via email. Respondent reports that, because of 

Hafner’s comments, he felt “compelled” to allow the student to move back into the 

“larger body” of students, even though she “didn’t earn” it. Respondent appeared very 

unhappy about this. 

49 

160.  Respondent reports that he was professional and polite to Reghitto, even 

though she “demonstrated concerns regarding her intrinsic biases against me.” He 

reports that Reghitto told him she noticed in a pre-evaluation observation from the 

first couple of days of the school year, that “things were unsettled,” and he believes 

that she made up her mind “that’s who he was and nothing could change her mind.” 

He feels Reghitto was irritated because she made several unannounced visits from the 

District offices to respondent’s classroom on dates that he was absent due to his back 

problems. Respondent reports that, during observations, Reghitto routinely “stepped 

out of the classroom to attend to other business” for “several minutes or longer.” 

Reghitto denies this contention. 

161.  Respondent testified that he did not know that he could request  another 

evaluator to replace Reghitto. However, he admits that the August 17, 2021, TAP 

Meeting Notes he received states that he could request an alternate administrator 

evaluator and an alternate CT evaluator. 

162.  Regarding Reghitto’s claim that respondent in one class spoke for 45 

minutes with no verbal interaction relating to the 10 Arenas, and conceded this 

afterwards, he reports that he conceded that he spoke too long “according to their 

observation criteria,” but he disagreed because he had a plan to “frontload” 

information on the origin of English rights, and he had years of experience and 

“time-tested success.” 

163.  Respondent believes that Reghitto is mistaken in her reports that he did 

not call on students by name on October 13, 2021. He attributes this mistake to her 

sitting in the back of the classroom and the use of masks, but also testified “maybe I 

didn’t use their name” and used a physical cue instead. He reports that he does not 

understand the concern. 

50 

164.  Respondent concedes that he is “not too methodical” about keeping 

track of which students answered questions and reports that he tries to “stay organic” 

and “keep a lively pace.” 

165.  Regarding the special education student who respondent simply told to 

write more, respondent reports this student had difficulty writing by hand and a habit 

of writing very little, but respondent needed him to write more to confirm he was 

understanding the material. 

166. 

In response to Reghitto’s criticism that he did not “give any verbal 

interactions as it relates to the 10 Arenas for the rest of the period,” respondent 

reports that “it looks like” he was giving a test that day and he maintains a quiet 

environment for tests, and provides an assignment for students to complete after the 

test, and if students have questions, they can just raise their hands and he will come to 

their desk to answer without disturbing other students. 

167.  Regarding providing accommodations to students, respondent reports 

that this sometimes makes a student feel “singled out,” so he gives accommodations 

to all the students, and Reghitto did not understand that slide notes he provided were 

an accommodation. He reports that he tries to pay attention to the plan for each 

student with a plan, and it is common for the plan to include proximity to the teacher, 

and he watches and “re-guides” if a student is “drifting,” for example tapping the 

student’s desk to refocus. 

168.  Regarding not using formal or informal assessments on October 11, 

2021, respondent reports that he was providing brand new information and “now’s not 

the time” for such assessments. He opines that the evaluation criteria are unreasonable 

51 

because students would “not learn any material” if he did that. He believes that he 

gives the same amount of assessments as any other teacher. 

169.  Regarding Reghitto’s claim that respondent did not use data to adapt his 

instruction, he reports that he believes that she wanted him to use a “data protocol,” 

but he had not been trained on that and Amer initially offered, but later refused, to 

provide him this training. Respondent reports that he nevertheless looked at tests to 

see if students “got something” and followed up when they did not. 

170.  Regarding Reghitto’s reports that she did not observe respondent follow 

up with students who did not complete the written assignment, respondent reports 

that he “imagines” Reghitto was calculating by the number of students who finished 

by the end of the class period, but she was “lazy” and did not go back to see if the 

students submitted the assignment later, because she was “looking for data to fit her 

narrative, not for accuracy.” Respondent also reports that there were excessive 

absences in the 2021–22 school year because the District had a different system 

“coming out of COVID” and there was no longer a counselor on campus to address 

“truants.” 

171.  Respondent points to Reghitto’s report that on April 22, 2022, she did 

not observe evidence of him providing feedback during “the” lesson, and her separate 

report on another page that in two class periods combined he called on no more than 

10 students, and claims these reports are contradictory. He does not explain how 

asking students questions contradicts the claim that he did not provide feedback. 

172.  Respondent describes Billings as a “master teacher.” He reports that she 

“helped,” and he tried to implement her suggestions. 

52 

173.  Respondent reports that he provides the same formal assessments as 

other teachers and collaborated with the history chair at John Muir for a dozen years 

on assessments. Respondent reports that this teacher told him that he had not 

changed his assessments. 

174.  Respondent refused to sign the evaluations because he did not agree 

with them. 

175. 

In August 2021 emails to Bejarano, respondent claimed that his 2020–21 

evaluations were “poisoned” by former principals of John Muir due to an adversarial 

relationship with him because he advocated for colleagues in his role as a union 

representative. He claimed that they created a hostile environment for him and had 

previously attempted to collude with assistant principals to negatively impact his 

evaluations. He claimed that “because I am conservative, these snowflakes took their 

displeasure out on me as a result of the national election of 2016.” He also claimed 

that the environment at John Muir had “become increasingly hostile against white, 

male, heterosexual, and conservative teachers,” and there was a systematic effort to 

“rid this campus” of such teachers. At hearing, respondent reported that he had 

worked with the union to address these claims but never filed a formal complaint. 

176.  Also in respondent’s August 2021 emails to Bejarano, he expressed 

concern about the evaluation process because the administrative members of the TQP 

“were held secret from me last year and I presume you won’t reveal them this year 

either.” At hearing, respondent admitted that the District’s Teacher Evaluation System 

Handbook lists all of the TQP members on the second page. The handbook is routinely 

distributed to all teachers each year. 

53 

177.  At hearing, respondent did not acknowledge any flaws in his teaching or 

indicate any intention or desire to improve his teaching in any of the areas the 

evaluators identified as deficient. 

Ultimate Findings 

UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE 

178.  The District evaluated respondent. Its evaluations included 

recommendations as to areas of improvement in respondent’s performance. It notified 

respondent that he was not performing his teaching duties in a satisfactory manner 

according to the District’s standards and described his unsatisfactory performance. 

Respondent was enrolled in the TAP and assigned a mentor. The District thereafter 

conferred with respondent and made specific recommendations as to areas of 

improvement in his performance. It endeavored to assist respondent in his 

performance. 

179.  Before 2020, respondent never had received a substandard evaluation. 

His testimony suggests that some of the specific criticisms of the evaluators were 

inaccurate. The evaluators did not always observe full class periods and otherwise may 

have lacked context for certain observations. Respondent was, especially during the 

2020–21 school year, dealing with unique challenges related to the COVID-19 

pandemic and adjusting to remote learning. No students or parents complained about 

his teaching. 

180.  However, four separate evaluators, each with sufficient experience and 

training, concluded in each of nine separate evaluations that respondent did not meet 

either of the standards being evaluated and overall did not meet the District’s 

standards for teaching. All of the evaluators testified at hearing and their testimony 

54 

was credible and consistent with the documentary evidence. There is no evidence in 

the record to support respondent’s testimony and written statements alleging a 

“systematic effort” to dismiss him on the basis of his race, gender, sexual orientation, 

or political beliefs. Moreover, two of the evaluators were consulting teachers not 

significantly connected to respondent’s school. Billings, whom respondent described 

favorably, reported that respondent only attempted to implement some of her 

suggested strategies; was meeting only some of the goals of the program in the first 

round of TAP; and she did not observe significant improvement thereafter. Like all four 

of the evaluators, she observed that respondent was challenged by students who did 

not show effort in their learning. Respondent’s attitude towards certain students was 

antithetical to the District’s philosophy that every student be challenged to achieve to 

the student’s “fullest potential.” Respondent does not acknowledge any problem with 

his teaching and shows no inclination to improve his performance. The District 

established by a preponderance of the evidence that, notwithstanding the assistance 

and opportunities it provided to respondent to correct his faults and address the 

grounds for the unsatisfactory performance charges against him, respondent did not 

improve his performance to a satisfactory level. Respondent’s teaching performance 

was unsatisfactory and remained unsatisfactory throughout the 2020–21 and 2021–22 

school years. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS 

181.  Respondent’s conduct towards Amer and Bejarano during his evaluations 

was at times unprofessional. However, no parent or student complained about 

respondent and no actual harm to any student or teacher was shown. Respondent’s 

conduct was recent, but there were extenuating circumstances, including the stresses 

and challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic and adapting to remote learning. 

55 

Respondent exhibited a poor attitude during the evaluation process, but not towards 

his students and he evidenced some thoughtfulness and effort in his approach to 

teaching. Respondent is not remorseful about his unprofessional conduct, but that 

conduct was limited to the evaluation process and there is no significant evidence it 

would otherwise recur. 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF RULES 

182.  Respondent received only “Does Not Meet Standard” evaluations in the 

2020–21 and 2021–22 school years. He attempted to implement only some of the 

feedback and coaching he received. He was unprofessional and insubordinate in the 

November 2020 videoconference with Amer when he refused to turn on his video or 

audio. He refused to sign most or all of the evaluations because he did not agree with 

them, despite the fact that they expressly indicated that his signature did not 

constitute any such agreement, only that he read and reviewed the final evaluation 

report. However, respondent generally cooperated with the evaluation process. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

The District bears the burden to prove cause to dismiss respondent. The 

standard of proof is a preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) The Commission 

has considered all testimonial and documentary evidence, and weighed all witnesses’ 

credibility, in making the factual findings above. These findings reflect a 

preponderance of the evidence. 

56 

Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction 

2. 

Respondent moves to dismiss this proceeding for lack of jurisdiction, 

based on untimely service under Education Code section 44936, subdivision (b).1 The 

District opposes. 

3. 

Section 44936 states in relevant part: 

(a) The notice of dismissal or suspension in a proceeding 

initiated pursuant to Section 44934 or 44934.1 may be 

given at any time of year. 

(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the notice of dismissal 

or suspension in a proceeding involving only charges of 

unsatisfactory performance initiated pursuant to Section 

44934 shall only be given during the instructional year of 

the schoolsite where the employee is physically employed. 

However, a notice of dismissal or suspension in a 

proceeding involving charges of unsatisfactory performance 

may be initiated pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision 

(b) of Section 44938. 

4. 

Respondent was not served with the District’s notice of its intention to 

dismiss him and a copy of the statement of charges until after the instructional year of 

the school where he is physically employed. (Factual Finding 5.) However, in addition 

to charges of unsatisfactory performance, the District also pled charges of evident 

1 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless stated otherwise. 

57 

 
unfitness for service; and persistent refusal to follow Board policies and regulations, 

state laws, and other rules governing his employment. (Factual Finding 6.) Because this 

proceeding is not one “involving only charges of unsatisfactory performance,” section 

44936, subdivision (b)’s requirement of service during the instructional year would not 

appear to be applicable. 

5. 

Nevertheless, respondent argues that, based on both the allegations and 

the evidence at hearing, the evident unfitness and persistent refusal allegations fail as 

a matter of law. Respondent argues that the District pled those allegations only to 

evade the subdivision (b) deadline, and that this commission lacks jurisdiction to hear 

the unsatisfactory performance charges. 

6. 

Respondent admits that there is no appellate opinion directly addressing 

this issue, but cites Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(Board of Education) (1976) 61 Cal.App.3d 664, in support of his contention. In Board 

of Education, the court considered a notice of dismissal and statement of charges 

against a teacher alleging both immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service. (Id. 

at p. 666.) At that time, the Education Code provided that a notice of dismissal “shall 

not be given between May 15 and September 15 in any year.” (Id. at p. 667.) However, 

a notice of suspension and intention to dismiss was permitted at any time on the basis 

of immoral conduct. (Id. at p. 668.) In Board of Education, the commission found the 

teacher was not guilty of immoral conduct and decided that it did not have jurisdiction 

to consider the charge of evident unfitness for service because notice of that charge 

was not given until after the May 15 deadline. (Id. at p. 667.) The superior court 

granted a writ of mandate, holding that the commission should have considered the 

evident unfitness charge. (Ibid.) The appellate court disagreed, holding that simply 

adding a charge that was not untimely did not allow the school board to avoid the 

58 

general service deadline applicable to the evident unfitness charge. (Id. at 669.) The 

court explained: 

Although the above issue is one of first impression, we are 

guided by analogous case law. In Livermore Valley Joint 

Unified Sch. District v. Feinberg (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 920, 

112 Cal.Rptr. 923, a loophole in the statutory language 

would have allowed the school district to avoid giving 90 

days notice, as required by section 13407, to an errant 

teacher if the charge was brought under section 13403.5 

instead of section 13403, although the charges under both 

section 13403.5 and section 13403 were, in fact, the same. 

The court stated this ‘. . . would permit astute counsel to 

avoid the notice requirement by labelling a single ground 

for dismissal under one section rather than its identical 

twin. Endorsement of such a triumph of mere form is 

unattractive.’ (At p. 922, 112 Cal.Rptr. at p. 924.) 

Analogously, in the instant case, if we hold as respondent 

would have us, then the Board, whenever it wanted to avoid 

the moratorium provisions of section 13405, would merely 

add a section 13408 charge to the section 13403 charge, 

thus immediately suspending the employee and obtaining a 

hearing at any time of the year in contravention of section 

13405. This ‘triumph of mere form’ would render section 

13405 a nullity. As both sections 13405 and 13410 were 

enacted at the same time, the Legislature could not have 

intended to have the one section so easily nullified. 

59 

(Board of Education, supra, 61 Cal.App.3d at pp. 518-19.) Essentially, the Court held 

that the school board could not evade the filing deadline for one untimely charge by 

alleging another charge that was timely. 

7. 

The subsequent change in the statutory scheme renders Board of 

Education inapposite. It is no longer the general rule that notices of dismissal may only 

be filed at certain times of year. Instead, the general rule now is that such notices may 

be filed at any time. (§ 44936, subd. (a).) The Legislature carved out a narrow exception 

to this new general rule, but that exception expressly applies only to proceedings 

where unsatisfactory performance is the only charge. (Id. at subd. (b).) This exception is 

unambiguous. The Legislature chose to limit the exception based upon the school 

board’s charges, and there is no reason to think that the Legislature was unaware of 

the fact that school boards control the content of their own pleadings.2 Respondent’s 

argument is rejected. This commission has jurisdiction to hear and decide the District’s 

unsatisfactory performance charges against respondent, as well as the evident 

unfitness and persistent refusal charges. 

First Cause for Dismissal (Unsatisfactory Performance) 

8. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), a school 

district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for unsatisfactory performance. 

2 Moreover, in this proceeding, although the District ultimately failed to prove 

that respondent should be dismissed based on the evident unfitness and persistent 

refusal allegations, there was sufficient support for those allegations such that they do 

not appear to be sham pleadings intended solely to evade the deadline of section 

44936, subdivision (b). 

60 

 
9. 

Education Code sections 44660 through 44665 set forth the requirements 

for evaluating certificated employees. Education Code section 44662, in relevant part 

provides: 

(b) The governing board of each school district shall 

evaluate and assess certificated employee performance as it 

reasonably relates to: 

(1) The progress of pupils toward the standards established 

pursuant to subdivision (a) and, if applicable, the state 

adopted academic content standards as measured by state 

adopted criterion referenced assessments. 

(2) The instructional techniques and strategies used by the 

employee. 

(3) The employee’s adherence to curricular objectives. 

(4) The establishment and maintenance of a suitable 

learning environment, within the scope of the employee’s 

responsibilities. 

10. 

Education Code section 44664, in relevant part, provides: 

(b) The evaluation shall include recommendations, if 

necessary, as to areas of improvement in the performance 

of the employee. If an employee is not performing his or 

her duties in a satisfactory manner according to the 

standards prescribed by the governing board, the 

employing authority shall notify the employee in writing of 

61 

that fact and describe the unsatisfactory performance. The 

employing authority shall thereafter confer with the 

employee making specific recommendations as to areas of 

improvement in the employee’s performance and endeavor 

to assist the employee in his or her performance. If any 

permanent certificated employee has received an 

unsatisfactory evaluation, the employing authority shall 

annually evaluate the employee until the employee achieves 

a positive evaluation or is separated from the district. 

11. 

Before a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee 

for unsatisfactory performance, it must comply with Education Code section 44938, 

subdivision (b), which, in relevant part, provides: 

(1) At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, 

the board or its authorized representative has given the 

employee against whom the charge is filed, written notice 

of the unsatisfactory performance, specifying the nature 

thereof with such specific instances of behavior and with 

such particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity 

to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for 

the charge. The written notice shall include the evaluation 

made pursuant to Article 11 (commencing with Section 

44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to the employee. 

12. 

The District evaluated respondent in accordance with Education Code 

sections 44660 through 44665. Its evaluations included recommendations as to areas 

of improvement in respondent’s performance. (Factual Finding 178.) It notified 

62 

respondent that he was not performing his teaching duties in a satisfactory manner 

according to the District’s standards and described his unsatisfactory performance. 

Respondent was enrolled in the TAP and assigned a mentor. (Ibid.) The District 

thereafter conferred with respondent and made specific recommendations as to areas 

of improvement in his performance. (Ibid.) It endeavored to assist respondent in his 

performance. (Ibid.) 

13. 

At least 90 days before it served a notice of intent to dismiss, the District 

gave respondent written notice of his unsatisfactory performance, specifying its nature 

with specific instances of behavior and particularity as to furnish him with an adequate 

opportunity to correct his faults and overcome the grounds for the charges. (Factual 

Finding 3.) 

14. 

Under the District’s standards, respondent’s teaching performance was 

unsatisfactory throughout the evaluation process, despite the District’s efforts to assist 

respondent. (Factual Finding 180.) Cause exists to dismiss him from employment for 

unsatisfactory performance under section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). 

Second Alleged Cause for Dismissal (Evident Unfitness for Service) 

15. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

“evident unfitness for service.” (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6).) Evident unfitness for service 

means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason 

of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 

(Woodland).) This cause for discipline connotes a “fixed character trait, presumably not 

remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (Id. at p. 1465, emphasis in original.) 

63 

Such evident unfitness may exist, for example, when a teacher is repeatedly and 

incurably insubordinate, or is incapable of maintaining cordial, cooperative 

relationships with colleagues. (Id., at pp. 1436-1440.) “‘Unprofessional conduct’ is, as it 

were, often a lesser included form of proscribed behavior within ‘evident unfitness for 

service.’ Thus, conduct constituting ‘evident unfitness for service’ will often constitute 

‘unprofessional conduct.’ But the converse is not true. ‘Evident unfitness for service’ 

requires that unfitness for service be attributable to a defect in temperament – a 

requirement not necessary for a finding of ‘unprofessional conduct.’” (Id. at p. 1445.) 

16. 

The Commission must evaluate “unfitness,” in this context, with reference 

to several criteria, including likelihood and degree of adverse impact on students and 

fellow teachers, proximity or remoteness in time of the relevant conduct, extenuating 

or aggravating circumstances, praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the teacher’s 

motives, and likelihood of recurrence. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 229-230.) In addition, the Commission must evaluate whether the conduct 

demonstrating unfitness “is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Woodland, supra, 2 

Cal.App.4th at p. 1445.) 

17. 

The District did not prove evident unfitness. Respondent’s conduct 

towards Amer and Bejarano during his evaluations was at times unprofessional. 

However, no parent or student complained about respondent and no actual harm to 

any student or teacher was shown. (Factual Finding 181.) Respondent’s conduct was 

recent, but there were extenuating circumstances, including the stresses and 

challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic and adapting to remote learning. (Ibid.) 

Respondent exhibited a poor attitude during the evaluation process, but not towards 

his students and he evidenced some thoughtfulness and effort in his approach to 

teaching. (Ibid.) Respondent is not remorseful about his unprofessional conduct, but 

64 

that conduct was limited to the evaluation process and there is no significant evidence 

it would otherwise recur. (Ibid.) Respondent’s unprofessional conduct was not severe 

or broad enough to constitute evident unfitness. (See Woodland, 2 Cal.App.4th 1429.) 

18. 

The District argues that respondent’s failure to improve his teaching 

performance to an acceptable level shows a permanent defect in character. However, 

respondent’s teaching performance does not constitute the type of defect that would 

support an evident unfitness charge. Moreover, his many previous satisfactory 

evaluations suggest that his teaching performance problems are not caused by a 

permanent defect in his character. Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for 

evident unfitness under section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

Third Alleged Cause for Termination (Persistent Violation of or 

Refusal to Obey Applicable Laws or Regulations) 

19. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who engages in a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 

or by the governing board of the school district. (§ 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Such violations 

by the teacher must be “stubborn and continuing.” (San Dieguito Union High School 

District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) 

The willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing board of education is insubordination. (Board of Educ. of City of Los 

Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, overruled on other grounds by Bekiaris v. 

Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575.) However, a contentious debate between a 

teacher and principal about teaching objectives, even where the teacher repeatedly 

refused a principal’s request to write two objectives to be used in the evaluation 

process, is not cause to dismiss a teacher for persistent violation. (Bourland v. 

65 

Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317, 321.) Nor is a 

single violation of a school board's rules, by itself, cause for dismissal under this 

section. (Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 104 Cal.Rptr. 64.) 

In this case, respondent received only “Does Not Meet Standard” evaluations in 

the 2020-21 and 2021-22 school years. (Factual Finding 182.) He attempted to 

implement only some of the feedback and coaching he received. (Ibid.) He was 

unprofessional and insubordinate in the November 2020 videoconference with Amer 

when he refused to turn on his video or audio. (Ibid.) He refused to sign most or all of 

the evaluations because he did not agree with them, despite the fact that they 

expressly indicated that his signature did not constitute any such agreement, only that 

he read and reviewed the final evaluation report. (Ibid.) However, respondent generally 

cooperated with the evaluation process and his conduct simply did not rise to the level 

of a persistent violation of the applicable rules of his employment. (Ibid.) The District 

failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists to terminate 

respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for engaging in a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey state law or the District’s regulations under Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

Disposition 

20. 

The District established a basis to dismiss respondent for unsatisfactory 

performance, but did not establish a basis to dismiss him under its evident unfitness 

for service or persistent refusal charges. When reviewing a school district’s dismissal 

action against a certificated employee based solely upon unsatisfactory performance 

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), there is no need to apply the 

standards of fitness to teach set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214. (Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 

66 

1167, 1175-1176.) Respondent’s unsatisfactory performance, coupled with his refusal 

to acknowledge the validity of any of the evaluator’s criticisms of his teaching, 

suggests there is little hope that, if returned to the classroom, he would improve to 

satisfactory performance under the District’s teaching standards. The District’s 

dismissal must be upheld. 

ORDER 

Respondent Michael Jacobs is dismissed from his position as a permanent 

certificated employee of the San Jose Unified School District. 

DATE: 

DATE: 

MICHAEL C. STARKEY 

Commission Member 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

NICO SANDOVAL 

Commission Member 

67 

Nico Sandoval (Jun 19, 2023 17:06 PDT)Nico Sandoval06/19/202306/19/2023 
 
 
 
 
 
Dissent of Commission Member Amy Irwin 

I concur in the factual findings and legal conclusions above, but I do not find 

that the problems with respondent’s teaching rise to a level sufficient to justify 

dismissal from his position as a permanent certificated employee of the District. 

Accordingly, all of the charges against him should be dismissed.

DATE: 

AMY IRWIN 

Commission Member

Amy Irwin (Jun 19, 2023 17:56 PDT)06/19/2023 
 
 
 
 
 
