BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
OXNARD UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
ALICSUN BULLICER, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2022090050 
DECISION 
This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) by videoconference on March 29, 2023, April 10-14, 2023, September 
11-15 and 18, 2023, and December 4-8, 2023. The Commission members were Monica 
Feller, Angelica Jauregui, and Erlinda Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office 
of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, who presided. 
Mark W. Waterman and Eleanor M. Welke, of the law firm Lozano Smith, 
represented the Oxnard Union High School District (District). 
Daniel J. Kolodziej, of the law firm Trygstad, Schwab & Trygstad, represented 
Alicsun Bullicer (respondent), who was present throughout the hearing. 2
 Oral and documentary evidence was received. At the conclusion of the hearing 
on December 8, 2023, the record was held open to allow the parties to simultaneously 
file their closing briefs by March 1, 2024, and their optional response briefs by March 
15, 2024. On February 27, 2024, the ALJ granted the request of the parties to amend 
the briefing schedule. The due date for closing briefs was changed to March 15, 2024, 
and the response briefs were due by March 29, 2024. 
The parties timely filed their closing and response briefs. The District’s closing 
brief was marked as Exhibit 211, and its response brief was marked as Exhibit 212. 
Respondent’s closing brief was marked as Exhibit 468, and her response brief was 
marked as Exhibit 469. The closing and response briefs were admitted as legal 
argument. 
At the hearing, respondent presented Exhibits 422 and 451, which are lists of 
students who took NT classes in Edgenuity. These exhibits were admitted as hearsay 
pursuant to Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d). Respondent’s counsel, 
however, argued the exhibits should be admitted under the business records 
exception to the hearsay rule. (Evid. Code, § 1271.) Respondent’s objection is 
overruled. 
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on March 29, 
2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District.3
 2. On May 12, 2022, the District served respondent with a Final Notice of 
Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges, notifying her of the District’s intent to 
dismiss her within 30 days unless she made a written request for a hearing. (Exh. 1.) 
3. On May 23, 2022, respondent served the District with a Notice of Defense 
and Request for Hearing, which contained her request for a hearing to determine 
whether cause exists to terminate her employment. (Exh. 2.) 
4. On April 10, 2023, the District served respondent with a Second 
Amended Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges (Second Amended 
Statement of Charges). (Exh. 1A, pp. A1038 to A1054.) The Second Amended 
Statement of Charges is the operative pleading in this case. 
Respondent’s Background 
5. Respondent has been employed by the District as a permanent 
certificated employee since August 18, 2000. She has worked the entire time as a 
counselor at Oxnard High School (Oxnard HS). Respondent holds a bachelor’s degree 
in psychology, a master’s degree in school counseling, and a pupil personnel services 
credential.
Oxnard High School 
6. At all relevant times, Oxnard HS had a total enrollment of approximately 
2,800 students in grades 9 through 12, and a total of 212 employees. At all relevant 
times, Richard Urias has been the Principal of Oxnard HS. Oxnard HS was on distance 
learning for the 2020-2021 school year (2020-21SY). 4
 7. Under the Professional Standards adopted by the District’s Governing 
Board, District employees are expected to maintain the highest ethical standards, 
behave professionally, follow district policies and regulations, and exercise good 
judgment when interacting with students and other members of the school 
community. (Exh. 5.) District employees are expected to engage in conduct that 
enhances the integrity of the District, advances the goals of the District’s educational 
programs, and contributes to a positive school climate. ( )
8. The job duties and responsibilities of a counselor for the District include 
informing students and parents of the coursework and academic program needed for 
satisfactory completion of high school, and promoting a rigorous academic curriculum 
for every student and ensuring equitable access to the most rigorous educational 
opportunities for all students. (Exh. 4.)
ACADEMIC COUNSELORS  
9. For the 2020-21SY, Oxnard HS had a total of eight academic counselors. 
Two counselors were assigned for each grade level. Each counselor was assigned half 
of the students in the grade level, divided alphabetically by students’ last names. 
Counselors were authorized to make changes to student class schedules only for their 
assigned grade-level students. Counselors made changes to their assigned students’
schedules through the Synergy computer system.
10. In the 2020-21SY, respondent had over 20 years of experience as a 
counselor and was considered by her peers as a veteran counselor. For the 2020-21SY, 
respondent was the assigned counselor for seniors (12th grade) with last names Lopez 
to Z. (Exh. 46.)5
 THREE-CLASS MINIMUM
11. For the 2020-21SY, all schools in the District changed from a semester 
schedule to a quarter schedule. All students were required to take a minimum of three 
classes per quarter taught by certificated teachers. However, an exemption from the 
District's three-class minimum could be granted for a student with extenuating 
circumstances, but only after a Student Study Team (SST) meeting and approval given 
by the Principal, Assistant Principal, and the student’s assigned counselor. 
12. Under the quarter schedule, a student was assigned three classes with 
certificated teachers for periods 1, 2, and 3, and period 4 was available if the student 
had a specific need for a fourth class. (See Exh. 46.) Each class was worth five credits. 
Thus, a student could earn 15 credits per quarter, for a total of 60 credits by the end of 
the school year. 
13. On August 6, 2020, Principal Urias sent an email to all counselors, 
including respondent, directing that all students must take a minimum of three classes 
per quarter, and he would be “holding the line” on the three-class minimum and the 
counselors should do so as well. (Exh. 43.) 
14. In the 2020-21SY, respondent was aware of the three-class minimum. On 
August 16, 2020, respondent sent an email to one of her assigned 12th grade 
students, explaining the new quarter schedule and stating, in part: “Every student has 
to take 3 classes per quarter. Students that need to make up credits will take a fourth 
class in Edgenuity.” (Exh. 45). On August 24, 2020, respondent sent a similar email to 
the entire senior class, explaining the new quarter schedule and stating, in part: “Every 
student must take no less than 3 classes each quarter, no matter how many credits a 
student has earned.” (Exh. 46.) 6
 EDGENUITY
15. For the 2020-21SY, Oxnard HS used an online based program called 
Edgenuity, primarily for credit recovery. If a student failed a course, the student did not 
have to repeat the course in a traditional class with a certificated teacher but, instead, 
could take the online version of the course on Edgenuity. Students needed a computer 
to do the work in the Edgenuity program. 
16. Teachers who completed specialized training were assigned to Edgenuity 
classes during their SOAR period. There was no direct instruction from certificated 
teachers in Edgenuity classes. Instead, the students enrolled in a SOAR period worked 
independently on their assigned Edgenuity course. The Edgenuity teacher’s role was to 
monitor students’ progress in their assigned courses, take attendance, unlock tests and 
quizzes, and provide technical assistance when necessary. 
17. Edgenuity was not supposed to be a student’s first experience with a 
particular course. Edgenuity courses at the “NT” level could be used for credit 
recovery. However, students were not supposed to take an NT course in Edgenuity if 
they did not previously fail the course in a traditional classroom setting. An exemption 
could be granted but only after an SST meeting and with administrator approval. 
Edgenuity courses were not to be used for a student to get ahead in credits so they 
could graduate early. 
18. Students were enrolled in a SOAR period by their counselor. The 
counselor filled out an Edgenuity form indicating the Edgenuity course to be taken by 
the student. The counselor submitted the Edgenuity form to the student’s SOAR 
period teacher. The SOAR teacher would enroll the student in the Edgenuity course 
indicated by the counselor. 7
 19. A student’s final grade in an Edgenuiuty course was determined by an 
algorithm in the Edgenuity program. Edgenuity teachers did not assign grades to their 
students. When a student completed an Edgenuity course, the Edgenuity teacher 
would notify the Records Office and the student’s assigned counselor. The Records 
Office would enter the grade reported by the Edgenuity teacher, as determined by the 
Edgenuity program, on the student’s Oxnard HS transcript. 
Respondent’s Son Transfers to Oxnard HS 
20. Respondent’s son, A.B., enrolled as a junior at Oxnard HS for the 2020-
21SY. A.B. had completed his freshman year at Santa Paula High School (Santa Paula 
HS) and his sophomore year at Opportunities for Learning High School (OFL HS). 
21. At the time A.B. enrolled at Oxnard HS in August 2020, A.B. was severely 
credit deficient. Typically, a student starting their junior year of high school would have 
earned 115 credits towards the 230 credits needed for graduation. A.B. had earned 
only 58 credits in his first two years of high school.
22. As a freshman at Santa Paul HS, for his six classes, A.B. received four F 
grades, one D-minus, and one C grade. (Exh. 196.) A.B.’s grades improved in his 
sophomore year at OFL HS, where he received mostly B grades and one A-minus. ( ) 
OFL HS was an online, independent study program. 
23. At Oxnard HS, in Quarter 1 of the 2020-21SY, A.B. received one F grade, 
two D-minus grades, and one C-minus. (Exh. 196.) In Quarter 2, A.B. took three regular 
classes, receiving two D-minus grades and one F grade, and two Edgenuity NT courses 
for which he received an A-minus grade for each course. 8
 24. As discussed more fully below, A.B. took only Edgenuity courses for 
Quarter 3 and Quarter 4. However, A.B.’s enrollment in only Edgenuity courses was not 
discovered by administrators until one week before the end of the 2020-21SY.
Excessive Enrollment in Edgenuity Courses Discovered
25. On June 7, 2021, Emigdio Cordova, Chair of the Counseling Department, 
reported to Principal Urias that A.B.’s transcript showed he had taken an excessive 
number of Edgenuity courses, specifically, 26 Edgenuity courses from January to June 
2021. (Exh. 181.) Principal Urias became immediately alarmed. He determined that for 
Quarter 3 and Quarter 4, A.B. had been taken out of all his academic courses on 
February 14, 2021, and given “dismissal” for periods 1, 2, and 3. Then, from February 
14, 2021, until the end of the school year, A.B. was enrolled only in SOAR period 4. A.B. 
was enrolled only in Edgenuity courses and was not enrolled in three regular classes 
per quarter, as required by District policy. There was no SST documentation or 
administrator approval to justify this schedule for A.B. 
26. On June 7, 2021, after reviewing A.B.’s transcript, Principal Urias emailed 
the Registrar, Mayra Viveros, that no student should be enrolled in Edgenuity courses 
without his permission. (Exh. 165.) A.B. was still working on five Edgenuity courses. 
Principal Urias emailed Ms. Babylon and directed her to not enroll A.B. in any more 
Edgenuity courses and to immediately disenroll him from any pending Edgenuity 
courses. (Exh. 179.) Principal Urias also emailed respondent and directed her to cease 
and desist from adding A.B. to any Edgenuity courses, and to contact Mr. Anchondo, 
A.B.’s counselor, if she had any concerns. (Exh. 163.)
27. On June 8, 2021, Assistant Principal Aaron Luoma met with respondent 
and directed her to not undertake any further action with Edgenuity in any capacity, 9
 including requesting Edgenuity courses for A.B. (Exh. 169.) Respondent violated this 
directive. On June 14, 2021, respondent sent a text message to Ms. Babylon asking her 
to reopen Edgenuity courses for A.B. Ms. Babylon reopened the courses for A.B. 
Afterwards, Ms. Babylon felt “something was off” and called Principal Urias. Principal 
Urias directed Ms. Babylon to not contact respondent and to immediately close the 
Edgenuity courses she had reopened for A.B. Later, Ms. Babylon spoke with 
respondent and recounted that Principal Urias told her not to open Edgenuity courses 
for A.B. Ms. Babylon also told respondent she felt respondent had taken advantage of 
her inexperience as a new teacher. Ms. Babylon testified respondent apologized to her. 
28. At hearing, Ms. Babylon testified, by the end of the 2020-21SY, she no 
longer trusted respondent professionally. She felt respondent had taken advantage of 
her inexperience as a teacher. Ms. Babylon described herself as naive and eager to 
prove herself as a teacher. Respondent took advantage, knowing that Ms. Babylon was 
not likely to question her actions related to A.B. 
A.B. Transfers to OFL HS at the End of the 2020-21SY 
29. On June 16, 2021, respondent disenrolled A.B. from Oxnard HS. At that 
time, A.B.’s transcript showed he had 213 credits, 17 credits short of the 230 credits 
needed to graduate. (Exh. 197.) As previously noted, A.B. had only 58 credits when he 
enrolled at Oxnard HS at the start of the 2020-21SY. On July 1, 2021, A.B. enrolled at 
OFL HS. (Exh. 397.) In October 2021, A.B. graduated early and received his high school 
diploma. 
30. At hearing, respondent claimed she never planned for A.B. to graduate 
high school early. A.B. was eligible to attend summer school in 2021 to complete his 
unfinished Edgenuity courses, but he did not attend. Respondent claimed Assistant 10 
 Principal Luoma told her it would be in A.B.’s best interest to withdraw from Oxnard 
HS. At hearing, Mr. Luoma credibly denied telling respondent that A.B. could not 
attend summer school in 2021 or that A.B. could not attend Oxnard HS in the 2021-
2022 school year. 
Directive Not to Access District Technology
31. Respondent returned to work as a counselor at Oxnard HS in the 2021-
2022 school year. By letter dated September 10, 2021, the District notified respondent 
she was placed on paid administrative leave, effective immediately, pending the 
District’s investigation of allegations that she may have violated District policy in 
authorizing online course credit for A.B. without following the proper procedural 
processes. (Exh. 186.) 
32. In the September 10, 2021 letter, respondent was directed to 
immediately turn in all District keys, computers, and any other District property in her 
possession. She was also directed to “not enter any District facility or property or use 
District technology, including the email system,” unless she obtained advanced 
permission from Dr. Deborah Salgado, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources. 
(Exh. 186.) The letter notified respondent that failure to comply with these directives 
might subject her to disciplinary action. ( )
33. At hearing, Dr. Salgado testified respondent violated the directives given 
in the September 10, 2021 letter. Specifically, respondent downloaded emails and 
emailed them to herself, and she accessed the Synergy system and downloaded 
student records without obtaining advanced permission from Dr. Salgado or the 
District. At hearing, respondent’s counsel offered some of the downloaded emails and 11 
 student records. The District contends this conduct by respondent is yet another 
example of her violating District and school directives. 
34. At hearing, respondent claimed she “unknowingly” violated the 
September 10, 2021 directive to not enter District property or use District technology. 
Respondent could not recall the number of times she accessed the District’s computer 
systems. She claimed she accessed the District computer system after she received 
notice of her hearing, in order to prepare for the hearing. Respondent did 
not think she was doing anything wrong, especially since her computer log-in still 
worked and allowed her to access the District’s computer system. Respondent 
admitted she accessed the Synergy computer system to look at the various SOAR 
periods and see if there were any students enrolled who did not have three regular 
classes per quarter. 
Respondent’s Conduct 
REMOVING A.B. FROM HIS THREE REGULAR CLASSES 
35. On February 15, 2021, respondent used her access to the Synergy 
computer system and changed A.B.’s classes for periods 1 through 3 of Quarter 3 to 
“dismissal” periods. (Exh. 209, pp. A889.) Similarly, on April 12, 2021, respondent used 
her access to the Synergy computer system and assigned A.B. to “dismissal” periods 
for periods 1 through 3 of Quarter 4. As a result of respondent’s conduct, A.B. did not 
have three classes with certificated teachers, as required by District policy. 
36. For the 2020-21SY, Saul Anchondo was the assigned counselor for 
juniors (11th grade) with last names A to Mah. Mr. Anchondo was A.B.’s assigned 12 
 counselor. Mr. Anchondo was hired by the District in 2018. The 2020-21SY was his 
third year as a counselor. 
37. At hearing, Mr. Anchondo testified he did not approve of A.B.’s removal 
from his three regular classes in Quarter 3. Mr. Anchondo testified respondent did not 
speak with him about removing A.B. from his three regular classes. Mr. Anchondo 
testified, even if respondent had come to him first, he still would not have approved 
removing A.B. from all of his regular classes in Quarter 3. Mr. Anchondo was not aware 
of nor approved of respondent’s changes to A.B.’s schedule for Quarter 3 and Quarter 
4. Mr. Anchondo believes respondent’s conduct violated directives from the District 
and Principal Urias that students must take three classes per quarter. Mr. Anchondo 
explained that if a parent asked to remove their student from their classes with 
certificated teachers, the process for handling such a request would be to hold an SST 
meeting with the parent, teacher, principal, and assistant principal. As an experienced 
counselor, respondent was aware of the process. She never requested an SST meeting 
for A.B. 
38. Respondent’s method of replacing A.B.’s three classes with “dismissal” 
periods, rather than leaving the class periods blank, ensured the changes she made to 
A.B.’s schedule would not be detected by the holes-and-dupes report, which was a 
report generated at the start of each quarter to identify students with problems with 
their class schedules. Counselors had access to the holes-and-dupes report so they 
could determine if any of their assigned students had a problem with their schedule. If 
respondent had not replaced A.B.’s classes with “dismissal” periods, A.B.’s schedule 
would be blank for periods 1, 2 and 3, which would have caused him to be listed in the 
holes-and-dupes report as a student with “holes” in his schedule. Based on her 20 
years’ experience as a counselor at Oxnard HS, respondent reasonably could be 13 
 expected to know that replacing A.B.’s classes with “dismissal” periods would avoid 
detection by the holes-and-dupes report. 
CHANGING A.B.’S EDGENUITY TEACHER 
39. On March 31, 2021, respondent used her access to the Synergy computer 
system and changed the Edgenuity teacher for A.B.’s SOAR period (period 4) from Jan 
Quilantang to Kasimira Babylon. (Exh. 209, p. A889.) Then, on March 31, 2021, at 10:55 
a.m., respondent sent an email to Mr. Anchondo asking him to sign up A.B. in the Earth 
& Space Science Edgenuity NT course, period 4, with Ms. Babylon. (Exh. 87.) Nine 
minutes later, at 11:04 a.m., respondent sent an email to Ms. Babylon, informing her 
that A.B. was going to be in her period 4 SOAR period starting March 31 until the end 
of the school year. (Exh. 84.) The email also stated A.B. needed to take the Edgenuity 
NT course for Earth & Space Science, and Mr. Anchondo would be sending her the 
Edgenuity form. ( ) 
40. At hearing, Ms. Babylon testified respondent did not tell her why A.B. was 
moving to her SOAR period, and the email she received from respondent did not 
indicate a reason. Respondent did not copy Mr. Anchondo on her email to Ms. 
Babylon. Ms. Babylon described respondent’s email as an example of respondent 
communicating directly with the Edgenuity teacher about courses for her son. Mr. 
Anchondo testified he was not aware respondent was communicating directly with the 
Edgenuity teacher, Ms. Babylon, regarding courses for A.B.
41. Respondent’s conduct resulted in A.B. moving from a highly experienced 
teacher to one with less experience. In the 2020-21SY, Ms. Quilantang was a teacher 
with 20 years’ experience, while Ms. Babylon was a teacher with two years’ experience, 
having only been hired by the District in 2018. Ms. Babylon testified Quarter 3 of the 14 
 2020-21SY was the first time she was assigned as an Edgenuity teacher. She continued 
as an Edgenuity teacher through Quarter 4. She has not worked as an Edgenuity since 
the end of the 2020-21SY. 
NO PRIOR COUNSELOR APPROVAL FOREDGENUITY ENROLLMENT
42. At all relevant times, respondent knew that changes to a student’s 
Edgenuity classes should not be made without approval from the student’s counselor. 
On April 14, 2021, respondent sent an email to Edgenuity teachers reminding them 
that if their student “wants to change or add an Edgenuity class, they must meet with 
their counselor. Once that has been done, the counselor will send an updated 
Edgenuity form to the Records department and the SOAR teacher. Please do not make 
any changes in Edgenuity or add additional classes without the updated form to 
ensure counselor approval.” (Exh. 100.) 
43. In April and May 2021, respondent submitted Edgenuity forms directly to 
Ms. Babylon, by email, requesting she enroll A.B. in the courses indicated on the forms. 
Respondent was not A.B.’s assigned counselor. She did not have prior approval from 
Mr. Anchondo at the time she emailed the Edgenuity forms to Ms. Babylon. Instead,
respondent copied Mr. Anchondo on her emails to Ms. Babylon and requested he 
confirm the Edgenuity forms attached to the emails were correct. Respondent filled 
out the forms and selected the Edgenuity courses for A.B. Mr. Anchondo did not select 
the Edgenuity courses for A.B. Mr. Anchondo did not question the Edgenuity courses 
respondent selected for A.B. Mr. Anchondo trusted respondent and relied on her 
professional judgment that the courses she selected for A.B. were appropriate.
44. In the 2020-21SY, Mr. Anchondo was a third-year counselor, while 
respondent was in her 20th year as a counselor. Respondent was trusted and well-15 
 regarded as a counselor by the other counselors, teachers, and staff at Oxnard HS. 
Under these circumstances, it was reasonable for Mr. Anchondo to rely on 
respondent’s judgment that the Edgenuity courses she selected for A.B. were 
appropriate. 
EXCESSIVE ENROLLMENT IN EDGENUITY COURSES
45. As of May 5, 2021, A.B.’s Oxnard HS transcript showed grades for two 
Edgenuity NT courses in Quarter 3 and three Edgenuity NT courses in Quarter 4. (Exh. 
196.) The transcript also showed A.B. had a total of 118 credits, and he needed 112 
credits to graduate. As of May 5, 2021, there were approximately five weeks left in the 
2020-21SY. 
46. On May 10, 2021, respondent emailed Mr. Anchondo an Edgenuity form 
she filled out for A.B. to access 11 Edgenuity NT courses. (Exhs. 124, 127.) That same 
day, Mr. Anchondo emailed the Edgenuity form to Ms. Babylon and requested she 
allow A.B. to access all 11 courses at once. (Exh. 125.) At hearing, Mr. Anchondo 
testified the request for A.B. to access all 11 courses at once came from respondent. 
He included respondent’s request in his email to Ms. Babylon because he trusted and 
deferred to respondent’s judgment that her request to allow A.B. to access the 11 
courses at once was appropriate.
47. At hearing, Mr. Anchondo explained that a total of 55 credits could be 
earned from completing 11 courses, and that 55 credits is about one school year worth 
of credits. Mr. Anchondo noted there was only one month left in the 2020-21SY when 
respondent requested 11 Edgenuity courses for A.B. on May 10, 2021. Mr. Anchondo 
testified that, as a counselor, it did not make sense to him to enroll a student in one 
year’s worth of courses with only one month left in the school year.16 
 48. On May 18, 2021, respondent emailed Mr. Anchondo an Edgenuity form 
she filled out for A.B. to access another five Edgenuity NT courses, and requested he 
forward the form to Ms. Babylon as soon as possible. (Exh. 134.) Mr. Anchondo was 
injured in a car accident on May 18, 2021. That same day, respondent emailed Ms. 
Babylon to inform her Mr. Anchondo was in an accident and that she would send Ms. 
Babylon an Edgenuity form for A.B. directly. (Exh. 133.) At hearing, Mr. Anchondo 
testified he missed two weeks of work due to his injuries from the May 18, 2021 
accident. Mr. Anchondo testified he did not work for two weeks and, during that time, 
he did not communicate with respondent, and did not tell respondent she could act as 
A.B.’s counselor during his absence. 
49. On May 26, 2021, respondent filled out an Edgenuity form for A.B. to 
gain access to 12 Edgenuity NT courses. (Exh. 204, p. A879.) That same day, 
respondent emailed the form to Ms. Babylon, requesting that she add the additional 
classes in Edgenuity for A.B. ( , at p. A877.) As of May 26, 2021, there were 
approximately two weeks left in the 2020-21SY. Yet respondent requested 12 
Edgenuity courses for A.B. that were worth a total of 60 credits, the equivalent of one 
school year of credits.
CHANGING ATTENDANCE PROCEDURE  
50. Ms. Babylon testified the students in her Edgenuity classes worked on 
their individually assigned courses. The students logged on to Google classroom to 
access their Edgenuity courses. Ms. Babylon required her Edgenuity students to stay 
logged on for one hour. During that hour, Ms. Babylon could see the students’
computer screens and watch them work. After one hour, Ms. Babylon allowed her 
students to work independently. Ms. Babylon explained that if a student did not log on 17 
 to Edgenuity through Google classroom, she would have difficulty monitoring the 
student’s work in their Edgenuity course. 
51. On May 8, 2021, respondent asked Ms. Babylon if A.B. could send her an 
email everyday to check in for his Edgenuity class instead of actually logging in to the 
class through Google classroom. (Exh. 123.) Respondent claimed A.B. was “going 
through some stuff” and she thought “his attendance would be better” if he could 
check in by email. ( ) At hearing, respondent explained A.B. was not attending his 
Edgenuity classes because of mental health issues. 
52. Although Ms. Babylon generally required her Edgenuity students to stay 
logged in to Edgenuity for at least one hour so she could monitor their work, Ms. 
Babylon agreed to allow A.B. to check in by email as requested by respondent because 
she trusted respondent’s judgment as an experienced counselor. After granting 
respondent’s request, Ms. Babylon received only one check in email from A.B.
REQUEST FOR “RELATIVE GRADE”FOR A.B. 
53. During the last few days of the school year, the District allowed 
graduating seniors to receive what was called a "relative grade” for an Edgenuity 
course if they had completed and passed 60 percent of the course. If the student’s 
relative grade was 60 percent or higher, that grade could be reported to the Records 
Office as the student’s final grade in the class. The “relative grade” option was allowed 
only for graduating seniors who were running out of time to complete classes needed
to graduate. The “relative grade” option was not allowed for underclassmen, who 
could make up their unfinished class at a future date. 18 
 54. On June 5, 2021, respondent asked Ms. Babylon to report a “relative 
grade” for A.B. for the Edgenuity courses he had not yet completed. On June 7, 2021, 
Ms. Babylon submitted A.B.’s “relative grade” for his Edgenuity courses to the Records 
Office. (Exh. 168, p. A525.) Subsequently, Ms. Babylon was informed by the Registrar, 
Ms. Viveros, that relative grades were only for seniors, not underclassmen. Ms. Viveros 
indicated she could not accept a “relative grade” for A.B. On June 10, 2021, Principal 
Urias sent an email to all Edgenuity teachers and all counselors as a reminder that 
“relative grades” were only for seniors. (Exh. 173.) 
55. Respondent requested a “relative grade” for A.B. even though he was 
only a junior and not allowed to receive a “relative grade.” At hearing, respondent 
claimed she did not know a “relative grade” was available only for seniors. 
Respondent’s claim is not convincing. As one of the assigned counselors for the senior 
class, as well as being an experienced counselor, respondent knew, or reasonably 
should have known, of the procedures specifically applicable to graduating seniors, 
such as the “relative grade” option. 
DELAY IN PROVIDING PRIOR TRANSCRIPT INFORMATION  
56. When A.B. was enrolled at Oxnard HS in August 2020, respondent was 
requested by the Registrar to provide transcripts from A.B.’s previous high schools. 
Respondent did not provide any transcript information for A.B. until May 5, 2021, one 
month before the end of the 2020-21SY. From the information received on May 5, 
2021, the Records Office built a transcript for A.B. that showed his courses and grades 
from Santa Paula HS, OFL HS, and Oxnard HS as of that date. (Exh. 196.) 
57. Mr. Anchondo testified respondent did not provide him with A.B.’s 
transcripts from the previous schools he attended for his freshman and sophomore 19 
 years. On April 13, 2021, Mr. Anchondo received an email from respondent asking him 
to enroll A.B. in an Edgenuity NT course (English 10) with Ms. Babylon. (Exh. 94.) In the 
email, respondent also wrote that she was still waiting to receive A.B.’s cumulative file 
and updated transcripts from his previous schools. At this time, in April 2021, Mr. 
Anchondo did not have any transcripts or information about whether A.B. had passed 
or failed the course being requested by respondent in Edgenuity. Consequently, he
relied on respondent’s recommendation of the classes to give A.B. 
58. Mr. Anchondo explained the evaluation of a A.B.’s transcript from his 
previous schools helped to determine the classes he should be given at Oxnard HS. A 
transcript evaluation could not be completed for A.B. without information from his 
previous schools. This is why Mr. Anchondo followed respondent’s recommendation in 
her April 13, 2021 email (Exhibit 94) to assign to A.B. to the Edgenuity NT course for 
English 10. Mr. Anchondo followed respondent’s recommendation as a professional 
courtesy. Mr. Anchondo trusted that respondent had information about A.B.’s previous 
classes that he did not have.
59. At hearing, Mr. Anchondo was shown Exhibit 121, the Counselor 
Transcript Evaluation Form dated May 5, 2021, prepared for A.B. Mr. Anchondo 
testified he never did a transcript evaluation using the Form admitted as Exhibit 121, 
but acknowledged that his signature is on the document. Mr. Anchondo testified 
respondent prepared the Counselor Transcript Evaluation Form dated May 5, 2021 
(Exhibit 121) and brought it to Mr. Anchondo in his office, when he was busy and 
distracted with other work. Respondent asked him to sign the transcript evaluation for 
A.B. (Exh. 121.) Mr. Anchondo signed it but does not recall respondent giving him 
copies of A.B.’s transcripts. He testified the May 5, 2021 Counselor Transcript 
Evaluation Form (Exhibit 121) was the first time respondent provided information 20 
 about classes A.B. had taken and failed. Prior to May 5, 2021, Mr. Anchondo trusted 
respondent “100 percent” in selecting classes for A.B. 
60. The May 5, 2021 Counselor Transcript Evaluation Form prepared by 
respondent (Exhibit 121) indicated A.B. had taken English in 10th grade and received a 
B grade. Yet, on April 13, 2021, respondent had asked Mr. Anchondo to enroll A.B. in 
the English 10 Edgenuity NT course, which was not appropriate because A.B. had 
already taken and passed English 10 at OFL HS in the previous school year (spring 
2020). The NT courses in Edgenuity were not to be taken unless the student had 
previously taken and failed the course. 
ACADEMIC INTERGRITY CONCERNS WITH A.B.’S TRANSCRIPT  
61. Respondent’s conduct allowed A.B. to receive a high school transcript 
that, on its face, reflects poorly on the academic integrity of the District and Oxnard 
HS. The transcript shows a suspiciously excessive number of courses and credits 
awarded to A.B. in the last two quarters of the 2020-21SY. The sheer number of 
courses and credits clearly exceed what would be typically expected of a student to 
accomplish under a quarter schedule.
62. The Commission finds the District’s arguments persuasive that A.B.’s 
transcript, which resulted from respondent’s violation of District policies and 
procedures, raises concerns about the validity of the grades A.B. received for his 
Edgenuity courses in Quarters 3 and 4 of the 2020-21SY.
63. The District reviewed data for all of the Edgenuity courses taken by A.B. 
and the time he actively spent on each course. (Exh. 13.) The Edgenuity program 
generated data showing the amount of time the student actively spends working in 21 
 the course, clicking through the content, and engaging in the content. The Edgenuity 
data indicates A.B. did not complete the work for the courses. The Edgenuity Course 
Report (Exhibit 210) lists the activities for each lesson in a course (i.e., Instruction, 
Assignment, Quiz, and Unit Test), the estimated time to complete each activity, and the 
“Total Time” the student spent on each activity. 
64. The District’s analysis of Edgenuity data indicated A.B. was not 
completing the coursework but was receiving full credit for his Edgenuity courses. For 
example, A.B. took the Edgenuity NT course for Principles of American Democracy in 
Quarter 3 and received five credits. (Exh. 197.) According to the Edgenuity data, A.B. 
spent a total of 59 minutes, 38 seconds working in the Principles of American 
Democracy course. (Exhs. 13, 14.) The Course Report shows A.B. recorded zero minutes 
for some activities, or minutes significantly below the estimated time for the activity. 
For example, A.B. spent zero minutes for Instruction and Assignment activities. (Exh. 
210, pp. A957 to A959.) For a Unit Test due on July 3, 2019, with an estimated time of 
40 minutes to complete, A.B. spent only five minutes, 21 seconds. (Exh. 210, p. A957.) 
65. Another example is the Economics NT course A.B. took in Quarter 4 and 
received 5 credits. (Exh. 197.) For this Economics course, the total time A.B. spent on 
the course was one hour, 30 minutes. (Exhs. 13, 14.) The Course Report showed A.B. 
spent zero minutes on Instruction and Assignment activities, and minutes significantly 
below the time estimate for quizzes and tests. (Exh. 210, pp. A920 to A922.)
66. The Commission recognizes that school districts have policies and 
procedures to ensure that students meet the same statewide educational and grade-
level standards. Respondent intentionally violated the District’s policies and 
procedures to benefit only her son and allow him to receive grades for Edgenuity 22 
 classes in which the data indicates he spent minimal to no time on the coursework 
embedded in the program. 
Respondent’s Testimony 
67. Respondent does not believe she engaged in any wrongful conduct 
related to A.B.’s courses in the 2020-21SY. She expressed no remorse or acceptance of 
responsibility for her conduct. Respondent claimed her conduct was motivated by her 
desire, as A.B.’s mother, to do what was in his best interest. Respondent believes the 
conduct of others in not being truthful or doing their jobs to the fullest caused the 
District’s charges against her. For example, she believes Mr. Anchondo was not being 
truthful when he claimed he did not give consent or approval for the changes she 
made to A.B.’s course schedule. She believes Principal Urias is biased against her 
because she made a complaint against him that resulted in him being denied a 
promotion. 
68. Respondent testified that she collaborated and conferred with Mr. 
Anchondo in selecting A.B.’s Edgenuity courses for Quarter 3 and Quarter 4. She 
prepared the Edgenuity enrollment forms to be consistent with the conversations she 
had with Mr. Anchondo. She sent the forms to Mr. Anchondo and asked him to verify 
they were correct. Mr. Anchondo never indicated corrections were needed. 
Respondent contends all of A.B.’s courses for Quarter 3 and Quarter 4 were approved 
by Mr. Anchondo. Respondent contends she filled out the Edgenuity forms for A.B. as 
a way to help Mr. Anchondo, whom she described as being “slow” in completing tasks. 
Respondent recounted how the counselors in the Counseling Department will help 
each other out when needed to complete tasks. Respondent’s contention that Mr. 
Anchondo approved of the changes she made to A.B.’s courses was not convincing. 23 
 Respondent’s contention is not reflected in the documentary evidence and was 
credibly refuted by Mr. Anchondo’s testimony. 
69. The Commission finds respondent took advantage of her seniority and 
the collaborative environment at Oxnard HS to achieve the goal of obtaining sufficient 
credits for A.B. to graduate before the end of the school year. Respondent knew the 
difference in seniority between herself and Mr. Anchondo made it likely he would rely 
on her guidance in recommending classes to give A.B. 
70. Respondent testified it was appropriate for A.B. to take Edgenuity NT 
courses because A.B. had previously taken and failed the courses at OFL HS. 
Respondent testified those courses were not shown on A.B.’s transcript from OFL HS 
because OFL HS only listed courses where the student received an A, B, or C grade, 
and not the courses where the student received a D or F grade. Respondent testified 
that A.B. took and failed at least 20 courses while a student at OFL HS, but she had no 
documentation and her testimony lacked specificity. Respondent’s uncorroborated 
testimony was insufficient to establish A.B. was appropriately enrolled in NT level 
Edgenuity courses. 
71. Respondent testified she decided to enroll A.B. in Oxnard HS for his 
junior year because A.B. wanted to have a fresh start and get back to regular school 
activities like playing sports. Respondent testified she expected that A.B. would attend 
classes in-person if he transferred to Oxnard HS for the 2020-21SY. The Commission 
notes, however, respondent was aware that Oxnard HS would still be on remote 
learning in the 2020-21SY. Therefore, a return to regular school activities, like playing 
sports, was not likely. 24 
 72. Respondent testified she had no intention or expectation that A.B. would 
graduate early from high school. This testimony was not convincing. By her conduct, 
respondent enabled A.B. to receive more than two years of credits in the last two 
quarters of the school year. A.B. was severely credit deficient when he enrolled at 
Oxnard HS. Respondent rushed to have A.B. enrolled in new Edgenuity courses upon 
being notified he completed his previous courses. She sought to have A.B. receive a 
“relative grade” for his partially completed Edgenuity courses. She arranged for A.B. to 
work on multiple Edgenuity courses at once, an option available only for seniors, not 
juniors like A.B. When the 2020-21SY ended, respondent was only 17 credits short of 
the 230 credits needed for graduation. Respondent disenrolled A.B. from Oxnard HS, 
thereby locking in all of the credits from Edgenuity courses on A.B.’s high school 
transcript. She then enrolled him at OFL HS, where he graduated early, prior to the end 
of his senior year. 
73. Respondent’s actions implemented her plan for A.B. to quickly amass 
credits for graduation, by intentionally violating school policies and procedures and by 
exploiting Oxnard HS’s culture of collaboration and the trust of less experienced 
colleagues. 
74. Respondent testified that A.B. received special education and related 
services from 3rd grade to 7th grade, he was removed from special education in 8th 
grade, and he resumed special education services in 9th grade. His Individualized 
Education Program (IEP) dated January 22, 2019, was presented at hearing. (Exh. 18.) 
The IEP indicated A.B. was in 10th grade at OFL HS and eligible for special education 
based on Other Health Impairment (primary) and Specific Learning Disability 
(secondary). On October 24, 2019, respondent revoked her consent for A.B. to receive 
special education services. (Exh. 32.) Consequently, as of October 30, 2019, A.B.’s 25 
 special education services were discontinued and he became a general education 
student. ( )
75. When A.B. enrolled at Oxnard HS in August 2020, respondent informed 
the Records office that A.B. did not have an IEP. (Exh. 50.) The Records Office changed 
A.B.’s instructional setting to “Regular.” (Exh. 49.) Consequently, A.B. did not receive 
special education services and supports, including the additional monitoring and 
supervision of his program by an IEP team. 
76. Respondent removed A.B. from special education because she felt the 
stigma of an IEP negatively impacted A.B.’s motivation. When A.B. attended Santa 
Paula HS for 9th grade, he was reluctant to use his special education supports. She 
noted A.B. had an IEP because he had a learning disability with reading and math, 
ADHD, and social emotional issues due to bullying and racism. Respondent addressed 
these issues by transferring A.B. to OFL HS, which was an online, independent study 
program. Respondent testified OFL HS was selected for A.B. after discussion with A.B. 
and his therapist. Respondent claimed A.B. was afraid to go outside due to fear of 
being physically assaulted. The online program at OFL HS made A.B. feel safe because 
all classes were taken by computer and there were no live lectures to attend. 
Respondent testified A.B. currently receives mental health therapy from a psychiatrist 
and takes medications for ADHD.
General Credibility Findings 
77. The Commission found the District’s witnesses testified credibly. Their 
testimony was straightforward and supported by the documentary evidence. The 
Commission found it notable the District’s witnesses expressed that they harbored no 
bias or animosity toward respondent prior to this dismissal action. They praised 26 
 respondent as a trusted, skilled, and well-regarded counselor, and a collaborative 
member of the counselor team. 
78. The Commission found respondent’s explanations for her conduct were 
less convincing, not supported by or consistent with the documentary evidence, and at 
times inconsistent. The Commission finds it particularly concerning that respondent 
has not accepted responsibility for her conduct and continues to blame others. 
Respondent used her status as a District employee to obtain a benefit for her son that 
was not available for other students and families, in violation of the District’s policies 
and protocols. Respondent knew what she was doing on behalf of A.B. was wrong. 
Respondent’s explanation that she was merely acting as a mother trying to take care 
of her son, did not excuse or justify her violation of District policies and protocols. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. The Commission has jurisdiction to proceed in this matter, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1 through 4. All further 
undesignated statutory references are to the Education Code. 
2. The District has the burden of proof in this matter and the standard of 
proof is preponderance of the evidence. (
(1985) 164 Cal. App. 3d 1035, 1038-1039.) “Preponderance of the 
evidence” means evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it. 
( (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325.)
3. It is settled that the trier of fact—in this case the three members of the 
Commission—may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject another part 27 
 even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” ( . 
(1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact may also “reject part of the testimony of a 
witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits 
of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth 
of truth out of selected material.” ( ., at 67-68, quoting from 
(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.) The testimony of “one credible witness may 
constitute substantial evidence.” ( 189 
Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) 
4. The grounds for dismissal alleged by the District against respondent are 
immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of 
or refusal to obey school laws or reasonable regulations. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. 
(a)(1), (4), (6), (8).) 
Immoral Conduct 
5. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1), for immoral conduct, based on Factual Findings 1-78. 
6. The term “immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 
to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)
7. In this case, the preponderance of the evidence established respondent 
engaged in immoral conduct. Respondent misused her authority as a counselor to 28 
 improperly obtain a benefit for her son that was not available to others. She took steps 
to ensure her pattern of conduct was not detected by others. She took advantage of 
less experienced staff, knowing they were unlikely to question her actions as a veteran 
counselor. Respondent betrayed the trust of her co-workers, who had held her in high 
regard as a counselor. 
Dishonesty 
8. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(4), for dishonesty, based on Factual Findings 1-78. 
9. Dishonesty “connotes a disposition to deceive” and “necessarily includes 
the element of bad faith.” It means “fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness,” and 
“denotes an absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive 
and betray.” ( (1946) 29 Cal.2d 13.)
10. Respondent engaged in dishonesty when she manipulated the Synergy 
system to conceal improper changes she made to A.B.’s class schedule. Respondent 
used her Synergy log-in and unilaterally made changes to A.B.’s schedule in Quarter 3 
without Mr. Anchondo’s knowledge or approval. Respondent improperly removed A.B. 
from his required three regular classes. Removal of the three classes would leave three 
blank periods on A.B.’s schedule, which would be detected on the holes-and-dupes 
report. To avoid detection, respondent filled in the three blank periods by assigning 
A.B. to “dismissal” for those periods. Similarly, for Quarter 4, respondent assigned A.B. 
to three periods of “dismissal” instead of the required three regular classes, without 
Mr. Anchondo’s knowledge or approval. Respondent’s improper changes to A.B.’s class 
schedule were not discovered until one week before the end of the school year.29 
 11. Respondent did not have a valid reason to remove A.B. from his three 
regular classes, which respondent knew violated District policy. After removing A.B. 
from the three classes, she took the additional step of assigning him to “dismissal” 
periods to avoid attracting attention to what she did. As a result, A.B. was assigned 
only to a SOAR period for Quarters 3 and 4. Respondent then took action and enrolled 
A.B. in Edgenuity courses which allowed him to amass an excessive number of credits 
in the last two quarters of the school year. A.B. received over one school year of credits 
(85 credits) in Quarter 4 alone. She rushed Ms. Babylon to enroll A.B. in Edgenuity 
classes as soon as he finished his previous class. The evidence supports a reasonable 
inference that respondent, by her conduct, was seeking to have A.B. graduate high 
school early. There was a process for respondent to request the class schedule she 
secretly created for A.B., namely, requesting an SST meeting through Mr. Anchondo or 
asking for it herself. Respondent did not do that, and no valid reason was established 
as to why she did not do that. 
12. Respondent also engaged in dishonesty after she was placed on paid 
administrative leave, when she violated the September 10, 2021 directive by accessing 
District technology without permission and downloaded emails and students records. 
Her explanation that she was acting to prepare for her hearing, or that her 
computer log-in still worked after she was placed on administrative leave, did not 
excuse or justify this conduct. The directive to not access District technology and 
emails was clear and unambiguous.
Evident Unfitness for Service 
13. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(6), for evident unfitness for service, based on Factual Findings 1-78.30 
 14. Evident unfitness for service means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 
inadequacies.” (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th1429, 1444.) Evident unfitness for service “connotes a 
fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s 
conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” ( ) 
15. In this case, the Commission is persuaded that respondent’s misconduct 
was caused by a defect in temperament and non-remediable. Despite her knowledge 
of the rules and procedures required to make changes to student schedules and to 
enroll students in Edgenuity courses, respondent continued to engage in misconduct 
related to her son’s educational program. Respondent reasonably should have known 
her actions provided an improper benefit to her son and resulted in a high school 
transcript lacking in academic integrity. Respondent reasonably should have known 
her conduct related to her son’s schedule was wrongful. But she has not shown a 
willingness or capability to cease engaging in the conduct. Respondent’s inability to 
accept responsibility for her misconduct, or even recognize that she did something 
wrong, is concerning. Respondent knew the procedures for enrolling students in 
Edgenuity courses, yet she acted contrary to the procedures. Respondent made no 
effort to comply with the procedures, such as requesting an SST meeting for A.B.
Persistent Violation of School Laws and Regulations 
16. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), for persistent violation or refusal to obey school laws or regulations, 
based on Factual Findings 1-78.31 
 17. In order for a teacher to be terminated under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(8), for violations of school laws or rules, the violations must be either “persistent” or 
“motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.” (
(1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81.) A single violation of a 
school board’s rules is not of itself cause for dismissal; it is the persistent disregard of 
school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate. ( , at p. 84.) Isolated events 
or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are generally not 
considered persistent violation of rules. (
(1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) 
18. In this case, the preponderance of the evidence established respondent 
engaged in a persistent violation of District policies and procedures during Quarter 3 
and Quarter 4 of the 2020-21SY. Respondent used her access to Synergy to make 
changes to A.B.’s schedule when she was not his assigned counselor. She violated the 
three-class minimum when she removed A.B. from all his classes with certificated 
teachers and filled his schedule with dismissal periods. She submitted Edgenuity forms 
that allowed A.B. to access an excessive number of Edgenuity courses. Respondent 
accessed emails and student records, in violation of the September 10, 2021 directive 
she was given when placed on paid administrative leave. The totality of respondent’s 
conduct was inconsistent with the District’s Professional Standards, which requires 
District employees to, among other things, maintain high ethical standards, follow 
policies and regulations, and advance the goals of the District’s educational programs.
Morrison Factors 
19. Cause for discipline against a teacher must relate to his fitness to teach 
within the meaning of the factors enumerated in the case of 32 
 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. Here, the Commission has found cause exists to dismiss 
respondent based on immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and 
persistent violation of school rules. With regard to those causes for dismissal, the 
Commission considered all the factors suggested by and compared them to 
the facts established above. Not all  factors need be present for the 
test to be satisfied. (  (1994) 28 
Cal.App.4th 369.) Moreover, the analysis need not be conducted on each 
individual fact established, but rather can be applied to the accumulated facts 
established collectively. "When the camel's back is broken we need not weigh each 
straw in its load to see which could have done the deed." (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
1457.)
20. The case of  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
229, sets forth the following factors for determining a teacher’s fitness to teach: (1) the 
likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; 
(2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of 
the conduct; (4) the type of certificate held by the teacher; (5) extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood that the 
conduct in question will recur; and (8) the extent that discipline will cause an adverse 
chilling impact on the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.
21. Based on consideration of the  factors, the Commission finds 
that respondent’s conduct related to A.B. in Quarters 3 and 4 of the 2020-21SY, is 
related to teaching and her fitness to teach. The  factors apply in 
respondent’s case as follows: 33 
 (1) The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow 
teachers. Respondent’s conduct adversely affected other counselors and staff at 
Oxnard HS, who felt their trust in her as a counselor was betrayed and they could no 
longer trust her professionally. The District no longer has confidence in respondent’s 
ability to properly serve as a counselor and to not take advantage of her access to 
District technology in the future. 
 (2) The degree of such adversity. Respondent’s conduct, after it was 
discovered, caused a high degree of adversity in the District and the Oxnard HS 
community. 
 (3) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s 
conduct occurred recently, in and around the 2020-21SY.
 (4) The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved.
Respondent’s misconduct is related to her duties as a counselor and her pupil 
personnel services credential.
(5) The existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 
surrounding the conduct. The Commission finds aggravating circumstances 
surrounding respondent’s conduct in this case. Respondent misused her authority and 
seniority as a counselor to obtain a benefit for her son that was not available to any 
other families in the District. She manipulated the Synergy computer system to hide 
her misconduct. She exploited the collaborative relationship among her colleagues. 
She betrayed the trust of her less experienced colleagues. Respondent knew that her 
actions were wrong and she knowingly violated District policies and procedures. 34 
 (6) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in 
the conduct. The Commission finds no praiseworthiness or blameworthiness in 
respondent’s motives for her conduct. 
 (7) The likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct. The 
Commission finds there is a likelihood of recurrence of respondent’s conduct.
Respondent has failed to acknowledge she engaged in misconduct or accept 
responsibility for her misconduct. She has shown no remorse for her misconduct.
 (8) The extent discipline may cause adverse impact or chilling effect upon 
the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. Not applicable. 
Disposition 
22. “The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 
unfitness to teach . . . , and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate 
sanction.” ( (1999) 20 Cal.4th327, 
343-344.) Thus, even where cause for dismissal has been established, the Commission 
still has broad discretion to determine whether such discipline is actually warranted. 
( (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)
23. The Commission finds respondent has not performed her duties as a 
counselor in accordance with the District’s rules, policies, and expectations. She used 
her position as a counselor to allow her son, A.B., to have a program consisting solely 
of Edgenuity courses, which was not available to other students in the District. 
Respondent used her position as a counselor to access the District’s Synergy computer 
system and make changes to A.B.’s schedule, something that parents of other students
could not do. Respondent’s conduct resulted in a high school transcript for A.B. that 35raises academic integrity concerns because A.B. received credits for Edgenuity courses 
where he did not complete all of the course work. Respondent has not acknowledged 
or accepted responsibility for her misconduct, which is concerning.
24. Based on the foregoing, the decision of the Commission in this case is 
that respondent shall be dismissed from employment with the District. (Factual 
Findings 1-78; Legal Conclusions 1-23.)
ORDER
Respondent Alicsun Bullicer shall be dismissed from employment with the 
Oxnard Union High School District.
DATE:
DATE:
DATE:MONICA FELLER
Commissioner
ANGELICA JAUREGUI
Commissioner
ERLINDA SHRENGER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
