BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
FOR THE GOVERNING BOARD OF 
TAHOE TRUCKEE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

MARGUERITE SEEHEUTTER, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022010159 

DECISION 

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on May 23 

through May 26, 2022, from Sacramento, California.1  

Ingrid A. Meyers, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelly, represented the Tahoe 

Truckee Unified School District (District).

Marguerite Seeheutter (respondent) represented herself.

1 On May 12, 2022, the parties agreed to waive their right to a hearing before a 

three-person Commission on Professional Competence, and to have the hearing 

conducted by an ALJ sitting alone, pursuant to Education Code section 44944, 

subdivision (c)(1).

 
Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on May 26, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

California Department of Public Health Order 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. She is a

Spanish teacher at Truckee High School, in Truckee, California. On August 21, 2021, the 

California Department of Public Health (CDPH) issued an order, titled “State Public 

Health Officer Order of August 11, 2021,” (Order) requiring all public and private 

kindergarten through grade 12 schools to verify the COVID-19 vaccination status of all 

workers, maintain records of employee vaccination status, and make available records 

of vaccination verification to the local health jurisdiction for purposes of case 

investigation. The Order states:  

California is currently experiencing the fastest increase in 

COVID-19 cases during the entire pandemic with 22.7 new 

cases per 100,000 per day, with case rates increasing 

tenfold since early June. The Delta variant, which is two 

times more contagious than the original virus, is currently 

the most common variant causing new infections in 

California. 

Unvaccinated persons are more likely to get infected and 

spread the virus, which is transmitted through the air … 

2

Vaccination against COVID-19 is the most effective means 

of preventing infection with the COVID-19 virus, and 

subsequent transmission and outbreaks. 

2. 

Furthermore, Section II.C. of the Order states: 

Workers who are not fully vaccinated, or for whom vaccine 

status is unknown or documentation is not provided, must 

be considered unvaccinated. 

Section III of the Order addressed testing requirements: 

A. Asymptomatic unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated 

workers are required to undergo diagnostic screening 

testing. 

B. Workers may be tested with either antigen or molecular 

tests to satisfy this requirement, but unvaccinated or 

incompletely vaccinated workers must be tested at least 

once weekly with either PCR testing or antigen testing … 

C. Unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated workers must 

also observe all other infection control requirements, and 

are not exempted from the testing requirement even if they 

have a medical contraindication to vaccination, since they 

are still potentially able to spread the illness. Previous 

history of COVID-19 from which the individual recovered 

more than 90 days earlier, or a previous positive antibody 

3

test for COVID-19, do not waive this requirement for 

testing. 

[¶] … [¶]

The Order was issued pursuant to various Health and Safety Code sections, and 

took effect on August 12, 2021, at 12:01 a.m. All schools in the District were required 

to comply with the Order by October 15, 2021. The Order was signed by Tomás J. 

Aragón, M.D., Dr.PH., State Public Health Officer and Director. The Order became 

District policy requiring all District employees to submit proof of vaccination against 

COVID-19 or undergo weekly diagnostic testing in accordance with the Order. The 

District required full compliance with the proof of vaccination/testing requirement by 

October 15, 2021.

Board Policies and Regulations 

3. 

Board Policy 4119.21, Personnel – Professional Standards, states:

The Governing Board expects district employees to 

maintain the highest ethical standards, behave 

professionally, follow district policies and regulations, abide 

by state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment 

when interacting with students and other members of the 

school community. Employees shall engage in conduct that 

enhances the integrity of the district, advances the goals of 

the district’s educational programs, and contributes to a 

positive school climate.

4

4.

District Board Administrative Regulation 4112, Appointment and 

Conditions of Employment, … states in pertinent part that certificated staff shall, 

among other things, “Fulfill any other requirements as specified by law, collective 

bargaining agreement, Board Policy or Administrative Regulation.”  

5. 

Board Policy 4000, Concepts and Roles in Personnel, states in pertinent 

part: 

The Governing Board recognizes that the success of the 

district students and programs hinges on effective 

personnel. The Board desires to establish safe and 

supportive working conditions that will attract and retain 

staff members who are highly qualified and dedicated to 

the education and welfare of students. The district’s 

personnel policies and related regulations shall be designed 

to ensure a supportive, positive climate and shall be 

consistent with collective bargaining agreements and in 

conformance with state and federal law and regulations.

Respondent’s Email Inquiries Regarding Religious Exemption

6. 

On Saturday, August 21, 2021, respondent emailed Carmen Ghysels, 

District Superintendent, stating, “I want to work normally, without wearing a mask, 

getting tested or vaccinated.” Respondent asked who would be making the 

accommodations for her request, whether there was a special form to be completed, 

and whether there was any reason why her request would be denied. Respondent 

informed Ms. Ghysels that her request was “required by law to be accommodated.”

Ms. Ghysels responded to respondent’s email that evening, thanking respondent for 

5

her questions and stating that Joan Zappettini, the District’s Director of Human 

Resources, would respond to respondent’s email “with what protocols our District and 

other Districts in the state are required to follow.” Ms. Ghysels copied Ms. Zappettini 

on her email response.

7.

On Sunday, August 22, 2021, Ms. Zappettini emailed respondent, in 

pertinent part:

Under the new California State mandate and CDPH 

guidelines for vaccinations and testing, here are the 

answers to your questions.

1. You are not required to get the vaccination. Non-

vaccinated employees will be required to do a COVID test 

weekly. More information on the testing process will be 

forthcoming. 

2. Under the law, there is no religious exemption for testing 

or wearing of a mask. You will be required to do both. 

8. 

On Monday, August 23, 2021, respondent responded to Ms. Zappettini’s 

email, stating that she understood that she was not required to get vaccinated, but 

was still requesting a religious exemption. Respondent further stated, “I have to say I 

am religious and can say no to what is done to my body (covering my entire nose and

mouth or any means of testing).” Respondent also stated, “It is my understanding tests 

and masks are under an emergency use authorization, but it is currently not a statutory 

law; however, Federal law-Title VII Civil Rights Act does require you and [the District] 

to accommodate my religious beliefs.” Respondent again inquired whether the District 

6

had a special form for her to complete, who needed to sign the religious exemption 

letter, and whether it needed to be notarized.

9. 

Ms. Zappettini responded shortly thereafter, informing respondent that 

“there is no exemption for face masking or testing.” She added that a medical 

condition could affect the face mask requirement, but not a religious reason.

10.  On August 24, 2021, respondent sent a letter to Ms. Zappettini, stating 

that the letter was her “formal request and right (under Title VII Civil Rights Act of 

1964) for an accomodation [

] not to be vaccinated, wear a covering over [her] entire 

mouth and nose, or to undergo any testing.” Respondent “sincerely profess[ed] that 

Jesus Christ died and was resurrected for [her],” and that she is “set apart through 

salvation and belong[s] to a Body of Christ.” In support of her formal request, 

respondent provided numerous bible verses; a sampling is set forth below: 

1 Corinthians 6:19-20 “Do you not know that your bodies 

are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you 

have [r]eceived from God? You are not your own; you were 

bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your body[.]

1 John 4:15 “Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son 

of God, God dwelleth in Him, and He in God[.]

Philippians 2:16 “As you hold firmly to the word of life, then 

I will be able to boast on the day of Christ that I did not run 

nor did I labor in vain[.]

Respondent concluded in her letter:

7

I sincerely believe wearing a mask covering the body parts 

that God created for me to breathe freely is not a law, and 

is a sin. I feel fake and I feel I am lying to myself. Without 

violating my conscience, I am open and willing to wear a 

mask that will leave my nose uncovered. I am willing to call 

in sick if I have any flu-like symptoms.

District Emails Regarding Compliance with Order  

11.  On September 22, 2021, Ms. Zappettini sent to those employees, 

including respondent, that had not yet submitted documentation of their COVID-19 

status, an email titled “IMPORTANT-TIME SENSITIVE: Self Certification COVID-19 

Vaccination Status Form.” (Capitalization in original.) She instructed the employees to 

complete the District’s Self-Certification of Vaccination Status Form, and to follow the 

directions for providing verification of their vaccination status. After completing the 

form, employees were instructed to bring their vaccination record to Human Resources

(HR), so that HR could make a copy. If employees were not vaccinated, they were still 

required to complete the form and to comply with the Order requiring weekly testing. 

All forms were required to be completed and returned no later than Wednesday, 

October 6, 2021. Employees were provided with directions for Mandated Weekly 

Testing:

Testing will begin on or before October 15, 2021;

Testing will be conducted at your work site;

You will be noticed as to when and where to test.

8

12.

On October 4, 2021, Ms. Zappettini sent an email titled, “COURTESY 

REMINDER: DUE WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 6 – IMPORTANT – TIME SENSITIVE: Self 

Certification COVID-19 Vaccination Status Form,” reminding employees who had not 

yet done to so complete the District’s Self-Certification of Vaccination Status Form 

(self-certification), and to bring their completed form and vaccine record to the 

District’s Human Resources Department by October 6, 2021. The email contained the 

same information as Ms. Zappettini’s September 22, 2021 email. Respondent was 

included in the list of employees that were sent this email. 

13.  On October 14, 2021, Ms. Zappettini sent an email to those employees 

who were testing weekly as noted in their self-certification, and those employees who 

did not respond to the request to complete the Self-Certification of Vaccine Status. 

The email provided the weekly testing protocol for the District, specifically stating that: 

weekly testing was mandated for all employees that were not vaccinated or did not 

show proof of vaccination; weekly testing was to begin on October 18, 2021; 

employees were required to test on their first work day of each week; and non-

compliance of the testing mandate “will result being placed on unpaid leave beginning 

the week of October 25.” Respondent was included in the list of employees that were 

sent this email. 

14. 

In addition, Ms. Ghysels sent an email to all District staff on October 14, 

2021, informing employees that Governor Newsom announced the Order in August 

2021, requiring all public and private schools in California to verify that all employees 

were fully vaccinated or to take part in weekly COVID-19 testing. She reminded 

employees that the Order took effect on August 12, 2021, and all school districts must 

comply with the Order by October 15, 2021. If an unvaccinated employee did not 

9

undergo weekly testing, “the individual would not receive compensation during the 

time they are excluded from work.” 

15.  On October 19, 2021, Ms. Zappettini emailed respondent to follow up on 

weekly testing that began the previous day. Ms. Zappettini informed respondent that 

she respected and understood respondent’s religious beliefs on vaccination and 

testing, but that there were only “religious exemptions for vaccines, but not for 

testing.” Ms. Zappettini directed respondent to report for testing, stating “Please see 

Logan today to test. Starting next week you will test on the first work day of each 

week.” Later that morning, respondent responded to Ms. Zappettini’s email, 

reasserting her August 24, 2021 formal request for a religious exemption, and stating:

I am exercising my Title VII right to not undergo testing, not 

wear a mask that fully covers my nose and mouth, and not 

to be vaccinated. You as my “higher ups” have the authority 

to honor or discriminate against my rights. It is my 

understanding “the State” can not [

] pick and choose 

what my religious exemptions can be – they are what they 

are because of my sincerely held beliefs. 

16.  On October 20, 2021, Ms. Zappettini met with respondent and sent 

respondent an email confirming that the District respected her personal choices. 

However, the District’s weekly testing requirement was based on a “legal directive that 

the district is required to follow.” Ms. Zappettini repeated that “there is no religious 

exemption for testing.” She again directed respondent to begin weekly testing 

“starting this week.” Ms. Zappettini informed respondent that if she chose not to test, 

she would be “placed on unpaid leave beginning next week (October 25).”

10 

17.

On October 24, 2021, Ms. Zappettini sent respondent an email 

memorializing their in-person conversation on October 20, 2021. Ms. Zappettini

informed respondent of the state mandate that went into effect on October 15, 2021, 

requiring respondent to either get the COVID-19 vaccine, or test weekly for COVID-19. 

Ms. Zappettini acknowledged respondent’s August 24, 2021 letter requesting a 

religious exemption from testing, and reminded respondent that there were no 

religious exemptions for testing. Ms. Zappettini also reminded respondent that she 

needed to see the District’s testing lead, Logan Mallonee, to test. At their meeting on 

October 20, 2021, Ms. Zappettini again shared with respondent that there was no 

religious exemption for COVID-19 testing and directed respondent to test. Ms. 

Zappettini went to Truckee High School on October 22, 2021 to touch bases with 

respondent, but respondent had been absent for two days. Ms. Zappettini then called 

respondent and left a message, but did not hear from respondent. Respondent was 

again directed to appear for work the following Monday and test, or if she chose not 

to, she would remain at home, off of work. 

If respondent chose to remain off of work, she would be placed on paid 

administrative leave that Monday, and interactive meeting would be set up, and if 

respondent continued to refuse testing, she would remain on paid administrative leave 

until Wednesday, November 3, 2021. On that day, the school board would take action 

to place respondent on unpaid administrative leave pending termination for 

insubordination for failing to follow the mandate. 

18.  On October 25, 2021, respondent sent Ms. Zappettini an email stating 

that the District had the responsibility to address her August 24, 2021 formal request 

for a religious exemption within 30 days, and the District had not yet done so. 

Respondent further asserted that she believed her “exemption under federal law had 

11 

been honored.” She again asserted that a religious exemption is her “right under 

federal law,” and that “one, two or twenty mandates does not control [her] sincerely 

held beliefs.” 

Letter of Reprimand

19.

On October 27, 2021, respondent received a Letter of Reprimand

informing her that refusing to follow the District’s directive of the state COVID-19 

mandate violates the Education Code, and her actions were insubordinate, a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations, 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, and evident 

unfitness for service. The District directed respondent to comply with the state COVID-

19 testing mandate and to report to the Testing Lead at Truckee High School for 

testing. Respondent’s failure to comply with the District’s directive “will result in a 

recommendation for an unpaid suspension and termination.” 

Notices of Intent to Dismiss and Immediate Unpaid Suspension 

20.  On November 12, 2021, the District served respondent with a Notice of 

Intent to Dismiss, unless she demanded a hearing as set forth in the Education Code. 

The District also served respondent with a Notice of Immediate Unpaid Suspension 

pursuant to Education Code section 44939 for her willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without cause. Respondent timely requested a hearing. 

Amended Statement of Charges for Dismissal and Immediate 

Suspension 

21.  On November 9, 2021, Ms. Ghysels, in her official capacity, signed and 

thereafter filed a Statement of Charges for Dismissal and Immediate Suspension 

12 

against respondent. An Amended Statement of Charges was filed on February 22, 

2022. The District alleged that respondent’s conduct violated health and safety orders, 

requirements, and directives, and put the health of her coworkers at risk. In addition, 

respondent undermined the District’s goals, failed to meet the District’s fundamental 

expectations of its certificated employees, demonstrated unfitness to teach, and 

showed persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state, and 

regulations. She also showed willful refusal to perform her regular school assignments 

without reasonable cause, and committed an act of dishonesty. Ms. Ghysels 

recommended that respondent be immediately suspended without pay and 

subsequently dismissed from her employment with the District. 

District’s Witnesses 

CARMEN GHYSELS, SUPERINTENDENT AND CHIEF LEARNING OFFICER 

22.  Ms. Ghysels is the Superintendent and Chief Learning Officer for the 

District. She oversees all of the District’s operations. She seldomly interacted with 

respondent, but was aware of the many communications between respondent and Ms. 

Zappettini set forth above. The District was required to follow the Order. Failure to do 

so would have potentially placed the District at risk of losing its liability insurance 

coverage if the District compromised the health and safety of students and staff. All 

schools were to verify the vaccination status of all workers, and if anyone refused to 

show proof of vaccination or test weekly, “there would be sanctions from the state 

level to force us to comply.” “Whatever the [CDPH] mandated, that became our policy 

ever since the mandate began.”

23. Ms. Ghysels set forth the general expectations of District employees. 

Employees are expected to act professionally and in a competent manner, and to 

13 

follow any mandates, recommendations, Board policies and procedures, District 

Directives, and their professional contract for employment. 

24.  Ms. Ghysels asserted that the District sent to its employees consistent 

communications explaining the Order, and what was required of the District and each 

employee. This information was shared at Board meetings, on the District’s website, 

through emails from Jeff Santos, Executive Director of Student Services, as well as Ms. 

Zappettini, the District’s HR Director. 

25.  Ms. Ghysels acknowledged receipt of respondent’s email of August 21, 

2021, inquiring about a religious exemption from wearing a mask, testing, and getting 

vaccinated. She referred respondent’s email to Ms. Zappettini for a response. Ms. 

Ghysels added that there are religious exemptions for vaccines, but not for testing. 

Testing was mandated by the state, and it was not something that the District could 

choose to ignore. Ms. Ghysels informed all District employees by email of the state 

mandate, and “absolutely expected staff to read [her October 14, 2021] email.” 

26. 

Respondent repeatedly refused to comply with the Order, and as of 

November 9, 2021, she still refused to be vaccinated or test weekly for COVID-19. The 

District filed a Statement of Charges, then filed an Amended Statement of Charges to 

include an act of dishonesty by respondent. Specifically, on November 10, 2021, 

respondent secretly recorded her telephone conversation with Ms. Zappettini without 

Ms. Zappettini’s consent. The District learned of the secret recording when respondent

sent the recording to the District’s legal counsel to show that her religious 

accommodations were not being met. Ms. Ghysels asserted that secretly recording 

staff is not acceptable by any employee, and violates the District’s code of conduct for 

professionalism. 

14 

27. Ms. Ghysels was involved in the District’s decision to dismiss respondent.

She did not recommend a lesser form of discipline because respondent repeatedly 

refused to test, even after she was issued a Letter of Reprimand. Moreover, 

respondent’s failure to follow the District’s directives, policies, and procedures, and the 

state mandate, demonstrates evidenced unfitness for service. Ms. Ghysel believes that 

respondent should not continue her employment with the District because her actions 

placed the health and welfare of others at risk. Her conduct “equates to willful refusal 

to comply with the laws of the state.” Ms. Ghysel added that the District did not treat 

any other non-complying employee differently. 

JEFF SANTOS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF STUDENT SERVICES

28. 

Jeff Santos has worked for the District as its Executive Director of Student 

Services for the past three years. He oversees special education and health services, 

and “work[s] with HR in anything COVID-related as it relates to employees.” Mr. Santos 

assisted with developing COVID protocols for the District at the start of the 2021-2022 

school year. He received guidelines from the Department of Public Health, and 

updated the District’s employee handbook accordingly, six or seven times. If there was 

change in the handbook, he sent an email to District employees highlighting the 

updates in the handbook, and would also send a recorded voice mail with the updated 

highlights. The email updates consisted of “anything related to masking, quarantines, 

timelines, employee vaccination, direct exposure, student athletics vaccination 

requirements, testing and testing options. 

29. Mr. Santos confirmed that the Order applied to the District, as it was 

addressed to all school districts, specifically kindergarten through grade 12 schools. He 

also confirmed that if the District failed to follow the state mandate, the District would 

15 

lose its liability insurance, place District families at risk, and subject the District to 

litigation. 

30.  On October 15, 2021, Mr. Santos sent an email to all employees in the 

District, including respondent, informing them of changes to the employee handbook 

regarding testing requirements. Employees had the option of taking an antigen or 

molecular (PCR) test. The District offered the antigen test at school sites, or employees 

“could get a PCR test in town.” Mr. Santos did not recall respondent asking questions 

about this email, and she did not contact Mr. Santos about her unwillingness to test 

for COVID-19. Mr. Santos’ expectation was that respondent would read this email. 

31.  On October 26, 2021, Mr. Santos sent another email to all employees in 

the District, including respondent, informing them of updates to the employee 

handbook. The updates included adding that employees were not exempt from the 

testing requirement if they had COVID-19 within the past 90 days, weekly testing was 

a safe, non-invasive procedure, and employees had the option to test at school or in 

town. Mr. Santos’ expectation was that respondent would read this email. Mr. Santos 

added that respondent inquired about a saliva test, but such test was not available at 

the District. 

JOAN ZAPPETTINI, DIRECTOR OF HR 

32.  Ms. Zappettini testified consistently with the contents of her emails 

described above. She added that she interacted with respondent approximately eight 

to 10 times because respondent “continued to be out of compliance” with the state 

mandate on COVID-19. The general expectations of all employees in the District are to 

be professional and to follow District mandates, procedures, directives, and District 

beliefs which are in the District’s vision statement.  

16 

33. Ms. Zappettini confirmed that the District did not have an option when 

following the Order. The District was mandated by law to follow the order, and failure 

to do so would subject the District to sanctions such as funding, and posed liability 

risks for the District. Mr. Santos “took care of logistics,” and Ms. Zappettini set up the 

District’s testing centers and maintained documentation related to proof of 

vaccination and testing. Despite respondent’s claims to the contrary, Ms. Zappettini 

responded to respondent’s questions in her August 22, 2021 email inquiring about a 

religious exemption to the Order. Ms. Zappettini informed respondent that there was 

no religious exemption for testing or mask wearing, based upon a three-hour training 

session on the mandate provided by legal counsel for the District’s liability insurance 

carrier. The training included testing documentation, to whom the Order applied, and 

what to do if an employee refused to comply. 

34. 

As of October 20, 2021, respondent still did not provide her vaccination 

status to the District, nor did she comply with Ms. Zappettini’s September 22, October 

4, or October 14, 2021, emails regarding completion of the self-certification forms. Ms. 

Zappettini told respondent she would be placed on leave if she did not comply, and 

the District did not have a choice in following the Order. 

35.  On October 27, 2021, Ms. Zappettini had an interactive meeting with 

respondent, her union representative, and her pastor. They discussed the state 

mandate and District requirements. Respondent was again informed that as an 

unvaccinated employee, she was required to test weekly and she had not complied as 

of that date. Saliva tests were not available for any school district in California. She was 

again told that there was no religious exemption for testing or masking. Respondent

spoke extensively about her religious beliefs and quoted from the bible. 

17 

36.

Regarding respondent’s secret recording of Ms. Zappettini during their 

conversation on November 10, 2021, Ms. Zappettini did not know she was being 

recorded, and only learned later from the District’s counsel about the recording when 

respondent provided it to the District. 

37.  Ms. Zappettini does not believe that respondent should continue to be 

an employee of the District. Respondent’s continued refusal to comply with the 

District’s policy carrying out the Order placed the health and welfare of others at risk. 

Ms. Zappettini believes that respondent’s refusal to test or vaccinate is a willful refusal 

of the District’s policy and state mandate. Ms. Zappettini asserted that the District did 

not treat respondent any differently than anyone else. 

LOGAN MALLONEE, TRUCKEE HIGH SCHOOL PRINCIPAL 

38. 

Truckee High School has 850 enrolled students, and 75 to 80 classified 

employees. As principal, Ms. Mallonee supervises employees and completes employee 

evaluations. She ensures that the District’s policies and procedures are followed. Ms. 

Mallonee sends weekly emails to staff, which include staff weekly reminders. She 

expects employees to read all emails, because that is the primary mode of 

communication. If a teacher does not understand her emails, the expectation is that a 

teacher would contact Ms. Mallonee to discuss it. Ms. Mallonee directly supervised 

respondent.

39.

At the start of the 2020-2021 school year, the District had COVID-19 

protocols in place, including wearing masks, social distancing, and desk spacing. The 

expectation was that all employees would follow all of the District’s protocols and 

directives. Ms. Mallonee stated that the Order applied to all employees at Truckee 

High School, and that if employees were not vaccinated, the were required to test 

18 

weekly. Ms. Mallonee was responsible for administering the test and providing the 

results to the District. She confirmed that respondent did not comply with the District’s 

directive to test weekly. She also recalled seeing an email on District policy addressing

religious exemptions applicable to vaccination, but not testing. 

JEFFREY MURPHY, TRUCKEE HIGH SCHOOL ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY

40.  Mr. Murphy is the secretary to the Principal and Vice Principal of Truckee 

High School. He considers respondent a colleague and a friend. They share the same 

faith. Mr. Murphy is aware of and understands the COVID-19 protocols at the District, 

and the District mandates requiring proof of vaccination, or weekly testing for 

unvaccinated employees. He received Mr. Santos’s emails on COVID-19 protocols and 

updates to the employee handbook. The emails were clear and he understood the 

protocols. Mr. Murphy also received an email from Mr. Santos informing all employees 

about the Order. Mr. Murphy read all emails from Mr. Santos and did not ignore them, 

because part of his job is to be informed of all information disseminated by the 

District. Mr. Murphy had no problems complying with the District’s policy and 

directives carrying out the Order. He did not see anything about religious exemptions 

in the Order.

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

41. 

Respondent has taught at Truckee High School for 26 years and has 

enjoyed it. She has served as the campus Christian Club Advisor for 12 years. She 

described herself as a “yes person,” meaning that if she is asked to perform extra tasks

or assignments, she will do so. Respondent has been a practicing Christian for 20 

years, and her conduct is governed by the Holy Bible. 

19 

42.

Respondent contracted COVID-19 in December 2020. She conducted her 

own research about COVID-19, and found that people were getting sick or dying from 

the COVID-19 vaccine. She believed she was immune from COVID-19 after contracting 

it. She believes that her body is not her own in accordance with passages from the 

bible, stating “[m]y physical body does not belong to me; my body is not my own.” 

Respondent conceded that she read the Order, but did not see anything in the Order 

addressing religious exemptions. Respondent believed this was so because religious 

freedoms are protected under the Constitution.

Respondent believed that the Order was only a recommendation providing 

guidance, not a mandate, because she saw the words “temporary” and “limited” in the 

Order. Furthermore, she saw the word “eligible” and believed she was ineligible to 

comply with the Order due to her sincerely held religious beliefs. Based on her strong 

personal religious conviction, respondent chose not to comply with the state mandate 

and District policy carrying out the Order. 

43.  On August 23, 2021, respondent emailed Ms. Ghysel and Ms. Zappettini 

regarding her religious exemption inquiry. Respondent sought clarification of Mr. 

Santos’s emails because the employee handbook was changed frequently, and 

respondent did not find an actual law in the handbook regarding religious exemptions. 

She knew that there were protections for religious practice in the workplace, and 

believed that Ms. Zappettini was not knowledgeable and was speculating when she 

informed respondent that there was a religious exemption for vaccinations, but not for 

weekly testing. Respondent believed that Ms. Zappettini’s response did not apply to 

her because she knew the law and read the employee handbook. After a lot of prayer, 

respondent submitted her formal request for a religious exemption on August 24, 

2021. 

20 

44.

Respondent assumed that her formal request for a religious exemption 

had been granted because she heard nothing further from the District. She did not 

read and deleted all COVID-related emails from the District. She did not believe she 

was irresponsible in doing so. She asserted that 56 days went by, before receiving a 

personal email from Ms. Zappettini regarding weekly testing. Respondent was “blown 

away” because so much time had passed with no response. Respondent felt betrayed 

by the District. She only wanted the District to respect and honor her request for a 

religious exemption. 

45. 

During the interactive meeting with Ms. Zappettini on October 27, 2021, 

respondent asked Ms. Zappettini to approve and sign her formal request for a 

religious exemption. Ms. Zappettini refused. Respondent asked Ms. Zappettini to 

seriously consider her decision not to sign. Ms. Zappettini told respondent she had a 

choice to test weekly, but respondent believed she did not have a choice due to her 

strong convictions. Respondent was surprised that she was facing dismissal from her 

employment based on her religious beliefs. 

46. 

Regarding the Amended Statement of Charges, respondent did not 

believe that she was putting everyone around her at risk and was unsafe. She 

continued to believe that Ms. Zappettini was incorrect, had no knowledge, did not 

know what she was talking about, and was speculating about the dangers of COVID-

19, stating that there is “no proof that unvaccinated and untested people [are deemed] 

unsafe.” Respondent conceded that she is not a COVID-19 expert, and did not consult 

with an attorney about complying with the Order. She also understood that as a 

teacher in the District, she must follow District policies and regulations. 

Regarding her secret recording of her conversation with Ms. Zappettini on 

November 10, 2021, respondent claimed that doing so was her “note taking system,” 

21 

because she has a bad memory. On February 17, 2022, she emailed the secret 

recording to the District’s counsel to be transparent and forthcoming. Respondent 

asserted that she has not refused or undermined the District in any way that shows she 

is insubordinate, unprofessional, and unethical. 

PASTOR JAMES STARK

47. 

James Stark is a Pastor at Deerfield Community Church in Truckee, 

California, and is respondent’s spiritual counselor. He was present at a meeting at the 

District Office on October 27, 2021, the day that respondent received the Letter of 

Reprimand. He observed the conversation between respondent and Ms. Zappettini 

and did not participate in the discussion of the state mandate. Pastor Stark did not 

read the Amended Statement of Charges, or know of the charges contained therein. 

GABRIEL DEIRO 

48. 

Gabriel Deiro is a former student of respondent’s Spanish class and the 

campus Christian Club at Truckee High School. He and respondent attend the same 

church. He recalled church members asking him via a group chat to attend a 

November 9, 2021 board meeting to support respondent. He prayed with respondent 

at the meeting, and recalled addressing the board that night regarding her dismissal. 

Mr. Deiro believes that the Order was “a mandate but it wasn’t law,” and there are 

“more substantial laws protecting [respondent] versus the mandate forcing 

[respondent] to follow the regulations.” He claimed that “there are no laws on COVID 

but there are mandates,” and that respondent’s “religious exemption should honor 

that situation.” Mr. Deiro conceded that he is not lawyer, nor is he an expert on 

COVID-19. He did not read the Amended Statement of Charges, or know of the 

charges contained therein.

22 

Analysis

49.

A teacher is an educator that must engage in conduct that enhances the 

integrity of the District, advances the goals of the District’s educational programs, and 

contributes to a positive school climate. A teacher must always maintain the highest 

level of ethics, judgment, and professionalism in their position as an educator and in 

complying with District and Board policies and regulations. A teacher is in a position of 

trust with students, parents, administrators, and the teaching community. 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION/REFUSAL TO OBEY RULES REGARDING EMPLOYMENT

50. 

The evidence established that respondent engaged in a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the District and Board’s policies, procedures, and 

regulations, District directives, state mandate, and Order regarding COVID-19 proof of 

vaccination and weekly testing. District employees were subject to the Order, and Ms. 

Ghysels credibly testified that the mandates in the Order became District policy. The 

evidence established that Mr. Santos sent emails to all District employees on October 

15 and 26, 2021, informing employees of changes to the employee handbook 

regarding testing requirements and testing locations. The handbook updates stated 

that there were no exemptions from the testing requirements even if an employee had 

COVID-19 within the past 90 days. There were no other exemptions provided in the 

updates. Respondent admitted that she did not read and deleted these emails because 

she believed she was exempt based on her religious beliefs.

51.

The evidence also established that the Order was a legal mandate 

requiring all school districts to comply, or face sanctions and the potential loss of 

liability insurance. Respondent’s belief that the Order merely contained 

recommendations and guidelines was not persuasive.

23 

52.

Respondent’s claim that Ms. Zappettini was not knowledgeable and was 

speculating when she informed respondent that there was a religious exemption for 

vaccinations, but not for weekly testing, was not persuasive and unsupported by the 

evidence. Ms. Zappettini testified credibly that she completed a three-hour training 

session on the mandate provided by legal counsel for the District’s liability insurance 

carrier. From that training, Ms. Zappettini was informed that no religious exemption 

existed for weekly testing.  

53. 

Despite Ms. Zappettini’s numerous emails to respondent addressing 

respondent’s religious exemption inquiries, and attempting to seek respondent’s 

compliance of the mandate, respondent consistently refused to obey the District’s

directives and state mandate, evidence by the credible testimony of Ms. Ghysels, Ms. 

Zappettini, and Ms. Mallonee. In addition, Mr. Murphy, a colleague and person of the 

same faith as respondent, testified credibly that there were no religious exemptions set 

forth in the Order, and further confirmed that he read all of Mr. Santos’s emails 

updating the employee handbook regarding COVOID-19 protocols, the emails were 

clear, and he had no problems complying with the District’s policy and directives 

carrying out the Order. 

54. 

In addition, the District alleged that respondent violated Penal Code 

section 632.7, which makes it a crime to intentionally record a telephone conversation 

without the consent of all parties to the communication. Although the requisite 

elements of a Penal Code section 632.7 violation appear to have been met, the 

violation is criminal in nature and a finding in this regard is left to the criminal court. 

However, the evidence established, by respondent’s own admission, that she recorded 

her conversation with Ms. Zappettini without her consent. Respondent’s claim that she 

24 

recorded the conversation because that was her way of taking notes due to her bad 

memory, was not persuasive. 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION/REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS 

WITHOUT REASONABLE CAUSE

55. 

The evidence established that respondent refused to provide the District 

with proof of vaccination or weekly testing on September 22, October 4, October 14, 

October 20, October 24, and October 27, 2021. Respondent continued to willfully 

refuse to perform regular assignments, as set forth in the emails on these dates,

without reasonable cause. 

DISHONESTY 

56. 

The evidence established that respondent’s secret recording of her 

phone conversation with Ms. Zappettini on November 10, 2021, without her consent, 

was dishonest. As stated above, respondent’s claim that she recorded the conversation 

in lieu of taking notes due to a bad memory was not persuasive. Respondent claimed 

that she provided the recording to the District in an effort to be forthcoming and 

transparent, but she was not so when she decided to record Ms. Ms. Zappettini in 

secret.

MORRISON CRITERIA

57. 

Education Code sections 44932 and 44944 create the statutory 

framework for this proceeding. The statutes give discretion to both the District and the 

Commission. The District has the right to determine when to seek disciplinary action 

against a teacher and what discipline to seek. The Commission, however, is not bound 

by the District’s choice. It has broad discretion in disciplinary matters. Its role is not 

25 

limited to determining whether charged conduct in fact occurred, but it must also 

decide whether that conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach when measured against 

the criteria set forth in 

214, 229-30. (

 (

) (1969) 1 Cal.3d 

(

) (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 

219-22.) In exercising its discretion in this matter, the Commission determines whether 

dismissal is warranted by the facts established at the hearing.

58. 

Before a decision can be made as to whether respondent’s conduct was 

immoral (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)), dishonest (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4)), 

constituted evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)), and/or was a 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the State or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board or 

by the governing board of the school district employing him (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(8)), the Commission must determine whether respondent’s conduct demonstrated 

he was unfit to teach using the 

criteria. (

(1977) 

19 Cal.3d 691, 696.) The 

criteria are: (1) the likelihood the conduct may have 

adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the type of 

teaching certificate held by the party involved; (5) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the likelihood of the recurrence of 

the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved 

or other teachers. (

, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 

26 

LIKELIHOOD CONDUCT MAY HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED STUDENTS OR 

TEACHERS

59.

Respondent’s persistent violation and refusal to obey the rules regarding 

her employment and perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, and her 

dishonesty, have created a very high likelihood that her conduct may have adversely 

affected students or teachers. She violated Health and Safety orders set forth in the 

Order, placed District employees and students at risk of contracting COVID-19, and 

undermined the authority of the District to carry out the provisions of the Order.

THE DEGREE OF THE ADVERSE EFFECT 

60. 

Respondent failed to acknowledge and appreciate how her conduct 

affected District employees and students. Rather, she focused on how the Order 

affected her. The District was required to comply with the Order or face sanctions; its 

intent was not to restrict respondent’s religious freedoms. Respondent created the risk 

that she could have passed on the COVID-19 virus to others without knowing it. 

Respondent’s conduct will have a severe and lasting adverse effect on District 

employees and students. In addition, her secret recording of her conversation with Ms. 

Zappettini was unprofessional, undermined the integrity of the District, and created a 

negative school climate.

District and school administrators aware of respondent’s conduct may result in 

them questioning their own ability to protect students and ensure their safety if 

respondent is permitted to return to school. Respondent’s behavior will also have a 

significant adverse effect on the teaching community, as students and parents will 

question the amount of trust and faith they should have in educators.

27 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT

61.

The conduct at issue took place last year, in 2021. The conduct at issue is 

not remote in time. 

TYPE OF TEACHING CREDENTIAL

62. 

Respondent is a single-subject credentialed teacher with over 26 years of 

teaching experience.

EXTENUATING AND AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

63. 

Respondent is a credentialed teacher. She is responsible for complying 

with District policy and the Order, to avoid placing the health of co-workers and 

students at risk. She is expected to read her emails, not ignore and delete them. She is 

expected to maintain high ethical standards, abide by state and federal laws, and 

exercise good judgment. She is expected to be trustworthy. Respondent repeatedly 

demonstrated that she cannot abide by the policies and directives of the District, and 

cannot be trusted to maintain the integrity of her own disciplinary matter.

She demonstrated a lack of good judgment and regard for others. Her 

continued persistent violation of District policy and the state mandate is deeply 

concerning and calls into question her ability to follow District directives. She has 

shown she lacks judgment, professionalism, and inability to recognize the dangers she 

posed to the health and safety of District employees and students.

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

64. 

The likelihood of recurrence is high. Respondent’s repeated and 

persistent violation and refusal to obey the rules regarding her employment and 

28 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, and her dishonesty, do not 

provide the District with any assurances that she will change her outlook on the 

District’s proof of vaccination/testing requirement. Respondent’s lack of insight into 

her own conduct and failure to take responsibility for her actions increases the 

likelihood of recurrence of her misconduct. 

ADVERSE IMPACT OF CHILLING EFFECT UPON THE CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 

OF THE TEACHER INVOLVED OR OTHER TEACHERS

65. 

There was no evidence that dismissing respondent would inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of respondent or other 

teachers.

CONCLUSION 

66. 

After considering the 

criteria outlined above, the evidence 

established that respondent is unfit to teach. 

Causes of Action 

DISHONESTY 

67. 

Dishonesty indicates a lack of honesty; a disposition to lie, cheat, or steal 

(www.dictionary.com); or to deceive. (

(1946) 29 Cal.2d 13, 18.) “Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of bad 

faith.” (

 (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 450, 456.) “[I]t means fraud, deception, 

betrayal, faithlessness; an absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or 

defraud; deceive and betray.” (

.) “Dishonest conduct may range from the smallest 

fib to the most flagrant lie. Not every impropriety will constitute immoral or 

29 

unprofessional conduct, and not every falsehood will constitute ‘dishonesty’ as a 

ground for discipline.” (

Cal.3d 208, 220, fn. 12.) 

(

) (1998) 45 

68. 

The District alleges respondent was dishonest with the District when she 

secretly recorded her conversation with Ms. Zappettini on November 10, 2021, without 

her consent. By her own admission, respondent did so for the purpose of taking notes. 

The evidence established that respondent was dishonest. 

PERSISTENT VIOLATIONS

69. 

The school district board has the right to adopt rules governing the 

conduct of its employees and to require the employees to observe the rules. However, 

a single violation of a school board’s rules is not of itself cause for the dismissal of a 

permanent teacher under subdivision (a)(8) of section 44932. (

(

) (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 84.) The 

Legislature, apparently to allow an opportunity for correction, has decreed that a 

single violation is insufficient to warrant dismissal; “it is the persistent disregard” of 

school rules that subdivision (a)(8) is designed to regulate. (

(1957) 149 Cal.App.2d 265, 272.) As such, the District must 

establish that an employee’s refusal to follow the laws or regulations was “persistent,” 

i.e., “stubborn and continuing.” (

 (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) Isolated incidents or 

incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally 

considered “persistent.” (

(1985) 

174 Cal.App.3d 317.) The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to 

relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . 

30 

constantly repeated.” (

28 Cal.App.3d at 82.) In other judicial decisions, 

the word has been interpreted to mean “continuing or constant.” (

) 

70.  Here, the District met its burden of establishing respondent violated the 

Order, the District’s corresponding policy reflecting the Order, Board Policy 4119.21 

(Professional Standards), District Board Administrative Regulation 4112 (Appointment 

and Conditions of Employment), and Board Policy 4000 (Concepts and Roles in 

Personnel). She repeatedly refused to comply with the Order and the District’s 

directives requesting she do so. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

71. 

Evident unfitness for service means:

[C]learly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, 

ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident 

unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, 

presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the 

employing school district.

(

(

) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The 

 criteria must be analyzed 

as a threshold matter to determine if the conduct indicates unfitness for service. (

. at 

p. 1445.) If the 

 criteria are met, the next step is to determine if the teacher’s 

unfitness is “‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in 

temperament.” (

.)

31 

 
72.

Respondent engaged in repeated and willful refusal to obey the rules 

governing her employment and perform regular assignments without reasonable 

cause. The District conceded that respondent is free to exercise her religious freedoms, 

but must also comply with District and Board policies, directives, regulations, state and 

federal law. Respondent lacked good judgment when she secretly recorded her 

conversation with Ms. Zappettini without her consent. Respondent’s conduct displayed 

a fixed character trait inconsistent with the tenets of teaching. Given the above, a 

preponderance of the evidence established that respondent’s conduct was a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the rules governing her employment, to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, committed an act of dishonesty, and involved 

an evident unfitness for service. 

73. 

Finally, all arguments and evidence presented to support respondent’s 

asserted affirmative defenses have been considered and are rejected. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause. (Ed. Code, § 44934.) 

Causes include: dishonesty, persistent violation of Board policy, and evident unfitness 

for service. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds. (a)(1), (4), (6), & (8).)

2. 

A permanent employee served with a Notice of Dismissal is entitled to a 

due process hearing. (Ed. Code, § 44934.) Education Code section 44944 establishes 

the right to a hearing, the process for selecting the three-member CPC, and sets forth 

the CPC’s authority to issue a final decision. The standard of proof in a teacher 

dismissal proceeding is a preponderance of the evidence. (

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) A preponderance 

32 

of the evidence means that the evidence on one side of an issue outweighs, 

preponderates over, and is more than the evidence on the other side of the issue, not 

necessarily in number of witnesses or quantity, but in the convincing effect the 

evidence has on those to whom it is addressed. In other words, the term refers to 

evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it. (

(2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

Causes for Discipline 

3. 

A trier of fact may consider the totality of the offensive conduct, 

evaluating facts in the aggregate. (

, 

, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1456-1457.) 

When a camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load 

to see which one could have done the deed. Second, causes can be consolidated. “It is 

true that a particular act or omission on the part of a teacher may constitute more 

than one of the causes for his removal specified in Education Code section 13403, 

[now 44932].” (

(1978) 84 

Cal.App.3d 251, 260.) “Acts that are unprofessional conduct may at the same time be 

evidence of evident unfitness, i.e. a fixed character trait or temperamental defect which 

renders the teacher incapable of avoiding acts that are unprofessional.” (

.) 

“Unprofessional conduct,” as used in section 44932, subdivision (a), has been viewed 

broadly as ‘conduct such as to indicate unfitness to teach.’” (

 (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.)

4. 

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, cause exists to dismiss 

respondent under Education Code section 44932 for persistent violations of Board 

policy, dishonesty, and an evident unfitness for service based upon her refusal to 

comply with the Order, state mandate, and District directives, policies, and regulations. 

(Evid. Code, § 44932, subds. (a)(4), (6), and (8).)  

33 

Discipline

5.

Here, the Commission has only two choices: to dismiss or not to dismiss. 

(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a).) “The commission shall not have the power to dispose of 

[a] charge of dismissal by imposing probation or other alternative sanctions. The 

imposition of suspension . . . shall be available only in a suspension proceeding 

authorized pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 44932 or Section 44933.” (

, 45 Cal.3d at p. 216.)

6.

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, the District proved, by a 

preponderance of the evidence, that respondent violated sections 44932, subdivisions 

(a)(4), (6), and (8), and the conduct supports dismissal of respondent.

ORDER

The Tahoe Truckee Unified School District dismissal of respondent Marguerite 

Seehuetter from her employment as a teacher at Truckee High School is UPHELD. 

Respondent’s appeal of her dismissal from employment with the Tahoe Truckee

Unified School District is DENIED.

DATE: June 29, 2022

DANETTE C. BROWN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

34

