BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
RIVERSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

CANDICE REED, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022030360 

DECISION 

This matter was heard before the Commission on Professional Competence by 

videoconference and telephone on October 24 through 28, 2022. The Commission was 

comprised of the following members: Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, 

Janice Cloward, and Amar Samet.  

Christopher D. Keeler, Attorney at Law, Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, 

represented the Riverside Unified School District (district). 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Carlos Perez, represented 

respondent, Candice Reed.  

On November 17, 2022, the Commission met to deliberate, and the matter was 

submitted. 

PROTECTIVE SEALING ORDER 

The names and images of all minor students referred to in this matter are 

confidential and subject to a protective sealing order. Several witnesses who testified 

were also minor students. The documents received as evidence in this matter that 

contain the name of a student have been redacted to remove the student’s name. No 

court reporter or transcription service shall transcribe the names of the student 

witnesses or student names mentioned in testimony but shall instead refer to each 

student by their corresponding initials as set forth in the Confidential Names List 

marked and received into evidence under seal as Exhibit 115. To protect privacy and 

confidential personal information from inappropriate disclosure, a written Protective 

Order Sealing Confidential Records was issued. The order lists the exhibits ordered 

sealed and governs the release of documents to the public. A reviewing court, parties 

to this matter, their attorneys may review the documents subject to the order, 

provided that such documents are protected from release to the public. 

CASE SUMMARY 

Ms. Reed was employed by the district for almost 19 years at John W. North 

High School (“North”) where she taught Mathematics beginning in the 2002-03 school 

year. On October 19, 2021, during three of her math classes, Ms. Reed performed a skit 

where she portrayed a “little Indian boy” on a quest as a mechanism to teach a 

trigonometry concept. One of the three skits she performed on that day was recorded 

on video by a Native American student, who disseminated the video and showed the 

video to his father, who in turn brought it to the attention of the administrative staff of 

North. As a result, the school administration at North investigated. During the 

2 

investigation, the district discovered Ms. Reed had performed the same skit in her 

mathematics classes for many years. Additionally, the video of the skit went viral on 

social media and created and received international media attention resulting in 

multiple protests at North and the district. Ms. Reed’s conduct was harmful to many 

students and created a divisive environment at North. The Commission found that Ms. 

Reed’s actions constituted immoral conduct, and persistent violations or refusals to 

obey regulations and district policies. The Commission did not find that Ms. Reed’s 

actions constituted evident unfitness for service. Based upon the evidence presented, 

the Commission concluded that the allegations were sustained and warranted Ms. 

Reed’s dismissal from the district. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Ms. Reed was employed by the Riverside Unified School District as a high 

school teacher in the subject of Mathematics beginning in August 2002. During the 

time of the alleged incidents, she worked at North.  

2. 

On October 19, 2021, Ms. Reed was placed on paid administrative leave 

from her position at the district. 

3. 

Kyley K. Ybarra, the district’s Assistant Superintendent of Personnel, 

signed the Notice of Intent to Immediately Suspend and to Dismiss; Statement of 

Charges on February 3, 2022, in her official capacity. The notice set forth the facts and 

laws on which the district was relying and sought to immediately dismiss Ms. Reed 

from employment with the district on the grounds of immoral conduct (Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1)), evident unfitness for service (Education Code 

3 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(6)), and persistent violation or refusal to obey 

regulations and district polices (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8)). 

4. 

On May 9, 2022, Ms. Ybarra signed the First Amended Notice of Intent to 

Immediately Suspend and to Dismiss; Statement of Charges in her official capacity. The 

notice set forth the facts and laws on which the district was relying and sought to 

immediately dismiss Ms. Reed from employment with the district on the same grounds 

as alleged in the February 3, 2022, Notice of Intent to Immediately Suspend and to 

Dismiss; Statement of Charges. 

5. 

In the Statement of Charges as set forth in the First Amended Notice of 

Intent to Immediately Suspend and to Dismiss; Statement of Charges, the district 

alleged that on August 3, 2020, Ms. Reed had completed training provided by the 

district entitled “Culturally Responsive Pedagogy,” and thereafter on October 19, 2021, 

Ms. Reed performed a “skit” in which she portrayed a “Little Indian Boy,” while 

chanting the trigonometric mnemonic “SOH CAH TOA” wearing a headband with 

paper feathers, making a “tomahawk” chopping motion with her hands, yelling and 

stomping or dancing around the classroom, and climbing on furniture. Ms. Reed 

performed this same skit in three of her classes on October 19, 2021. A Native 

American student in one of those classes recorded about six minutes of the skit and 

was deeply offended by the skit. On October 19, 2021, the Native American student’s 

father showed the video to administrators at the school site, who immediately 

contacted Ms. Reed and met with her. During that meeting Ms. Reed “did not seem to 

understand that the ‘skit’ was problematic.” On October 20, 2021, a video clip from the 

Native American student’s recording went “viral” after it was posted on Instagram. 

Thereafter, more video recordings by students of the skit were posted on social media. 

Video of Ms. Reed’s skit was reposted several times on social media, including by an 

4 

“influencer” and has been seen hundreds of thousands of times. The videos gained 

local, national, and international media attention. The district noted that “it was 

discovered,” and publicized, that Ms. Reed had been performing this skit in her 

classrooms for many years, dating back to 2012. There were multiple protests at the 

school site and district office, comments made by the public at governing board 

meetings, and thousands of emails, voicemails, and telephone calls to the district, 

many of which demanded the dismissal of Ms. Reed as a result of the skit. 

The Statement of Charges further alleges that Ms. Reed’s conduct by 

performing the skit has negatively affected her relationship with North students, 

administration, and the community; her conduct was detrimental to the mission and 

function of the district and wellbeing of students; her conduct, which was repeated 

over many years, created a hostile environment on the basis of race and ethnicity, in 

violation of board policies and the Education Code.  

6. 

Ms. Reed timely appealed the suspension and dismissal action, denying 

that grounds for her suspension and dismissal from employment existed, and this 

hearing followed. 

Motions in Limine 

7. 

The parties filed motions in limine and oppositions thereto. Tentative 

rulings were issued on August 8, 2022, and the parties were allowed to orally argue 

their positions at the start of trial. After providing opportunity for oral arguments, final 

rulings were issued consistent with the tentative rulings.  

5 

The District’s Evidence 

8. 

The district called 13 witnesses at the hearing and provided video 

recordings of the October 19, 2021, skit by Ms. Reed taken by a student in her 

classroom, multiple videos of board meeting public comments, and voluminous 

documentary evidence, including news articles, emails and transcripts of voicemails 

received by the district and North by members of the community and public. The 

following factual findings are based upon the testimony of the witnesses, as well as 

video and documentary evidence related to that testimony. 

VIDEO OF MS. REED’S SKIT ON OCTOBER 19, 2021 

9. 

Three video recordings of Ms. Reed’s October 19, 2021, skit in her 

classroom were received into evidence. The videos show Ms. Reed dressed in 

patterned pants and wearing a paper head dress with multiple paper feathers while 

stomping, dancing, and walking around the classroom. It also shows the use of an 

overhead projector that has a hand drawing of a stick figure with a headdress and 

feathers. She tells a story of a “Little Indian Boy” who is “out in the wilderness,” and is 

praying to the water goddess for the “secret Indian chant,” and states, “obviously this 

is ridiculous.” During the dancing and stomping she was loudly chanting “SOH CAH.” 

At one point she gets on top of furniture and starts stomping and chanting loudly 

“SOH CAH.” Then she jumps off the furniture and starts screaming “SOH CAH” while 

hopping to the front of the classroom. Then Ms. Reed acts as if she stubbed her toe 

and screams that she “just hurt my TOA.” Thereafter, Ms. Reed sits on her knees on top 

of her desk with her arms spread and up while praying in a loud singing voice to a god 

to “give me the secret.” Ms. Reed then gets off the desk and walks to a corner of the 

room and states, “I just ran into the rock god,” and she produces rocks that she stated 

the “rock god” gave to her. Ms. Reed then appears to pray to the rock god and states 

6 

that the mountain god told her “SOH,” and the water goddess told her “CAH.” Ms. 

Reed asked, “what do you have to impart upon me today?” Ms. Reed then states that 

the rock god told her “TOA.” Then Ms. Reed starts to scream, “I can go home,” and 

proceeds to say that she is going to “do tomahawks.” She then uses her hands in a 

tomahawk chop motion. At that point, Ms. Reed starts to loudly chant “SOH CAH TOA” 

over and over while performing tomahawk chops with her hands and stomping around 

the classroom with her knees bent while moving both forwards and sideways. Ms. 

Reed then states that “eventually I get to go home, and I get all my feathers.” Ms. Reed 

then states, “What does all this nonsense have to do with math?” She then explains the 

trigonometry mnemonic of “SOH CAH TOA.”  

10.  During the videos while Ms. Reed is on top of a desk screaming and 

stomping, at least one student in the classroom can be seen hiding his face, putting 

his head on his desk, and generally appearing embarrassed. At the end of the video 

when Ms. Reed starts to explain the trigonometry mnemonic of “SOH CAH TOA,” one 

student could be heard saying, “No way you did not,” and Ms. Reed states, “I sure did.”  

TESTIMONY OF STUDENTS OF NORTH HIGH SCHOOL 

11. 

ZHW is a 14-year-old student at North and is in the 10th grade. She was 

in the ninth grade in 2021, and she had Ms. Reed as a math teacher in first period class 

that year, which is one of the classes in which Ms. Reed performed the skit described 

above. ZHW testified that she and the class had just finished a quiz in Ms. Reed’s 

classroom when Ms. Reed began to perform the skit. ZHW was present in the same 

classroom as the Native American student who recorded the videos admitted into 

evidence in this matter. ZHW testified that Ms. Reed’s “demonstration was racist” and 

“had a lot of offensive stereotypes,” such as playing the part of a “Little Indian Boy,” 

talking about nature, and praying to the rock, water, and mountain gods with chanting 

7 

and dancing. ZHW testified that prior to performing the skit, Ms. Reed instructed the 

class to “not record the class” after they took their quiz. ZHW stated that this was the 

first time she had ever heard Ms. Reed explicitly instruct the class to not record her 

lesson. ZHW testified that the skit made her feel “uncomfortable to be a part of it” and 

she “did not want to go back to the class the next day.” On October 19, 2021, ZHW 

went to “Mr. Brown’s office,” whom she identified as an athletic director at North, and 

provided a written statement of what she saw in class that day. The written statement 

was received in evidence and mirrored ZHW’s testimony at the hearing.  

12. 

CO is a 15-year-old 10th grade student at North High School. In 2021 he 

was a ninth-grade student. On October 19, 2021, he was in Ms. Reed’s second period 

math class, which is one of the three classes in which Ms. Reed performed the skit that 

day. CO testified that after taking a quiz in Ms. Reed’s class that day, Ms. Reed 

instructed the class to put their phones away and not to record what she was about to 

do, which is something she had never done before. Thereafter, Ms. Reed performed 

the “Little Indian Boy” skit to teach the trigonometry mnemonic “SOH CAH TOA.” CO 

described Ms. Reed’s “performance” of the skit as “a crude depiction of a Native 

American boy trying to search for something.” CO stated that Ms. Reed “began to 

chant and run around the room” wearing a paper headdress with paper feathers on it. 

She made reference to a water goddess and a secret Indian chant. CO testified that he 

was “shocked and disturbed” by Ms. Reed’s skit, and he thought “it was not real at 

first.” CO stated that he did not process what had happened until he was out of Ms. 

Reed’s class that day. After Ms. Reed’s class, CO spoke with friends who were also in 

the class and those friends all had similar reactions. During the lunch period that day, 

CO visited a school counselor, Mr. Keys, along with another student with initials DAP, 

who was not in Ms. Reed’s class but whom CO had told about Ms. Reed’s skit, in order 

8 

to inform Mr. Keys about Ms. Reed’s skit. CO stated that he had a video recording of 

Ms. Reed’s skit with him that he showed and provided a copy to Mr. Keys. 

CO testified that while many students expressed to him that they were 

disturbed by Ms. Reed’s skit, some students were not bothered by it and told him it 

was funny, and that CO and others were simply “overreacting and sensitive.” CO stated 

that he did not understand how mocking another culture could be funny. CO testified 

that as a result of Ms. Reed’s skit, there were protests at North, and he believes the 

incident tarnished North’s reputation. CO stated that Ms. Reed’s skit changed the way 

he thought of Ms. Reed and her class. CO said that prior to the skit, he thought Ms. 

Reed was a good math teacher, but after the skit he was surprised and “did not expect 

something like this to happen.” CO believes that Ms. Reed should not continue to be 

employed at North because all of the negative media attention and protests that 

resulted from Ms. Reed’s skit will get worse if she returns to North. 

13. 

LGA is a 15-year-old student at North. On October 19, 2021, LGA was in 

Ms. Reed’s third period math class, which is one of the classes in which Ms. Reed 

performed the skit. LGA testified that prior to performing the skit in her class, Ms. Reed 

asked the students to put their phones away and not to record her, which is something 

that Ms. Reed had not done before. LGA described Ms. Reed’s skit as “ultimately 

offensive.” LGA stated that Ms. Reed was playing a Native American boy who was 

worshiping gods, including the rock god, mountain god, and water goddess. Ms. Reed 

was doing a “tomahawk chop” and dancing around the room. LGA stated there were 

Native American students in the classroom when Ms. Reed was performing the skit, 

and LGA believed that Ms. Reed was “making fun of their culture.” LGA was 

“embarrassed” by what Ms. Reed was doing, and described Ms. Reed’s skit as “wrong,” 

because it was “racist and made fun of Native Americans.” LGA stated that some of her 

9 

friends who were also in Ms. Reed’s class told LGA that they were uncomfortable when 

Ms. Reed performed the skit. LGA witnessed protests at North as a result of Ms. Reed’s 

skit and saw Native Americans demanding that Ms. Reed be fired. Prior to the skit, LGA 

thought that Ms. Reed was a good math teacher. After the skit, LGA does not want Ms. 

Reed to return to North because she does not want her to repeat her offensive 

conduct. LGA stated that after Ms. Reed’s skit, LGA learned through a yearbook photo 

that Ms. Reed had performed the skit in years past. LGA believes there are far less 

offensive ways to teach the trigonometry mnemonic than the skit Ms. Reed performed. 

14.  DAP is a 15-year-old student at North, who identifies as Native American 

and Indigenous. DAP never had Ms. Reed as a teacher and has not been in any of Ms. 

Reed’s classes. However, DAP learned about Ms. Reed’s skit from two other students 

who were in Ms. Reed’s classroom during the time she performed the skit, namely CO 

and another student. DAP received three videos of Ms. Reed performing the skit in her 

classroom, and she viewed those videos on October 19, 2021. DAP was shocked when 

she saw Ms. Reed’s actions in the video and felt embarrassed “about my culture,” and 

very uncomfortable. DAP stated that she believed Ms. Reed was mocking Native 

Americans with the skit by using a paper headdress with paper feathers, dancing 

around and chanting, and praying to a rock god, water god, and mountain god. DAP 

explained that Native Americans do not believe in a rock god, water god, or mountain 

god. Furthermore, the headdress worn by Native Americans has a meaning within their 

culture and is not a costume. DAP believes that Ms. Reed’s lesson is very racist and 

poses a danger to Native Americans by mocking their culture. DAP was aware of 

protests at the school as a result of Ms. Reed’s skit. DAP believes that Ms. Reed should 

not return to North “because this is still a known thing and will be for a long time.” 

DAP believes that Ms. Reed should be punished for “mocking an entire race of 

people.” 

10 

15. 

LNA is a 15-year-old student at North. On October 19, 2021, LNA was in 

Ms. Reed’s second period math class, which is one of the classes in which Ms. Reed 

performed the skit. LNA stated that prior to the skit, the students were taking a quiz 

and during that time LNA noticed a stick figure drawing of a little boy with a feather 

headdress on the overhead projector. After the quiz, Ms. Reed told the class that she 

would be doing “an act” about a trigonometry lesson and told the class to put away 

their phones, did not want to see anyone recording her, and did not want to see any 

recordings on social media. Thereafter, Ms. Reed put on a paper headdress with paper 

feathers, started to chant the words SOH CAH TOA, and went around the room “in 

different stations,” one station each for the rock god, mountain god, and water god. 

LNA testified that while Ms. Reed was performing the skit, LNA “was mortified” 

because other students in the classroom appeared shocked. LNA stated that “it did not 

fully click what had happened until hours later when she saw the video on social 

media.” LNA stated that immediately after Ms. Reed’s class, several students were 

talking about the skit, one student told her that they thought the skit was normal 

because the student’s sibling had Ms. Reed’s class in earlier years and she performed 

the skit then, too. LNA was disturbed that the school had allowed Ms. Reed to perform 

this skit for many years because she thought it was offensive. LNA believes that the 

skit was racist and hurtful to Native Americans because Ms. Reed was making fun of 

Native Americans.  

LNA testified that in 2021 she was the freshman class president, and the 

school’s student government has a social media account on Instagram for North, 

which LNA was running, along with two other students, for the freshman class. As a 

result of Ms. Reed’s skit, the student government Instagram account received a 

substantial amount of “hate comments” directed towards North. Most of the 

comments alleged that North was racist. As a result of the deluge of hate comments, 

11 

all of the school’s social media account’s comments sections had to be turned off “for 

our safety and mental health.” LNA also noted that there were protests at North as a 

result of the skit, which LNA stated got “more and more out of hand,” and directed 

“hate towards the students of the school.” LNA felt concerned for her safety and saw 

more and more threats online as a result of the skit. LNA stated “there was a point 

where I did not want to come to school or cheer at football because I felt safer when I 

was away from school.” LNA stated that the teachers and staff at North tried to make 

the students feel safe, and also conducted a number of “listening circles” with students 

to hear what they had to say and to “help relieve the anxiety” students had about Ms. 

Reed’s skit and its impacts. LNA does not believe that Ms. Reed should return to her 

job at North because what she did “was very hurtful to a lot of people,” and because if 

Ms. Reed returns there will be people who will cause safety concerns because they 

want to “get back” at the school.  

TESTIMONY OF EMPLOYEES OF THE DISTRICT 

16. 

Jodi Gonzales is currently employed as the Principal of North, a position 

she has held for the past three years. Prior to this position, she worked as the Vice 

Principal of Riverside High School, as the Assistant Principal of Ramona High School, 

as an Instructional Specialist at the district office, and as a Spanish teacher at Ramona 

High School. Ms. Gonzales has worked for a total of 19 years in an administrative role 

for the district. Ms. Gonzales explained that North has about 2,150 students, who are 

demographically about 72 percent Hispanic, 11 percent African American, and about 

nine percent are Caucasian with the remainder of students falling into categories of 

Pacific Islander, Asian, and Other. Ms. Gonzales stated that North has approximately 54 

students currently who identify as Native American. About 13 percent of the students 

12 

at North, approximately 350 students, are English language learners, and about 78 

percent of the students at North qualify for free or reduced cost school lunch. 

Ms. Gonzales first learned about Ms. Reed’s October 19, 2021, skit from the 

Assistant Principal of North, Eric Johnson, who brought it to her attention at almost 

noon on October 19, 2021. Mr. Johnson learned about the skit from Mr. Keys, who 

received the information from the complaints of CO and DAP. After learning of the 

skit, Ms. Gonzales and Mr. Johnson went to Mr. Keys to obtain the names of CO and 

DAP so they could speak to them. After the lunch break, Ms. Gonzales came back to 

her office to find a parent, Robert Perez, waiting for her. Mr. Perez informed Ms. 

Gonzales that his son is in Ms. Reed’s class and recorded the skit, which Mr. Perez 

described as racist. Mr. Perez showed Ms. Gonzales the skit on the phone belonging to 

the student. Mr. Perez had stopped to see Ms. Gonzales on his way to work and had to 

leave to go to work. Ms. Gonzales asked Mr. Perez to stop by the school after work so 

they could continue their conversation about Ms. Reed’s skit. Ms. Gonzales then 

contacted a student who had been in Ms. Reed’s first period class and asked the 

student what happened. The student told Ms. Gonzales about Ms. Reed’s skit and had 

a copy of a video recording of the skit on the student’s phone. Ms. Gonzales obtained 

a copy of that video from the student. Ms. Gonzales then called the district’s Assistant 

Director of Personnel to explain the situation with Ms. Reed’s skit. The Assistant 

Director of Personnel instructed Ms. Gonzales to send him a copy of the video by 

email and to go to Ms. Reed’s classroom to make sure she was not performing the skit. 

Ms. Gonzales explained that at this time it was the sixth period class. After she sent the 

email with the video to the Assistant Director of Personnel, the Superintendent of 

Personnel, Ms. Ybarra, called Ms. Gonzales and informed her that she, the Assistant 

Director of Personnel, and the Riverside City Teacher Association (RCTA) President, 

Laura Boling, would be coming to North that day to meet with Ms. Reed. 

13 

While those listed district employees were driving to North for the meeting with 

Ms. Reed, Ms. Gonzales went to Ms. Reed’s classroom to tell her to go to Ms. 

Gonzales’s office for the meeting. When Ms. Gonzales saw Ms. Reed, she told her that 

the district had concerns regarding instruction in classes that day. Ms. Gonzales 

testified that Ms. Reed immediately looked at the ceiling, sighed, and said “SOH CAH 

TOA.” Ms. Gonzales stated that she took Ms. Reed’s reaction to mean that she was 

frustrated that Ms. Gonzales was speaking to her about the lesson. Ms. Gonzales 

walked Ms. Reed to Ms. Gonzales’s office for the meeting. While waiting for the others 

to arrive, Ms. Reed began to explain the SOH CAH TOA lesson to Ms. Gonzales and 

told her, “I have been doing that lesson ever since I started working here.” Ms. 

Gonzales told Ms. Reed to stop talking and wait for the others to arrive to discuss the 

issue. After the others arrived and the meeting started, Ms. Ybarra led the meeting and 

explained to Ms. Reed that the district was concerned about the skit she did in class 

that day, and that Ms. Reed would be placed on administrative leave while the district 

investigated. Ms. Reed responded by asking if that was really necessary and, “Is this 

that serious?” According to Ms. Gonzales, Ms. Reed did not seem to understand the 

seriousness of the situation or the reason she was being placed on leave. Ms. Gonzales 

stated the meeting lasted about 15 minutes, and she told everyone in her office she 

was expecting a parent to arrive for a meeting, and they all needed to be gone before 

the parent arrived.  

Mr. Robert Perez came back to Ms. Gonzales’s office at 4:30 p.m. after he got off 

from work, and they continued their conversation regarding Ms. Reed’s skit. According 

to Ms. Gonzalez, Mr. Perez was upset and stated that his son was also very upset. Mr. 

Perez and his family identify as Native American. Mr. Perez asked Ms. Gonzales what 

the district was going to do about having “a racist teacher” on campus, and that his 

son took the video while he was in Ms. Reed’s class. Ms. Gonzales told Mr. Perez that 

14 

his son “could get in trouble for recording the video of Ms. Reed without her 

knowledge.” Mr. Perez responded by telling Ms. Gonzales, “If that is the way the 

district was going to deal with it then he would sue the district.” Ms. Gonzales clarified 

that she had no intention of “sweeping the matter under the rug.”  

Ms. Gonzales also interviewed Mr. Perez’s son, IP, the next morning during first 

period. According to Ms. Gonzales, IP told her that Ms. Reed had a drawing of a stick 

figure of an Indian boy on the overhead projector and she did a skit portraying a 

Native American, which upset him very much because he felt he was being humiliated. 

IP took the video of Ms. Reed during the skit. Ms. Gonzales explained that on October 

20, 2021, she and the Assistant Principals, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Brown, began to 

interview the students who were in Ms. Reed’s classrooms the day before. Ms. 

Gonzales stated that the three of them had been given questions on a form from the 

district’s Personnel Department for the students so that they would all be asked the 

same questions. Mr. Johnson and Mr. Brown took notes on those forms to record the 

student’s answers to the questions. All of those forms were received in evidence. Most 

of the students indicated that the skit Ms. Reed performed was inappropriate, 

disrespectful, and made them feel uncomfortable or embarrassed. 

On October 20, 2021, Ms. Gonzales learned that the recorded video of Ms. Reed 

performing the skit in her classroom had been posted to social media and had “gone 

viral.” Ms. Gonzales looked up the social media posting on Instagram and saw that the 

video had been viewed “many times” and there were over 20,000 comments to the 

video. Ms. Gonzales began receiving telephone calls, voice mails, and emails from 

people outside of the district about the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit. Ms. Gonzales 

stated that she stopped counting the number of voice mails and emails she received 

after she received about 7,000 or so. Additionally, on October 21, 2021, people from 

15 

the community gathered in front of North on the sidewalk with flags and signs 

protesting the video. Ms. Gonzales reached out to the district to request additional 

resources of school officers and Riverside Police Department as a result of the protest 

because she was concerned about student and staff safety. The students of North also 

wanted to participate in the protest and were planning on walking out of school at 

noon to join the protesters. Ms. Gonzales was very concerned about students leaving 

campus for the protest because the district cannot control the students’ safety if they 

leave campus. As a result, Ms. Gonzales met with students from the student 

government and a multicultural council teacher to get the message to all students that 

if they wanted to join the protest at noon, they were free to do so but to please not 

leave campus and stay on school grounds. Ms. Gonzales stated that her strategy was 

successful and at noon about 100 students walked out in protest and met on the 

school grounds on “the hill” to form a “unity circle” to meet and share their thoughts. 

As a result of the video going viral, Ms. Gonzales received emails and phone 

calls from the public “nonstop” for the next two weeks. Ms. Gonzales stated that she 

had to devote all of her time for the next two weeks “all day, every day” dealing with 

the fallout from the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit. Ms. Gonzales also participated in two 

unity circles with classes in those weeks that followed the skit, and another unity circle 

was conducted by teachers at North. Ms. Gonzales stated that the time she spent on 

the issue of Ms. Reed’s skit became less and less until December 2021 when the calls 

and emails again started pouring in until about February 2022.  

Ms. Gonzales testified that Ms. Reed’s skit impacted the students at North in a 

negative way, including Ms. Gonzales’s daughter who was in Ms. Reed’s first period 

math class on October 19, 2021. The school prides itself on diversity, inclusivity, and 

openness, but when the video of Ms. Reed’s skit went viral, a lot of students were hurt, 

16 

upset, and angry because the video negated those values. Ms. Gonzales also believes 

that Ms. Reed’s skit had a negative impact on the school’s reputation as shown by the 

plethora of emails and voicemails she received from the community. Ms. Gonzales’s 

own daughter also suffered as a result of the skit and reading comments on social 

media about it.  

Ms. Gonzales stated that she has serious concerns about Ms. Reed returning to 

North because “she disgraced our culture,” “damaged the school,” “ridiculed students,” 

and caused harm to the students and staff of the school. Ms. Gonzales does not 

believe that the community or the students will welcome Ms. Reed back to North. If 

Ms. Reed is welcomed back to North, Ms. Gonzales is concerned about what message 

that will send, specifically that Ms. Reed’s skit was okay, when in fact it was not. 

Additionally, Ms. Gonzales is concerned that Ms. Reed will “do something like this 

again” because Ms. Reed “did not take the time to understand our diverse community 

and student body.” According to Ms. Gonzales, Ms. Reed has never apologized to the 

students or to North for the skit.  

Ms. Gonzales also testified that while she has worked at North for the past six 

years, she never learned that Ms. Reed had been using the skit as a lesson in previous 

years. Ms. Gonzales explained that the North yearbook is created by the students in a 

specialized class just for that purpose with the oversight of a teacher. It is designed 

and published by the students with the supervision of a teacher. No member of the 

school administration oversees the yearbook or reviews it. Ms. Gonzales did not learn 

that Ms. Reed was pictured in the school’s yearbook wearing a headdress from the 

SOH CAH TOA lesson until after the video of her skit when viral and Ms. Gonzales read 

comments on social media about the yearbook. After learning this, Ms. Gonzales 

reviewed the yearbooks from previous years and saw the 2012 yearbook had the 

17 

photo of Ms. Reed wearing a headdress on a page with other photographs of teachers 

teaching lessons. Prior to October 2021, Ms. Gonzales had never known about Ms. 

Reed’s SOH CAH TOA skit.  

17. 

Kyley Ybarra is currently employed by the district as an Assistant 

Superintendent of Personnel, a position she has held for the past seven years. Her 

current job duties include employee discipline in the district. Prior to this position she 

worked for the district in many roles including as the Director of Certificated 

Personnel, Principal of both elementary and middle schools in the district, and teacher 

for fourth to sixth grade special day class and general education. Ms. Ybarra has a 

bachelor's degree in psychology and a master's degree in counseling. She holds a 

multiple subject and clear pupil services teaching credentials, as well as a clear 

administrative credential. 

Ms. Ybarra learned about Ms. Reed’s skit on October 19, 2021, from the 

district’s Assistant Director of Personnel who told her, “There is a situation at North 

High School, and you need to watch the video.” After she watched the video of the skit 

sent to her, Ms. Ybarra shared the video with the Superintendent and Assistant 

Superintendent of Instruction and informed them she would go to North to have a 

conversation with Ms. Reed. Ms. Ybarra testified that when she first saw the video, she 

thought that Ms. Reed was under the influence of drugs or alcohol, but the more she 

watched the video she realized Ms. Reed was not under the influence of drugs or 

alcohol, but the skit was a planned lesson. Ms. Ybarra contacted Laura Boling, 

Riverside City Teachers Association (RCTA) President, after seeing the video to ask her 

to go with Ms. Ybarra to meet with Ms. Reed so that Ms. Reed would have a 

representative from the teacher’s union present. Ms. Ybarra, Ms. Boling, and others 

met at North with Ms. Reed on October 19, 2021, and Ms. Ybarra asked Ms. Reed 

18 

about the SOH CAH TOA skit. According to Ms. Ybarra, Ms. Reed did not think that the 

lesson could be perceived as offensive, and Ms. Reed seemed almost annoyed at Ms. 

Ybarra being there to speak with her. Ms. Reed told Ms. Ybarra she had taught the 

lesson for years. Ms. Ybarra testified that Ms. Reed seemed to have no understanding 

or “sense of connection” as to how the video or the lesson could be offensive or 

harmful. At the meeting, Ms. Ybarra placed Ms. Reed on administrative leave and 

provided her with a letter by hand regarding that administrative leave. According to 

Ms. Ybarra, Ms. Reed did not seem to understand why she was placed on 

administrative leave, and repeatedly questioned the necessity of doing so. 

The district conducted an investigation of the incident, which included an 

interview of Ms. Reed, which took place in December 2021. Ms. Ybarra interviewed Ms. 

Reed, and Michelle Cortez, Director of Personnel, took notes during the interview on a 

form that contained the questions Ms. Ybarra asked Ms. Reed. Additionally, a union 

representative was present at the interview of Ms. Reed. During the interview, Ms. 

Reed informed Ms. Ybarra that she had taught the skit for many years since she 

started teaching and the skit was the same as when she started, but she would “feed 

off the student’s comments and elaborate when needed” for entertainment effect. Ms. 

Reed admitted that she did not teach the skit in the year 2020 because the class was 

done by videoconference and the performance needed “to be in person.” Ms. Ybarra 

noted that the lessons given virtually in 2020 were all recorded, and those recordings 

could be accessed by parents. Ms. Reed told Ms. Ybarra that she obtained the skit 

from her master teacher named Kristy O’Rourke. When asked why she used the skit, 

Ms. Reed stated “simply because the students enjoy it.” Ms. Reed admitted that she 

asked students not to record her classroom instruction on October 19, 2021, and she 

said she did so because “I don’t mind being expressive for my students, but I don’t 

want to be super expressive for the world.” With regard to her request to students not 

19 

to record the skit, Ms. Reed stated, “I was wise in saying [not to record the lesson] but 

what happened still happened.” Ms. Reed denied that the skit was racist and denied it 

was culturally insensitive. After seeing the video posted on social media, Ms. Reed still 

believed that she would “be fine” because she “was not malicious in any way,” and she 

“was having fun with [her] students,” with “no ill intent.” Ms. Reed told Ms. Ybarra 

during the interview that she believed she could simply have a conversation with her 

students and have a staff meeting regarding the issue of the skit in order for her to 

return to North as a teacher. Ms. Reed also admitted during this questioning that she 

had completed the “culturally responsive training” provided by the district prior to the 

October 19, 2021, skit. District documentation demonstrating that Ms. Reed had 

completed that training on August 10, 2020, was received in evidence. 

Ms. Ybarra testified that the video of Ms. Reed’s skit went viral on social media, 

and Ms. Ybarra saw the video on numerous national news stations and in newspapers. 

Multiple news articles regarding the skit were received in evidence. Additionally, Ms. 

Ybarra witnessed protests at North, as well as at the district office regarding the skit. 

There were multiple protests at the district officer over Ms. Reed’s skit. Ms. Ybarra also 

addressed the public comments regarding the skit made at district board meetings. 

Multiple videos of those board meeting comments were received in evidence.  

After the investigation of Ms. Reed’s skit, the district board recommended the 

immediate suspension and dismissal of Ms. Reed, and notification was given to Ms. 

Reed in a January 6, 2022, letter of that recommendation. Thereafter, a “Skelly 

meeting1” took place on January 27, 2022, where the Statement of Charges were 

1 In Skelly v. State Personnel Board (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194, 215, the California 

Supreme Court held that in order to satisfy due process, an agency considering 

20 

 
provided to Ms. Reed, and Ms. Reed read a written statement. The written statement 

was received in evidence. Ms. Ybarra’s role at the Skelly meeting was to act as the 

Skelly officer, a neutral party who hears the case and makes a determination and 

recommendation to the district board on whether to move forward with the charges. 

Ms. Ybarra presented the final version of the Statement of Charges against Ms. Reed at 

the February 23, 2022, to the district board, who approved those charges in closed 

session. 

Ms. Ybarra testified that she does not believe Ms. Reed can return to North or 

to any other school in the district because the district has a “loss of confidence” in Ms. 

Reed, there has been “a ton” of media attention to this matter, which the district is still 

addressing, and because Ms. Reed’s actions were racist and had a “huge negative 

impact” on the district and school. Ms. Ybarra believes in progressive discipline, but in 

this case the only appropriate discipline is dismissal. 

18. 

Renee Hill is currently employed by the district as Superintendent of 

Schools, a position she has held for the past two years. Prior to this position, she 

worked for the district as the Chief Academic Officer. Ms. Hill was retired from 2017 to 

2020, and prior to her retirement she worked for 20 years for the district as both a 

disciplinary action against a public employee must accord the employee certain “pre-

removal safeguards,” including “notice of the proposed action, the reasons therefor, a 

copy of the charges and materials upon which the action is based, and the right to 

respond, either orally or in writing, to the authority initially imposing discipline.” The 

Supreme Court’s directive gave rise to an administrative procedure known as a Skelly 

hearing, in which an employee has the opportunity to respond to the charges upon 

which the proposed discipline is based. 

21 

 
 
teacher and in administrative roles. Ms. Hill holds both teaching credentials and 

administrative credentials. Her current duties include to oversee and direct the work of 

the district in all aspects and to interact with the community. Ms. Hill acts as the chief 

executive officer of the district and only reports to the board of the district. 

Ms. Hill first became aware of Ms. Reed’s skit on October 19, 2021, when it was 

brought to her attention by Ms. Ybarra. On October 21, 2021, the district had a 

meeting of the district board and at all board meetings there is a public comment 

portion to the meeting. During the October 21, 2021, district board meeting, the 

public comments focused on Ms. Reed, the skit, and its effect on North. Ms. Hill stated 

that the tone of those comments was critical of the district and Ms. Reed, and the 

commenters were angry and hurt. Ms. Hill stated that she also received thousands of 

phone calls, voicemails, and emails from the public regarding Ms. Reed’s skit, most of 

which expressed anger and criticism of Ms. Reed and the district regarding the skit. 

Ms. Hill testified that the main phone system for the district was “flooded” with 

telephone calls regarding Ms. Reed’s skit to the point where the system could not 

handle the number of phone calls incoming. As a result, the district had to hire extra 

people to handle all the calls, and the district created a log of voicemails related to the 

matter. Ms. Hill stated that the sheer number of telephone calls received impacted the 

district’s ability to do other business. Additionally, the district received thousands of 

emails regarding Ms. Reed’s skit, and initially the district had an automated email 

response to the emails received. Thereafter, the district did respond to some of those 

emails individually. Ms. Hill stated that all of this community feedback caused her to 

have concern for the safety of students of the district, school employees, and herself 

because many of the messages received were “menacing” and on some occasions 

people would push their way into the district building and refuse to leave until they 

spoke to Ms. Hill. Protests happened at North and at the district offices and many 

22 

students expressed their concern to Ms. Hill for their safety. If the students wore gear 

from North, they would be approached by members of the public and asked about the 

incident. 

Ms. Hill went to North and spoke to students on October 25, 2021, as part of a 

listening session. Ms. Hill also had other listening sessions regarding Ms. Reed’s skit. 

During those listening sessions she met with two classes, namely the student 

government class and the multicultural council class. She stated that she discussed 

with the students how they can return to the theme they had selected for that year, 

which was unity and reconnection. Ms. Hill did not meet specifically with parents from 

North, but she did meet with members of the community, including with her 

community advisory group as well as with leaders of the Native American community. 

Ms. Hill also took part in a joint meeting of the district governing board, State 

assembly members, and the public to give people a chance to speak and to figure out 

a way that the district could repair relationships with the community moving forward. 

Ms. Hill testified that Ms. Reed’s skit affected students, staff, and the entire district 

community. She stated that the impact of that skit was felt nationwide, and also 

internationally. Ms. Hill received emails from all over the world. Ms. Hill spent 

hundreds of hours of her time dealing with these issues that resulted from Ms. Reed’s 

skit. 

Ms. Hill testified that the recommendation for dismissal of Ms. Reed was taken 

to the district board on February 3, 2022, and she supported the decision to dismiss 

Ms. Reed. Ms. Hill explained that she supported the dismissal of Ms. Reed because her 

actions in performing the skit were “far afield from district values, expectations, and 

the expected interactions between teachers and students.” Ms. Hill also considered the 

23 

impact Ms. Reed’s skit had on the students, district, and community in her decision to 

support Ms. Reed’s dismissal.  

19. 

Jacqueline Perez is currently employed by the district as the 

Superintendent of Equity, Access, and Community Engagement, a position she has 

held for the past two-and-a-half years. Ms. Perez has worked for the district for the 

past six years in various capacities. Prior to working for the district, Ms. Perez was an 

Assistant Superintendent at another school district and has worked in school 

administration for 27 years. Prior to working in school administration, Ms. Perez 

worked as a high school teacher for biology and science. She holds a single subject 

teaching credential for biological sciences and an administrative credential. Ms. Perez 

has a bachelor’s degree in biology, a master’s degree in education administration, and 

a doctorate degree in educational leadership. Ms. Perez’s responsibilities in her current 

position include oversight of all district-wide equity efforts.  

Ms. Perez testified that the district implemented a training course on culturally 

responsive pedagogy for teachers to increase their understanding of culturally 

responsive pedagogy in teaching. Ms. Perez explained that culturally responsive 

pedagogy is a way to deliver instruction and teaching to students in a way that is 

respectful and honors the student’s cultural background to provide a safe learning 

environment for the student. She stated that the training was given to teachers in the 

district in 2020, and it was voluntary training, not mandatory. Documents received in 

evidence demonstrate that Ms. Reed took this culturally responsive pedagogy class in 

August 2020, prior to teaching the skit on October 19, 2021. Ms. Perez was surprised 

to learn that Ms. Reed had taken that course but still taught the skit. Ms. Perez noted 

that Ms. Reed completed the training voluntarily.  

24 

Ms. Perez was involved in the district’s response to Ms. Reed’s skit. Specifically, 

she assisted with the immediate support of the principal, students, and staff through 

the event. Ms. Perez set up coaching for the principal and teachers to work 

collaboratively. Ms. Perez also gave training to student leaders at North regarding 

social media. Ms. Perez explained that the district has an outside consultant that has 

established equity teams and goals. The equity teams consist of teachers, students, 

and administrators, who build capacity to work through inequities they observe at the 

school. With regard to student leaders and their use of social media for the school, the 

district selected four students to monitor comments on social media accounts. 

Additionally, the district provided student leaders with key statements they could use 

for the media onslaught that took place after the skit.  

Ms. Perez stated that one of the biggest district initiatives after Ms. Reed’s skit 

was to establish a Native American initiative as a direct response to give support to 

Native American students and families directly affected. Ms. Perez’s role is to 

implement the different components of the Native American initiative, which is 

comprised of local tribal leaders, a Native American stakeholder group to connect to 

community members, a parent group, and a student group. Ms. Perez also set up 

listening sessions for the community in the aftermath of Ms. Reed’s skit. Ms. Perez 

testified that she participated in many listening groups regarding Ms. Reed’s skit and 

stated that “there was a lot of hurt and need for repair of relationships.” Ms. Perez 

stated that “lack of professionalism” was something that “came to the surface often.” 

Ms. Perez testified that immediately after Ms. Reed’s skit, most of Ms. Perez’s time for 

many months was spent on dealing with the aftermath. The initiatives created as a 

result of Ms. Reed’s skit are ongoing and may last throughout her career. 

25 

Ms. Perez attended district board meetings after Ms. Reed’s skit and stated that 

she “has never experienced anything like” the community input at those meetings. 

Specifically, she stated, “the hurt and impact it had on our community and on our 

indigenous families was hard to experience.” Ms. Perez received thousands of emails 

and voicemails after Ms. Reed’s skit, “about 98 percent of which were negative, angry, 

hateful, and disgusted.”  

Ms. Perez stated that she did not believe Ms. Reed should return to the district 

because “the experience and trauma” experienced by the students and teachers “is not 

repairable.” Ms. Perez stated that if Ms. Reed was allowed to return to teaching at the 

district, the district would have difficulty building trust with the community. Ms. Perez 

noted that the district formally apologized for Ms. Reed’s skit at a July 2022 district 

governing board meeting where the president verbally stated the apology.  

TESTIMONY OF COMMUNITY MEMBERS 

20. 

Zara Hurtado was previously employed by the district as a bilingual aide 

and tutor, and later as a classroom teacher. Ms. Hurtado is currently working as a 

teacher in another school district. Ms. Hurtado is a member of the Native American 

Indigenous Education Coalition, which was formed by families of students attending 

school in the district and others who became aware of issues at the district after Ms. 

Reed’s skit video was circulated. Ms. Hurtado first learned of Ms. Reed’s skit through 

the video being posted on social media. In February 2022, Ms. Hurtado participated in 

public comments to the district board regarding Ms. Reed’s skit, video of which was 

received in evidence. Ms. Hurtado testified at the hearing consistently with her 

comments to the district board. Specifically, she stated that Ms. Reed’s behaviors in 

the classroom are not acceptable and have no place in the school curriculum, and 

harm students. Ms. Hurtado stated that Ms. Reed’s behavior “made fun of Native 

26 

American culture” and had “a long-lasting impact,” as well as caused a “distrust of 

other teachers.” Ms. Hurtado also sent emails to Ms. Hill regarding Ms. Reed’s skit to 

let her know that family members of students still felt as though the district had not 

done enough to make amends for Ms. Reed’s skit, and had not issued a formal 

apology after Ms. Reed’s conduct in the classroom. Ms. Hurtado also took part in one 

protest at the district offices regarding Ms. Reed’s skit.  

Ms. Hurtado supports the dismissal of Ms. Reed and communicated that 

opinion to the district during district governing board meetings. Ms. Hurtado stated 

that if the district brought Ms. Reed back to the classroom, it would “show Native 

families that their feelings did not matter at all.” If Ms. Reed were to return to the 

classroom in the district, Ms. Hurtado anticipates further protests at the district and 

the school as a result. She stated, “The community has not forgotten what happened.” 

The video of Ms. Reed’s skit gave Ms. Hurtado feelings of anger, disgust, and 

confusion as to how that can happen in a classroom. Ms. Hurtado explained that 

seeing Ms. Reed mock Native American culture “was astounding.” 

21. 

Georgia Sorrell is a resident of Riverside and has two sons who attend 

North. Ms. Sorrell and both of her sons identify as Native American. Ms. Sorrell’s oldest 

son was in Ms. Reed’s math classroom in a different year than in 2021. Ms. Sorrell’s 

youngest son has never been in Ms. Reed’s math class, but he saw the video of Ms. 

Reed’s skit while he was attending North. Ms. Sorrell first saw the video of Ms. Reed’s 

skit when Ms. Sorrell’s sister shared it with her and Ms. Sorrell’s two sons. Ms. Sorrell 

was shocked when she saw the video. She testified that her oldest son, who is now in 

college, had been in Ms. Reed’s math class when she did a “similar skit” using the SOH 

CAH TOA mnemonic and made reference to an “Indian boy,” but nothing to the extent 

that was shown in the video of Ms. Reed’s skit on social media. Specifically, her older 

27 

son told her that Ms. Reed just used a white board, but she did not “dress up” or 

“move or dance around” like she did in the video. Ms. Sorrell was concerned about her 

younger son who saw the video because “the imagery used in this fashion (meaning 

her dress and dancing)” was “like a caricature.” Ms. Sorrell explained that as Native 

Americans, they see such caricatures of Native American cultures in sports mascots 

and other inappropriate ways, and Ms. Reed’s skit was also inappropriate.  

In January or February of 2022, Ms. Sorrell met with Ms. Hill after Ms. Hill 

reached out to her. Ms. Hill asked Ms. Sorrell for her feedback on how she and her 

sons reacted to the video of Ms. Reed’s skit. Ms. Sorrell and her oldest son attended 

the meeting with Ms. Hill and conveyed the same information she provided in the 

hearing regarding her reaction. Ms. Sorrell does not believe that Ms. Reed should 

return to North because her skit was “not appropriate,” particularly coming from an 

educator.  

TESTIMONY OF STEPHANIE FRYBERG, PH.D. 

22.  Dr. Stephanie Fryberg is currently a University Diversity and Social 

Transformation Professor at the University of Michigan, Department of Psychology, a 

position she has held since 2019. She is also the founding Director of Research for 

Indigenous Social Action and Equity (RISAE). Dr. Fryberg received her Ph.D. degree in 

Social Psychology from Stanford University in 2002. The title of her dissertation for her 

Ph.D. degree was “’Really? You don’t look like an American Indian’; Social 

Representations and Social Group Identities.” She received her master's degree in 

Psychology from Stanford University in 1999. She obtained her bachelor's degree in 

Psychology in 1994 from Kenyon College. Dr. Fryberg has taught in classroom settings 

for three years, and she has worked as an intervention specialist to create identity 

safety in classrooms. Dr. Fryberg’s research work focuses on bias and prejudice 

28 

towards indigenous people. She currently runs the leading center in the country for 

the collection of data related to studies in schools of indigenous people. Her research 

is focused on how to create identity safe classrooms at multiple levels of the education 

system, including working with teachers and students to examine the factors that 

create identity safety. Dr. Fryberg conducts both experimental and survey studies of 

students, including exposing students to different situations or stereotypes and 

comparing that to a control group. Dr. Fryberg testified on behalf of the district as an 

expert witness on bias in the classroom. 

23. 

In preparation for her testimony, Dr. Fryberg reviewed documents 

provided to her by the district regarding this case, including all documents produced 

as exhibits, the videos of Ms. Reed’s skit, teaching standards in California, California 

Education Code sections, and the Morrison Factors.2 Dr. Fryberg testified that research 

and studies have demonstrated that Native American students when exposed to 

stereotypes of Native Americans, like Disney’s “Pocahontas” or sports mascots utilizing 

Native American imagery, considered to be “positive imagery,” the Native American 

students experience a decrease in self-esteem, community worth, and future goals. Dr. 

Fryberg stated that those “positive images” of Native Americans decreased feelings of 

self-worth more than the negative stereotypes, such as Native Americans being 

associated with high drug and alcohol use, and higher incidents of suicide. Dr. Fryberg 

testified that the negative images and stereotypes of Native Americans increase stress, 

anxiety, suicidal ideation, and decrease other psychological wellbeing measures in 

Native American students. The studies show that all of these negative effects of 

2 The seminal case for teacher dismissals is Morrison v. State Board of Education 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, which sets forth factors for analysis in teacher dismissal cases. 

29 

 
stereotypes of Native Americans affects school outcomes for Native American students 

in a negative way. 

Dr. Fryberg also explained the term “invisibility,” which is cultural omission or 

psychological invisibility or when you look at the world and don’t see yourself or your 

culture. Research and studies show that 87 percent of mentions of Native Americans in 

school curriculum depict Native Americans only in a pre-1900 context as if Native 

Americans are only historical and don’t currently exist, which increases apathy towards 

Native Americans.  

24. 

Dr. Fryberg stated that the video of Ms. Reed’s skit depicting a Native 

American boy provides much stronger stereotypes of Native Americans than those her 

research utilizes and is very damaging to Native American students. Specifically, the 

use of the feather headdress, tomahawk chop, sitting with her legs crossed, and the 

dancing and chanting exhibited by Ms. Reed in that video is a level of mockery that is 

much stronger than what Dr. Fryberg would expose students to in her research. She 

stated that Ms. Reed was “really taking a group’s identity and using it to represent 

Native Americans in a way that is tremendously adverse.” Dr. Fryberg would never 

expose Native American students to such mockery because it would do harm to the 

students. Dr. Fryberg stated that Ms. Reed’s actions in the skit shows a “level of bias 

regarding what she is describing Native Americans as looking and sounding like.” Dr. 

Fryberg understands that Ms. Reed was trying to teach the students the mnemonic 

SOH CAH TOA for a trigonometry lesson, but the chant used by Ms. Reed depicted in 

the way that she did it “was associating Native Americans as simple-minded and 

uncivilized.” The actions of Ms. Reed shows a bias, racism, and dehumanizes the Native 

American group by depicting them as less civilized and simple-minded. 

30 

Dr. Fryberg also interviewed two students from North, specifically CO and DAP, 

and she also read written statements made by other students who were in Ms. Reed’s 

classes when she performed the skit. Dr. Fryberg explained that many of the Native 

American students in Ms. Reed’s class felt “utterly humiliated” by the skit, which is 

exactly what Dr. Fryberg would expect based on her research. Dr. Fryberg also 

explained that many of the Native American students who expressed anger or concern 

regarding Ms. Reed’s skit were accused by other students of being “too sensitive” or 

“taking it too far” because those students thought that the Native American students 

should not care about the skit. However, Dr. Fryberg explained that the Native 

American’s identity was being mocked, and when a group identity is criticized in such 

a way, particularly a group largely omitted from other representation like Native 

Americans, telling those Native American students that they are “too sensitive” is just 

another micro-aggression towards them. 

With regard to Non-Native American students, Dr. Fryberg explained that Ms. 

Reed’s skit also has negative impacts on those students. Specifically, her research 

shows that such depictions as in Ms. Reed’s skit shape the way Non-Native American 

students think about Native Americans. Her research shows that such depictions 

increase the amount of apathy Non-Native American students have towards serious 

issues facing Native Americans, such as violence against Native American women, and 

increases the view that Native American people are only “people of the past” or only 

historical figures. The more that viewpoint is endorsed, the more it minimizes the 

racism Native Americans experience, and the more it increases the apathy Non-Native 

Americans have towards that racism. Ms. Reed’s skit “taps into” that monolithic 

representation of Native Americans and contributes to societal ills as a result. 

31 

Dr. Fryberg is aware that Ms. Reed taught the “Indian boy” skit in years prior to 

2021 going back at least until 2012. Dr. Fryberg was struck by the fact that the skit had 

not been brought to the attention of school administration or the public prior to 2021. 

She stated she believes that “this speaks to the way we minimize these types of 

situations.” Dr. Fryberg believes that in 2021, and particularly since 2020, which she 

described as the “year of racial awakening,” there has been a much larger focus on 

systemic racism in this country. Prior to 2020, there was much less focus on systemic 

racism. As a result, Dr. Fryberg can understand why Ms. Reed’s skit was “swept under 

the rug” prior to 2020. Dr. Fryberg states that research supports this “racial 

awakening,” particularly for younger people, since 2020 when George Floyd was 

murdered by police officers, and his death was shown in the media. Dr. Fryberg 

believes that part of the reason Ms. Reed’s skit became more of “an issue” in 2021, 

rather than a decade ago, was because students are more sensitive to those issues 

now. However, Dr. Fryberg was careful to explain that while students are more 

culturally sensitive or aware today, Ms. Reed’s skit taught in 2012 would likely have a 

more harmful effect on Native American students in 2012 because having cultural 

awareness provides some protective properties to students and back in 2012 there was 

less cultural awareness and, thus, less protective properties.  

25.  Dr. Fryberg testified that people have an individual responsibility to be 

aware of cultural issues, but that school districts also should be providing some 

training regarding cultural awareness. Dr. Fryberg provides professional training to 

school districts teaching teachers to engage with students in culturally relevant ways. 

Dr. Fryberg reviewed the “Culturally Responsible Pedagogy” course that Ms. Reed took 

on August 10, 2020, and she stated that this training course is very consistent with the 

current research and literature on culture.  

32 

26.  Dr. Fryberg opined that Ms. Reed’s skit was “an extreme situation” with 

how it mocked Native Americans, and the skit had a very negative effect on Native 

American students, in particular, but also on Non-Native American students. She 

explained that Native American students, for whom the skit spoke to their group 

identity, were more vocal about how they were hurt. Dr. Fryberg acknowledged that 

for Non-Native American students, for whom the stereotypes in the skit was not part 

of their identity, may feel differently about the skit than how the Native American 

students feel.  

Ms. Reed’s Evidence 

27.  Ms. Reed presented testimony from nine witnesses at the hearing. Those 

witnesses included herself, other teachers in the district, two students from North and 

two character witnesses. The following factual findings are based on the testimony of 

those witnesses and supporting documents received in evidence.  

TESTIMONY OF MS. REED 

28. 

Candice Reed received her bachelor's degree in Liberal Studies with a 

minor in Mathematics from California Baptist College in 1997. She received her 

master's degree in Education Research from California Baptist College in 2002. In 2003 

she obtained her single subject teaching credential in mathematics. Ms. Reed does not 

hold any other teaching credentials. Ms. Reed was first employed as a teacher in 1998 

in the Corona-Norco Unified School District as a substitute teacher. She first worked as 

a full-time as a teacher in the 1999-2000 school year for the Corona-Norco Unified 

School District. Thereafter, she moved out of state to work in photography for about a 

year-and-a-half. In September 2001 she moved back to California and started working 

as a substitute teacher for the district at both North and a middle school. Ms. Reed 

33 

first started working full-time as a mathematics teacher at North for the 2002-2003 

school year and has worked in that position ever since until she was placed on leave 

by the district on October 19, 2021. During the entire time she worked at North, Ms. 

Reed taught mathematics, initially teaching Algebra I, Geometry, Algebra II and honors 

pre-Algebra. More recently Ms. Reed taught Math I, Math II, and Math II accelerated.  

29.  Ms. Reed described her teaching style as being “direct, not overly 

expressive, but detailed.” Ms. Reed stated that she likes to find the easiest way to get 

things across to students. During her 19 years at North, Ms. Reed received formal 

evaluations only about five or six times, but she had many informal evaluations. Ms. 

Reed stated that all of her informal and formal evaluation results were “meets or 

exceeds expectations.” Prior to being placed on leave on October 19, 2021, Ms. Reed 

had never received any discipline as a teacher and never been the subject of 

allegations or investigations. Ms. Reed testified that she may have had the occasional 

complaint from parents or students regarding homework or a requested extension of 

time for work, but never any significant complaints regarding her teaching.  

30.  Ms. Reed described the events of October 19, 2021. Ms. Reed explained 

that each school day had a total of six classes or periods. The first three periods that 

day were her Math II accelerated classes and the last two periods that day were her 

Math I classes. For her first three morning classes, she started those classes by 

reviewing homework, then administering a test or quiz, and finally performing the 

“SOH CAH TOA skit.” Ms. Reed stated that the skit lasted for about 10 to 12 minutes 

total, and thereafter the class was dismissed. With regard to her last two classes that 

day, Ms. Reed “did an assessment” for the entirety of each of those classes and did not 

provide any instruction that day for those classes.  

34 

With regard to the first three classes on October 19, 2021, Ms. Reed stated that 

with the skit she was trying to convey to the students the SOH CAH TOA mnemonic as 

a mechanism to remember the trigonometric ratios. Ms. Reed obtained the skit from 

another teacher in about 2008 to 2011 when that other teacher was a math coach, 

who came to Ms. Reed’s classroom, created slides, and “acted [the skit] out” for Ms. 

Reed during the “period preparation.” On cross-examination Ms. Reed stated that she 

obtained the skit from this teacher in 2003. Ms. Reed stated she has performed this 

skit as a lesson “several times,” but she was unsure exactly how many times. She 

explained that the skit “takes a lot of energy,” and as a result, she did not perform the 

skit during times when she was pregnant or after one pregnancy when she had health 

issues because of the energy requirement. During the times she did teach with the skit, 

she only performed the skit once per year for any of the years she used it. She 

explained that there may have been times when she was not assigned this particular 

curriculum for the trigonometric ratios, and if that was the case, she did not perform 

the skit those years, either. Ms. Reed stated that the skit was meant to be “over the 

top” to “shock” the students, be “flamboyant and boisterous” so that the students 

would remember the mnemonic.  

Ms. Reed stated she gave the skit lesson generally the same way each time she 

performed it over the years with the outline of the story remaining the same, namely 

starting with the mountain, then water, then rock. However, she would change “maybe 

the type of dance [she] did” if there was a popular dance at the time. Ms. Reed stated 

that she also changed the props she used each time based upon suggestions she 

received from students. Ms. Reed admitted that she did not use the headdress each 

year she performed the skit, and she only used a headdress on two occasions, 

including on October 19, 2021. Ms. Reed stated that the photograph of her wearing a 

headdress in the 2012 yearbook came about because students brought that headdress 

35 

to her to wear for the photo, so she did. Wearing the headdress in the photo for the 

2012 yearbook was the reason Ms. Reed began using the headdress for her skit in 

class on those two occasions. 

Ms. Reed explained the SOH CAH TOA skit as being about a little boy who 

climbed a mountain and asked the mountain god about finding a “secret Indian 

chant.” On the mountain the boy finds the first part of the chant – SOH – and then the 

boy dances around. Then the boy goes to a second location of a pond or stream and 

asks a water goddess for the next part of the chant and is given – CAH – and the boy 

“runs around chanting SOH CAH.” Then the third location the boy goes to is a rock 

and the boy cries out, “Oh rock god – I hit my toe” and “oh my TOA” because his toe 

hurts. The boy talks to the rock god, who tells him he already knows the chant. The 

boy then figures out the “secret Indian chant” of “SOH CAH TOA.” Ms. Reed then will 

explain what “SOH CAH TOA” means in trigonometry. She stated that the entire skit 

was a “super goofy” way for the students to remember the mnemonic of SOH CAH 

TOA.  

On October 19, 2021, after the third class in which Ms. Reed performed the skit, 

Ms. Reed was not approached by any school administrator until after the school day 

was over and she was sitting in her classroom preparing for the next day. Ms. Gonzales 

came to Ms. Reed’s classroom after that school day and asked her to come to Ms. 

Gonzales’s office to discuss “an incident that happened in [Ms. Reed’s] class that day.” 

Ms. Reed testified that she thought about the events of the day and assumed that “the 

incident” was the SOH CAH TOA lesson. Ms. Reed asked Ms. Gonzales if it was about 

the SOH CAH TOA lesson and walked to Ms. Gonzales’s office. When she arrived at Ms. 

Gonzales’s office, Ms. Reed then realized that she was not just meeting with Ms. 

Gonzales, but also with members of the personnel department, including Ms. Ybarra, 

36 

and the president of the teacher’s union. Ms. Reed stated that the meeting was very 

short, about 15 minutes, and she was handed a letter to read, which placed her on 

administrative leave. After Ms. Reed read the letter, Ms. Ybarra asked her if she had 

any questions, and Ms. Reed asked her how long the investigation would take, and if 

Ms. Reed would be allowed to leave lesson plans for her students. Ms. Reed left this 

meeting with the understanding that she could not speak to students, parents, or 

colleagues. Ms. Reed testified that after the meeting, she really did not understand 

what the complaint was that required investigation. Ms. Reed was immediately placed 

on leave on October 19, 2021, and she did not return to the district until December 

2021 when she met with Ms. Ybarra and others from the district. 

31. 

In mid-December 2021 Ms. Reed met at the district offices with Ms. 

Ybarra, a teacher’s union representative, and others. Ms. Reed explained that she 

understood the purpose of the meeting was for Ms. Reed to provide her version of 

events and “to discuss where [she] might be placed” within the district as a teacher. 

The December 2021 meeting lasted about two-and-one-half hours and was very 

formal in nature with Ms. Ybarra asking Ms. Reed questions. Ms. Reed stated that she 

was instructed by Ms. Ybarra to wait until the question was finished before providing 

an answer, and once Ms. Reed started to provide an answer she could not “take a 

break” during the answer. Ms. Reed felt as if she was being interrogated at a police 

station. Ms. Ybarra asked her a lot of questions about the skit, as well as whether Ms. 

Reed wanted to return to North, to which Ms. Reed replied, “Yes.” Ms. Ybarra asked 

Ms. Reed what she thought she needed to do to go back to North, and Ms. Reed 

responded, “as a starting point she would need to have a conversation with the 

students and staff to make some recommendations of what they were feeling and 

what they would need to feel comfortable” with Ms. Reed’s return. Ms. Reed testified 

that she was thinking of “something like a unity circle” with the students as a 

37 

mechanism for the conversation. Ms. Reed stated that she needed to know how the 

students felt and “what they needed” or “what the community of North High School 

needed.” In the December 2021 meeting, Ms. Ybarra asked her if “there is anything 

else you want to add” and Ms. Reed “felt speechless” and did not “know how to put all 

of [her] thoughts into words.” Ms. Reed described the December 2021 meeting as 

negative. 

32.  Ms. Reed was aware of at least one protest at North and one protest at 

the district office regarding her skit. She also read some newspaper articles and online 

news articles regarding the skit. Ms. Reed stated that she does not participate in social 

media, other than on Facebook strictly for family photos. Ms. Reed does not engage 

with other social media. During the time after she was placed on administrative leave, 

Ms. Reed did not speak to anyone about the skit and felt isolated. Ms. Reed was aware 

that the video of her skit went viral and that “a lot of people were angry” about it. 

However, she stated that “it seemed that it was the outside world and not the inside 

world of North High School” that was angry about the skit. Between October 2021 and 

December 2021, there was a protest at Ms. Reed’s home, which happened late at night 

when she and her husband and children were sleeping. Ms. Reed stated that the 

protest at her home was menacing and threatening because the protesters stated that 

they would hunt her down and kill her. Ms. Reed stated that initially she did not have 

an understanding as to why the public was upset by the video of her skit. Ms. Reed 

said it took a while for her “to start building that understanding,” and she “started 

seeing progress toward” that understanding after she did some research. 

33.  Ms. Reed next met with the district on January 27, 2022, at the Skelly 

meeting along with her attorneys, union representative, Ms. Ybarra, and others. Ms. 

Reed stated that she wanted to go to this meeting so that she could give an apology 

38 

and make a statement. Ms. Reed wanted the district, students, families, and Native 

American tribal council to know how sorry she was for her actions. She also wanted to 

tell them what she had been working on and had learned from the experience. Ms. 

Reed wrote a letter, which she read out loud at the Skelly meeting, containing her 

apology and statement she wanted to give. The letter was received in evidence. In the 

letter Ms. Reed wrote that she is “sincerely sorry for the negative impact that the [SOH 

CAH TOA skit] has created for the Native American community, the North high [sic] 

community and Riverside Unified as a whole.” In the letter Ms. Reed wrote that she 

would like to communicate with students and families to apologize and “begin the 

process of reconciliation.” Ms. Reed has wanted to apologize to her students, their 

families, and the community since the October 19, 2021, skit, but has not been able to 

do so. 

Ms. Reed testified that at this Skelly meeting she understood why her skit was a 

problem. Specifically, she stated, “from the research I did the number one thing was 

the headdress and that was incredibly offensive.” She understands now that the 

headdress is only for indigenous people and is reserved for “sacred things” and “only a 

select few indigenous people are eligible to wear a headdress.”  

34.  Ms. Reed testified that she had no ill-intent when she performed the skit, 

and no intent to attack any student. She stated she had no intent to be malicious or 

mocking of any student. She wishes she had realized at the time she gave the skit that 

students were offended. She would not have done the lesson if she thought it would 

hurt students. After she was placed on leave, Ms. Reed spent some time “evaluating 

her teaching practices” to see if there was “anything that could be a problem” or 

where she may “inadvertently be biased.”  

39 

35. 

After the Skelly meeting, Ms. Reed did further research regarding 

indigenous cultures and historical events related to the oppression of indigenous 

cultures. Ms. Reed stated that after completing this research, it “clicked” with her that 

her skit caused such outrage because “this group of people had been so oppressed 

and had their culture stolen from them,” and that “what [she] did represented that.” 

After the Skelly meeting, Ms. Reed also learned that there had been multiple protests 

at the district offices regarding her skit, and that there had been thousands of 

voicemails and emails to the district about her skit, all of which “ate up” significant 

time for the district. Ms. Reed stated this was devastating to learn. Through the 

process of discovery leading to this hearing, Ms. Reed reviewed multiple emails to the 

district from various people, including from Native American people. One email was 

from a Native American person located in Michigan. Ms. Reed reached out to this 

person in the summer of 2022 because she believed he would be willing to talk to her 

“based on the tone” of his email. Ms. Reed discussed various issues with this individual 

related to indigenous people and learned from the conversation. She stated that she 

learned from him “that the headdress was the singular most offensive thing that I did.” 

She also learned from him that intention is what matters most, and that because she 

did not have malicious intent that she is capable of learning and changing. Ms. Reed 

testified that she believes she can avoid teaching the SOH CAH TOA lesson in the 

future because she has learned that “if it is not my culture, I should not use it.” 

36.  Ms. Reed testified that the only training she had undergone from the 

district regarding cultural inclusion and diversity was the August 10, 2020, training 

discussed above, which she stated was limited. Ms. Reed loves teaching and believes it 

has been the best gift of her life. She can’t imagine not being able to teach again. Ms. 

Reed loves the district community and has children who attend the district schools. 

She stated she has learned a lot from this experience and has grown immensely.  

40 

TESTIMONY OF TEACHERS FROM NORTH HIGH SCHOOL 

37. 

Jesse William Paulos is currently employed as a math/AVID teacher in the 

district at Riverside Virtual School, a position he has held since January 2022. Prior to 

this position, Mr. Paulos worked as a math teacher at the district at North from 2013 to 

January 2022. During the time he was at North, he worked directly with Ms. Reed. Mr. 

Paulos also worked as a teacher for the district at King High School from 2007 to 2013. 

Mr. Paulos received his bachelor’s degree and teaching credentials in 2007 from 

University of California Riverside (UCR). He received his master’s degree in counseling 

and psychology in 2012 from UCR. Mr. Paulos is a 2003 graduate of North. Mr. Paulos 

testified that he left his job at North in 2022 because of a “triggering factor” of a 

physical and verbal altercation with a student in October 2021, where he “felt he was 

not supported by the school administration.” On cross-examination Mr. Paulos 

admitted that the physical and verbal altercation arose from Mr. Paulos making “a cry 

baby bitch” face to a student after the student called him a “cry baby bitch.” Mr. Paulos 

stated that he made the face to the student while the student was driving past him in a 

golf cart, and the student came to his class “with the intention of fighting.” 

During the time he worked at North as a math teacher, he taught the same 

classes as Ms. Reed, namely Math I and Math II. His classroom was directly across the 

hallway from Ms. Reed’s classroom. They saw each other often in staff meetings, and 

he collaborated with Ms. Reed by writing common assessments together, writing math 

final examinations together, discussing best practices, and shared ideas on how to 

teach lessons. Mr. Paulos testified he has a younger sister that also graduated from 

North and took a math class from Ms. Reed, who his sister described as her favorite 

teacher. Mr. Paulos also observed Ms. Reed teaching during the time he worked at 

North, and specifically did so in 2015 or 2016, and he observed Ms. Reed perform the 

41 

SOH CAH TOA skit that went viral as part of his observations. Mr. Paulos stated that 

the observations of other teachers “was part of a push to have teachers observe their 

colleagues to create a community of shared ideas.” Mr. Paulo stated that he had been 

teaching for about eight years when he observed this SOH CAH TOA skit from Ms. 

Reed, and that after observing this skit he did not bring the same skit into his 

classroom. However, he did “bring a story about Chief SOH CAH TOA into a lesson” in 

his class and he has taught that lesson in 2016, 2017 and 2018. The last time he taught 

the lesson was in 2018. He stated that he had seen the same lesson taught by another 

teacher at King High School and the teachers discussed it in collaboration. However, 

Mr. Paulo stated that “after this backlash” he would no longer teach that lesson 

because of fear of backlash.  

Mr. Paulo testified that based on his observations, Ms. Reed’s rapport with her 

students was good and her students responded well to her. He stated that Ms. Reed 

made significant contributions to the math department at North. She offered valuable 

insights, and she has made contributions to the curriculum and academics. He said she 

brought “a lot of wisdom and resources” to the math department.  

Mr. Paulo became aware of the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit a few of days after 

it happened. After he watched the video, his opinion was that the video “was unfair to 

Ms. Reed in the way the video was edited.” He stated that he knew the point she was 

trying to make, the educational goal of that lesson, and he thought that goal was 

misrepresented through the video. Mr. Paulo made comments publicly regarding his 

opinion at the district board meeting on January 13, 2022. His intention in making 

those comments was to “stand up and speak out” because he “was raised to say 

something if you see something wrong.” He hoped the district would see that Ms. 

Reed is a brilliant teacher and has been a valuable asset to the district for 20 years. On 

42 

cross-examination, Mr. Paulo acknowledged that he knew that there were people who 

were upset by the skit, and there was a public outcry as a result. However, that “did 

not give him pause for a moment” because he believes making a statement on behalf 

of Ms. Reed “was the right thing to do.” Mr. Paulo testified that he did not see Ms. 

Reed’s skit as being culturally insensitive at all. While he acknowledged that others 

“may see it that way,” he knows that Ms. Reed had no intention to be racist or 

culturally insensitive and that is what matters. Mr. Paulo stated, “I don’t know what is 

culturally insensitive anymore, we just stick to very bland lessons to avoid any 

potential for stepping into any culturally insensitive areas.”  

38. 

Emmanuela Alina Herrera currently works as an education advisor for 

State Oak Charter school. Ms. Herrera was employed by the district at North as a math 

teacher (and for two years as a math instructional coach) from August 2012 to May 

2022. Ms. Herrera received her bachelor's degree in political science from UCR in 2008, 

her master's degree in political science from the University of California Davis (UCD) in 

2010, and her teaching credential from UCR in 2012.  

Ms. Herrera met Ms. Reed during the first week that Ms. Herrera worked as a 

student teacher at North because Ms. Herrera observed Ms. Reed teaching. In 2011, 

when Ms. Herrera was a student teacher, she observed Ms. Reed give a geometry 

lesson where Ms. Reed had her students create a paper cube and take notes on the 

side of the cube. In 2011 Ms. Herrera also observed Ms. Reed teach a class where she 

was teaching her students a “proportional project.” Ms. Herrera stated that she would 

watch Ms. Reed’s classes whenever she could. Ms. Reed told her then that she likes to 

give her students different ways to process information. Ms. Herrera testified that Ms. 

Reed was trying to find new ways to engage her students and was creative in 

instructional approaches. 

43 

From 2012 to 2022, Ms. Herrera worked closely with Ms. Reed and collaborated 

with her to create daily lessons, create projects, and write assignments for students. 

When the school transitioned to a common core curriculum, Ms. Herrera and Ms. Reed 

both taught the Math II class, which was a new course. Ms. Herrera worked closely with 

Ms. Reed to implement that course. Ms. Herrera described Ms. Reed as a team player 

and great co-worker with whom she had a very positive relationship. 

Ms. Herrera became aware of the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit but only saw the 

first minute or two of the video. She testified that she did not watch the entire video 

because “it was hard to watch.” In the video, Ms. Herrera saw Ms. Reed teaching a 

trigonometry lesson wearing a headdress made of paper, telling a story, and walking 

around the class chanting SOH CAH TOA. Ms. Herrera stated that it was hard to watch 

because she assumed that there would be “students who would be uncomfortable 

with the lesson.” She assumed that because of the “stereotype it was making of Native 

Americans.” Ms. Herrera stated that she understood how the skit could be offensive to 

students in the class, but that she understood that Ms. Reed had no malice in the 

lesson or her approach to it. Ms. Herrera explained that Ms. Reed was performing the 

skit out of her desire to help students remember the material. Ms. Herrera stated that 

Ms. Reed had a great rapport with her students, and she made herself available to 

tutor her students outside of class. Ms. Herrera believes that Ms. Reed is a good 

teacher. Prior to October 2021, Ms. Herrera never observed Ms. Reed to act 

inappropriately with any student or to treat students differently.  

39. 

Richard Edward Davis, Jr., is retired from the district. He worked from 

1981 to 2015 for the district with those entire 35 years spent working at North. Mr. 

Davis began working at North as a teacher, then as a student advisor, a.k.a. counselor, 

and then as an administrator for 20 years. Mr. Davis became an administrator at North 

44 

in 1995. Mr. Davis was an administrator of North when Ms. Reed was hired as a math 

teacher. He oversaw the math department, and attended math department meetings 

and break-out groups. If there was an issue with a student in the math department, 

Mr. Davis would attend any meetings addressing those issues. Mr. Davis testified that 

he did not recall observing Ms. Reed’s classes, but he is sure that he did so as part of 

his job. Mr. Davis does not recall if he ever gave a formal evaluation of Ms. Reed, but if 

he did, then based on his experience, he knows it would have been a positive review. 

Mr. Davis observed Ms. Reed in her classroom on several occasions in an informal 

setting because Mr. Davis would typically walk in classrooms unannounced. During 

those visits Mr. Davis never observed any issue with Ms. Reed. Mr. Davis has a great 

admiration of Ms. Reed as a teacher and believes she is fair and has great expertise.  

Mr. Davis is aware of the video of Ms. Reed’s skit that went viral, and he has 

seen “a little of” that video. Prior to seeing the video, Mr. Davis had never seen Ms. 

Reed perform that skit and never observed her teach that lesson. Mr. Davis stated that 

sometime, either in the 1990s or at least before 2010, he did observe another teacher 

performing a similar skit with SOH CAH TOA and chanting with the same story. When 

Mr. Davis first saw the video of Ms. Reed’s skit, he was surprised because Ms. Reed “is 

very reserved and I thought it was outside of her comfort zone.” Despite the video, Mr. 

Davis believes that Ms. Reed is fit to teach and can connect with students on all levels. 

40.  Donald Dwane Phelps is currently employed by the district as a full-time 

math teacher and softball coach at North, a position he has held for the past 28 years. 

Mr. Phelps holds a single subject clear teaching credential for math. Two of Mr. 

Phelps’s three children graduated from North. In addition to teaching, for the past ten 

years Mr. Phelps has worked as a teacher’s union site representative for North (site 

45 

representative). His duties as a site representative include attending meetings with 

teachers and administrators and taking notes.  

Mr. Phelps has known Ms. Reed since she started working at North. Two of Mr. 

Phelps’s children had Ms. Reed as a math teacher during the time they attended 

North. Mr. Phelps never had any concerns or complaints about Ms. Reed during the 

time she taught his children. Mr. Phelps testified that he can’t recall ever observing Ms. 

Reed’s class, but he is aware that he likely did so because the math teachers did 

observe other teachers in the past. As Ms. Reed’s colleague, Mr. Phelps did interact 

with Ms. Reed. Specifically, Ms. Reed taught the math class that fed into Mr. Phelps’s 

class the next year. Accordingly, Ms. Reed was responsible for making sure those 

students had the requisite knowledge to progress to Mr. Phelps’s class. Mr. Phelps and 

Ms. Reed shared strategies and ideas for teaching, and they met weekly with the other 

math teachers for math department meetings. Mr. Phelps stated that North has about 

11 or 12 math teachers in the math department. Mr. Phelps described Ms. Reed as very 

professional as a teacher, and very caring towards students. 

Mr. Phelps is familiar with the mnemonic SOH CAH TOA that is used to teach 

trigonometric ratios. He stated that this mnemonic has been in use longer than he has 

been alive. Mr. Phelps is also familiar with this mnemonic in the context of a story of a 

little Indian boy, which he stated has also been around a long time. Mr. Phelps learned 

the mnemonic SOH CAH TOA through that same little Indian boy story when he was a 

student. He stated he knows that the little Indian boy story has been used as a 

teaching mechanism at North and generally over the years, and he stated that there 

are variations on the story. He stated that he has seen the teaching mechanism in 

math textbooks dating back to the 1970s. Mr. Phelps testified that if you go to 

46 

YouTube you can find many videos of people using that little Indian boy story to teach 

SOH CAH TOA. 

Mr. Phelps is aware of the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit. However, prior to that 

video going viral, Mr. Phelps was aware that Ms. Reed performed that skit in her math 

classroom for many years. He stated that every year when his students would come 

into his class, the skit was a topic of conversation. Mr. Phelps told those students that 

he “is not as outgoing as Ms. Reed in telling stories” and that he would not tell stories 

in his class. Mr. Phelps described himself as a very straightforward teacher and “not 

theatric.” Mr. Phelps testified that his own children, who were in Ms. Reed’s class, had 

come home to tell him about that skit at the time they saw it in the years 2017 and 

2021. Mr. Phelps had never seen Ms. Reed perform the skit prior to seeing the viral 

video. Mr. Phelps recalls occasions when Ms. Reed would walk by his classroom and 

tell him that “today is SOH CAH TOA day,” and Mr. Phelps would respond, “Go get 

them.” According to Mr. Phelps, everyone in the math department knew that Ms. Reed 

performed the SOH CAH TOA skit the way she did. Mr. Phelps is not aware of anyone 

at North beyond the math department who was aware that Ms. Reed was performing 

the skit. Mr. Phelps testified that he also uses mnemonics in his teaching, which he 

calls Phelpisms. Mr. Phelps believes that there is a place in the classroom for 

mnemonics and “goofy behavior” from teachers because some students learn better 

that way. 

Mr. Phelps recalled when the video of Ms. Reed’s skit went viral. He was 

coaching on the softball field, and got a text from another teacher telling him that Ms. 

Reed was in the front office and asking for a site representative. Mr. Phelps went to the 

front office, but by the time he arrived, the teacher’s union had sent a representative 

from the main office for Ms. Reed, and Mr. Phelps did not sit in on that meeting.  

47 

On January 10, 2022, after he had received Ms. Reed’s permission to do so, Mr. 

Phelps sent an email to all the North teachers and staff explaining that the district 

would be starting the process to terminate Ms. Reed’s employment and advocating for 

Ms. Reed regarding this matter. Mr. Phelps testified that he sent the email because he 

wanted to get information out to fellow teachers on campus. He had been getting lots 

of emails, texts, and calls from teachers asking about Ms. Reed’s status, and he found 

this to be the most efficient way to communicate to all of the teachers and staff at 

North. In his email, Mr. Phelps wrote, in part, as follows: 

I have known Candice for many years now as a colleague 

and, like many of you, as my child’s teacher. . . . She is a 

teacher that goes above and beyond to help her students 

inside and outside the classroom. . . . Frankly this decision 

by the district angers and scares me as an educator. While I 

can understand why many will see Mrs. Reed’s partial lesson 

as culturally insensitive, the whole lesson must be seen to 

understand the context of what was seen in the small 

snippet of the video. Furthermore, this lesson has been 

taught for many years with nary a complaint. As 

administrators have come and gone, this lesson has never 

been a problem. In fact [sic] this lesson has been lauded in 

the past. She has not been given a platform to explain her 

side of the situation. . . .  

Mr. Phelps does not believe that Ms. Reed should be terminated from her 

position at the district. He stated that “education is a learning tool, not just for 

students, but also for educators.” He further stated, “If we don’t learn from our 

48 

mistakes and move forward, we are missing out on what could make us better people.” 

Mr. Phelps understands that “cultural sensitivity has increased recently,” but he does 

not believe that Ms. Reed “should be fired for this but should learn from it and grow to 

become a better teacher.”  

TESTIMONY OF STUDENTS  

41. 

JD is 15 years old and currently a student at North in the 10th grade. JD 

was in the ninth grade on October 19, 2021, and a student in Ms. Reed’s first period 

classroom when Ms. Reed performed the SOH CAH TOA skit. Prior to Ms. Reed’s 

performance of the skit, JD’s experience with Ms. Reed was positive and JD stated that 

Ms. Reed “was kind and accepting of everyone.”  

JD described her reaction to witnessing Ms. Reed’s SOH CAH TOA skit. JD stated 

that she “was confused and giggling and did not know where it came from.” She said 

that after that class, she “had a chat with friends and we were confused but it was no 

big deal to us.” JD talked about the skit with her friends, and they agreed “it was 

weird,” but they “moved on to the next class and thought about it no more.” 

Sometime thereafter the district talked to students about that lesson. JD said that the 

district wanted to make sure they “were okay and had resources to talk to.” JD felt 

comfortable after these events.  

JD testified that she thinks Ms. Reed is a good teacher and should be allowed to 

continue to teach. JD thinks that Ms. Reed is involved with her students and makes 

sure that they are engaged. Ms. Reed has never made JD feel embarrassed or 

humiliated. JD stated that Ms. Reed has never made fun of her, made fun of her 

religion or dress or language. In response to the question of “Did you ever believe that 

Ms. Reed was making fun of cultural dances?” JD answered, “I don’t think she intended 

49 

to make fun of it, but that is how it came off to other people – her intent was not to 

make fun but to educate.” JD then stated that she distinguishes between Ms. Reed’s 

intent and “how people perceive things.” However, JD admitted that it would be 

reasonable for Native American students to think Ms. Reed was making fun of them. 

JD then stated, “I think that the dancing was offensive.” However, she did not think 

that the prayer to each of the gods in Ms. Reed’s skit was offensive.  

42.  Maria Rebecca Alvarado Barahona is 19 years old and graduated from 

North in 2021. Ms. Barahona currently works as a “Lead” at a marketing company. She 

has attended college for one year at UCR majoring in sociology. Thereafter, she began 

working in her mother’s business and ultimately took a position with a company that 

would pay for her next year of college. During her freshman year at North, Ms. 

Barahona had Ms. Reed as her Math II teacher. Ms. Barahona testified that Ms. Reed 

was “one of the best teachers [she] has had,” and never did anything to disrespect her. 

While at North, Ms. Barahona would go to Ms. Reed for help in her advanced calculus 

class even though Ms. Reed was not her teacher for that class. Ms. Barahona stayed in 

contact with Ms. Reed after Ms. Barahona graduated from North.  

Ms. Barahona learned of the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit in October 2021 

during the time she was attending UCR. After seeing the video, Ms. Barahona stated “it 

was an automatic ‘oh no’ for me.” She explained that by “oh no” she meant that the 

“media is taking things out of hand instead of focusing on the real issues, and we are 

discussing something that offended only one student.” Ms. Barahona recalls that Ms. 

Reed performed the same skit in 2017 or 2018 in her classroom, but she “thought 

nothing of it,” and “nobody [in Ms. Barahona’s class] expressed to her” that they were 

offended by the skit. After seeing the video, Ms. Barahona characterized Ms. Reed’s 

50 

skit as “misguided.” Ms. Barahona stated multiple times during her testimony that as a 

result of Ms. Reed’s skit, “nobody was actually hurt.”  

On October 28, 2021, Ms. Barahona sent an email to the district’s board 

regarding the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit. She stated that she reached out to other 

students from North regarding the email and “about 10 students edited” the email for 

her after she wrote it. Ms. Barahona wrote the email because she knows Ms. Reed, and 

her fellow classmates who edited the email know her and took Ms. Reed’s classes, and 

“all were delighted by it.” Ms. Barahona stated that she wrote the email because “this 

whole cancel culture thing bothered me,” and she spent a couple of hours drafting the 

email. Ms. Barahona’s email, which was received in evidence, provides, in part, as 

follows: 

I’d like to begin by saying that by no means are her actions 

to be excused. The headdress to be specific, was an action 

of ignorance and offensive to the indigenous culture. Her 

actions are to be reprimanded and they have been by 

having her take leave with the negative and harsh uproar 

the video caused. She was mocking the culture and it was 

wrong. Therefore we must take action to avoid such 

behavior to be expressed by teachers for the sake of all. . . . 

The system should change in order to obtain a better 

school environment for all. This is a lesson for all educators 

to learn about the culture and ethnic backgrounds of their 

students so they can be more sensitive, accepting and 

aware of that when teaching and interacting with them. 

Firing Ms. Reed doesn’t treat the root of the issue, it offers 

51 

an easy out for administrators. . . . Please don’t try to sweep 

this under the rug by firing her. There should be talk of a 

transfer and a chance to amend [sic] the damage she  

did. . . .  

Ms. Barahona testified that “there are issues far more hurtful to students than 

what happened in this lesson.” She stated that while she was not personally offended 

by the skit, “that does not make the lesson right” and characterized the lesson as 

“misguided.” Ms. Barahona stressed that the district knew this lesson was happening 

for years but did nothing about it. Ms. Barahona said, “there was one student that 

began this entire thing by posting the video instead of talking to administrators about 

it.” She said she does not blame the student but does blame the school 

administration’s response because “if the school had responded differently, then I 

would not have seen horrible messages to the teacher.”  

TESTIMONY FROM CHARACTER WITNESSES 

43. 

Cindy Sewell retired from her position as a teacher in another school 

district six years ago. Prior to her retirement, Ms. Sewell worked as a teacher for 30 

years in classes from second to sixth grades. Prior to that she worked as a teacher of 

English as a second language for a few years and was a math specialist. She received 

her bachelor's degree in Education in 1976 and held multiple teaching certifications. 

Ms. Sewell never worked for the district.  

Ms. Sewell has known Ms. Reed for over 30 years because Ms. Sewell’s daughter 

and Ms. Reed have been good friends since the age of 12. Ms. Sewell’s daughter met 

Ms. Reed at church and they quickly became best friends. During the time Ms. Sewell’s 

daughter and Ms. Reed were in high school, Ms. Reed would come to Ms. Sewell’s 

52 

 
home often. During the time Ms. Reed was considering becoming a teacher, Ms. Reed 

came to observe one of Ms. Sewell’s class at an elementary school sometime in 1995 

to 1997 and also participated in the class and helped with the students. Ms. Sewell 

observed Ms. Reed during that class and said she had a good rapport with students 

and was personable. Ms. Sewell described Ms. Reed as “one of the kindest people I 

know,” as “honest, hard-working, and responsible.” Ms. Sewell has never observed Ms. 

Reed as a teacher in Ms. Reed’s classroom.  

Ms. Sewell saw the viral video of Ms. Reed’s skit on social media. At the time she 

first saw the video, she did not realize that Ms. Reed was the teacher in the video. Ms. 

Sewell testified that she believed that the teacher in the video was simply “engaging 

the kids.” A few months after seeing the video, Ms. Sewell “figured out” the teacher 

was Ms. Reed. Ms. Sewell’s impression of the video was that the teacher was “doing 

whatever it takes to make the lesson stick.” Ms. Sewell testified that she did not see 

anything from the video that she considered to be offensive or that may have an 

impact on Native American students. Ms. Sewell stated, “I used to dress up like a mad 

scientist and in historical costumes to help my kids learn – I have done some whacky 

things.”  

44. 

Carrie Marie Ayars currently lives in Tennessee, where she has lived for 

the past three months. Prior to that, Ms. Ayars lived in Corona, California. From 1989 to 

1996, Ms. Ayars lived in Riverside, California where she first met Ms. Reed. Ms. Reed 

and Ms. Ayars attended junior high school and high school together. They graduated 

high school together in 1996. After high school, Ms. Ayars and Ms. Reed kept in touch. 

Ms. Ayars and Ms. Reed have been friends for 33 years. 

Ms. Ayars described Ms. Reed as her best friend for 33 years. She said Ms. Reed 

is smart, very strong, a good mother to her children, a good friend, a good listener, 

53 

and has been a good support system for Ms. Ayars for years. Ms. Ayars testified that 

Ms. Reed is very forthcoming, is not racist or prejudiced, and has never done anything 

that led Ms. Ayars to believe Ms. Reed is prejudiced towards other cultures. 

Ms. Ayars first became aware of the video of Ms. Reed’s skit when Ms. Ayars’s 

daughter showed it to her. Ms. Ayars saw the video and stated that she “was not 

shocked” because she knew Ms. Reed was a dedicated teacher, “who was willing to do 

that for her students.” Ms. Ayars said that Ms. Reed had the “humility to put herself 

out there to teach a math concept to high schoolers, who are very judgmental.” Ms. 

Ayars said that Ms. Reed “was making a fool of herself” to teach a math concept, which 

“is honorable and I admire that.” Ms. Ayars stated that she did not perceive the video 

as being racist in any way, but she “knows it was perceived as racist.” Ms. Ayars said 

that she doesn’t think “it came from a place of racism,” but that she can see how 

people think it is racist. Ms. Ayars knows that Ms. Reed “did not intend it that way.”  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Code Sections Regarding Dismissal Actions 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44934 and 44944.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 

permanent employee. Subdivision (a)(1) authorizes dismissal for immoral conduct. 

Subdivision (a)(6) authorizes dismissal for evident unfitness for service. Subdivision 

(a)(8) authorizes dismissal for persistent violation or refusal to obey regulations and 

district polices. 

54 

3. 

Education Code section 44939 provides the grounds for suspension of a 

permanent employee. 

4. 

Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the 

process for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and 

sets forth the Commissions’ authority regarding its final decision.  

5. 

Education Code section 44938 outlines the procedures the governing 

board must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent 

employee. 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

6. 

The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, to convince the 

trier of fact that the existence of a fact sought to be proved is more probable than its 

nonexistence. (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 

1128.) The district has the burden of proof to establish cause to dismiss its employee. 

7. 

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) A preponderance of the evidence means that 

the evidence on one side of an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than, 

the evidence on the other side of the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or 

quantity, but in the convincing effect the evidence has on those to whom it is 

addressed. In other words, the term refers to evidence that has more convincing force 

than that opposed to it. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 

Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

55 

Board Policies and Additional Statutes Alleged to Be Applicable 

8. 

District Board Policies 0410, 0415, and 4119.21 set forth the professional 

standards the board expects of its employees. As noted in Policy 0410, the board 

expects district employees to “provide equal opportunity for all individuals in 

education,” to provide programs, activities, and practices that are “free from unlawful 

discrimination, including discrimination against an individual or group based on race, 

color, ancestry, nationality, national origin, ethnic group identification, age, religion,” 

and “[d]istrict programs and activities must also be free of any racially derogatory or 

discriminatory school or athletic team names, mascots, or nicknames.” As noted in 

Policy 0415, the district “prohibits discrimination, harassment, intimidation, or bullying 

in all district programs, activities, and employment on the basis of actual or perceived 

ancestry, age, color, disability, gender, gender identity, gender expression, nationality, 

race or ethnicity, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, parental or marital status, 

pregnancy, or association with a person or a group with one or more of these actual or 

perceived characteristics.” The Profession Standards section 4119.21 sets out ethical 

standards of educators as adopted by the district. 

9. 

Education Code section 200 provides: 

It is the policy of the State of California to afford all persons 

in public schools, regardless of their disability, gender, 

gender identity, gender expression, nationality, race or 

ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or any other 

characteristic that is contained in the definition of hate 

crimes set forth in Section 422.55 of the Penal Code, 

including immigration status, equal rights, and 

opportunities in the educational institutions of the state. 

56 

The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit acts that are 

contrary to that policy and to provide remedies therefor. 

10. 

Education Code section 220 provides: 

No person shall be subjected to discrimination on the basis 

of disability, gender, gender identity, gender expression, 

nationality, race or ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or 

any other characteristic that is contained in the definition of 

hate crimes set forth in Section 422.55 of the Penal Code, 

including immigration status, in any program or activity 

conducted by an educational institution that receives, or 

benefits from, state financial assistance, or enrolls pupils 

who receive state student financial aid. 

Relevant Judicial Authority 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

11. 

The seminal case for teacher dismissals is Morrison v. State Board of 

Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. There the Supreme Court held that where charges of 

immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, or evidence unfitness for service are raised 

in teacher dismissal cases, the applicable standard is whether the person is fit to teach. 

The factors outlined in Morrison must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, 

whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service. (Id. at p.229.) 

12. 

Immoral conduct has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and 

57 

dissoluteness. It can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing 

moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (Board of 

Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (19 60) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

13. 

The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher dismissal cases 

is whether the person is fit to teach. “Fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact. 

(Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 

555, 560-561.) 

14. 

“Evident” is defined as “clear to the vision and understanding.” “Unfit” is 

defined as “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; incapable; incompetent; and 

physically or mentally unsound” and “unsuitable, incompetent and not adapted for a 

particular use or service.” (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. 

Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 

15. 

In Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, the court noted the two parallel, yet 

contradictory, lines of cases regarding “unfit for service.” One line of cases equated 

that term with “unprofessional conduct” and the other line of cases distinguished the 

two definitions. In deciding that the latter line of cases was the correct way to evaluate 

“unfit to serve,” the Woodland court complied with the rules of statutory construction. 

The Woodland court concluded that “unprofessional conduct” and “evident unfitness 

for service” do not mean precisely the same thing. Although conduct constituting 

“evident unfitness for service” will often constitute “unprofessional conduct,” the 

58 

converse is not always true. Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for 

service be attributable to defect in temperament, which is not necessary for a finding 

of unprofessional conduct. Nevertheless, lower courts may not disregard the criteria 

for unfitness set out in Morrison where that court concluded that “unprofessional 

conduct” meant conduct showing a teacher was unfit to teach. These criteria must be 

analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the conduct indicates unfitness 

for service. If it does, the next step is to determine whether the “unfitness” is “evident”; 

i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. (Id. at 

pp.1442-1445.) A finding of “unfit to serve” can be made if the evidence, taken in the 

aggregate, shows that retaining the employee would pose a significant danger of 

psychological harm to students and fellow teachers. (Id. at p.1456.) 

16. 

An employee can be dismissed from the teaching profession only upon a 

showing that his or her retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm 

to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions 

as a teacher. The inquiry is whether any adverse inferences can be drawn from the 

teacher’s conduct as to his teaching ability, or as to the possibility that publicity 

surrounding the past conduct may in and of itself substantially impair his function as a 

teacher. (Morrison, supra, at p. 235.) 

17. 

To establish a teacher is unfit to teach, Morrison requires a nexus 

between government employment and alleged employee misconduct stemming from 

the principle that “[n]o person can be denied government employment because of 

factors unconnected with the responsibilities of that employment.” (San Diego Unified 

School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th1454, 1463.) 

59 

18. 

“Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one’s conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing school district.” (San 

Diego Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2013) 214 

Cal.App.4th 1120, 1142-43.) 

19. 

An employee’s actions on a given day may suggest a lack of judgment 

and discretion or may be an isolated act precipitated by an unusual accumulation of 

pressure and stress. An absence of any other incidents in the employee’s teaching 

career suggestive of lack of judgment or discretion can further distinguish the aberrant 

character of the act at issue. In such a case, a fact finder could reasonably conclude 

that the isolated incident of poor judgment was outweighed by years of demonstrated 

teaching competence, and that on balance the employee possessed the qualities of 

character necessary for teaching fitness. (Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal. 

3d 691, 696-701.) 

20. 

In determining whether the teacher’s conduct indicated unfitness to 

teach, such matters as (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students or fellow teachers, (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated, (3) the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, (4) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, (5) the likelihood of the recurrence of 

the questioned conduct, and (6) the notoriety and publicity accorded the teacher’s 

conduct may be considered. (Jack M., supra., at p.702, fn. 5.) 

21. 

The nexus between an employee’s conduct and his or her fitness to teach 

is established when the conduct is detrimental to the mission and functions of the 

employer. Factors to consider are whether the acts demonstrate a serious lapse in 

good judgment, the teacher fails to recognize the seriousness of his misconduct, the 

60 

teacher attempts to shift blame to parents and students, the principal has lost 

confidence in the teacher’s ability to serve as a role model based upon his or her 

actions, or, most noteworthy, the teacher’s testimony that he or she does not think his 

or her actions would have any impact on his ability to teach students if any of them 

had viewed the actions as immoral. The conduct itself, together with the teacher’s 

failure to accept responsibility or recognize the seriousness of it, given his or her 

position as a teacher and role model, demonstrates evident unfitness to teach. (San 

Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, 1465-66.) 

22.  One act does not alone demonstrate the unfitness of the teacher but is 

simply one of the factors to be considered. (Board of Education v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal. App.3d 555, 561-62.) 

23. 

There must be a nexus between the teacher’s conduct and his or her 

usefulness to the school district and only when so construed can grounds to dismiss 

for immoral conduct or unfitness to serve be constitutionally applied. (Board of 

Trustees v. Judge (1975) 50 Cal. App. 3d 920, 929.) 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF OR REFUSAL TO OBEY LAWS 

24. 

A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), must also 

be established by reference to the Morrison factors. If unfitness to teach is shown, 

then the district must further establish that the employee’s refusal to follow the laws 

or regulations was “persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and continuing.” (San Dieguito Union 

High School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 

1176, 1183.) Isolated incidents or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period 

61 

of time are not generally considered “persistent.” (Bourland v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) 

25. 

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent; 

continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly 

repeated.” (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 

Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) Education Codes section 44932, subdivision (8) pertains to 

unintentional as well as intentional transgressions, and hence the Legislature has 

decreed that a single violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal, apparently to 

allow for correction; “it is the persistent disregard” of school rules that the subdivision 

is designed to regulate. (Id. at p.84.) 

Morrison Factors 

26. 

In Morrison, supra, the Supreme Court suggested seven factors to 

consider when evaluating whether the school employee should be dismissed: (1) the 

likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the 

degree of such adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) 

the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the existence of extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the 

likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent that the 

discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 

the teacher. 

27. 

The Morrison factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate. 

When a camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load 

to see which one could have done the deed. A trier of fact is entitled to consider the 

62 

totality of the offensive conduct. (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456-1457.) 

28.  Only the pertinent Morrison factors need to be analyzed. (Broney v. 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.) 

Other Disciplinary Considerations 

29. 

An administrator’s loss of confidence in the educator and doubt 

regarding the educator’s ability to serve as a role model for students are factors that 

may be considered. (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.) 

30. 

The Commission is vested with discretion not to dismiss an employee 

even if grounds for discipline exist. (Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 

45 Cal.3d 209.) 

Evaluation of Charges 

31.  Ms. Reed has been employed by the district at North for almost 20 years, 

since the 2002-2003 school year. Based on the evidence, Ms. Reed appears to have 

been utilizing the “SOH CAH TOA skit” that was recorded by a student on October 19, 

2021, for many years at North and at least as far back as 2012, although she did not 

use the skit every year during that time period. Mr. Phelps credibly testified that the 

entire math department of North was aware that Ms. Reed was performing this skit for 

many years. However, the evidence did not establish that North administrators were 

aware that Ms. Reed was using the SOH CAH TOA skit prior to October 19, 2021. The 

Commission finds that the preponderance of the evidence established that Ms. Reed 

was never told by the district’s administration or anyone else that she should not 

63 

utilize the skit. To the contrary, other math teachers praised her use of the skit as an 

effective method to keep her students engaged and to retain the mnemonic SOH CAH 

TOA.  

A preponderance of the evidence established that multiple students of North 

experienced emotional, social, and psychological harm as a result of Ms. Reed’s skit. 

Specifically, Dr. Fryberg provided credible and persuasive testimony regarding the 

negative impact Ms. Reed’s behavior during the skit had on all the students at North, 

both indigenous students and non-indigenous students. Five students testified at the 

hearing regarding the negative impact Ms. Reed’s skit had on them and their fellow 

students. The five students credibly testified that Ms. Reed’s skit made them 

uncomfortable, was racist, and was mocking indigenous culture. One student testified 

that when he voiced his feelings regarding how Ms. Reed’s skit was racist, other 

students told him that he was “too sensitive,” which as credibly explained by Dr. 

Fryberg, is simply another microaggression towards indigenous students. Extensive 

evidence was received showing emails, and comments to the district board by many 

students, community members and families that Ms. Reed’s skit adversely affected 

students at North and people in the community. Students testified at the hearing that 

they felt unsafe as a result of protests at the school that were a direct result of Ms. 

Reed’s skit. Accordingly, the Commission finds that the Morrison Factors of the 

likelihood Ms. Reed’s conduct caused an adverse effect to students was established 

and that likelihood was very high, and the degree of those adverse effects was very 

high. 

Additionally, Mr. Phelps credibly testified that the “little Indian boy skit” has 

been around for many years, and was the method taught to Mr. Phelps when he was a 

child. Accordingly, this SOH CAH TOA skit is well known, and Ms. Reed was praised by 

64 

the other math teachers for using it. However, despite its long history, a 

preponderance of the evidence established that the skit was culturally insensitive and 

harmful to students as found above. Ms. Reed had even undergone training on August 

10, 2020, for “Culturally Responsive Pedagogy,” yet she still chose to give the skit as a 

lesson without any reflection on how it would affect her students. While Ms. Reed 

intended to use the skit to teach her students, her failure to understand the cultural 

insensitivity of the skit, particularly in light of her previous training, is disturbing and 

blameworthy. A preponderance of the evidence also established that Ms. Reed 

continued to be perplexed as to why the skit was offensive to students and others well 

after she had been placed on administrative leave. Ms. Reed has an obligation to abide 

by district policies, which require her not to discriminate against her students based on 

ethnic group identification, and her use of that skit repeatedly for many years, which 

was demeaning and mocking of indigenous people, directly violated those district 

policies regardless of whether her intent in doing so was to teach students. The 

Commission finds that Ms. Reed’s conduct constituted a persistent violation of district 

policies. Furthermore, the Commission finds that Ms. Reed’s conduct also constituted 

immoral conduct because the conduct showed a moral indifference towards the 

adverse effects the skit had on all her students, particularly indigenous students. 

While the Commission finds that Ms. Reed violated district policies and her 

conduct constituted immoral conduct, as set forth above, the Commission did not find 

that Ms. Reed has a “fixed character trait” that would not be remediable on receipt of 

notice that her conduct was wrong. As noted above, a preponderance of the evidence 

did not establish that Ms. Reed had ever been notified prior to October 19, 2021, by 

the school, the district, students, or anyone that her skit was inappropriate. Given her 

20 years of experience as a teacher at North with positive performance reviews, the 

evidence does not establish that Ms. Reed would have been unable to stop performing 

65 

the skit or any other culturally insensitive lessons if she had been notified to do so. To 

the contrary, the evidence establishes that she likely would have stopped using the skit 

immediately if she had been given any notification at all that she should not be using 

it. The district never provided such notice. Accordingly, the Commission did not find 

that the evidence established that Ms. Reed is evidently unfit for service as a teacher. 

32. 

After consideration of all the evidence, the Commission finds that Ms. 

Reed’s conduct during the October 19, 2021, skit, as well as each of her performances 

of the skit prior to that date as discussed above, constitutes immoral conduct and 

persistently violated multiple district policies regarding professional standards, code of 

ethics, and prohibition against discrimination or harassment based on race and 

national origin. 

33. 

The Commission did not find that Ms. Reed is evidently unfit for service 

as a teacher. Specifically, insufficient evidence was provided to establish that Ms. 

Reed’s performance of the skit constituted a “fixed character trait” that would not be 

remediable on receipt of notice that her conduct was wrong. The evidence 

demonstrated that prior to October 19, 2021, Ms. Reed had received no notice at all 

from the district, students, or anyone else that her skit was wrong. Instead, she 

received praise from other math teachers for using it. While her failure to reflect on the 

skit and how it would affect her students was blameworthy, the evidence did not 

establish that she was not capable of stopping the behavior if she had ever received 

any notice that it was wrong. The evidence failed to establish that the district ever 

gave such notice.  

66 

Cause Exists to Dismiss Ms. Reed 

34. 

Cause exists to dismiss Ms. Reed pursuant to Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(1), because the evidence established that Ms. Reed engaged in 

immoral conduct. 

35. 

Cause exists to dismiss Ms. Reed pursuant to Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(8), because the evidence established that Ms. Reed persistently 

violated district polices, regulations and school directives. 

Cause Does Not Exist to Dismiss Ms. Reed for Evident Unfitness for 

Service 

36. 

Cause does not exist to dismiss Ms. Reed pursuant to Education Code 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), because the evidence did not establish that Ms. Reed 

was evidently unfit for service.  

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

67 

ORDER 

Ms. Reed’s appeal of her immediate suspension and dismissal from employment 

with the Riverside Unified School District is denied. The district’s request to suspend 

and dismiss Ms. Reed is granted. Ms. Reed shall be dismissed from the district.  

DATED: February 24, 2023 

DATED: February 24, 2023 

DATED: February 24, 2023

Janice Cloward 
Commission Member 

Amar Samet 
Commission Member 

DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

68 

Janice Cloward (Feb 24, 2023 09:27 PST)Amar Samet (Feb 24, 2023 09:56 PST) 
 
 
 
 
 
