BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
PALERMO UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

TINA JAMISON, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent 

OAH No. 2022100662 

DECISION 

This matter was heard before a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) of the Palermo Union Elementary School District (District) by 

videoconference on February 21 and 22, 2023. The Commission included Relena Ellis, 

Janine Hughes, and Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, presiding from Sacramento, California. 

Christian Keiner and Chelsea Tibbs, Attorneys at Law, represented the District. 

Eric Lindstrom, Attorney at Law, represented Tina Jamison (respondent), who 

was present throughout the hearing.  

The matter was submitted for decision when the Commission concluded its 

deliberations on February 22, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. She 

holds a Child Development Site Supervisor permit and is authorized to supervise a 

childcare and development program operating at a single site. Since 2012, respondent 

has been assigned to teach preschool at Helen Wilcox Preschool (Wilcox). 

Respondent’s direct supervisor is Kimberly Butcher, the District’s Preschool Director. 

2. 

On August 26, 2022, the District’s Superintendent, Kathleen Andoe-

Nolind, notified respondent that she was placed on administrative leave from her 

employment with the District pending completion of an investigation into an incident 

that occurred on August 23, 2022. The District’s allegations regarding the incident are 

set forth in Factual Finding 4, below.  

3. 

On October 12, 2022, Superintendent Andoe-Nolind signed the 

Statement of Charges1 recommending termination of respondent’s employment with 

the District on the basis of (1) immoral conduct; (2) persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the 

1 Before the hearing, respondent moved to strike paragraphs 8 through 11 of 

the Statement of Charges because the events alleged in those paragraphs occurred 

more than four years before the filing of the Statement of Charges. Over the District’s 

opposition, the ALJ granted the motion, and paragraphs 8 through 11 were stricken. 

2 

 
District; and/or (3) evident unfitness for service. Respondent timely filed a request for 

hearing and this hearing followed. 

District’s Allegations and Respondent’s Written Statement 

4. 

The District’s allegations in support of the charges are set forth in the 

Statement of Charges as follows: 

On or about August 26, 2022, a preschool student made a 

‘spitting’ action towards Respondent. Respondent ‘reacted 

by striking the [Student's] face with an open palm.’ 

Respondent, just after the incident, admitted, ‘I just slapped 

a child,’ as well as admitting that day she ‘slapped [Student] 

in the face.’ 

On or about June 16, 2020, the District discovered that 

Respondent's District owned, classroom iPad contained 

photos of nude children. Respondent received a letter of 

warning regarding her violation of the District’s ‘iPad Use 

Agreement,’ and Board 24 Policy 4040(b), ‘for use of 

personal photos and particularly photos of this nature.’ 

On or about November 5, 2019, Respondent received a 

Conference/Conversation Summary from the District 

Preschool Director, Kimberly Butcher, regarding her conduct 

which ‘included raising your voice at a student, not 

fostering a classroom climate of collaboration and respect, 

and the allegation of [Respondent] putting your hands on 

the student's face during the intervention.’ The remainder 

3 

of the Conference/Conversation Summary set forth 

directives for next steps and classroom management 

strategies. 

District’s Evidence 

INCIDENT ON AUGUST 26, 2022 

5. 

Jodie Duggins has been a site supervisor at Wilcox for approximately six 

years. She has taught in the classroom next to respondent for many years and believes 

respondent is good at working with children and staff. She has no animosity toward 

respondent. 

6. 

On August 26, 2022, at approximately 9:30 a.m., respondent entered Ms. 

Duggins’s classroom and appeared “visibly upset.” Ms. Duggins asked if something 

was wrong and respondent said, “I just slapped a child.” Ms. Duggins advised 

respondent to call Director Butcher. 

7. 

Director Butcher also testified at hearing. She has been the Director at 

Wilcox for approximate four years. Before that, she had more than 25 years of 

experience as a director for other school districts. As Director at Wilcox, she is 

responsible to ensure students’ and parents’ rights are protected, including those 

involving physical safety and positive classroom interactions. 

8. 

At approximately 10:30 a.m. on August 26, 2022, respondent called 

Director Butcher and asked if she had time to talk. Director Butcher asked if anything 

was wrong, to which respondent replied that she had slapped a child, who was three 

years old. Respondent was “crying hard” and explained that the student was 

repeatedly touching a keyboard she was not supposed to touch. When respondent 

4 

asked her not to, the child spat in respondent’s face. Respondent explained she 

reacted by smacking the child’s face. The child ran to another part of the classroom. 

After a few minutes, respondent approached her, calmed her, and apologized. Director 

Butcher summarized her conversation with respondent in writing after it ended. At 

hearing, she testified consistent with the notes she made that day. 

9. 

Director Butcher met with Superintendent Andoe-Nolind later on August 

26, 2022, and Superintendent Andoe-Nolind decided to place respondent on 

administrative leave. She explained, based on her decades of experience in education, 

that three-year-olds, and older students, regularly engage in that kind of behavior. 

While working in a middle school, Superintendent Andoe-Nolind was intentionally spat 

upon and physically assaulted. Even in those circumstances with significantly larger 

students, she never believed it was appropriate to slap a child. 

10.  On August 29, 2022, Director Butcher submitted an Unusual 

Incident/Injury Report to the Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing 

Division (State Licensing). State Licensing program analysts investigated the incident 

and prepared a Facility Evaluation Report in which they cited Wilcox for a “Type A” 

violation of the student’s personal rights. Director Butcher explained “Type A” is the 

most serious category of violation. Based on the report, State Licensing required 

Wilcox to provide a copy of the report to parents of children enrolled then or at any 

time in the next year, keep a signed form from each parent acknowledging receipt of 

the report, and post a notice regarding the investigation for 30 days. The school 

complied with all requirements. 

5 

INCIDENT ON JUNE 16, 2020 – NUDE PHOTOS ON IPAD 

11. 

In mid-2020, most District employees worked from home due to the 

COVID-19 pandemic. The District provided them with iPads to facilitate their work. In 

June 2020, a member of the District’s information technology (IT) staff asked 

respondent to provide access to her iPad for a routine software update. When 

accessing the iPad, the IT employee discovered nude photos of children on the device 

and alerted Director Butcher. 

12.  Director Butcher and Superintendent Andoe-Nolind viewed the photos 

and confirmed the children were not clothed. Director Butcher then met with 

respondent to discuss the photos. Respondent explained they were photos of her 

grandchildren playing in a pool. Director Butcher reminded respondent not to use 

District equipment to store personal photos, particularly of nude children, as such 

images “could be misconstrued.” Director Butcher provided respondent with a letter 

confirming their conversation and her instruction to “remove all personal photos from 

the classroom iPad” and “refrain from using the iPad for the storage of personal 

information, photos, or videos.” 

INCIDENT IN OCTOBER 2019 

13.  Heather Peterson has worked for the District for more than 10 years. She 

is a librarian at Wilcox. In October 2019, she was an instructional aide at Wilcox. The 

class she assisted shared a playground with the class respondent taught. In mid-

October, as Ms. Peterson’s class was entering the playground, she saw respondent and 

her aides “rounding up” their students to return to the classroom. Ms. Peterson heard 

a child “causing a ruckus.” She saw respondent scream at the boy, “get into his face,” 

squeeze his face “intensely” with her thumb and fingers, shake him by the forearms, 

6 

and “toss him” toward the line of students. Ms. Peterson was “shocked” and “appalled” 

by what she considered “disgusting” behavior. She immediately reported the incident 

to her supervisor. 

14.  Director Butcher and Superintendent Andoe-Nolind both reviewed video 

surveillance footage of the incident. At hearing, they explained that from the angle of 

the video, they could see respondent lean into a group of students, but did not have a 

clear view of the student’s face or respondent’s hands. Director Butcher also 

interviewed Ms. Peterson, who described the event as “frightening.” 

15.  On November 1, 2019, Director Butcher and Superintendent Andoe-

Nolind met with respondent and discussed, among other things, the allegation that 

respondent yelled at and inappropriately touched a child. At the meeting, respondent 

acknowledged raising her voice, but denied touching the child inappropriately. On 

November 5, 2019, Director Butcher gave respondent a “Conference/Conversation 

Summary” in which she wrote, among other things: 

During the conversation, we discussed your conduct, which 

included raising your voice at a student, not fostering a 

classroom climate of collaboration and respect, and the 

allegation of you putting your hands on the student [sic] 

face during the interaction. You clarified that you would 

never put your hands on a child, but that you may have 

raised your voice out of frustration. We discussed how your 

interaction with your student affected your student and 

staff. We discussed, in general, student behavior trends. 

7 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

16. 

Respondent began working for the District as an aide in 1994. Since 

2010, she was a site supervisor at Wilcox, working in the full-day class since 2012. 

17. 

Regarding the incident on August 26, 2022, respondent explained that 

the student was continually touching a keyboard that is only for adults. Respondent 

asked her to stop, and the child hissed, to which respondent replied, “no thank you.” 

When the student continued to touch the keyboard, respondent asked her to stop 

again, and the student spat on respondent. She described the spitting as “blowing a 

raspberry,” during which the child blew out forcefully while holding her tongue 

between her lips. Startled, respondent had “an automatic reflex” and “tapped” the 

student with her hand. She recalls feeling “shocked, but not frustrated” with the 

student. She touched the student “slightly on the lower cheek” with her fingertips. It 

“wasn’t a slap,” and respondent insisted “the whole side of my hand didn’t make 

contact with her face.” 

18. 

After touching the student’s face, respondent’s “whole world stopped.” 

The student ran to another part of the classroom and whimpered and cried by herself. 

Respondent approached her and apologized. The student soothed her and said, “it’s 

OK,” to which respondent replied, “no, it’s not.” She explained to the student that it 

was “also not OK to spit in my face.” Respondent then went to Ms. Duggins’s 

classroom because she was feeling “pretty much out of sorts.” Ms. Duggins advised 

her to call Director Butcher, which respondent did. Respondent does not recall telling 

Ms. Duggins that she “slapped” the child, but also does not believe Ms. Duggins 

8 

testified dishonestly. At hearing, she did not recall what words she used to describe 

the events to Director Butcher. 

19. 

As for her use of the District’s iPad, respondent explained she took 

photos of her grandchildren playing during a water balloon fight. During the hearing 

no inquiry was made of her regarding whether the children were clothed. When 

Director Butcher instructed her to delete the photos, she did so right away and never 

used the iPad to take personal photos again. She does not recall receiving a letter of 

warning from Director Butcher on June 17, 2020, nor being formally disciplined for her 

misuse of the iPad. 

20. 

Regarding the allegation that she yelled at a child and squeezed his face 

in October 2019, respondent has no recollection of those events. She was “shocked” 

when Director Butcher brought up those allegations during their conference on 

November 1, 2019, and explained that she would never put her hands on a student 

inappropriately. She saw the video and confirmed that the angle did not show her 

hands or the student’s face. At hearing, she recalled that Ms. Peterson was present at 

that time, but was behind respondent and did not have a clear view of the events. She 

believes the camera had a better viewpoint than Ms. Peterson. 

TESTIMONY OF OTHER WITNESSES 

21. 

Respondent called five additional witnesses. Jane Shettlesworth has been 

an aide for the District since 2005 and an aide in respondent’s classroom since 

approximately 2012. She believes respondent excels at redirecting and deescalating 

children when they are upset. She has never seen respondent scream at or behave 

roughly toward a child. She was off work on August 26, 2022, and did not witness 

respondent’s actions that day. She took over as an associate teacher for respondent’s 

9 

classroom to help fill in for respondent after she was placed on administrative leave. 

She assisted the school in having parents sign the State Licensing form. 

22. 

Karina Sandoval-Cantu has been a part-time aide in Ms. Duggins’s 

classroom for approximately three years. She works in respondent’s classroom a few 

times per month and was assisting in respondent’s classroom on August 26, 2022. She 

noticed the child in question was crying, screaming, and “having a rough time” that 

morning. She believes respondent was calm with the child. She did not witness anyone 

slap the child. 

23. 

Ronda Rodriguez has worked as a teacher at a different school in the 

District for approximately 21 years. Her grandchildren attend Wilcox and she has seen 

respondent interact with them and other students. She has never seen respondent be 

physically aggressive or yell at any children. She believes respondent is “nurturing and 

affectionate” and tries to make children comfortable. She was not present on August 

26, 2022, but believes, as a preschool teacher, it is never appropriate to slap a child. 

24. 

Tara McClain has been an aide with the District for approximately four 

years and has worked in respondent’s classroom since 2021. She described respondent 

as “a fun-loving hippie.” She was not present on August 26, 2022, but has never seen 

respondent behave inappropriately or handle children roughly. 

25. 

Charity Guptill has worked for the District since 2003. Since 2015, she has 

been a site supervisor. She splits her shifts between Wilcox and another District school. 

She described respondent as “kind of a grandma” who is “super loving and 

accommodating.” She was not present the morning of August 26, 2022, but has never 

seen respondent behave inappropriately or aggressively towards students.  

10 

Analysis 

26. 

The Commission must resolve two issues in this case. First, it must 

determine whether respondent engaged in the conduct alleged in the Statement of 

Charges. If so, it must then determine whether that conduct indicates that respondent 

is unfit to teach. 

RESPONDENT’S CONDUCT 

27. 

The District alleged respondent engaged in multiple acts of misconduct. 

Regarding the allegation that in August 2022, respondent slapped a student, the 

District’s evidence was more persuasive than respondent’s. Specifically, Ms. Duggins 

and Ms. Butcher testified that respondent told them, during separate conversations 

the day of the event, “I slapped a child.” A month later, on September 30, 2022, 

Superintendent Andoe-Nolind interviewed respondent. At that time, respondent said 

she “tapped” the child. Superintendent Andoe-Nolind clarified that she heard correctly, 

and respondent repeated the word “tapped.” 

28. 

At hearing, respondent again said she “tapped” the child, explaining, “the 

whole side of my hand didn’t make contact with her face.” Instead, as respondent 

described it, her fingertips tapped the child’s face “slightly on the lower cheek.” That 

version of events lacked credibility because it was inconsistent with both respondent’s 

contemporaneous statements as well as her characterization of her response and the 

child’s response. When asked what happened after she “tapped” the child, respondent 

said, “my whole world stopped.” She also explained that the child ran to another area 

of the classroom, where she cried and whimpered. Both respondent’s and the child’s 

reaction are consistent with a slap, but inconsistent with a “slight tap.” When 

11 

considering all the evidence, the Commission finds that it is more likely than not that 

respondent slapped the child in August 2022. 

29. 

Regarding the allegation that in June 2020, respondent used her District-

issued iPad to take and store nude photos of her grandchildren, the District’s evidence 

was more persuasive than respondent’s. Specifically, Director Butcher and 

Superintendent Andoe-Nolind testified credibly that they viewed the photos and that 

the children were not clothed. In contrast, when respondent testified, she did not 

contradict the allegation. On that basis, the Commission finds that it is more likely than 

not that respondent used her District-issued iPad to take and maintain nude photos of 

her grandchildren. 

30. 

Finally, regarding the allegation that in October 2019, respondent raised 

her voice and put her hands on a student’s face during a behavioral intervention, the 

District’s evidence was more persuasive than respondent’s. Specifically, Ms. Peterson 

testified that she saw and heard respondent scream at the child, get close to his face, 

squeeze his face “intensely” with her thumb and fingers, shake him by the forearms, 

and “toss him” toward the line of students. Ms. Peterson’s testimony was credible for 

several reasons. She was in the playground where the events happened and was close 

enough to see and hear respondent’s behavior. (Evid. Code, § 780, subd. (d).) She 

testified calmly about her employment history and background but became emotional 

when she discussed respondent’s conduct. Her demeanor was consistent with recalling 

what she described as “shocking” and “disgusting” behavior. (Id. at subd. (a).) Finally, 

she reported the incident to her supervisor immediately after she witnessed it. 

31. 

In contrast, although respondent generally denied the alleged 

misconduct, she did not have a specific recollection of the events in question. She said 

she “would never put her hands on a student’s face,” but that is untrue, as evidenced 

12 

by the August 2022 incident. Additionally, her testimony was biased by her own self-

interest. (Evid. Code, § 780, subd. (f).) Furthermore, as discussed above, respondent’s 

testimony regarding the August 2022 incident was inconsistent with what she said the 

day of that event. Respondent’s equivocation about that incident made her testimony 

less credible in general. (Id. at subd. (b).) When considering all the evidence, the 

Commission finds that it is more likely than not that respondent raised her voice and 

put her hands on a student’s face during a behavioral intervention in October 2019. 

FITNESS TO TEACH – MORRISON FACTORS 

32. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 

(Morrison), the California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from 

the teaching profession only upon a showing that [her] retention in the profession 

poses a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others 

who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.” The court listed the following 

factors as relevant when determining whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that she is 

fit to teach: 

[1] the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, [2] the degree of such 

adversity anticipated, [3] the proximity or remoteness in 

time of the conduct, [4] the type of teaching certificate held 

by the party involved, [5] the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, [6] the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct, [7] the likelihood of the recurrence 

of the questioned conduct, and [8] the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling 

13 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved 

or other teachers.” (Id. at pp. 229-230.) 

As set forth below, when respondent’s conduct is considered in light of the 

Morrison factors, the District established that she is unfit to teach. 

Adverse Effect on Students or Fellow Teachers 

33. 

Respondent used excessive force on two students. This not only had an 

adverse impact on the students, but also on Ms. Peterson, who was shocked and 

disgusted by respondent’s behavior in October 2019. Additionally, respondent stored 

nude images of her grandchildren on her District-issued iPad. Director Butcher and 

Superintendent Andoe-Nolind were both subjected to viewing these images in the 

course of supervising respondent. 

34. 

“A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 

by the children coming under her care and protection.” (Bd. of Education v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552.) Respondent violated the District’s trust in her when she 

used excessive force against two students and stored nude images of children on her 

District-owned iPad. 

Degree of Adversity Anticipated 

35. 

As respondent testified, after “tapping” the child in August 2022, the 

child ran to another area of the classroom and cried and whimpered. As Director 

Butcher and Superintendent Andoe-Nolind explained, they had to view images of 

nude children because of respondent’s irresponsible use of the District’s iPad. As Ms. 

Peterson described, in October 2019, respondent screamed at a child, got close to his 

14 

face, squeezed his face “intensely” with her thumb and fingers, shook him by the 

forearms, and “toss[ed] him” toward the line of students. This was all done on the 

playground in full view of other students. In all of these events, there is a substantial 

likelihood that respondent’s conduct had a significant adverse effect on the students 

and teachers involved and those who observed her conduct. 

Proximity or Remoteness in Time 

36. 

After respondent slapped a child on August 26, 2022, the District placed 

her on administrative leave the same day. It then promptly investigated the incident 

and served respondent with a Notice of Statement of Charges and Immediate 

Suspension Without Pay 49 days later. Although the events of October 2019 and June 

2020 are more remote in time, it is reasonable to conclude that the District viewed 

those events in a new light after the August 2022 incident. Consequently, when the 

facts are considered in their entirety, the most recent event in respondent’s pattern of 

misconduct was not remote in time. Furthermore, the older events are not so remote 

that they should be excluded from consideration. 

Type of Teaching Certificate Held 

37. 

Respondent teaches pre-school students in highly impressionable years. 

As a teacher, respondent is expected to display appropriate adult behavior. Instead, 

respondent used excessive force against two students and exhibited a pattern of poor 

judgment. 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

38. 

There is no justification or excuse for respondent’s use of excessive force 

against children in her care. Her explanation for “tapping” the student, namely that the 

15 

student “spit” on her, was not persuasive. To the contrary, when asked for details, 

respondent explained that the student “blew a raspberry” by blowing out while her 

tongue was between her lips. Although this may have caused spit to land on 

respondent, such conduct is not an extenuating circumstance. Rather, Superintendent 

Andoe-Nolind credibly testified that, based on her decades of experience in education, 

such conduct is the normal and predictable behavior of three-year-olds like the 

student in question. There are no aggravating circumstances beyond the misconduct 

alleged in the Statement of Charges. 

Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of Motives 

39. 

Respondent alone is to blame for her multiple instances of misconduct. 

Both times that she used excessive force, the children were not posing any threat of 

harm to themselves or others. Similarly, respondent knew or should have known how 

to use the District’s iPad responsibly. 

Likelihood of Recurrence 

40. 

“Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of [one’s] actions is an essential 

step towards rehabilitation.” (Seide v. Committee of Bar Examiners (1989) 49 Cal.3d 

933, 940.) By failing to fully acknowledge her misconduct, respondent failed to 

demonstrate she has engaged in sufficient rehabilitation to establish she will not 

engage in similar misconduct in the future. To the contrary, respondent repeatedly 

described her conduct in August 2022 as an involuntary reaction to being spit upon. 

As explained above, it is likely that a pre-school teacher will encounter similar 

misbehavior from children, and respondent’s insistence that she reacted involuntarily 

demonstrates that her conduct is likely to recur. 

16 

Potential Adverse Impact on Respondent’s Constitutional 

Rights 

41. 

Respondent did not present evidence or argue that her dismissal will 

have an adverse or chilling effect on her constitutional rights or the constitutional 

rights of any other teachers. The Commission finds such adverse impact unlikely. 

CONCLUSION 

42.  When all the evidence is considered, the District proved it is more likely 

than not that respondent slapped a student in August 2022, took and stored nude 

photographs of her grandchildren on her District-owned iPad in June 2020, and 

inappropriately raised her voice and forcefully and inappropriately put her hands on a 

student’s face in October 2019. When all the Morrison factors are considered, the 

District established that such conduct demonstrates respondent’s unfitness to teach 

children. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A school district seeking to dismiss a permanent certificated employee 

from employment bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 

(Gardner v. Comm’n on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035; Bevli v. 

Brisco (1989) 211 Cal.App.3d 986.) The term preponderance of the evidence means 

“more likely than not.” (Sandoval v. Bank of Am. (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.). 

2. 

A school district may discipline a permanent certificated employee for 

“immoral” conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1).) In San Diego Unified School 

17 

District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466, 

the court explained: 

A teacher may . . . be dismissed for “[i]mmoral or 

unprofessional conduct.” (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1).) “‘The term 

“immoral” has been defined generally as that which is 

hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 

good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education v. 

Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 4 Cal.Rptr. 286.) 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” (Board of Trustees 

v. Stubblefield, supra, 16 Cal.App.3d at p. 824, 94 Cal.Rptr. 

318.) 

3. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 27 through 31, respondent slapped a 

student in August 2022, took and stored nude photographs of her grandchildren on 

her District-owned iPad in June 2020, and inappropriately raised her voice and put her 

hands on a student’s face in October 2019. In doing so, respondent showed a moral 

18 

indifference and an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

Her conduct during these three incidents, both independently and collectively, was 

inconsistent with the reasonable expectations society places upon teachers to model 

appropriate adult conduct to the students they teach, and to protect the safety of 

students and advance their educational welfare. Respondent’s conduct therefore 

establishes cause to dismiss on the basis of immoral conduct pursuant to Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 

4. 

A school district may discipline a permanent certificated employee for 

“[p]ersistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or 

by the governing board of the school district employing . . . her.” (Ed. Code, § 44932, 

subd. (a)(8).) As set forth in Factual Findings 27 through 31, respondent engaged in a 

pattern of misconduct from October 2019 through August 2022, despite warnings 

from the District. Respondent’s conduct therefore establishes cause to dismiss based 

on her persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the District pursuant to Education Code 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

5. 

A school district may discipline a permanent certificated employee for 

“evident unfitness for service.” (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6).) That term means, 

“clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 

Comm’n on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term 

“connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 

notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 

19 

district.” (Ibid.) The court held that the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to 

determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for 

service.” (Id. p. 1445.) As the court in Woodland explained, “[i]f the Morrison criteria 

are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., 

whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.) 

6. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 27 through 31, respondent’s conduct in 

slapping a student in August 2022, taking and storing nude photographs of her 

grandchildren on her District-owned iPad in June 2020, and inappropriately raising her 

voice and putting her hands on a student’s face in October 2019, individually and 

collectively, demonstrate that respondent is unsuitable for teaching due to a fixed 

character trait, not remediable merely on notice that her conduct fails to meet the 

District’s expectations. Consequently, respondent’s conduct establishes cause to 

dismiss her for evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6). 

7. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 32 through 42, when all the Morrison 

factors are considered, the District established that respondent is unfit to teach 

children. Consequently, the District’s dismissal of respondent under Education Code 

section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(6), and (a)(8), is upheld. 

// 

// 

20 

ORDER 

Respondent Tina Jamison is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated employee 

of the Palermo Union Elementary School District based on the Factual Findings and 

Legal Conclusions 1 through 7, jointly and individually. 

DATE: March 24, 2023

RELENA ELLIS 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

JANINE HUGHES 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

SEAN GAVIN 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional Competence 

21 

Relena D. Ellis (Mar 24, 2023 18:36 EDT)Relena D. EllisJanine Hughes (Mar 24, 2023 16:21 PDT)Janine HughesSean Gavin (Mar 24, 2023 16:21 PDT) 
 
 
 
 
