BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Appeal from Dismissal by: 

ROY DESMANGLES, JR., Respondent 

OAH No. 2022110760 

DECISION 

Jessica Wall, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on June 27 through 

30, 2023, from Sacramento, California. 

Monica M. Espejo and Eileen O’Hare-Anderson, Attorneys at Liebert Cassidy 

Whitmore, represented complainant San Joaquin Delta Community College District 

(District). 

Gary G. Kreep, Robroy R. Fawcett, and Kenneth Ely, Attorneys at Law, 

represented respondent Roy Desmangles, Jr., who was present throughout the 

hearing. 

The record remained open after the hearing’s conclusion for the parties to 

submit written arguments. They did so timely, the record closed, and the matter 

submitted for decision on October 24, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

The District serves residents of San Joaquin County and other counties 

around the Central Valley. Located in Stockton, California, San Joaquin Delta College 

(Delta College) is the District’s main campus. The District educates approximately 

14,000 students each year, the majority of whom are students of color. 

2. 

The District hired respondent in January 2015 to serve as a full-time 

Counselor for the AFFIRM Program (AFFIRM) at Delta College. AFFIRM is a learning 

community that focuses on increasing the retention and transfer rates for African 

American and Black students. In February 2019, the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) 

approved respondent’s employment as a tenured faculty member. During the relevant 

period, respondent taught a single course in the fall semester titled, “Education and 

Interpersonal Growth.” 

3. 

On March 23, 2022, the District served respondent with a Notice of 

Intended Termination and an unsigned Statement of Charges. The documents 

informed respondent the District was recommending his termination based upon his 

alleged (1) evident unfitness for service; (2) persistent violation of or refusal to obey 

the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government 

of the community colleges by the governing board of the community college district 

employing him; and (3) willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 

district. (Ed. Code, §§ 87732, subds. (d), (f), 87735.) 

2 

Specifically, the Statement of Charges alleged respondent refused to comply 

with the District’s COVID-19 safety protocols. Respondent received a religious 

exemption to the District’s vaccine mandate. The Statement of Charges alleged 

respondent refused to agree to the accommodations offered pursuant to that 

exemption (wear a face covering on campus and test for COVID-19) or provide 

clarification about his objections to those accommodations in the interactive process. 

The District alleged these refusals meant the District could not depend on respondent 

to provide a safe environment for its diverse student body, including the vulnerable 

students in AFFIRM. 

4. 

On June 21, 2022, Lisa Aguilera Lawrenson, Ph.D., Superintendent and 

President of Delta College, signed the Statement of Charges and Recommendation for 

Termination. The Board subsequently voted to terminate respondent’s employment on 

July 5, 2022. Respondent timely requested a hearing under Education Code section 

87673 and Government Code section 11506. This hearing followed. 

Collective Bargaining Agreement 

5. 

Respondent’s position was subject to the collective bargaining 

agreement (CBA) between the District and the San Joaquin Delta College Teachers’ 

Association (CTA). The CBA was a bilateral and binding agreement between the 

parties, which they supplemented with memoranda of understanding (MOUs). MOUs 

addressed significant issues that arose outside of the contract negotiation period and 

served as addenda to the CBA. 

6. 

The District and CTA negotiated a CBA for the period of July 1, 2021, 

through June 30, 2024. Under Article II of the CBA, the CTA was “the exclusive 

representative of all full-time and adjunct faculty of the District, including librarians 

3 

and counselors, … for the purposes of meeting and negotiating.” The CBA provides 

that any item negotiated and agreed to by both the District and the CTA becomes a 

part of the CBA. (CBA, § 1.4.) 

7. 

The CBA requires the District to evaluate regular faculty members at least 

once every three years. (CBA, § 16.1.4.2.) If a faculty member is teaching an online 

course, the District observes “any communication platform such as live chat rooms, 

listservs, discussion forums and class and/or service materials excluding email.” (CBA, 

§ 16.1.4.2.3.) If a faculty member’s evaluation indicates unsatisfactory performance in 

any area, “a performance improvement plan is required.” (CBA, § 16.1.5.) 

8. 

“All faculty are expected to fulfill their professional obligations and to 

conduct themselves in a manner which is appropriate to an academic environment, is 

aligned with the District’s Mission Statement, and supports student success.” (CBA, 

§ 29.1.) When a faculty member does not meet professional expectations or does not 

follow the District’s policies, procedures, or obligations under the CBA, there is a 

progressive discipline process. (CBA, § 29.3.) Progressive discipline applies unless the 

Vice President of Human Resources and Risk Management determines that skipping 

the steps is warranted under Education Code section 87732. The progressive discipline 

steps are as follows: (1) verbal discussion; (2) conference memorandum; (3) letter of 

reprimand; (4) formal reprimand letter; and (5) notice of intention to suspend, place on 

leave, reassign, or dismiss. (CBA, § 29.4.) 

COVID-19 VACCINE MOU 

9. 

In August 2021, the Board voted to institute a COVID-19 vaccine 

mandate as part of the District’s return-to-campus efforts. In the subsequent months, 

the District and the CTA drafted an MOU on the COVID-19 vaccine mandate (Vaccine 

4 

MOU) to effectuate the Board’s vote. The Vaccine MOU was a bilateral agreement, 

executed by both the District and the CTA, which took effect October 11, 2021. 

10. 

Under the Vaccine MOU, all employees had to be fully vaccinated for 

COVID-19 or apply for a medical or religious exemption by October 15, 2021. 

Employees who were in the process of complying, but had not fully complied by 

October 15, 2021, would receive a warning letter, and then had to test for COVID-19 

twice a week until they provided proof of full vaccination. If that employee failed to 

comply fully by December 17, 2021, the employee would receive a final letter with 

intent to terminate. The District was to “begin the termination process no later than 

December 31, 2021.” The employee would be placed on unpaid status effective 

January 1, 2022, and remain on unpaid status until the termination process concluded. 

11. 

Employees who refused vaccination and did not apply for an exemption 

would receive a warning letter by October 16, 2021. That employee then had until 

December 17, 2021, to comply or be terminated. If at any point that employee refused 

to complete twice weekly COVID-19 testing, the employee would immediately be 

placed on unpaid status pending termination. 

12. 

The Vaccine MOU provided policies for how an employee could request a 

medical or religious exemption to the vaccine mandate. It provided a link to a website 

with the exemption request form and instructions. Exemption requests were due by 

October 15, 2021. Once the employee completed the exemption request, the District 

would contact the employee about “next steps in the interactive process.” 

13. 

If the District denied the exemption request, the employee had to 

immediately comply with the vaccine mandate. Employees who received exemptions 

were ”required to undergo COVID-19 testing twice a week for the indefinite future 

5 

even if they are working remotely.” The testing requirement only applied when the 

employee had an active assignment at the District. Staff did not need to test when 

classes were not in session. 

The 2021–2022 School Year 

14.  During the 2021–2022 school year, Dr. Aguilera Lawrenson was the 

Assistant Superintendent/Vice President of Instruction and Planning. In her role, she 

made recommendations to the Board about termination. She was familiar with 

respondent from their work together on the Black Faculty Equity Task Force. She 

testified at hearing about her recollection of the events in the 2021–2022 school year. 

15. 

Lonita Cordova, Ph.D., has been the Assistant Superintendent/Vice 

President of Student Services at Delta College since March 2021. The Student Services 

Division includes counseling faculty. During the 2021–2022 school year, Delta College 

had 30 counselors, including respondent. Dr. Cordova testified at hearing about 

respondent’s job duties and the District’s COVID-19 safety protocols. 

AFFIRM 

16.  Delta College provided AFFIRM with a center for its learning community 

to gather. The AFFIRM center contained a front desk, a student study area with 

computers, and several offices, including respondent’s. Before the pandemic, the 

AFFIRM center was typically full during its open hours. 

17. 

Respondent’s job was to provide one-on-one counseling to students and 

to teach. His focus was on supporting AFFIRM’s students so they would attend a four-

year university after Delta College. Face-to-face contact was particularly important for 

students in AFFIRM. Like many staff members, respondent worked remotely at the 

6 

start of the pandemic. The District never approved him for permanent remote work. 

Delta College was repopulating during the 2021–2022 school year. Its learning 

communities were open, except AFFIRM. Dr. Cordova was concerned that the AFFIRM 

center remained closed because respondent was still working remotely. 

DELTA COLLEGE’S COVID-19 SAFETY PROTOCOLS 

18.  Dr. Cordova was on the District’s COVID-19 Task Force. In setting safety 

protocols, the District reviewed state and local policies and aligned with the most 

conservative ones to protect its students and staff. For guidance on testing and 

masking, the District followed recommendations from the California Department of 

Public Health (CDPH), the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health 

(Cal/OSHA), and the San Joaquin County Health Department. 

19. 

San Joaquin County required face masks for in-person interactions. Staff 

and students were required to wear face masks while interacting with others on 

campus. Masks were not required when working from home. 

20. 

Local school districts in San Joaquin County imposed vaccine mandates. 

The District worked to mirror those efforts. All employees were subject to the vaccine 

mandate unless they received exemptions. This requirement reflected the evolving 

nature of when different departments returned to campus. Some fields, like nursing 

and transportation, had continued in person throughout the pandemic. Other 

departments had worked remotely and were transitioning back to in-person work. In 

November 2021, the District notified counselors that they were to work from campus 

in person once per week, beginning in January 2022. Their in-person days were 

staggered to limit exposure. 

7 

The Vaccine Exemption Process 

21.  Dana Kosaka has worked for the District for 23 years. She is a Human 

Resources Manager. She was involved in the District’s handling of medical and 

religious exemption requests and tracked COVID-19 testing compliance. Ms. Kosaka 

testified at the hearing about her recollection of events during the 2021–2022 school 

year. 

22. 

The District expected many exemption requests, so it retained Shaw 

Consulting (Shaw) to assist with the exemption process. The process followed a set 

structure with uniform documentation to ensure staff were treated equally. The first 

step was to go to the exemption website and fill out a form, indicating the intent to 

apply for an exemption. For religious exemptions, the form was titled “Religious 

Exemption Request Form for COVID-19 Vaccination” (religious exemption form). The 

form explained that the District would consider requests for sincerely held religious 

beliefs on an individual basis. It stated that religious beliefs included closely held 

moral/ethical convictions, but not purely personal preferences. Under the terms of the 

Vaccine MOU, employees had to submit the exemption request form by October 15, 

2021. 

23. 

Shaw received the requests and kept track of the interactive process. The 

District provided Shaw with the criteria that requests should meet, but Shaw did not 

make decisions for the District. Instead, Shaw aggregated all information and made 

presentations during weekly meetings with the District. Ms. Kosaka was on the panel 

that considered these requests. In videoconference meetings, the panel reviewed each 

request to decide whether to approve it, deny it, or seek more information. The District 

received a high number of religious requests and approved the vast majority. 

According to Ms. Kosaka, the standard for religious requests was light. 

8 

24.  When the District approved an exemption request, the exemption only 

applied to vaccination. After approval, the employee would receive a standard letter 

with the same accommodations offered to others with approved exemption requests. 

For religious exemptions, those accommodations were to wear a face mask and test 

for COVID-19. The second step was to sign and return the Vaccine Exemption 

Accommodations Agreement (Accommodations Agreement). The Accommodations 

Agreement was a brief, one-page form with two checkboxes. The first checkbox stated 

that the employee would continue to work unvaccinated and agreed to the masking 

and testing accommodations. The second checkbox simply stated, “I do not agree with 

the above.” It then asked the employee to “Please provide any clarification and/or 

corrections to the above to assist the parties to understand how best to support you 

going forward in this interactive process.” 

25. 

Employees who checked the second box, stating they disagreed with the 

accommodations, moved to a third step. The District engaged them in the interactive 

process to understand the reasons they could not mask or test and to find agreeable 

accommodations. Several employees completed the third step. Some employees wore 

face shields instead of face masks. Other employees took saliva-based COVID-19 tests 

instead of using swab-based tests. No employee with a vaccine exemption received an 

accommodation to skip COVID-19 testing altogether. This was because employees 

who worked remotely could choose to come on campus at any time, potentially 

infecting students and staff. 

RESPONDENT’S RELIGIOUS EXEMPTION REQUEST 

26. 

Elizabeth Maloney, Ed.D., is a full-time instructor at Delta College. She 

has been CTA president for eight years. Dr. Maloney testified about her recollection of 

the events that took place during the 2021–2022 school year. At the start of that year, 

9 

the CTA surveyed its members about the vaccine mandate. The CTA negotiated the 

Vaccine MOU based on the results of that survey. 

27. 

In late September 2021, respondent was copied on an email chain 

between a member of his union and Dr. Maloney. The emails addressed the vaccine 

mandate and the ongoing communications between the CTA and the District about 

exemption forms. Dr. Maloney also communicated with respondent individually about 

his options. She spoke with him about the available exemptions and how to fill out 

forms. In their communications, respondent told her he wanted to work remotely, did 

not want to wear a mask, and did not want to put chemicals in his nose. He felt the 

District was being unreasonable, so the CTA referred him to its legal counsel, Eric 

Lindstrom. 

28.  On October 11, 2021, respondent emailed the District a list of concerns 

he had with the exemption process. His concerns included his belief that he taught 

successfully online; that he had “Natural Immunity” to COVID-19; that he did not agree 

with the form’s options; that he did not feel he had enough time to review the forms; 

and that he felt entitled to know the ethnic backgrounds of those reviewing exemption 

requests. 

29. 

Rebecca Wicks is a Senior Consultant at Shaw, where she has worked for 

the past nine years. She testified at the hearing about respondent’s exemption request 

and the District’s attempts to engage him in the interactive process. Ms. Wicks replied 

to respondent’s email the day he sent it. She explained that the District would offer 

reasonable accommodations to employees with approved exemption requests. She 

detailed that the accommodations would generally consist of masking and testing. The 

District was unable to accommodate respondent’s “Natural Immunity” request because 

10 

of Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) rules. Ms. Wicks also offered 

respondent an extension to submit his request. 

Respondent Submitted a Religious Exemption Request 

30.  On the evening of October 31, 2021, respondent faxed his religious 

exemption request to the District. On the form, he did not check the box that he 

worked on campus. Instead, he wrote he was currently working 100 percent online but 

worked on campus “when there is a normal/usual working environment.” 

31. 

In response to the question asking respondent to describe his sincerely 

held religious beliefs, practices, or observances that conflicted with the COVID-19 

vaccine, respondent wrote: 

I am evoking [sic] my legal right to ethical, moral and 

religious exemption. My spiritual convictions do not allow 

for any unwanted or unneeded intrusion on my mind, body 

or soul. I am exempt from your activities because they are 

opposed to my sincerely help [sic] system of commitments. 

Much like my students with disabilities, I am ready to 

discuss reasonable accommodations. You are being 

formally notified that I am exempt from this process/activity 

based on my sincerely held spiritual commitments. The 

Most High created me fully equipped with a magnificent 

and Godly immune system and I will not alter The Most 

High’s incredible design. It is a moral sin to disavow the will 

of The Most High. I am completely healthy and have no 

sickness which might require medication advised by my 

11 

doctor when or if needed. It is against my God given 

conscience to allow anyone or anything to intrude into my 

body which is a temple of The Most High and I follow his 

commands. Deuteronomy 7:12-15 ... The Most High will 

keep me free from every disease ... 

Respondent did not define or explain what he believed would be a mental, 

bodily, or spiritual intrusion. He did not reference masking or testing, or state that his 

religious objection expanded beyond vaccination. 

32. 

In response to the question asking how respondent has applied his 

sincerely held religious beliefs about vaccines and preventative medicine in other 

contexts, respondent wrote: 

I do not worry about drugs of any sort because The Most 

High instructs me in everything that I do. I have been 

instructed to stay physically fit and to eat of the fruit of the 

Most High. Timothy 4:8 

For physical training is of some value, but godliness has 

value for all things, holding promise for both the present 

life and the life to come. 

Jeremiah 33:6 Nevertheless, I will bring health and healing 

to it; I will heal my people and will let them enjoy abundant 

peace and security. 

33. 

The form also asked if respondent could provide documentation to 

support his sincerely held religious belief and need for an exemption, providing two 

checkboxes (Yes or No). Respondent did not check either box or provide 

12 

documentation. Instead, he wrote, “By way of this form—I have answered all your 

questions to the best of my ability. Feel free to reach out if you need to communicate.” 

Respondent signed the form and dated it “10-27-31.” 

The District Granted Respondent’s Exemption Request and 

Began the Interactive Process 

34.  On November 3, 2021, the District granted respondent’s religious 

exemption request. Dr. Vicki Nicholson, the Interim Vice President of Human 

Resources, sent respondent a letter titled, “Interactive Process Update: COVID-19 

Religious Vaccine Exemption Approval & Vaccine Exemption Agreement.” The letter 

said, in relevant part: 

[The] District has approved your religious exemption and 

approved your presence at work unvaccinated with the 

provision that you will be required to continue to wear an 

approved face covering until such time [the District] 

determines unvaccinated employees may remove face 

coverings. In addition to this, you will be subject to COVID-

19 testing and/or other safety measures as required by [the 

District]. 

To memorialize the exemption, the District required respondent to sign and 

return the Accommodations Agreement. The deadline was November 10, 2021. 

35. 

Respondent received a reminder email to sign the Accommodations 

Agreement on November 9, 2021, the day before the form was due. He responded the 

next day that he was “send[ing] this info to [his] counselor” and would then respond. 

13 

36.  When respondent failed to submit the Accommodations Agreement, Dr. 

Nicholson followed up on December 2, 2021. Like the prior letter, Dr. Nicholson 

advised respondent that the District had granted him a vaccine exemption, and he 

needed to submit the Accommodations Agreement. She extended his deadline until 

December 7, 2021. 

37. 

A week later, respondent emailed his direct supervisor, Elizabeth David, 

Dean of Student Services, copying Ms. Kosaka and Ms. Wicks. He wrote that he was “in 

an unknown quandary” because he felt the accommodations were “unreasonable 

institutional dictates.” Respondent repeated that he would not agree “to any unwanted 

intrusions on or in my body.” This time, he specified that his perception of “unwanted 

intrusions” included “a face mask or drug experiments.” He did not define “drug 

experiments,” and Ms. Kosaka testified she did not understand what he meant. 

Respondent further wrote that he was “not going to place [his] body in any jeopardy 

because [he was] very healthy and doing great with [his] natural antibodies and a 

strong and powerful immune system.” 

38. 

Respondent did not comply with the Vaccine MOU by the December 

2021 deadline. By January 2022, respondent still had not returned that 

Accommodations Agreement. He emailed District employees again on January 19, 

2022, copying his legal counsel, Mr. Lindstrom. In that email, respondent expressed he 

would not sign the form because he disagreed with the accommodations. His email 

focused on his health, rather than his religious beliefs. He wrote his “health [was] 

exceptional” and he had “a strong immune system and strong antibodies.” Conversely, 

he challenged whether the campus was safe enough for him to return since he felt safe 

at home. He further argued he had “a legal religious exemption from unwanted 

14 

intrusions on or in my body.” He did not clarify how masking or testing conflicted with 

his religious beliefs. 

39.  Ms. Wicks showed respondent’s email to the panel, who expressed they 

needed more clarification about how masking and testing conflicted with respondent’s 

religious beliefs. At the hearing, Ms. Wicks explained how flexible the District tried to 

be, repeatedly offering individuals extensions and following up when deadlines 

approached. The District was open to exploring alternative accommodations with 

respondent. It just needed more information. 

40. 

To better understand the religious basis for respondent’s objections, the 

District sent him another letter on January 20, 2022. In this letter, Dr. Nicholson 

requested that respondent submit a Religious Clarification Form, explaining how his 

sincerely held religious beliefs impacted the accommodations offered by the District. 

The District gave him until January 27, 2022, to return the completed form. 

41. 

The Religious Clarification Form had four simple questions. First, it asked 

whether wearing a face mask conflicted with the employee’s religious beliefs. If so, the 

employee was given room to explain that conflict. Second, if the employee had a 

religious objection to masking, it asked whether that objection applied to all types of 

face coverings, such as cloth masks and face shields. Third, the form asked if taking a 

COVID-19 test conflicted with the employee’s religious beliefs. If it did, the form 

provided space for the employee to explain the conflict. Fourth, if the employee had a 

religious objection to COVID-19 testing, the form asked if that objection extended to 

all types of COVID-19 tests. The employee was required to sign the form, certifying the 

answers were true and accurate. 

15 

The District Closed the Interactive Process 

42. 

Another month passed and respondent did not return the Religious 

Clarification Form. Ms. Kosaka testified about her perception that respondent was not 

willing to interact with the District. She wanted to work with him to find a solution. Yet 

respondent refused to cooperate, return the necessary forms, and provide clarity 

about his religious objections. The whole process took several months beyond the 

Vaccine MOU’s deadlines because the District repeatedly extended the time for 

respondent, hoping to gain his compliance. 

43.  On February 23, 2022, Dr. Nicholson sent respondent a letter titled, 

“Interactive Process: COVID-19 Religious Vaccine Exemption Notice of File Closure.” 

Over 100 days had passed since the District granted respondent’s religious vaccine 

exemption and began the interactive process. The letter memorialized the 

communications between respondent and the District from October 2021 through 

February 2022. It stated, in relevant part: 

You did not return a completed Religious Clarification Form 

by January 27, 2022. As such, the [District] only has your 

above emails to understand your inability to wear a face 

covering and COVID-19 test. In reviewing the above emails, 

it does not appear your objection to wear a face covering 

and COVID-19 test is religious in nature. As such, please 

allow this letter to serve as notice that your religious 

interactive process is being concluded and the District will 

not provide additional accommodations to you. 

As such, the San Joaquin Delta Community College will 

16 

expect you to wear an approved face covering and COVID-

19 testing 2x weekly in accordance with its policies. 

44. 

Three days later, respondent responded. He wrote, in relevant part: 

I have said from the beginning while evoking [sic] my legal 

right to a religious exemption that I will not allow ungodly 

intrusions in or on my body. The experimental drug, the 

masks and testing have all been mentioned and discussed 

rather openly throughout this process and they are all 

unnecessary, unwanted, and ungodly intrusions. I do not 

sign documents that have pending disagreements. Perhaps, 

there is a misunderstanding whereby Liz Maloney could be 

an intermediary or a mediator. In more than 40 years of 

education employment, I have never had an employer ask 

me so many questions centered around my spirituality and 

frankly it is and [sic] intrusive and uncomfortable and 

maybe an illegal process. I remind you that I am working 

productively from home and have been for 2 years. Masks 

and testing are very questionable matters, particularly now, 

and I group these matters in my religious exemption. 

He did not provide any further clarification about how face masks and COVID-

19 testing violated his religious beliefs. He did not specify whether his objections 

applied to all face coverings and types of COVID-19 tests. 

17 

DISABILITY ACCOMMODATION REQUEST 

45. 

After the interactive process closed on his religious exemption request, 

respondent sought a disability accommodation to work remotely. Respondent sent the 

District a March 9, 2022, email requesting medical accommodations. Attached to the 

email was a “COVID-19 Request for Temporary Reasonable Accommodation” form, 

dated March 3, 2022. On the form, respondent requested a remote work assignment 

and stated: “I HAVE MAINTAINED A HIGH WORK LOAD [sic] AND PERFORMANCE 

WORKING REMOTELY AND THAT WILL CONTINUE.” He listed the expected duration of 

his accommodation as March 3 through May 20, 2022. He did not sign the form or 

certify the accommodation was required because of the COVID-19 pandemic. 

46. 

Respondent also attached an undated letter from his physician, 

Mohammad Reza, M.D. That letter stated: 

Patient had an appointment with Dr. Reza on 3/3/2022. 

Please allow patient to continue to work remotely from 

home until 5/20/22 given his current age and risk factor. 

Thank you for your consideration. 

47. 

Initially, there was a delay in responding to respondent’s request because 

he sent it to the wrong email address. On April 12, 2022, the District sent respondent a 

letter about the disability interactive process. The letter advised him that his doctor’s 

letter did not indicate he required COVID-19-related accommodations. Thus, the letter 

denied his disability accommodation request. 

18 

RESPONDENT’S PERFORMANCE REVIEW 

48.  Dean David worked for the District from September 2021 through June 

2023. She was respondent’s direct supervisor and testified at the hearing about remote 

learning and respondent’s 2021 performance review. Dean David was familiar with 

studies documenting the negative impact that remote learning had on students. Not 

all students had adequate access to technology and some of the programs offered at 

Delta College could not be converted to an online equivalent. 

49. 

Between October and December 2021, Dean David evaluated 

respondent’s performance in his online course and a counseling appointment. Dean 

David is a former faculty member with certifications in online course instruction. She 

was concerned about the lack of content in respondent’s course website. While many 

instructors would post videos, comparable to a presentation, respondent did not. He 

also did not provide any activities for student participation. 

50. 

Respondent received positive remarks in most categories on his 

performance review. Yet in two areas, he failed to meet standards. Under Organization 

and Use of Time, Dean David noted that respondent needed to improve his 

organization and align his course curriculum with the themes and number of lecture 

hours required. Under Presentation/Delivery, he failed to meet standards because his 

course did not have sufficient instructional content, lecture hours, and activities. 

Respondent’s performance evaluation did not include respondent’s noncompliance 

with the District’s COVID-19 protocols because that was not within Dean David’s 

purview to evaluate. 

51.  On December 9, 2021, Dean David met with respondent via 

videoconference to answer his questions and provide feedback. She recalled that 

19 

respondent felt there would be no impact on his students if he continued to work 

remotely. She disagreed. Dean David also allowed respondent to go over the 

evaluation with his union representative. Dr. Maloney was present at the meeting 

where respondent discussed his objections to the evaluation. She recalled that 

respondent disagreed with why he received unsatisfactory marks, minimizing the 

issues as a small part of his job. 

52.  Dean David sent respondent a copy of the performance evaluation, dated 

December 15, 2021, for his signature via DocuSign. Above the instructor’s signature 

line, the form stated, in relevant part, “I have reviewed this evaluation, but my 

signature does not necessarily indicate my agreement with the evaluation.” 

Respondent refused to sign the performance evaluation because he disagreed with the 

evaluation. He had until March 28, 2022, to provide a response. He did not do so. 

53. 

A performance improvement plan (PIP) is required when a faculty 

member fails to meet performance standards. The PIP outlines the deficiencies, what 

support the faculty member needs to succeed, and a timeline for additional review. 

Dean David found no deficiencies with respondent’s counseling session and offered 

him the opportunity to avoid a PIP if he chose to stop teaching. She recognized, 

however, that many District employees would be reluctant to give up a part-time 

teaching assignment because the overtime hours made it so lucrative. 

54. 

If respondent wanted to continue teaching, he needed to follow the PIP. 

The PIP required respondent to complete training on how to teach an online course, 

update his course website to include necessary content, find a faculty peer mentor to 

help him with course design and development, and engage in peer shadowing or 

research activities related to his deficiencies. Dean David offered respondent time to 

consider his options and gave him until May 2022 to decide. 

20 

DECISION TO TERMINATE 

Letter of Warning 

55. 

The District supplied COVID-19 tests for individuals required to test. The 

individuals tested through a proctored website and reported their results to the 

District. Ms. Kosaka tracked employee testing and confirmed that respondent never 

submitted test results during the 2021–2022 school year or requested saliva-based 

testing. 

56.  On March 11, 2021, Dean David prepared a Letter of Warning for 

respondent. The letter stated it was to “serve as a Letter of Reprimand regarding 

[respondent’s] insubordination by failing to follow the [District’s] vaccination mandate 

for all employees and students of the [District].” She advised respondent about the 

grounds for termination later listed in the Statement of Charges. 

Specifically, the letter informed respondent that employees granted a religious 

exemption to the vaccine mandate needed to submit COVID-19 test results twice 

weekly. Respondent failed to comply. Dean David provided the timeline of 

respondent’s request for exemption and reminded him that he had failed to return the 

Religious Clarification Form, which the District interpreted as his disengagement from 

the interactive process. The letter also warned respondent about the consequences of 

continued noncompliance, as follows: 

Your actions, in continually refusing or otherwise failing to 

comply with the District’s mandate and the MOU 

constitutes grounds for discipline under the CTA Contract. 

Your failure to follow the District’s vaccination requirement 

places your colleagues, the District’s students, and the 

21 

community at risk. Especially during a pandemic and a state 

of emergency, the District must be able to depend on its 

employees to comply with directives and act in a safe 

manner. 

The letter gave respondent seven days to come into compliance by testing for 

COVID-19 twice a week or he would be terminated. 

Notice of Intended Termination 

57.  On March 23, 2022, Dr. Nicholson issued respondent a letter about the 

District’s intent to terminate his employment. She attached the Statement of Charges, 

which set forth the factual findings underlying the notice. Respondent had until April 

15, 2022, to present relevant information to the human resources department. 

58.  On April 13, 2022, respondent submitted a letter to the District instead of 

attending a meeting under Skelly v. State Personnel Board (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194. In that 

letter, respondent’s attorney, Mr. Lindstrom, argued that respondent’s failure to 

comply with COVID-19 safety protocols did not impact his ability to perform his job 

duties. He described the interactive process pursued by the District as composed of 

“cold, inflexible, and untailored form letters,” and argued that the District did not 

consider respondent’s individual circumstances. The letter demanded respondent be 

allowed to work from home indefinitely. 

Recommendation to Terminate and Board Vote 

59. 

The District advised respondent that his termination would be considered 

at the Board meeting on July 5, 2022, and provided him with the relevant documents 

in advance. Dr. Aguilera Lawrenson signed a Recommendation for Statement of 

22 

Decision to Terminate. She recommended the Board terminate respondent’s 

employment. She wrote that respondent’s conduct had disrupted the District’s orderly 

administration and negatively impacted student education. 

60.  On July 5, 2022, the Board voted to terminate respondent. In the 

Resolution of Termination, the Board noted it had considered Dr. Aguilera Lawrenson’s 

July 2022 recommendation, as well as respondent’s December 2021 performance 

evaluation, in reaching its conclusion. The Board found the charges constituted good 

cause to terminate respondent under the Education Code. The termination was 

effective 30 days after respondent was served with notice of his termination. 

61. 

The District served respondent with notice of his termination on July 7, 

2022. Respondent sent his notice of defense and requested a hearing on July 11, 2022. 

62.  On October 18, 2022, the Board passed an additional resolution to 

address the issue of unpaid suspension. The amended resolution stated, in part: 

Pursuant to the provisions of the California Education Code 

sections 87732, 87735 and 87666 et seq., the Board of 

Trustees terminates and suspends [respondent] without 

pay, retroactively to July 5, 2022. 

63. 

The District’s witnesses testified about the number of employees 

terminated because they would not comply with the vaccine mandate and related 

accommodation requirements. Respondent was one of two permanent employees 

terminated for this reason. In addition, about 100 adjunct faculty were released for 

non-compliance. Some chose to resign, while others were terminated. 

23 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

64. 

Respondent testified extensively at the hearing. He started as a full-time 

counselor for AFFIRM in January 2015. Before Delta College, respondent worked with 

the RISE program at Sacramento City College, a community college in a different 

district. 

65. 

Respondent lives in Lincoln, California, 80 miles from Delta College. His 

typical commute to Delta College was 80 minutes each way. He commuted to work in-

person for five years, then worked remotely for the first two years of the pandemic. 

Respondent wanted to continue teleworking because he felt safer at home. He 

understood that COVID-19 was a serious illness that caused harm. At 66 years old, he 

was in a high-risk group. 

66. 

Respondent spoke highly of his specialty in assisting high-need students. 

He believed that his skills and presence transformed AFFIRM. AFFIRM’s students 

needed a lot of coaching. A lot of these students lacked personal computers and 

internet access, limiting their ability to study at home. 

Vaccine Exemption and Accommodations Process 

67. 

At the hearing, respondent did not dispute that the District had granted 

him a religious exemption to the vaccine mandate. The issue was the accommodation 

the District offered him. Respondent explained for the first time at the hearing that he 

did not want to wear a face mask because he has hypoxia and claustrophobia. He did 

not provide medical documentation about these diagnoses and could not explain how 

these medical conditions related to his religious beliefs. 

24 

68. 

Respondent also provided further detail about his objection to COVID-19 

testing. Respondent did his own research during the pandemic. In that research, he 

discovered a theory that the swabs used in COVID-19 testing were laced with toxic 

chemicals. This theory led him to conclude that swab-based COVID-19 tests were 

ungodly because he would be putting toxic chemicals inside his nose or mouth. 

Respondent testified that he requested saliva-based COVID-19 testing during the 

2021–2022 school year. He was unable to produce any evidence of that request. 

69. 

Respondent testified that the title of the exemption form, “Religious 

Exemption Request Form for COVID-19 Vaccination,” was ambiguous. He thought the 

form was not specific to vaccination and applied to testing and masking. After the 

District approved his exemption, respondent recalled receiving the Accommodations 

Agreement. Feeling like it “imposed upon” him, he sought legal counsel. Because he 

did not agree with the accommodations offered, he refused to sign it. Respondent 

testified if he checked the second checkbox, which reflected he did not agree to the 

accommodations, it would mean he agreed to them. He was offended the District 

asked him how masking and testing violated his religious beliefs. He considers his 

religion to be private. He felt the entire process was “delusional.” 

70. 

Respondent agreed he never returned the Accommodations Agreement 

or Religious Clarification Form to the District. He understood there were deadlines to 

return the forms, but he wanted “a meeting of the minds.” Nevertheless, he also 

acquiesced that he never requested a meeting. He was “trying to buy time.” Similarly, 

he does not dispute that he never tested for COVID-19. 

71. 

Respondent felt surprised by the Letter of Warning. He found it offensive 

and rude, believing that it questioned his credibility and professionalism. He described 

25 

the Letter of Warning, as well as the Statement of Charges, as “abusive.” Respondent 

believed that he “engaged with everybody.” 

72. 

Respondent would be willing to return to the District if he was not 

required to comply with COVID-19 safety protocols. When asked if there was anything 

he would do differently in retrospect, respondent spoke at length about his desire to 

communicate. He did not express remorse for his actions or the impact his choices had 

on students. Likewise, he did not identify anything he would change going forward. 

Performance Evaluations 

73. 

Respondent provided several performance evaluations from his time at 

Delta College. His student reviews were positive. In 2017 and 2018, he received an 

overall rating of “competent.” The tenure review committee noted in his 2018 review 

that he lacked responsiveness in “Organization and Use of Time” and needed 

reminders to complete professional obligations. Nevertheless, he improved after his 

supervisor addressed the deficiencies with him directly. Right before the tenure 

decision in January 2019, his rating increased to “strong.” The committee found 

respondent improved in the areas where he was previously borderline. 

74. 

Respondent did not dispute he received the December 2021 

performance review and met with Dean David and Dr. Maloney about his objections. 

He testified the December 2021 performance evaluation was the first negative review 

he received in 45 years of education work. Respondent believed he was more 

knowledgeable about teaching his course than Dean David. He decided to “exert 

faculty freedom” rather than operate within the normal curriculum requirements. He 

said a prior dean permitted him to do so. 

26 

Specifically, respondent did not like Canvas, the District’s official platform for 

online instruction. He thought it worked poorly. He chose not to use Canvas and 

substituted with other methods. Respondent taught his course using emails, text 

messages, and other websites. He testified that he could have used Canvas like his 

colleagues, but he made “an executive decision” to do something different. He also 

thought the deficiencies in his online instruction were moot because he was not 

teaching in Fall 2022. His course no longer qualified for transfer credits. 

RESPONDENT’S WITNESSES 

75. 

Respondent offered the testimony of several character witnesses at the 

hearing. None of his witnesses had reviewed the Statement of Charges or had personal 

knowledge about the facts alleged, other than what respondent and his attorneys told 

them. 

76.  Daniel Fernandez is a professor and counselor with the Puente Program 

at Delta College, a learning community for Latino students. Mr. Fernandez has worked 

at Delta College for seven years. During the pandemic, his relationship with 

respondent grew close because they were both focusing on ethnic-specific 

programming. He thinks respondent is a good counselor. Mr. Fernandez eventually 

returned to campus and wore a face mask in common areas. He chose to mask and be 

vaccinated because he respects other people. 

77. 

Randolph Gaines has worked at Delta College since 1981. He has worked 

in the position of counselor for 22 years and teaches a course. He believes respondent 

made AFFIRM more successful during his years at Delta College. Jonathan Harris has 

been a part-time counselor at Delta College since 2013. He was respondent’s 

colleague in AFFIRM from 2014 until the pandemic began. He testified about how 

27 

AFFIRM thrived when it was in-person. During the pandemic, AFFIRM experienced 

challenges because some students lacked internet access and equipment. Mr. Harris 

returned to the general counseling department when the campus repopulated. 

78. 

Angela Williams has worked for Delta College since 1993. She has been a 

resource specialist for the past nine years. She worked with respondent planning 

activities for AFFIRM. She explained respondent was like a father figure to many 

students and cared about their success. Ms. Williams returned to campus in July 2022. 

Many of AFFIRM’s students have not come back to campus because they prefer to 

take classes online. She believed it could help AFFIRM to have respondent, or 

someone like him, back on campus to reinvigorate AFFIRM. She agreed face-to-face 

interaction was important in AFFIRM but also thought they used technology to 

communicate effectively during the pandemic. 

79.  Destiny Akins is a graduate of AFFIRM. She attended Delta College from 

2017 to 2020 and graduated before the pandemic. Ms. Akins used respondent’s 

services as a counselor, teacher, and mentor. She described respondent as an 

inspirational figure who was dedicated to his students. Ms. Akins spent much of her 

time at Delta College in the AFFIRM center. During those years, the center was busy, 

loud, and full of students. Ms. Akins has visited the AFFIRM center since she graduated 

and testified it is now “bleak” and less populated. 

80. 

Evan Wade is a history professor at Delta College, where he has worked 

for the past nine years. Mr. Wade teaches courses for AFFIRM and co-chaired the Black 

Faculty Task Force with respondent. He thinks respondent was an “awesome” 

colleague who helped AFFIRM improve student outcomes. Mr. Wade is “a Christian, 

first and foremost,” and maintains that his religious beliefs trump District policies. Mr. 

Wade was able to comply with the District’s COVID-19 safety protocols without 

28 

violating his religious beliefs. Still, he thinks it was “profound and brilliant” that 

respondent stood on his religious principles. 

RESPONDENT’S LEGAL ARGUMENTS 

81. 

In his briefs and at hearing, respondent presented a plethora of legal 

arguments. He argued the District violated the California Fair Employment and 

Housing Act (FEHA) and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII) by not 

granting him his preferred accommodation. He contended the District’s vaccine 

mandate was preempted because the California State Legislature fully occupied the 

legal field related to the vaccination of employees in state educational facilities. He 

asserted that the vaccine mandate violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments to 

the United States Constitution, as well as the California Constitution. 

82. 

Respondent also argued the District failed to impose progressive 

discipline, in violation of the CBA. He contended that the CBA and Vaccine MOU 

cannot be considered reasonable regulations. He asserted the Board could not 

terminate him under Education Code section 87732 because his performance review 

was unsigned and did not relate to his noncompliance with COVID-19 safety protocols. 

He argued Education Code section 87735 does not apply to faculty. He asserted the 

District abused its discretion. Finally, respondent argued multiple issues related to his 

compensation grievance and termination date. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

A community college district that seeks to dismiss a tenured academic 

employee bears the burden of establishing the appropriateness of that action by a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, §§ 115; 500; Ricasa v. Office of Admin. 

29 

Hearings (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 270 (Ricasa).) Preponderance of the evidence 

means “evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.” (People v. 

Mabini (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 654, 663.) 

2. 

“The terms and conditions of employment for community college 

employees are governed by a comprehensive statutory scheme set forth in the 

Education Code.” (Ricasa, supra, 31 Cal.App.5th at p. 272.) Education Code section 

87667 provides that a regular employee may be dismissed for one or more of the 

grounds set forth in Education Code section 87732. “A ‘regular’ employee is … one 

who has achieved tenure.” (Ricasa, supra, 31 Cal.App.5th at p. 272.) 

3. 

In the dismissal of a regular employee, Education Code section 87671 

requires the following conditions to be satisfied: 

(a) The employee has been evaluated in accordance with 

standards and procedures established in accordance with 

the provisions of this article. 

(b) The district governing board has received all statements 

of evaluation which considered the events for which 

dismissal or penalties may be imposed. 

(c) The district governing board has received 

recommendations of the superintendent of the district and, 

if the employee is working for a community college, the 

recommendations of the president of that community 

college. 

30 

(d) The district governing board has considered the 

statements of evaluation and the recommendations in a 

lawful meeting of the board. 

4. 

Education Code section 87732 provides that an academic employee shall 

not be dismissed except for one or more enumerated causes, including: 

(d) Evident unfitness for service. 

[¶] … [¶] 

(f) Persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, the school laws 

of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the community colleges by the board of 

governors or by the governing board of the community 

college district employing him or her. 

5. 

Education Code section 87735 provides, in relevant part, that: 

Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and verified 

by the person filing them with the governing board of a 

community college district, or upon a written statement of 

charges formulated by the governing board, charging a 

permanent employee of the district with … willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 

prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing district, the governing board may, if it deems 

such action necessary, immediately suspend the employee 

from his or her duties and give notice to him or her of his or 

31 

her suspension, and that 30 days after service of the notice, 

he or she will be dismissed, unless he or she demands a 

hearing. 

6. 

Following an evidentiary hearing, “the administrative law judge shall 

determine whether there is cause to dismiss or penalize the employee. If he or she 

finds cause, he or she shall determine whether the employee shall be dismissed and 

determine the precise penalty to be imposed, and shall determine whether his or her 

decision should be imposed immediately or postponed pursuant to Section 87672.” 

(Ed. Code, § 87680.) 

Respondent’s Legal Arguments 

STATUTORY CIVIL RIGHTS CLAIMS 

7. 

Respondent argued the District should have granted him his preferred 

accommodation to work remotely. He believes its failure to do so violated his religious 

rights under FEHA and Title VII. 

8. 

To establish a prima facie case of religious discrimination, respondent 

had to show “(1) he had a bona fide religious belief, the practice of which conflicts with 

an employment duty; (2) he informed his employer of the belief and conflict; and 

(3) the employer discharged, threatened, or otherwise subjected him to an adverse 

employment action because of his inability to fulfill the job requirement.” (Berry v. 

Dept. of Social Services (9th Cir. 2006) 447 F.3d 642, 654.) The District accepted that 

respondent had a bona fide religious belief when it granted him a religious exemption 

from the vaccine mandate. Respondent refused to return the Religious Clarification 

Form, choosing not to provide the information necessary to inform the District about 

the conflict between his religious beliefs and the proffered accommodations. 

32 

9. 

To the extent respondent argued the District deprived him of his 

preferred accommodation, that argument fails. (Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc. (1999) 74 

Cal.App.4th 215, 228 [“As the Supreme Court has held in analogous circumstances, an 

employee cannot make his employer provide a specific accommodation if another 

reasonable accommodation is instead provided.”].) Respondent did not carry his 

burden with respect to his statutory civil rights defenses. 

CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIMS 

10. 

Respondent also argued the District’s vaccine mandate violated the First 

Amendment’s Free Exercise Clause, the First Amendment prohibition on penalizing an 

employee for exercising a constitutional right, and similar protections under the 

California Constitution. Additionally, he contended the District treated him differently 

because of his religion, and thus violated the Fourteenth Amendment. 

11.  Neutral and generally applicable laws seeking to protect community 

health and safety do not violate free exercise rights. (Doe v. San Diego Unified School 

Dist. (9th Cir. 2021) 19 F.4th 1173, 1177, reconsideration en banc den. (9th Cir. 2022) 

22 F.4th 1099.) Likewise, the desire to curb the spread of communicable diseases 

through vaccination is a compelling governmental interest that outweighs free 

exercise concerns under the California Constitution. (Brown v. Smith (2018) 24 

Cal.App.5th 1135, 1145.) 

12. 

Governmental powers are even broader in the context of the employer-

employee relationship. (Waters v. Churchill (1994) 511 U.S. 661, 671.) Courts have 

approved the constitutionality of vaccine mandates and mask/test accommodations at 

other postsecondary educational institutions. (See, e.g., Klaassen v. Trustees of Indiana 

Univ. (7th Cir. 2021) 7 F.4th 592, 593 (Easterbrook, J.) [“These plaintiffs just need to 

33 

wear masks and be tested, requirements that are not constitutionally problematic.”]; 

Norris v. Stanley (6th Cir. 2023) 73 F.4th 431, 437.) 

13.  On its face, the Vaccine MOU was neutral and applied to all members of 

the CTA, regardless of religious beliefs. The Vaccine MOU only referenced religion with 

respect to the process for applying for an exemption. As applied, the Vaccine MOU 

was also neutral. Respondent did not show he was treated differently than other 

employees because of his religious beliefs. Multiple witnesses discussed the District’s 

flexibility with religious accommodations and the light standard imposed for granting 

religious requests, so long as the employee participated in the interactive process. 

14. 

The evidence showed respondent’s refusal to provide clarification closed 

the interactive process. Thereafter, his refusal to comply with District COVID-19 safety 

protocols and test biweekly, not his religious beliefs, resulted in his termination. 

Respondent did not provide evidence that the District showed any religious animus. 

PREEMPTION ARGUMENT 

15. 

Respondent further contended the California State Legislature 

preempted the issue of vaccination requirements at state educational facilities. In 

support of this argument, respondent cited to California Code of Regulation, title 8, 

sections 5199 and 3205; Health & Safety Code section 120360; and Let Them Choose 

v. San Diego Unified School Dist. (2022) 85 Cal.App.5th 693, 705, review den. (Feb. 22, 

2023) (“Let Them Choose”). 

16. 

Cal/OSHA’s “Aerosol Transmissible Diseases” standard (Cal. Code Regs., 

tit. 8, § 5199) “is limited to only certain employers, such as medical services and 

facilities, certain laboratories, correctional facilities, homeless shelters, and drug 

treatment programs.” (Western Growers Assn. v. Occupational Safety and Health Stds. 

34 

Bd. (2021) 73 Cal.App.5th 916, 927 fn. 2.) Community colleges are not among the listed 

facilities. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 8, § 5199, subd. (a)(1).) California Code of Regulation, 

title 8, section 3205 requires employees to wear face masks when required by a CDPH 

order and authorizes more protective or stringent local orders and guidance. (Cal. 

Code Regs., tit. 8, § 3205, subds. (f)(1) & (a)(3).) The regulation is silent on the issue of 

whether an employer can require employees to be vaccinated for COVID-19. 

17.  Health and Safety Code section 120360 provides that the statute 

governing compulsory student vaccination does not apply to adults or minors seeking 

to enroll in community college. (See also Health & Saf. Code, § 120335, subd. (b).) 

Correspondingly, in interpreting that statute, the court of appeal addressed 

preemption solely in the context of vaccination requirements for students in primary 

and secondary education. (Let Them Choose, supra, Cal.App.5th at pp. 705–706.) None 

of the sources respondent cited addressed requirements applicable to employees 

working in public postsecondary educational institutions. 

EDUCATION CODE ARGUMENTS 

Section 87732 

18. 

First, respondent argued the CBA and Vaccine MOU do not qualify for 

consideration under Education Code section 87732. He asserted the CBA and Vaccine 

MOU set forth contractual obligations and refusing to comply cannot constitute a 

violation under Education Code section 87732. 

19. 

Education Code section 87732, subdivision (f), provides that a regular 

employee may be terminated for persistently violating or refusing to obey “reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the community colleges by the board of 

governors or by the governing board of the community college district employing him 

35 

or her.” Here, the District’s Board voted to mandate vaccines for all employees in 

August 2021. The Vaccine MOU effectuated that vote and thus constituted a 

regulation that the Board prescribed for the health and safety of students and staff. 

Respondent did not offer evidence demonstrating that this regulation was objectively 

unreasonable. 

Sections 87735 and 87622 

20.  Next, respondent argued Education Code section 87735 cannot penalize 

a faculty member. Under respondent’s interpretation of Education Code section 87622, 

the only section of Article 6 that applies to faculty members is section 87732. 

21. 

Education Code, title 3, division 7, part 51, includes the statutes 

governing community college employees. Relevant articles include Article 2 

(“Employment of Faculty), Article 4 (“Evaluations and Discipline”), and Article 6 

(“Termination of Services and Reduction in Force”). Article 3 (“Community College 

Faculty”) includes Education Code section 87622, which provides: 

The employment, rights, responsibilities, dismissal, 

imposition of penalties for persons employed by a 

community college district in faculty positions shall be 

governed by Article 2 (commencing with Section 87600), 

and Article 4 (commencing with Section 87660). The 

employment of faculty by a community college district shall 

otherwise be governed as provided by law and in a manner 

consistent with Articles 2 and 4 and with this article 

(hereinafter referred to in this article, collectively, as “this 

act”). 

36 

This act shall take precedence, for the purposes of 

community college faculty, over any other act enacted by 

the Legislature at any session which, explicitly or implicitly, 

would result in community college faculty being governed 

by provisions inconsistent with this act. 

22. 

Courts reviewing similar arguments have looked to whether the relevant 

Education Code sections are distinct from or consistent with section 87622. (See Santa 

Monica College Faculty Assn. v. Santa Monica Community College Dist. (2015) 243 

Cal.App.4th 538, 554.) Here, Article 6, section 87735, is consistent with section 87622 

and Articles 2 and 4. Section 87735 applies to permanent employees and Article 2, 

section 87602, subdivision (b), defines “permanent employee” to include tenured 

faculty members. 

23. 

Read as a whole, the sections in Article 4 set forth the procedures to be 

followed before pursuing termination or other penalties under Article 6. For instance, 

Article 4, section 87667 provides that a regular employee may be dismissed or 

penalized for one or more grounds listed in Article 6, section 87732. Article 4 also 

provides that employees can be subject to penalties other than dismissal. (Ed. Code, 

§§ 87666–87669). Specifically, Article 4, section 87668 considers suspensions, the 

subject of Article 6, section 87735, and includes unpaid suspensions. Recognizing that 

Article 4 procedures generally apply to Article 6, only one exception was specified: 

suspensions for sex and narcotics offenses under section 87736. (Ed. Code, § 87670.) 

24. 

Indeed, Article 4 recognizes there are “[o]ther provisions of [the 

Education] code which govern the evaluation of, dismissal of, and the imposition of 

penalties on, community college faculty,” and requires those other provisions apply 

consistently with Article 4. (Ed. Code, § 87660.) In sum, Education Code section 87735 

37 

is consistent with section 87622 and Articles 2 and 4. This conclusion aligns with 

precedent, under which other districts have suspended faculty members under 

Education Code section 87735. (See, e.g., West Valley-Mission Community College 

Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766.) 

Sections 87671 and 87672 

25. 

Finally, respondent asserted the Board could not terminate him under 

Education Code section 87732 because his performance review was unsigned and did 

not detail his noncompliance with COVID-19 safety protocols. In support of this 

argument, he cited Education Code section 87671. He also argued the Board only 

offered him “an incomplete and imprecise decision and its reasons,” violating 

Education Code section 87672. 

26. 

Under Education Code section 87671, the District may dismiss or penalize 

a regular employee if one or more of the grounds outlined in Section 87732 are 

present and the following criteria are satisfied. Here, respondent’s last performance 

evaluation was performed in Fall 2021. His supervisor, Dean David, did not assess his 

failure to comply with the District’s COVID-19 protocols because that was outside her 

purview. Instead, she assessed his counseling and teaching. While the former was fine, 

the latter was deficient. As detailed above, respondent’s performance evaluation was 

unsigned because he refused to sign it. There is no factual dispute that he received it 

and had meetings with Dean David and Dr. Maloney to review his objections. 

Respondent was evaluated as required. He cannot use his refusal to sign the 

evaluation to exculpate himself. 

27. 

At the July 2022 meeting, the Board was provided with respondent’s 

evaluation, as well as the Statement of Charges, Dr. Aguilera Lawrenson’s 

38 

recommendation, the Vaccine MOU, respondent’s exemption request, interactive 

process letters, emails between respondent and the exemption/accommodation team, 

the Letter of Warning, and respondent’s February 2022 response. These documents 

included “all statements of evaluation which considered the events for which dismissal 

or penalties may be imposed.” Respondent did not argue any documents were 

improperly omitted. Rather, he interpreted section 87671 to require his December 

2021 performance evaluation to detail the reasons for which he was terminated. The 

Education Code does not require this. All the documents that the Board must consider 

were present at the time the Board made its decision. 

28.  On July 7, 2022, the Board sent respondent the Notice of the Decision to 

Terminate. This letter set forth that the Board decided there was cause to terminate 

respondent based on the reasons outlined in the Statement of Charges. The notice 

satisfied the Education Code’s requirement that the Board provide respondent with a 

written statement setting forth the Board’s complete and precise decision and its 

reasons therefor. (Ed. Code, § 87672.) 

CONTRACTUAL ARGUMENTS 

29. 

Respondent also argued the District violated the CBA by not engaging in 

progressive discipline. He asserted the CBA only allows the District to skip the steps of 

progressive discipline for violations related to Education Code section 87732, which he 

does not believe he violated. 

30. 

The CBA provides that when a faculty member violates District policies 

and procedures, progressive discipline will be used unless skipping steps is warranted 

because the conduct related to an Education Code section 87732 violation. (CBA, 

§ 29.3.) The Vaccine MOU gave employees until December 17, 2021, to comply or be 

39 

terminated. It required employees who applied for or received a vaccine exemption to 

test for COVID-19 twice a week. Employees who failed to comply were to be placed on 

unpaid status effective January 1, 2022, and remain on unpaid status throughout the 

termination process. 

31. 

Based on the language in the CBA and Vaccine MOU, the issue is not that 

the District denied respondent a right or process to which he was entitled. The Vaccine 

MOU clearly stated that refusal to comply with the District’s COVID-19 protocols 

would result in a letter of intent to terminate and unpaid status during the termination 

process. Here, the evidence indicates the District offered respondent repeated 

warnings and additional time to comply—more time than he was contractually entitled 

to receive. Under the contractual terms, the termination process should have begun in 

December 2021. Respondent’s compensation should have stopped on January 1, 2022. 

His termination was based on conduct related to an Education Code section 87732 

violation, which similarly allows skipping of progressive discipline under the CBA. 

32. 

Given the volume of respondent’s legal arguments and the varied 

analysis he provided for each, only the most cogent were analyzed here. All other legal 

arguments he presented were considered and rejected. 

Causes for Discipline 

33. 

The evidence provided at the hearing showed respondent refused to 

follow the District’s COVID-19 safety protocols throughout 2021–2022 school year, 

resulting in his inability to perform on-campus assignments that began in January 

2022. His CBA required him to fulfill his professional obligations and conduct himself 

in a manner that supported student success. Because the Vaccine MOU was 

incorporated into the CBA, respondent was required to comply with the Vaccine MOU. 

40 

For individuals with vaccine exemptions, those obligations included testing twice 

weekly for COVID-19 and wearing a mask in common areas on campus. Respondent 

chose not to comply with the Vaccine MOU, placing his preference for telework above 

the needs of his students. 

34. 

From the start, respondent’s communications with the District were 

amorphous and confusing. He told them he did “not worry about drugs” and anything 

he felt was unnecessary or intrusive violated his religious beliefs. He spoke at length 

about his excellent health and superior immune system before claiming the opposite. 

At the hearing, respondent offered areligious reasons for his refusal to accept the 

accommodations. He testified he could not wear a mask because of hypoxia and 

claustrophobia. His objection to COVID-19 testing was based on his belief in a theory 

that the swabs contain toxic chemicals. Notably, respondent refused to provide either 

explanation to the District before his termination. 

35. 

The District did not dispute the sincerity of respondent’s religious beliefs 

and put forth a good-faith effort to engage him in an interactive process. After 

granting his vaccine exemption, the District reached out on multiple occasions, seeking 

clarification about exactly what respondent objected to and why. Was his objection to 

all facial coverings, including face shields, or just face masks? Did he have an objection 

to all COVID-19 tests or just certain ones? Respondent chose not to provide the 

information that would have enabled the District to offer additional accommodations. 

36. 

Instead, respondent insisted he was entitled to his preferred 

accommodation: telework. He argued in closing briefing that the District should have 

reassigned his in-person duties to other staff so he could continue teleworking. Yet 

the law does not allow an employee to dictate the terms of his employment 

unilaterally. (Am. Postal Workers Union v. Postmaster Gen. (9th Cir. 1986) 781 F.2d 772, 

41 

777 [“In other words, a reasonable accommodation need not be on the employee’s 

terms only.”].) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

37. 

Section 87732, subdivision (d), authorizes dismissal for “evident unfitness 

for service.” The term “evident unfitness for service” means “clearly not fit, not adapted 

to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Com. on Prof. Competence 

(Woodland) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term “connotes a fixed character 

trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) To assess unfitness for 

service, the factors listed in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 

(Morrison) are used. (Id. at p. 1445.) 

38. 

In Morrison, the California Supreme Court provided a list of factors for 

assessing a person’s fitness to teach. The inquiry includes (1) the likelihood that the 

conduct may have adversely affected others and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of 

certification held by the party involved; (4) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved or other people in the profession. (Ricasa, supra, 31 Cal.App.5th at 

p. 285 [citing Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229].) 

42 

39. 

“The [Morrison] factors are not rules, but broad classes of issues to be 

considered to assist in determining whether to impose discipline.” (Ricasa, supra, 31 

Cal.App.5th at p. 285.) Not all the Morrison factors must be considered, only the most 

pertinent ones. (West Valley-Mission Community College Dist. v. Conception, supra, 16 

Cal.App.4th at p. 1777.) The factors may apply to all charges in the aggregate, 

considering the totality of offensive conduct. (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 

pp. 1456–1457 [“When a camel’s back is broken we need not weigh each straw in its 

load to see which one could have done the deed.”].) The determination of fitness for 

service required by Morrison is a factual one. (Fontana Unified School Distr. v. Burman 

(1988) 45 Cal.3d. 208, 220–221.) 

Likelihood of Adverse Impact 

40. 

The District established through its witnesses’ testimonies that 

respondent’s refusal to comply with COVID-19 safety protocols harmed the District, 

and specifically AFFIRM’s students. Because respondent would not agree to test for 

COVID-19 and wear a face mask, he was not cleared to return to campus and reopen 

the AFFIRM center. Both parties’ witnesses spoke about how many students in AFFIRM 

lacked access to technology, which increased the urgency of reopening the center to 

provide students with resources. During the relevant period, AFFIRM was the only 

learning community that had not reopened. Indeed, respondent was well-acquainted 

with the struggles his students faced. Yet he placed his preference for telework above 

their needs. The AFFIRM center did not reopen until July 2022. Accordingly, 

respondent’s conduct adversely impacted AFFIRM’s students. 

43 

Proximity of Remoteness in Time 

41. 

The conduct at issue here occurred close in time to when the District filed 

the Statement of Charges. The alleged conduct occurred between November 2021 and 

March 2022. Respondent did not attempt to remedy his conduct before termination. 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

42. 

Respondent did not present evidence of any circumstances that would 

justify or mitigate his conduct. While he argued in his closing belief that his religious 

beliefs constituted extenuating circumstances, he received a religious exemption from 

the vaccine mandate. He then refused to provide the District with clarification about 

how masking and taking a COVID-19 test violated his religious beliefs, instead hoping 

to “buy time” until the semester ended. 

Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of the Motives 

43. 

Respondent claims his religious beliefs motivated his conduct. Yet there 

is no evidence that the District retaliated against him because of his religion. Indeed, 

the District accommodated respondent’s religious beliefs by granting him a vaccine 

exemption. Thereafter, he chose not to comply with COVID-19 safety protocols or 

explain the reason he could not accept the accommodations offered. 

Likelihood of Recurrence 

44. 

Respondent has not acknowledged any wrongdoing. He was unwilling or 

unable to concede his position, despite the District’s many attempts to work with him, 

educate him about rules and regulations, and offer him opportunities to correct his 

behavior. Consistent with his view that he is without fault in this matter, he did not 

provide rehabilitation evidence. 

44 

45. 

Respondent’s testimony suggested his likelihood of violating policies 

again in the future is high. He insisted he knew better than his supervisor about 

instructing online courses, even though she held certifications he lacked. He 

maintained he had the authority to operate outside of normal curriculum 

requirements. He lacked insight and seemed to believe that he need not adhere to the 

rules required of others. Returning respondent to employment with the District 

presents the risk that respondent will violate other District policies and procedures 

because he views himself to be exempt from directives he disfavors. 

Chilling Effect Upon Constitutional Right 

46. 

Respondent made a myriad of arguments about how the District violated 

his rights. As detailed in the legal arguments above, respondent’s constitutional 

arguments lack merit. While respondent told others that his termination was based on 

religious discrimination, the evidence overwhelmingly showed his termination was 

based on unprotected conduct rather than unlawful discrimination. Witnesses also 

confirmed other employees with sincerely held religious beliefs successfully received 

exemptions and accommodations from the District. Thus, respondent’s termination did 

not and will not deter others from exercising their constitutional rights. 

47. 

After considering the relevant Morrison factors and the totality of the 

circumstances, respondent’s conduct in the aggregate indicates a factual nexus 

between his conduct and unfitness for service. A preponderance of the evidence 

demonstrated that respondent has temperamental defects that make him unfit for 

District employment. Therefore, the District established cause to dismiss respondent 

for evident unfitness for service. 

45 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION/REFUSAL TO OBEY SCHOOL LAWS OR REASONABLE 

REGULATIONS 

48. 

The Education Code empowers the governing board of each district to 

promulgate rules and regulations about the operation and administration of the 

community colleges within its jurisdiction, including “specific standards which it 

expects its faculty to meet in the performance of their duties.” (See Ed. Code, § 87664.) 

To constitute a “persistent violation of, or refusal to obey … reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the community colleges” under Education Code 

section 87732, subdivision (f), the District must show more than a single violation of its 

regulations. (Governing Bd. of the Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 

Cal.App.3d 77, 83.) Instead, the District must show respondent’s “intentional and 

continual refusal to cooperate” with reasonable regulations. (San Dieguito Union High 

School Dist. v. Com. on Prof. Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) 

49. 

As a member of the CTA, respondent was bound by the requirements of 

the CBA. These included the requirement to follow District policies and directives, or 

face discipline. Those policies and directives included the requirements imposed by 

the Vaccine MOU. (CBA, § 1.4.) As a condition of his religious vaccine exemption, 

respondent was required to test twice weekly for COVID-19. The District repeatedly 

advised respondent of the testing requirement and attempted to learn more about his 

objections. Nevertheless, between November 2021 and March 2022, respondent never 

tested or otherwise complied with COVID-19 safety protocols. His repeated refusal to 

obey this reasonable regulation, imposed to protect the safety of students and staff, 

meant he was never cleared to return to campus and reopen the AFFIRM center. The 

District established cause to dismiss respondent for persistent refusal to obey 

reasonable regulations by a preponderance of the evidence. 

46 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS 

50. 

Under Education Code section 87735, a district’s governing board may 

immediately suspend an employee for “willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing district.” “Although the term ‘willful’ has no ‘single, uniformly applicable’ 

definition, it refers generally to intentional conduct undertaken with knowledge or 

consciousness of its probable result.” (Patarak v. Williams (2001) 91 Cal.App.4th 826, 

829.) 

51. 

Respondent’s job duties included holding counseling hours, coordinating 

AFFIRM, and teaching. Beginning in January 2022, the District required him to return to 

campus on a hybrid schedule so the AFFIRM center could reopen. Respondent’s 

refusal to comply with the District’s COVID-19 safety protocols prevented him from 

returning to campus, Thus, he could not perform his regular assignments in person, as 

required. The District established cause to dismiss respondent for willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments by a preponderance of the evidence. 

Conclusion 

52. 

Cause exists to dismiss respondent for evident unfitness for service (Ed. 

Code, § 87732, subd. (d)), persistent violation of or refusal to obey the reasonable 

regulations prescribed by the governing board of the community college district 

employing him (Id. at subd. (f)), and willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause (Ed. Code, § 87735). The District’s decision to dismiss 

respondent from employment is reasonable and supported by a preponderance of the 

evidence. 

47 

ORDER 

The San Joaquin Delta Community College District’s decision to terminate 

respondent Roy Desmangles, Jr.’s employment is AFFIRMED. 

Respondent is dismissed from his employment with the District, effective 

immediately. 

DATE: November 13, 2023 

JESSICA WALL 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

48 

Jessica Wall (Nov 13, 2023 14:32 PST)Jessica Wall 
 
