BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
BEAUMONT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Proceeding to Dismiss: 

BRIAN CLEARY, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022050885 

DECISION 

This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on 

Professional Competence by videoconference and telephone on November 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 

and 10, 2022, and January 23, 24, 25, and 26, 2023. The Commission was comprised of 

the following members: Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Ray 

Andrzejewski, and Scott Richards, Jr. 

Kerrie E. McNally, Attorney at Law, Adams, Silva & McNally, LLP, represented 

complainant, Jennifer Castillo, Assistant Superintendent Human Resources, Beaumont 

Unified School District. 

Carlos R. Perez and Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorneys at Law, Law Office of 

Carlos R. Perez, APLC, represented respondent, Brian Cleary, who was present. 

On January 25 and 26, 2023, the Commission met to deliberate. On January 26, 

2023, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted. 

CASE SUMMARY 

Mr. Cleary’s interactions with a female high school student enrolled in his first 

period physics class during the 2021-2022 school year formed the bases of the 

allegations. Although Mr. Cleary‘s interactions with the student were immature and 

showed a lack of good judgment, they did not constitute immoral conduct. 

Complainant also did not prove that Mr. Cleary was dishonest or evidently unfit to 

serve. While complainant did establish that Mr. Cleary’s behavior demonstrated a 

persistent refusal to obey district policies and regulations, the Commission concluded, 

based upon the evidence presented, and consideration of the factors set forth in 

Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, that the allegation sustained 

did not warrant Mr. Cleary’s dismissal from the district. On this record, the statement 

of charges is dismissed, and Mr. Cleary shall be reinstated and awarded back pay with 

interest and benefits. 

PROTECTIVE ORDERS 

Exhibits 4, 25 through 43 inclusive, G, Q, R, U through Y inclusive, BB through 

DD inclusive, KK, KK2, FFF, HHH, III, MMM through PPP inclusive, SSS through ZZZ 

inclusive, and CCCC through KKKK inclusive, documents containing the names of 

students and parents of students, were received and contained confidential 

information. It is impractical to redact the information from these exhibits. To protect 

the privacy and the confidential personal information from inappropriate disclosure, 

those exhibits are ordered sealed. A protective order was issued on November 22, 

2022, when the matter was pending. Another protective order was issued on January 

26, 2023, when the matter was submitted. These sealing orders govern the release of 

2 

documents to the public. A reviewing court, parties to this matter, their attorneys, the 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, its attorneys, or designee, and a 

government agency decision maker or designee under Government Code section 

11517, may review the documents subject to these orders, provided the documents 

are protected from release to the public. 

In lieu of the students’ names, initials will be used in this decision and shall be 

used in any transcript of the hearing if one is prepared. 

FINDINGS OF FACT 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Mr. Cleary was employed by Beaumont Unified School District (district) as 

a science teacher. During the time of the alleged incidents, he was teaching Physics 

and Advanced Placement Physics (AP Physics) at Beaumont High School. 

2. 

On February 18, 2022, K.M., a student in Mr. Cleary’s first period physics 

class, notified administration of what she considered to be inappropriate behavior 

between Mr. Cleary and her friend, M.T., another student in his class. K.M. completed a 

witness statement form and testified at this hearing. 

3. 

On March 1, 2022, the district placed Mr. Cleary on paid administrative 

leave so it could complete its investigation. The district interviewed students, obtained 

emails and texts, and interviewed Mr. Cleary. Notes summarizing those interviews were 

received into evidence and were essentially consistent with the testimony offered. 

4. 

On April 1, 2022, Jennifer Castillo, the district’s Assistant Superintendent, 

Human Resources, provided Mr. Cleary a letter enclosing a copy of the Notice of Intent 

3 

to Immediately Suspend Without Pay, Notice of Recommendation for Dismissal, 

Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges), and supporting materials. She informed 

Mr. Cleary of his right to a Skelly 1 conference “[b]efore any decision is made to go 

forward with the recommendation” to terminate and immediately suspend him from 

employment. Assistant Superintendent Castillo also provided Mr. Cleary with the 

identity of the Skelly officer and advised him the Skelly conference was set for April 19, 

2022, at which time he would be given an opportunity to respond to the charges. 

5. 

On April 19, 2022, Mr. Cleary sent a written response “in lieu of an in-

person Skelly meeting.” He wrote that it was his “hope that, after reviewing the letter, 

you will agree dismissal is neither appropriate nor warranted.” Mr. Cleary wrote further: 

K.M. . . . accused me of an inappropriate relationship with 

her friend, M.T. M.T. did not corroborate this. No 

wrongdoing ever occurred. 

1In Skelly v. State Personnel Board (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194, 215, the California 

Supreme Court held that in order to satisfy due process, an agency considering 

disciplinary action against a public employee must accord the employee certain 

“preremoval safeguards,” including “notice of the proposed action, the reasons 

therefor, a copy of the charges and materials upon which the action is based, and the 

right to respond, either orally or in writing, to the authority initially imposing 

discipline.” The Supreme Court’s directive gave rise to an administrative procedure 

known as a Skelly hearing, in which an employee has the opportunity to respond to 

the charges upon which the proposed discipline is based. 

4 

 
M.T. is an emotionally disturbed [special education] student 

with kidney disease and a learning disability. She reported 

anxiety with group interaction, and retreated to the back of 

my classroom. She sat behind my desk where she did very 

little work. She spent most of her time there, sometimes 

accompanied by K.M. , and earned a very poor grade. 

M.T. is one of 30-40 students who spent their lunch time in 

my room. She sometimes would check in with her 2nd or 4th 

period teacher, then return to my room. Her [special 

education] teachers allowed her to go where her anxiety 

was less intense. [Special education] teachers came to my 

room regularly to pass messages to M.T. or retrieve her 

when she needed to leave. Everyone knew where she was at 

all times. 

I felt sometimes that M.T. crowded me as I [sic] at my desk. I 

told her there needed to be more distance between us. She 

responded with a vomiting sound, and then, crowded me 

less. 

K.M. often joined M.T. behind my desk and I would have to 

work around them to access my computer or materials. 

They both put their feet on my desk, told outrageous 

stories, asked for advice, and competed for attention. 

M.T. indicated to me that her kidney disorder was probably 

terminal within 8 years. At about the same time, I revealed 

5 

to all students and staff that I was receiving treatment for 

thyroid cancer. M.T. and I made deals with each other to 

ensure we both followed through with treatments we found 

intimidating or scary. I did my best to comfort her anxieties 

while encouraging her through her treatment. 

M.T. claimed that K.M. was jealous of the time she spent in 

my room, and that K.M. had threatened to turn us in for 

“doing bad stuff” if she didn’t leave and eat lunch with her 

instead. I didn’t take the threat seriously as we were not 

doing anything wrong. 

I was never alone with M.T. and had zero capacity to 

communicate with her outside of class or normal district 

email. She never had my personal contact info, and I never 

had hers. [Name] [sic] occasionally asked for hugs and I 

sometimes allowed them, but only from the side, and only 

with one arm. At times, she would approach from the side 

and lean on my arm. Hugs and leaning never lasted more 

than a moment. 

About two years ago, Mrs. Ponce reported to administration 

that a friend of M.T. approached her with disturbing news. 

The friend stated that M.T. was in love with the Engineering 

Teacher, Mr. Medore. M.T. also believed Mr. Medore was in 

love back with her. Mrs. Ponce filed multiple reports on the 

matter. Mr. Medore still works at [Beaumont High School]. 

6 

M.T. had a similar experience with Mr. Barker at San 

Gorgonio Middle School [SGMS]. He still works at SGMS. 

I participated in an interview on March 8. At no time was I 

invited or allowed to present evidence, background, or my 

personal perspective on the matter. The following day, I 

texted Joel Hudec in the hopes that he could facilitate 

another opportunity for me to speak. I was led to believe 

there would be ample chance to present evidence. Since 

then, however, I have been informed of the possibility of my 

dismissal without having had, in my view, an adequate 

opportunity to present my side of the story. 

I made no advances or sexual comments toward M.T. I 

stepped up to help a person who appeared to need it. The 

help I offered was 100% wholesome. No harm occurred or 

was going to occur. The initial report by K.M. was rife with 

assumptions, inaccuracies, and false conclusions. The notice 

of suspension given to me on April 1, presents my motives 

in a false light and is both inaccurate and misleading. 

Mr. Cleary requested that the charges be withdrawn, and he be returned to the 

classroom. He also welcomed the opportunity to be interviewed again. 

6. 

After reviewing all the evidence submitted, including Mr. Cleary’s letter, 

the Skelly officer issued a decision on April 21, 2022, concluding “it is appropriate for 

the District to move forward with your immediate suspension and termination.” 

7 

7. 

On April 26, 2022, Assistant Superintendent Castillo signed the Statement 

of Charges in her official capacity. The Statement of Charges set forth the facts and 

laws on which the district was relying and sought to immediately dismiss Mr. Cleary 

from employment on the grounds of immoral conduct (Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(1)), dishonesty (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4)), 

evident unfitness for service (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6)), and 

persistent violation or refusal to obey regulations and district polices (Education Code 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(8)).2 Complainant also alleged Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b), immoral conduct, as grounds to immediately suspend Mr. 

Cleary without pay. The charges stemmed from Mr. Cleary’s interactions with an 

eleventh grade female student enrolled in his first period physics class during the 

2021-2022 school year. 

8. 

Mr. Cleary timely appealed the dismissal action, denying that grounds for 

his dismissal from employment existed, and this hearing followed. 

Motion to Compel, Motions in Limine, and Pre-hearing Objections 

9. 

Mr. Cleary filed a motion seeking the following records which the district 

refused to produce: 

•  Referral and Attendance documents for two main students in connection 

with the Charges, students K.M. and M.T. 

•  Student Behavioral and Disciplinary Records of students M.T. and K.M. 

2 Complainant did not allege Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), 

unprofessional conduct. 

8 

 
• 

I.E.P. records of Student M.T. 

•  All Communications relating to behavioral issues of M.T. or K.M. including 

any complaints made by teachers or staff. 

•  Documents relating to any prior investigation and/or complaints by the 

District of allegations of misconduct by M.T. against other teachers. 

•  All Communications relating to any concerns by staff members concerning 

the conduct of M.T. 

Mr. Cleary’s motion was granted. As noted below, those documents revealed 

that M.T. made allegations against other male teachers, claiming she was being 

“groomed” and “swabbed.” The documents further showed that the district was aware 

of these issues but never put a behavior plan in place for M.T. 

10. 

The parties filed motions in limine and oppositions thereto. Tentative 

rulings were issued and the parties were allowed to orally argue their positions at the 

start of the hearing, after which the tentative rulings were affirmed.3 Respondent’s 

objections to hundreds of pages of newly disclosed documents of the staff training the 

district provided were sustained, but the district was allowed to ask question regarding 

that training. 

Classroom Layout, Seating Assignments, and Environment 

11.  Mr. Cleary’s physics class took place in a regular-sized classroom, not a 

larger-sized science classroom. The classroom had six tables arranged in rows of two, 

3 The tentative rulings were marked and received in evidence as Exhibit 100. 

9 

 
with six stools around each table, three stools on each side. The tall tables had even 

taller stools that did not fit under the tables. At the back of the class on one side of the 

room there was a lab table that was also used to play ping pong, and next to it was 

Mr. Cleary’s L-shaped desk with his teacher’s chair. Mr. Cleary testified that this was a 

large, padded chair he brought from home as it was more comfortable than the one 

provided by the district. The district provided a black mesh chair that he also kept 

behind his desk, and his Teaching Assistant (TA) sat there when grading papers. 

The shorter portion of the L-shaped desk was parallel to the students’ tables 

with the longer side of the L running along the side wall. Mr. Cleary’s chair was behind 

the shorter portion of the desk such that when he sat behind his desk, he faced the 

students, with his right arm along the wall. The other chair was to the left of Mr. 

Cleary’s chair. 

A diagram of the classroom showed that from the front to the back of the 

classroom, Tables 6, 4, and 2 were on the lab/ping pong table side of the room, with 

Table 2 being closest to the lab/ping pong table, at the back of the room. Tables 5, 3, 

and 1, were on Mr. Cleary’s desk side of the room, with Table 1 being closest to Mr. 

Cleary’s desk, at the back of the room. The main entrance to the classroom was 

through a door located by Table 5. There was also a door located on the side wall 

behind the lab/ping pong table which led to the hallway, printer, special education 

office, and restroom. 

M.T. was assigned to Table 3, in the top left seat. However, she seldom sat in 

her assigned seat, often sitting at the ping pong table or at Mr. Cleary’s desk in one of 

the chairs located there. No other students sat at Mr. Cleary’s desk other than the TA. 

No other student sat in Mr. Cleary’s chair. 

10 

The classroom environment was typically very loud. Students were allowed to 

move around the classroom while working on their labs. Because of the size of the 

classroom, students were also allowed to conduct their labs in the hallway or outdoors. 

During lab days, Mr. Cleary would play music in the classroom, and move around 

helping other students and answering questions. Students were allowed to talk with 

each other regarding their labs, and consult with students at other tables. On the days 

that Mr. Cleary gave instruction, students were expected to sit in their seats and listen. 

Students also sat in their seats and listened when the different groups gave their 

presentations. At the end of class, if students had completed their work, they were 

allowed to play ping pong in the remaining minutes of class time. 

Students were graded on their projects, the research that went into the projects, 

and how well they presented their work. Each student was graded individually. There 

was no ability to repeat assignments or make up work, and there was no extra credit 

given to students. 

K.M.’s Complaint to the District 

12. 

K.M. met M.T. in Mr. Cleary’s first period physics class during the 2021-22 

school year. She and M.T. became “very, very close friends” who “texted frequently.” 

During the second semester, K.M. notified school officials of her concerns regarding 

Mr. Cleary’s and M.T.’s behavior. She later provided the district with her text message 

exchanges with M.T. K.M. said she and M.T. are no longer friends because of K.M.’s 

complaint. The district investigated the matter, interviewing students and Mr. Cleary, 

and prepared notes of those interviews. Students, district employees, and Mr. Cleary 

testified in this hearing. Below is a summary of the notes obtained during the 

investigation and the witnesses’ testimony. 

11 

K.M. ’S WRITTEN STATEMENT 

13. 

In her written statement the district asked her to prepare, K.M. wrote: 

M.T. and Brian Cleary (teacher) are having too close of a 

teacher/student relationship. Cleary will ask M.T. personal 

questions about her home life & health issues. He also says 

she does things to make him “hard.” At one point in time 

they started hugging & cuddling up in class. [Student] is a 

witness to these actions. In his 1st period physics class, M.T. 

doesn’t do her work & gets an A. Cleary is giving M.T. 

“special treatment” & extra credit work which he does not 

give to others. I have brought up the situation multiple 

times to M.T. about what needs to be changed, but nothing 

has been done it has gotten to the point where they have 

started wrestling (illegible) chasing around for fun in class. 

Yesterday 2-17-22 after we did a lab M.T. was sitting on Mr. 

Clearys [sic] ping pong table in his room. Cleary sat next to 

M.T. & they started hugging & almost cuddling (illegible) 

shoulders, sitting super close, her leg over his.4 These 

events have gone on for months & other students have also 

noticed that this behavior is weird. Mr. Cleary has also told 

M.T. (past 3 months) that when she is around him, he wants 

to do things (sexual). [Student] has witnessed the cuddling 

& also thought it was weird. He has also brought up 

4 As noted below, K.M. denied observing this during her testimony. 

12 

 
numerous times of how M.T. reminds him of his daughter & 

how she (daughter) should act. I have told M.T. to report 

him but she refuses, so it has come to this point. 

K.M. ’s Testimony 

14. 

During the 2021-22 school year K.M. was a junior in Mr. Cleary’s first 

period physics class. K.M. met M.T. in Mr. Cleary’s class, and they were friends, but M.T. 

has not spoken to K.M. since K.M. notified the district of her concerns. When they were 

friends, K.M. “kept an eye out for M.T. in class” because she “wanted to make sure she 

was safe.” She described M.T. as “very mature and grown-up for her age.” 

K.M. was assigned to sit at Table 3, with M.T., on the side facing Mr. Cleary’s 

desk. M.T. only sat there sometimes; other times she sat at Mr. Cleary’s desk. K.M. 

never sat at Mr. Cleary’s desk, although she would visit M.T. when M.T. was sitting at 

Mr. Cleary’s desk. Mr. Cleary did not allow any other student to sit at his desk, except 

for the TA, who sat in a chair at his desk. 

M.T. never did the assigned classwork. She did not participate in the labs, she 

did not do any of the work. M.T. told K.M. that she earned credit other ways. She said 

that Mr. Cleary would send her around school looking for objects that he needed for 

his labs. Although Mr. Cleary did not allow extra credit work, he gave M.T. extra credit 

for doing these tasks. M.T. showed K.M. her grades, but K.M. could not confirm that 

M.T. received any extra credit. K.M. claimed she went with M.T. one time on one of 

these excursions, but K.M. did not earn any extra credit for doing so. Mr. Cleary 

allowed M.T. to grade other students’ lab work. M.T. also cursed in class every day, and 

K.M. never heard Mr. Cleary tell her to stop. 

13 

K.M. did observe M.T. having panic attacks. They usually lasted 20 to 25 minutes 

and occurred three or four times per week. M.T. told K.M. that she went to Mr. Cleary’s 

class during other periods. M.T. told K.M. that Mr. Cleary’s class is a comfort zone for 

her, and she did not have anywhere else to hang out, so she would go to his class. M.T. 

told K.M. she went to Mr. Cleary’s class every day for lunch; K.M. never went there at 

lunch. M.T. told K.M. she had lunch alone with Mr. Cleary. Based on what M.T. told her, 

K.M. thought that M.T. and Mr. Cleary were having lunch together alone. 

Mr. Cleary and M.T. did “not interact in a typical student/teacher manner. They 

acted like a father/daughter type relationship.” K.M. saw hugging between Mr. Cleary 

and M.T. They hugged chest to chest and also did side hugs, shoulder to shoulder. 

K.M. witnessed chest to chest hugs between them almost every day during class, their 

bodies were touching. She witnessed side hugs between them almost every morning. 

The hugs happened during class and when other students were present. The hugging 

began in September 2021 and lasted up in until February 2022. During their hugs, 

M.T.’s arms would be over Mr. Cleary’s shoulders on his lower back; Mr. Cleary’s arms 

would be on M.T.’s shoulders on her lower back. K.M. never observed Mr. Cleary tell 

M.T. to stop the face-to-face or the side hugs. The hugs made K.M. feel 

“uncomfortable” because she did not “believe a teacher should hug a student that 

way.” K.M. thought the hugs were “inappropriate.” 

Mr. Cleary and M.T. chased each other in the classroom during class time when 

other students were present. It looked as if they were playing tag. She observed Mr. 

Cleary chasing M.T., and M.T. chasing Mr. Cleary. When they would “catch” each other, 

they would push each other, and then chase each other again. This chasing activity 

happened almost every day in class. K.M. does not know if either of them had 

something in their hands during the chase. Mr. Cleary did not chase any other 

14 

students in class, and K.M. has never seen another teacher chase a student. K.M. never 

heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. to stop the chase. 

M.T. wrote her name on things in the classroom. She wrote “[M.T.’s nickname] 

was here” on whiteboards, stools, tables, students’ paperwork, and on Mr. Cleary’s 

clipboard. M.T. wrote on items every day in class. No other students wrote on the 

whiteboard or other classroom items. M.T. used both permanent marker and an Expo 

marker to write on the items. She wrote on items during class time. K.M. does not 

know if Mr. Cleary took any action to remove M.T.’s writings. 

Mr. Cleary wrote on M.T.’s shoes. Mr. Cleary wrote “Freaky Fresh,” which is Mr. 

Cleary’s nickname.5 He wrote on the inner sole of M.T.’s shoes. Mr. Cleary also wrote 

“Freaky Fresh” on M.T.’s cell phone case. K.M. recognized Mr. Cleary’s handwriting 

because he would write on students’ papers as part of his grading/feedback. Mr. 

Cleary never wrote on K.M.’s personal items, and she has never seen another teacher 

write on a student’s personal belongings. 

Mr. Cleary threw things at M.T. He threw ping pong balls and baby dolls at her a 

couple times per week. Mr. Cleary had little baby dolls around the classroom that he 

would grab and throw at M.T. Mr. Cleary did not throw ping pong balls or dolls at any 

other students. 

Mr. Cleary and M.T. sat on the ping pong table together. They sat shoulder to 

shoulder. Their legs would be touching. She never saw M.T. put her legs on top of Mr. 

Cleary’s leg. Mr. Cleary was facing the class and his arm was around M.T.’s shoulder. 

K.M. never heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. to stop, and did not see Mr. Cleary scoot away 

5 Mr. Cleary and M.T. testified his nickname is “Funky Fresh,” not “Freaky Fresh.” 

15 

 
from M.T. She also saw M.T. sit on Mr. Cleary’s lap behind his desk. She was sitting on 

one of his legs and leaning her head on his shoulder. It looked like M.T. was taking a 

nap, and Mr. Cleary was just watching over the classroom. This happened “quite 

often.” She never heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. to stop sitting on his lap, and she never 

saw any other students sit on Mr. Cleary’s lap. She never saw any other teacher allow a 

student to sit on the teacher’s lap. 

K.M. also saw Mr. Cleary rub M.T.’s leg in class when they were on the ping 

pong table. She observed this rubbing approximately five times. She never saw Mr. 

Cleary rub the leg of another student, and never saw any other teacher rub a student’s 

leg. She observed Mr. Cleary rub M.T.’s back. He would rub it in a circular motion 

going up and down M.T.’s back. She observed this rubbing approximately 20 or 30 

times and does not know why Mr. Cleary did it. 

K.M. heard Mr. Cleary ask M.T. personal questions. He asked about her mental 

health, her physical health, her family life at home, and how her mother treats her. She 

never heard Mr. Cleary ask M.T. questions of a sexual nature. M.T. would also tell K.M. 

about her conversations with Mr. Cleary. M.T. also told K.M. that Mr. Cleary asked her 

medical questions, personal questions, and questions about her family life. K.M. 

overheard discussions between Mr. Cleary and M.T. Mr. Cleary told M.T. that he found 

her “intriguing” and “interesting.” 

Mr. Cleary told M.T. that she makes him “hard.” K.M. does not know what they 

were talking about when Mr. Cleary made the “hard” comment. K.M. thought she 

might have been hearing things, and Mr. Cleary had not actually made that comment 

but realized she heard it correctly when M.T. told her he made that statement. K.M. 

thought perhaps Mr. Cleary was talking about something in the classroom when he 

said the word “hard,” she was not aware that he was talking about M.T. until M.T.’s text 

16 

confirmed the comment was about M.T. M.T. also told K.M. that Mr. Cleary made 

sexual comments to her, but K.M. does not recall the specifics. K.M. originally testified 

that M.T.’s text regarding the “hard” comment was not the first time K.M. heard the 

comment, but she later testified that her knowledge of what the comment meant was 

based on M.T.’s text. She also later testified that she never heard Mr. Cleary say that 

M.T. made him hard. 

K.M. explained how she and M.T. “orchestrated a plan” to make Mr. Cleary 

jealous. M.T. wanted K.M. to talk to M.T. about a boy M.T. saw on a social media 

platform to see how Mr. Cleary would react. K.M. identified the text messages 

exchanged between she and M.T., which included the “script” M.T. wanted K.M. to 

follow regarding the attempt to make Mr. Cleary jealous. The idea was for M.T. to 

know how Mr. Cleary felt towards her. K.M. originally did not want to “go along with 

the script” M.T. had written, but M.T. continued to ask K.M. to do it, and K.M. “finally 

gave in.” K.M. did not think the script was a good idea. K.M. thought it was “strange or 

unusual” for M.T. to want to make Mr. Cleary jealous. K.M. thought M.T. had a crush on 

Mr. Cleary “because they were acting a little too close to each other.” 

K.M. and M.T. performed the script in class while Mr. Cleary was walking by 

them. K.M. believes Mr. Cleary heard them because he looked over at both of them 

“with a weird looking face like he was interested in the discussion.” After the two 

performed the script, M.T. later texted K.M. that Mr. Cleary was acting “protective.” It 

was not the first time M.T. had claimed that Mr. Cleary was protective towards her; she 

made that comment “quite often,” but K.M. does not know the context in which it was 

made. M.T.’s text also said that Mr. Cleary told M.T. that he did not want her hanging 

out with boys who were either her age or older. K.M. never heard him say this, she got 

this information from M.T.’s text. 

17 

M.T., in addition, texted that Mr. Cleary asked M.T. if K.M. had “crossed the line” 

when K.M. asked M.T. how a medical appointment went. M.T. thought it strange that 

Mr. Cleary would comment on their conversation. It seemed like he was eavesdropping 

on their discussions, and asking M.T. personal questions. Mr. Cleary doing this 

“bothered” K.M. because she felt he should not eavesdrop on their personal, private 

discussions. 

K.M. texted M.T. about Mr. Cleary brushing against K.M. in class. K.M. was 

leaning up against her table talking to another classmate, and Mr. Cleary “went right 

up behind me and brushed up against me,” “on my behind.” It was “quick,” K.M. was 

looking in another direction, and Mr. Cleary kept walking after he brushed up against 

K.M. After it happened, K.M. looked towards him, Mr. Cleary did not look at K.M. , and 

he did not say or do anything that indicated he had brushed up against her. K.M. 

thought it was “weird” and she mentioned it to another classmate who told her that it 

was fine, and she should just brush it off and not worry about it. K.M. also testified 

about her text exchanges where M.T. was absent and wanted K.M. to give Mr. Cleary a 

hug for her, but K.M. texted that doing so made her uncomfortable and she did not 

want to hug Mr. Cleary. 

K.M. never heard Mr. Cleary ask M.T. any questions in class that were “overly 

personal.” On one occasion when M.T. and K.M. were discussing M.T.’s home life and 

how Child Protective Services (CPS) had been called, M.T. later texted that Mr. Cleary 

overheard that conversation. K.M. also provided the following text from M.T. (written 

as in original): 

i feel like today Cleary hit comfort with me officially bc he 

farts around me now and when he walks by me when i sit in 

18 

the black chair6 he doesn’t even care about my personal 

space he just brushed against me like tf @ i can’t tell if he 

feels like I’m annoying and in the way, or if he feels like i’m 

just a student he’s trying to help support, or if he’s growing 

an actual attachment i’m so confused to be honest! 

K.M. never discussed M.T.’s “fart” comment, but “thought it was a little weird.” 

K.M. did observe Mr. Cleary brush up against M.T. “quite a few times,” approximately 

three or four times a week. M.T. told K.M. that Mr. Cleary invaded her personal space, 

the two would be “super close with each other and Mr. Cleary would be in [M.T.’s] 

bubble or her space.” 

In another text, M.T. asked K.M. to confirm that Mr. Cleary was “alive” for M.T.’s 

“peace of mind” one day when M.T. was absent. K.M. thought the request was “weird.” 

Another text contained M.T.’s concern about wearing a rash guard to school during 

spirit week. M.T. thought Mr. Cleary would ask her a lot of questions about it. K.M. 

“thought it odd” that Mr. Cleary would ask any questions, and she advised M.T. not to 

answer his questions as it was not his business. There were some texts K.M. did not 

believe, such as when M.T. told her that Mr. Cleary told M.T. that she reminded him of 

his daughter because that “seemed weird” and K.M. never heard Mr. Cleary say that to 

M.T. 

M.T. sent K.M. a text message claiming Mr. Cleary told M.T. he had “grow a 

attachment and a bond” [sic] with M.T., which concerned K.M. because “a bond with a 

student is unprofessional.” K.M. was concerned for M.T.’s safety around Mr. Cleary. 

6 The black chair was the district-provided teacher chair. 

19 

 
K.M. was concerned by M.T.’s text that she was going to “take the leap” and open up 

to Mr. Cleary. K.M. was also concerned regarding a text from M.T. about her “territory” 

because M.T. wanted to “claim” Mr. Cleary as her own. 

M.T. texted K.M. that Mr. Cleary told M.T. that seeing her that way “fucked [him] 

up,” and he went home depressed. K.M. did not ask M.T. to explain the text but 

thought a teacher should not get “messed up” or go home depressed when seeing a 

student in a bad state of mind. K.M. was concerned because she thinks a student 

should not have an effect on the teacher unless it is schoolwork-related. K.M. worried 

that M.T. having such an impact on Mr. Cleary would affect how M.T. learned in class. 

M.T. did review emails on Mr. Cleary’s computer in class. M.T. told K.M. that Mr. 

Cleary would leave his computer open, and she could see all his emails. M.T. texted 

K.M. that she was looking at Mr. Cleary’s emails and saw an email regarding herself 

from her “case carrier” that stated something to the effect of: “it has been brought to 

my [case carrier’s] attention” or “I [case carrier] am aware of M.T. behavior in your class 

. . .” After seeing that email, M.T. was afraid she would be switched out of Mr. Cleary’s 

class. 

K.M. never saw another teacher interact with any student like Mr. Cleary 

interacted with M.T. When she saw their interactions, “it made me feel uncomfortable.” 

M.T. and Mr. Cleary were “all touchy and loving but in a creepy way.” She told M.T. that 

the interactions with Mr. Cleary were “weird and made me feel uncomfortable.” She 

acknowledged that part of what made her uncomfortable were M.T.’s texts. K.M. told 

M.T. that if M.T. did not notify the district about the behavior, K.M. would do so. 

Much of K.M.’s testimony was not credible and was unsupported by other 

credible evidence, as discussed below. Further, much of it was based on M.T.’s text 

20 

messages, most of which were simply not true. Although complainant argued that K.M. 

observed more than other students because she was looking out for M.T., so that was 

why she saw things in the classroom that others did not see, that argument was not 

persuasive. Instead, it appeared that K.M. incorrectly thought M.T. was receiving 

special treatment and set out to get Mr. Cleary fired. Her participation in the script to 

make Mr. Cleary jealous also cast doubt on her credibility. It showed she shared an 

emotional bond with M.T., and was willing to participate in a scheme to embarrass Mr. 

Cleary. Most of K.M.’s claims were unsupported, and some of her testimony directly 

contradicted her written statement and texts and was internally inconsistent. In short, 

she was not a reliable witness. 

M.T.’s Testimony 

15.  M.T. is the student at issue in the statement of charges. During the 2021-

22 school year M.T. was a junior at Beaumont High School enrolled in Mr. Cleary’s first 

period physics class. There are six periods in the day with two lunch periods. Students 

attend each class, once a day, five times per week. M.T. has an Individualized Education 

Plan (IEP) with her primary disability identified as Emotional Disturbance, and her 

secondary disability identified as Specific Learning Disability. She has been receiving 

special education services since 2013. Of note, despite repeated administration emails 

and testimony about putting a behavior plan in M.T.’s IEP because of her actions 

involving other male teachers, no such plan was ever put in place. Further, as found 

below, contrary to the statement of charges, it was never established that Mr. Cleary 

participated in developing M.T.’s IEP, other than to provide input regarding physics. He 

certainly was never a part of the IEP meetings regarding M.T.’s behaviors with male 

teachers. 

21 

M.T. liked Mr. Cleary as a teacher. He made her feel safe in his class. The 

environment in his class was very loud. Mr. Cleary would give instructions and packets 

of the assignments to the students. All the students knew what they had to do. Mr. 

Cleary would play music and “bounce around to each group” to make sure they were 

on task and to “address appropriate” questions. Students were allowed to walk around 

the classroom, and to perform their labs outdoors or in the hallway. 

M.T. was assigned a table in Mr. Cleary’s classroom but did not sit there on a 

regular basis. She sat at the ping pong table or with the TA at Mr. Cleary’s desk. Sitting 

at the desk with the TA made her more comfortable. She enjoyed the class better if 

she sat with her back up against something with no people walking behind her. 

On one occasion, M.T. went to Mr. Cleary’s class before school. She does not 

recall her junior year schedule, so did not recall going to his class during second or 

fourth period, and “perhaps maybe” she went to his class during third period. She 

could not recall if she had her Learning is Power (LIP) class, a special education study 

skills class, during fourth period, but during that class she would go to Mr. Cleary’s 

classroom “when [her] work was finished with permission.” When asked to explain, 

M.T. testified that she did not want “anyone to be misled” that she was in his 

classroom without her teachers’ knowledge. All of her teachers knew she was in Mr. 

Cleary’s classroom. She went there during her LIP class two times per week. When she 

went to his classroom, she would sit and listen to instruction and observe the labs. 

She went to Mr. Cleary’s class whenever she had a panic attack, and he helped 

her. He asked her what she needed, and if he could get her anything, and he got her 

water. She claimed when this occurred he was teaching class. She said he would come 

and “direct the [panic attack] issue and then go back to teaching.” On cross-

22 

examination she later said these panic attacks occurred during her first period physics 

class. 

M.T. graded other students’ papers. She graded “a couple students’ work with a 

TA.” Mr. Cleary would distribute labs, and the students would take notes on the labs 

and after he collected the work, she and the TA would grade it. There were no 

occasions when she graded work alone without the TA. M.T. and Mr. Cleary discussed 

taking AP physics during her senior year. He told her that she “could have been better 

challenged by the work” so should consider taking AP physics. She received a C or D 

grade first semester and an A grade second semester.7 

M.T. “daily” wrote “[M.T.’s nickname] was here”8 on items in the classroom. She 

“wrote everywhere.” She wrote on the whiteboard, ping pong table, desks and tables. 

She used both erasable and permanent markers. Mr. Cleary never disciplined her for 

writing on items in his classroom. He would just wipe off anything on which she had 

written, and “he knew it bothered my OCD [Obsessive Compulsive Disorder]” when it 

was taken down. 

When asked if she and Mr. Cleary played chase, she testified it was not “chase” 

to get away, it was more like she would hurry towards Mr. Cleary to get something 

away from him. She “would not call it ‘chasing,’” it was “more like speed walking.” She 

would speed walk towards Mr. Cleary to get whatever “I had or he had,” and she 

wanted it back, and she would catch him, “trying to get back an object such as a 

7 This grade was given after Mr. Cleary was placed on leave, so does not appear 

to have been the grade he gave Marissa. 

8 Some students testified she wrote “[M.T.’s nickname spelled differently] was 

here.” 

23 

 
marker or clipboard,” a lab he was looking at, or some article of paper. The bumping 

never happened intentionally while they were speed walking. The classroom was so 

small, with so many labs going on and stools pulled out, that when Mr. Cleary would 

stop, she would keep going and “bump” into him. Sometime Mr. Cleary “bumped” her 

when he was walking past her because the area between the desks and whiteboard 

were very narrow. When this happened, Mr. Cleary would “continue on or say ‘excuse 

me.’” It was not intentional or done in a negative, or harmful manner; Mr. Cleary never 

pushed her “in an inappropriate manner.” 

M.T. smiled when asked if Mr. Cleary threw things at her, admitting he threw 

ping pong balls at both her and the TA. She claimed “a few times perhaps” he threw 

markers, but never pencils at her. When asked if Mr. Cleary had a nickname, she 

answered “perhaps, it depends.” When asked if Mr. Cleary used the nickname “Funky 

Fresh,” M.T. answered that he “spoke about it, yes.” She then claimed she wrote the 

words “Funky Fresh” on her cell phone case and on her shoes. She denied Mr. Cleary 

ever wrote on her personal items, claiming “I wrote on my own shoes.” M.T.’s answers 

clearly demonstrated her lack of credibility because Mr. Cleary had already admitted to 

the district that he wrote “Funky Fresh” on M.T.’s belongings. 

M.T. admitted that she gave Mr. Cleary side hugs “a couple times.” She did not 

remember leaning on his arm and putting her head on his shoulder. She explained 

that the “two hugs” she gave him occurred when he was standing at the ping pong 

table, she gave him a hug, and he went back to playing ping pong. She hugged him on 

the side; he did not really even touch her, it was more like a pat on the back. Mr. 

Cleary never hugged her, he put his hand behind her to reciprocate a side hug but 

nothing more than that. He did not hug her with two hands and they did not front 

hug. She agreed it would not be appropriate for either of them to “face-to-face hug.” 

24 

M.T. did not remember Mr. Cleary ever telling her that she was “interesting.” 

She denied he ever told her she was “intriguing.” She admitted that Mr. Cleary did tell 

her she was “intelligent.” M.T.’s testimony was contradicted by her text message 

exchange with K.M. where she wrote (punctuation as in original): 

Cleary said..”…The things you say.. I find you very intriguing 

the things you say are very interesting” And then early in 

like class he was like “this song I think it’s the Italian that 

gets me kinda hard” 

I was like uhhh lovely..? [scared face emoji] 

M.T. claimed her text regarding Mr. Cleary’s statement about being hard was a 

“misconception,” claiming “a lot of his music was a different language, [it was] Italian.” 

However, this testimony did not explain that text. She denied that Mr. Cleary ever told 

her that she made him hard or said anything to her she thought was inappropriate or 

sexual. He never touched her in an inappropriate manner. An administrator told her 

that she told another student something about Mr. Cleary being hard, but she does 

not recall making that statement. Of note, M.T. was smiling while giving this testimony, 

casting doubt on her credibility. 

M.T. told Mr. Cleary about issues with her health. When asked if he told her that 

he had cancer, she testified the “whole class was aware of this” diagnosis. She told Mr. 

Cleary about her stepfather’s death. She could not recall discussing boys she was 

“interested in” with Mr. Cleary. She did not remember talking to Mr. Cleary about boys. 

Her testimony was contradicted by her text messages telling K.M. Mr. Cleary “was like 

maybe don’t hang out with ‘boys.’” 

M.T. was asked to explain the following text (punctuation in original): 

25 

I was in clearys at 1st lunch he said seeing me the way he 

did yesterday fucked him up and he said he went home 

depressed. Tho he said it wasn’t my fault 

I just feel like my mask is getting weaker and weaker and 

I’m scared 

She claimed that this text was sent a day following a panic attack. Mr. Cleary 

told her he did not like seeing her like that, and it messed him up, and he went home 

the next day and was depressed. She claimed that he asked her if she was okay and 

told her that it “fucked him up” and “he went home depressed” but she believes “he 

meant it in a joking manner.” She thought “he had concern for my well-being and I 

think it bothered him I was so frustrated.” Upon further questioning, M.T. later claimed 

that Mr. Cleary did not use the F word, that was her word. She also claimed he made 

these comments when her peers were around but could not recall when he made the 

statements. He asked her whether what had affected her was still affecting her, told 

her his classroom was available for her, and she thanked him. 

M.T. identified the witness statement she prepared for the district. When the 

initial allegations took place, she was told to write an incident report. She was “trying 

to figure out what they were trying to tell me and write it all down at once.” When she 

filled out the statement, she “knew a little bit of what had been reported regarding Mr. 

Cleary.” She was “trying to process it though” she “did not understand fully.” In her 

statement she signed on March 1, 2022, M.T. wrote (errors in original):  

I was told that I said to a student something in the regard 

to Mr. Cleary being hard. it is not in my nature to speak in 

this way or tell people stuff like that this is a very serious 

26 

allegation. I remember months ago talking to a friend about 

him in a overwhelming sounding manner because I try not 

to miss school when sick and she may have misinturprited it 

by thinking my health or something wouldn’t be put first. I 

was overwhelmed because missing school all around makes 

me anxious and nervous to fall behind and even more so 

when there are people I truly care about there and hate 

letting them down. I don’t recall say anything along the 

lines of Mr. Cleary being hard at all he is a good teacher 

and not in his nature to speak like that this was definitely 

misscommunication and person probably misunderstood 

what I said it is often very loud in his class due to his labs 

and conversation. perhaps it was loud and I maybe like this 

is not very likely possible said “oh it sounded like he said 

something (illegible) about him being hard, but he said . . . . 

“ I’m sure I would have reasure to what he might or said 

aside from what something can sound like because he often 

talks fast and we are all just trying to keep up and things 

can be misinturprited. if her were to have said something as 

forward as that I would have asked for a repeate or 

clearification or ask a peer what they heard. Whatever it 

may have been about the lab parts or what have you or 

perhaps him just being a hard teacher if it was something 

intentional as that im more that positive I would remeber 

but can’t say I do because not really like him to say that 

stuff. I’ve reasured this person that Im totally good, fine and 

27 

am comforable and come to school to for myself because I 

can’t miss work and fall behind and miss school makes me 

feel like ive let my teachers I care about down.   

M.T. ate lunch in Mr. Cleary’s class “every day along with everyone else.” She 

was not the only one in his classroom during lunch. There were clubs that Mr. Cleary 

ran in his classroom and supervised during lunch. There were perhaps 40 or 50 

students present during lunch. Many of the students were in the ping pong club, she 

was not, she just liked to watch. “Lots of students sat and ate or watched the ping 

pong tournaments.” She never had lunch alone with Mr. Cleary. 

M.T. presented as one who clearly loved the attention she was receiving and she 

appeared untruthful. It appeared she had written false texts to K.M. and then tried to 

explain them away at this hearing. Her testimony seemed deliberate, contrived, and 

intended to exculpate Mr. Cleary. That impression was only strengthened by the 

evidence of her prior false claims against other male teachers as detailed below. In 

addition, her testimony was contradicted, not only by her text messages, but also by 

Mr. Cleary’s admissions made during the district’s investigation. However, it was 

overall consistent with what other students observed. It was also consistent with Mr. 

Cleary’s testimony that nothing inappropriate occurred. In sum, she was a non-

credible, unreliable witness. 

Health Care Plan in M.T.’s IEP 

16. 

Cecilia Keegan is a district nurse. She described her duties and 

responsibilities at Beaumont High School. M.T. had a care plan in her IEP because of 

her health issues. M.T.’s physician had prepared orders for the school, which Ms. 

Keegan used to create the health care plan that was part of M.T.’s triennial IEP. The 

28 

health plan contained a chart with two columns, one titled “If you see this” the other 

titled “Do this.” The chart contained four boxes, three of which dealt with M.T.’s 

physical issues. The fourth box told staff that if M.T. “seems upset, angry, or 

overwhelmed. May shut down,” then staff was to “Offer her a 5-7 minute break outside 

away from other students.” 

Ms. Keegan testified that M.T.’s health care plan allowed accommodations for 

her condition. Because of her kidney condition, she was allowed to use the restroom as 

often as needed. M.T.’s physician also recommended that because of her anxiety, she 

should be allowed to “step away,” so that was also incorporated in her IEP health care 

plan. Ms. Keegan testified that the physician’s order was “very vague,” simply stating 

for her to be “away from other students.” M.T.’s stepfather had recently died and that 

was one of the reasons for her anxiety. M.T.’s mother told Ms. Keegan that M.T. was 

having a very hard time, and what helps M.T. is to spend some quiet time by herself, 

and then she is “usually ready to go.” 

Accordingly, allowing M.T. to take five to seven minute breaks was part of her 

IEP accommodations. There were no limitations placed on the number of breaks she 

was allowed to take, nor was she directed to go anywhere specific to take her breaks, 

but she was expected to return to class afterwards. There were never any changes 

made to the health plan, and all these accommodations were still in place when M.T. 

was a student in Mr. Cleary’s classroom. 

Other Students’ Testimony 

17. 

Students in Mr. Cleary’s first period physics class, who were eleventh and 

twelfth graders during the 2021-22 school year, testified, and many prepared written 

statements. They were also interviewed by the district, and their testimony was mostly 

29 

consistent with the district’s notes of those interviews. Although every student did not 

witness every event alleged, each student witnessed most of them. The students were 

credible, and appeared to be trying their best to recall the events. 

STUDENT N.M. 

18.  N.M. was an eleventh grader at Beaumont High School during the 2021-

2022 school year. He was in respondent’s first period physics class with M.T. N.M. sat 

at Table 1 in the middle bottom row seat, which was the row closest to Mr. Cleary’s 

desk with his back to Mr. Cleary’s desk. M.T. was assigned to Table 3, but more often 

sat in the black chair at Mr. Cleary’s desk. At the beginning of the school year, N.M. 

heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. to return to her table, but eventually he stopped. No other 

students sat at Mr. Cleary’s desk other than possibly K.M. M.T. would also socialize 

with Mr. Cleary at his desk; only a few other students ever talked to him at his desk. 

Mr. Cleary spent half the class time at his desk, the other half walking around; when at 

his desk he would be “mostly” on his computer. 

Mr. Cleary interacted with the students. He would go up to them if they needed 

help on their projects. Each table group would have different assignments, they would 

do a lab about the assignment, and present it on Tuesdays or Wednesdays. If Mr. 

Cleary was giving a lecture, students would sit at the tables. While working on labs, 

students were free to move around the classroom. It was a pretty noisy classroom 

environment. Students could also work on their labs outside; there is a door leading 

from Mr. Cleary’s class to the outdoors. Mr. Cleary would play music on his computer. 

If students finished their labs, they could do other activities, including playing ping 

pong, in the last few minutes of class time; playing ping pong did not happen “very 

often” during class. 

30 

N.M. described Mr. Cleary as a “pretty cool and chill,” “friendly” teacher. Mr. 

Cleary was “weird in a good way, funny weird.” Mr. Cleary was a “strict teacher when 

he gets angry,” but N.M. could not think of any examples. N.M. knew M.T. went to 

respondent’s class during lunch because he and M.T. have the same lunch period, and 

he would sometimes go to Mr. Cleary’s class and see M.T. there. Mr. Cleary ran a ping 

pong club at lunch time, N.M. was not part of it. When he went to Mr. Cleary’s class at 

lunch, there were approximately 35 other students in the class. 

N.M. observed M.T. put her head down on her desk, not do her assigned 

classwork, and socialize with other students at her table or with Mr. Cleary. M.T. 

regularly cursed every day in class whenever she got mad. She would use the “F” word. 

Mr. Cleary “most often” told M.T. to stop swearing. All the students heard her 

swearing, and the class would react by getting quiet to which M.T. would respond, 

“Oh, sorry.” Other students in class did not swear on a daily basis like M.T. did.  

Mr. Cleary and M.T. engaged in “horseplay” in class possibly three or four times. 

They would chase each other around the classroom, and shove and push each other. 

N.M. does not recall the context of the chases. He saw M.T. chase Mr. Cleary but 

cannot recall if Mr. Cleary chased M.T. He did see that M.T. would charge at Mr. Cleary 

trying to push him, and Mr. Cleary would push M.T. with his back. They would be 

laughing while engaging in this behavior, it appeared they were having fun. N.M. 

recalls one of them running with a whiteboard marker but does not recall who was 

holding it or if one of them was trying to grab the marker from the other. Mr. Cleary 

never told M.T. to stop, and he did not horseplay with any other students. 

M.T. wrote “[M.T.’s nickname] was here” on “things” in class every day, but he 

did not elaborate on what items she wrote. One time when N.M. was about to leave at 

the end of class, he saw Mr. Cleary and M.T. hug face-to-face while standing by Mr. 

31 

Cleary’s desk. M.T. hugged Mr. Cleary with both of her arms. Mr. Cleary had his arms 

leaning against his desk and N.M. did not recall if Mr. Cleary moved his arms to hug 

M.T. back. Mr. Cleary did not push M.T. away or tell her to stop. He does not recall any 

other students hugging Mr. Cleary. N.M. never saw Mr. Cleary touch M.T. 

inappropriately or heard him say anything inappropriate to M.T. 

N.M. overheard M.T. and Mr. Cleary talking about their childhood and heard her 

tell Mr. Cleary about her health. He never heard Mr. Cleary say anything about his 

health to M.T. Mr. Cleary and M.T. discussed health “often,” “approximately five times,” 

but N.M. cannot recall any specifics. Mr. Cleary and M.T. had those discussions at Mr. 

Cleary’s desk. It did not appear they were having a private discussion. He does not 

recall Mr. Cleary or M.T. sharing their health issues with other students. He does not 

recall Mr. Cleary saying anything about his health other than one time telling the class 

he had metal plates in his knees. 

N.M. never saw any other teacher act how Mr. Cleary and M.T. acted last year. 

He acknowledged that in class he primarily focused on his work; he was not keeping 

an eye out for M.T. 

STUDENT L.B. 

19. 

L.B. was an eleventh grader in Mr. Cleary’s first period physics class 

during the 2021-22 school year. L.B. was assigned to the middle seat of Table 6, in the 

row farthest from the front of the class, facing Mr. Cleary’s desk. L.B. knew M.T. from 

class and met her during their sophomore year. M.T.’s assigned seat was diagonally to 

L.B. ’s left. M.T. sat in a few different seat at the Table 3, the bottom left and the top 

right seats. Mr. Cleary usually walked around the classroom. 

32 

In the beginning of the year, M.T. sat in her assigned seat, but towards the 

middle of the year she sat at different tables or at Mr. Cleary’s desk. L.B. could not 

specifically recall, but it “feels like” she observed M.T. with her feet up on Mr. Cleary’s 

desk. No other students were at Mr. Cleary’s desk like M.T. M.T. did not complete her 

work. She did not participate in labs and L.B. was confused as to why she did not. Labs 

were “a big part of how we were graded” so L.B. did not know why M.T. did not 

participate. 

L.B. described the atmosphere in the classroom as follows: the students were in 

table groups and would do the assignments with their group. There was a lot of 

talking and the classroom was loud because the students collaborated. However, when 

a group was presenting their lab results, the classroom would be quiet while the rest 

of the students listened to the presenting group. L.B. was not sure M.T. listened to the 

groups making presentations. 

M.T. frequently cursed in class. She use the “F” word, the “MF” word, the “B” 

word, and the “S” word. She was “pretty loud, loud enough to get your attention” and 

L.B. would look over at her. L.B. does not recall if M.T. swore while at Mr. Cleary’s desk. 

She never heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. to stop swearing. L.B. does not think that cursing 

is appropriate at school. There is a rule in every classroom to be respectful and to not 

use swear words. It was “distracting” when M.T. swore and “threw me off guard a little 

bit.” She never heard any other students curse in Mr. Cleary’s class. 

There was also a rule prohibiting horseplay in class. However, Mr. Cleary did not 

follow that rule. Once or twice a week, Mr. Cleary would be “kind of walking fast in the 

classroom” and M.T. would be following him. It looked like it was a “chasing game,” a 

“game of tag with fast walking.” Mr. Cleary and M.T. engaged in this activity “pretty 

frequently.” It looked like Mr. Cleary was trying to get away from M.T. L.B. could not 

33 

recall if Mr. Cleary chased M.T. M.T. would “catch Mr. Cleary” and try to get something 

that was in his hands. M.T. would be hugging Mr. Cleary from behind to get the item. 

It appeared to be a game. L.B. thought it was “distracting,” it “gets your attention,” it 

was “uncomfortable,” it “made me uncomfortable, I felt I had to look.” No other 

students chased Mr. Cleary like M.T. did. L.B. never heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. to stop. 

She never observed Mr. Cleary push or shove M.T. or touch her in an inappropriate 

way. 

M.T. wrote her name on things. She wrote “[M.T.’s nickname] was here.” L.B. 

remembers seeing M.T.’s writings on things “a lot.” L.B. never heard Mr. Cleary tell M.T. 

to stop writing on things. L.B. did not personally know that M.T. went to Mr. Cleary’s 

classroom during other periods, but she heard from other students that M.T. would 

come in during their classes and that made her “confused” because L.B. never went to 

Mr. Cleary’s classroom other than during her assigned period. L.B. and her friends 

questioned why M.T. went to Mr. Cleary’s classroom during other periods, but she 

never asked M.T. or district staff why. 

STUDENT E.E. 

20. 

E.E. was a senior in Mr. Cleary’s first period physics class during the 2021-

22 school year. E.E. was assigned to sit at Table 1, and sat in different seats at the 

table. Mr. Cleary was always moving around, helping students with their work but 

sometimes sat at his desk. Mr. Cleary also allowed the TA to sit behind his desk. 

E.E. described Mr. Cleary as a “fantastic teacher.” Mr. Cleary was “always really 

helpful, he made me understand physics a bit and I am not a very science student.” Mr. 

Cleary’s teaching style was one of having a curriculum that was “very well polished.” 

Students would work on projects to understand how physics works. During second 

34 

semester they would do the same projects, but Mr. Cleary’s expectation was that 

students would do them better because they had worked through the problems 

before. Classes were “very chaotic but in a good way.” There were a lot of things going 

on at once as each table was working on their own project. Students were allowed to 

move around and look at other projects. There was lots of talking within the groups. 

M.T. was a classmate with whom E.E. talked “time to time,” but they were not 

friendly. M.T. was assigned to Table 3, but she usually did not sit there. Instead, she sat 

at Mr. Cleary’s desk or sometimes on the ping pong table. It was “pretty rare” for her 

to sit at Table 3. M.T. never did her work as far as E.E. knew. He does not know what 

she did. The class work was “very physical.” The students were making things but M.T. 

usually was not a part of her group. She used her cell phone during class, socialized, or 

was on Mr. Cleary’s computer. M.T. “often cursed in class.” She used curse words 

“every two sentences.” Mr. Cleary never told her to stop. 

Mr. Cleary and M.T. chased each other in the middle of the classroom like they 

were playing tag. The tag/chasing happened both ways, with Mr. Cleary chasing M.T., 

and M.T. chasing Mr. Cleary, although more often M.T. chased Mr. Cleary. E.E. 

described the chasing as being “closer to running” than walking. He does not recall if 

they had objects in their hands. The two also poked at each other like they were 

tickling each other. The chasing and poking happened “pretty often.” Mr. Cleary did 

not chase any other student, and E.E. never saw another student chase Mr. Cleary. E.E. 

has never observed any other teacher engage in this behavior. 

M.T. wrote her name on things in the classroom. She wrote “[M.T.’s nickname] 

was here” on the whiteboards, on the table, and sometimes wrote with lead pencil. He 

never observed Mr. Cleary telling M.T. to stop. Mr. Cleary would “playfully” throw 

things at M.T. such as markers or pencils. He never threw things that other students. 

35 

E.E. observed Mr. Cleary and M.T. give each other side hugs and saw them 

sitting on the ping pong table together. He was coming into the class one morning, it 

was pretty early, and the two were sitting on the ping pong table and talking. He could 

not tell what they were saying because they were whispering but it did not seem like a 

“normal student/teacher conversation.” “The setting of it and how it was, was a bit 

intimate.” They were sitting close together, but he cannot recall if they were touching. 

M.T. leaned on Mr. Cleary and put her head on his shoulder. There were approximately 

six or seven other people in the classroom when this occurred. The two were sitting 

pretty close, but “from this angle I was looking I did not want to look.” He could have 

heard their discussion but he “chose to zone out because I did not want to meddle in 

their business.” He described this incident as “intimate, the whole setting, she was 

there early, it just felt intimate, and it was a whisper not really like a talking.” 

E.E. spoke with friends at school about how weird it was that M.T. would be in 

Mr. Cleary’s class when it was not her assigned period. E.E.’s friend who was in Mr. 

Cleary’s physics class during a different period talked with E.E. about it being weird 

that M.T. came in to Mr. Cleary’s class during that class. 

E.E. also observed M.T. in Mr. Cleary’s classroom after school during the ping 

pong tournament. E.E. never had lunch at Mr. Cleary’s class, he participated in the ping 

pong club during a different lunch time. Mr. Cleary supervised the ping pong club 

during lunch, and students could play ping pong at the end of class. 

STUDENT D.H. 

21. 

 D.H. was a twelfth grader during the 2021-22 school year in Mr. Cleary’s 

first period physics class. He previously had Mr. Cleary for geophysical science during 

his freshman year. He thought Mr. Cleary was a fair teacher, “more of a laid back 

36 

teacher, he was not constantly lecturing, he was not a strict teacher.” He liked Mr. 

Cleary as a teacher because he let the students teach themselves. Mr. Cleary let the 

students learn from their own research, and if they had a problem he would help them. 

D.H. sat at Table 1 in the top right seat. At the beginning of the school year, Mr. 

Cleary created a layout of the different subjects the students would be learning. Each 

time there was a new topic, Mr. Cleary would walk to the table groups, explain that 

topic, and then students would take pages of notes from their textbooks or other 

sources regarding the topic. On Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, students would 

take notes and create a lab about that subject. Mr. Cleary played music on those days 

and students were allowed to move around and talk. Students were allowed to work 

on their labs both inside and out of the classroom, and class was pretty loud. Students 

would present their labs on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Mr. Cleary walked around the 

classroom helping students at their labs, he was only at his desk to take attendance. 

D.H. knows M.T. from class, but is not friends with her. D.H. described M.T. as an 

“a**hole.” To some students she was nice and friendly, to other students she was an 

a**hole. He heard her say that she wanted to kill her teachers, she hated them and 

wished they were dead. D.H. has nothing personally against M.T., and never really 

spoke to her in school. 

M.T. had an assigned seat but usually sat at Mr. Cleary’s desk. She rarely 

participated in the labs, and only presented twice with her table group. Other than the 

TA, no other students were allowed to sit at Mr. Cleary’s desk. He never saw K.M. at 

Mr. Cleary’s desk. While at Mr. Cleary’s desk, M.T. would talk to the TA, sleep, be on 

her phone, or “once in a while” try to go on Mr. Cleary’s computer, but he would ask 

her not to do so if he saw her. M.T. did not do her assigned work. If Mr. Cleary went 

back to his desk, she would socialize with him. 

37 

On one occasion in early February 2022, D.H. saw Mr. Cleary and M.T. sitting 

behind his desk talking, and M.T. placed her hand on Mr. Cleary’s knee up to his thigh. 

They were sitting side-by-side. M.T. raised her left hand, placed it on Mr. Cleary’s right 

knee, then moved it up a little bit to the upper part of his inner thigh. At that point, 

D.H. looked away because “it just made me really uncomfortable, it happened and I 

looked away but I was uncomfortable by what I saw, it’s how I felt.” D.H. saw Mr. Cleary 

pull back, get up, and walk around the classroom. M.T. backed up and moved away. 

D.H. got the impression M.T. enjoyed what had happened. He never saw other 

teachers act this way. D.H. never saw Mr. Cleary attempt to touch M.T. He never heard 

Mr. Cleary say anything inappropriate to students. He felt that Mr. Cleary cared about 

all the students. He enjoyed Mr. Cleary’s physics class. 

D.H. saw M.T. chase Mr. Cleary in class. He saw them hug “only one time” 

towards the end of class. M.T. was talking to Mr. Cleary, and when class ended they 

stood up and hugged face-to-face. He overheard discussions between the two of them 

regarding how she was doing in her classes, her personal life, of her life at home, and 

how she hated her home life. He heard M.T. discuss “a lot” with Mr. Cleary how she 

hated her teachers. D.H. tried to ignore what Mr. Cleary and M.T. were doing in class 

and focus on his schoolwork. 

There were times M.T. would come to class looking very upset. She would be 

crying and would sit behind Mr. Cleary’s desk. She looked mad. Sometimes she would 

break pencils or storm out of the classroom. She would typically be upset several times 

a week. It was distracting because she was really loud and disruptive. Her behavior 

drew attention away from what other students were doing in class. Sometimes she was 

“really destructive” and Mr. Cleary would ask her to step out of the classroom. Other 

38 

times he would try to talk to her and see what was wrong to calm her down. D.H. felt 

Mr. Cleary was “doing the best he could” to resolve or address M.T.’s behaviors. 

D.H. saw M.T. running after Mr. Cleary in class. He does not know why this 

happened but M.T. would run, and Mr. Cleary would “kind of speed walk away.” He 

never saw Mr. Cleary chase M.T. 

D.H. heard rumors that this was not the first time M.T. claimed that this 

happened with a teacher. She made these allegations before but they were “proven 

false.” He heard those rumors from another student who had the other teacher. M.T. 

claimed she had been “with that other teacher.” 

Mr. Cleary’s Education and Employment History 

22.  Mr. Cleary’s testimony regarding his education and employment history 

is summarized as follows: after high school, he attended Cal State Fullerton where he 

obtained a communication degree with an emphasis in advertising. He worked in sales 

for approximately 10 years where he did very well, but was not personally satisfied, so 

his wife convinced him to return to school to obtain a teaching degree. At the time, 

they were living in the Inland Empire so he attended Cal State San Bernardino, where 

he decided to pursue classes so he could teach science and math. He obtained a 

biology credential, an earth sciences credential, and a physics credential. He is certified 

to teach Gifted and Talented Education (GATE) students and has several other required 

certificates. 

His first teaching job was in 2005 at Martin Luther King Jr. High School where he 

taught for one year. His family then moved, and he taught at Arroyo Valley High 

School for six years. He and his family later moved to Northern California to care for 

his relatives, and he taught in Paradise for one year. His family returned to Southern 

39 

California where he taught at John Muir Charter School for approximately three years. 

He was hired by Beaumont High School in 2015, and was there until placed on leave in 

2022. At Beaumont High School he taught physics and AP physics to juniors and 

seniors, and a few earth science classes to freshman when needed. 

Beaumont High School Performance Evaluations 

23.  Mr. Cleary was evaluated while teaching at Beaumont High School. 

During the 2021-22 school he received overall scores of “Meets or Exceeds Standards.” 

His 2020-21 evaluation documented: 

[Mr. Cleary] continuously has a positive level of energy and 

enthusiasm with his students. [Mr. Cleary] demonstrates his 

deep understanding and passion for his content/subject-

area. His class instruction provides students with 

opportunities for collaboration between student to student 

and student to teacher, while promoting critical thinking 

and independence for students. The structure and 

expectations of [Mr. Cleary’s] labs are clear through the use 

of rubrics, posted instructional materials and resources, and 

ongoing communication with your [sic] students. [Mr. 

Cleary] is a contributing team member in his Professional 

Learning Community (PLC) and in staff meetings. [Mr. 

Cleary] is often collaborative and seeks professional input 

when looking to implement new ideas and continues his 

reflective practices as an educator. 

40 

Mr. Cleary’s Testimony 

24.  Mr. Cleary’s testimony about the events at issue is summarized as 

follows: His philosophy is to teach students how to learn, and do so in the context of 

the subject matter. He teaches them how to do presentations, and how to teach 

themselves and each other. He does this so that students take ownership of their 

learning, and he is removed from the process. His classroom is 100 percent project-

based, he does not lecture or give tests. Students perform their own research, become 

familiar with the subject matter, and then demonstrate their knowledge by group 

presentations. His classes perform 51 labs per year, which students present on 

Tuesdays and Thursdays. He makes a point to allow students to use their own 

materials so that the subject matter is relevant to them. Students’ grades are based 

upon their individual contributions and presentations. 

He was asked by yearbook staff to provide pictures so he took photos during 

class. The photographs depicted students actively engaged in experiments, most of 

whom were smiling and appearing to enjoy their work. During the 2020-21 school year 

Mr. Cleary did distance learning because of COVID-19. He still did all of the labs, he 

just performed them alone on camera for his students. While testifying, Mr. Cleary 

became extremely emotional and choked up when describing his classes. 

Mr. Cleary reviewed the “IEP At A Glance” documents that the case managers 

shared with all teachers. Each document was brief, a page or two, and contained 

general categories, the accommodations, and “a lot of legalese” he did not 

understand. M.T.’s “IEP At A Glance” indicated she had “Specific Learning Disability,” 

which he finds puzzling because he does not know what that means, and also 

“Emotional Disturbance,” and “Kidney Problem.” He recalls M.T.’s accommodations 

were to reduce her problems, give her extra time, and give her an ability to get out, 

41 

decompress, calm down, and get fresh air, and the district did not dispute this. Mr. 

Cleary provided all those accommodations to M.T. No evidence was offered that Mr. 

Cleary participated in formulating the accommodations set forth in M.T.’s IEP, was 

given more information than is contained in the IEP At A Glance, or had any of her 

qualifying categories explained to him. Although he was at one IEP meeting in 

February 2022, his participation involved her school work, not her behavior issues. 

M.T. also shared with him that she had a bad kidney that was “getting torn up” 

by kidney stones. He asked if she was a candidate for transplant, but she told him her 

condition was hormonal so a transplant was not an option, and her lifespan was only 

estimated to be to age 25. Mr. Cleary explained how he would check for M.T.’s 

understanding of the materials being taught. M.T. did some of the class work, but not 

all of it, and using the tools he was taught, he determined that M.T. understood the 

material quite well. For the accommodation allowing her to leave class, a couple of 

times she left the classroom, other times she would go to the back of the room where 

the ping pong table was located and sit there. There were also times where she stayed 

at her group table during class. 

As to the preferential seating accommodation, M.T. wanted to sit in the back of 

the room quite often, usually at the ping pong table. This was a lab table Mr. Cleary 

used for ping pong if nothing was going on in class. M.T. sat there often to escape the 

noise of her group. M.T. spent more time sitting behind Mr. Cleary’s desk than any 

other place in the classroom. Mr. Cleary would redirect her to sit at her table “on a 

regular basis.” 

M.T. was in his first period class and occasionally she would come to class 

before it started. Sometimes she would come back during second period, and 

sometimes she would come back after lunch during fourth period. He does not recall 

42 

when she started coming to his class during other periods, it happened sometime 

during the school year. Whenever she came to his class during other periods he would 

ask her, “Who’s missing you?” He would also tell her to return to her scheduled class, 

but she told him she “could not stand” to go back to those classes. She told him she 

had checked into her other class, done all her work, and was allowed to go wherever 

she wanted because of her anxiety. Mr. Cleary did not want to violate her IEP, so he 

allowed her to remain. He shared with Lindsey Garcia, M.T.’s special education case 

manager, that M.T. was coming to his classroom. He pointed out where she would 

“hang out,” and that M.T. said she came because of her anxiety. 

Mr. Cleary believes the district’s claim that he said M.T. came to his class during 

other periods approximately half the days of the week is not accurate. He does not 

believe he said that during his meeting with the district. He recalls she would come in 

to his class during other periods once or twice a week. Any time that M.T. was in his 

classroom during other periods, she was coming from special education classes so part 

of Mr. Cleary’s discussions with Ms. Garcia were about M.T. being in his class. He had 

many in person discussions with Ms. Garcia about M.T. being in his class during other 

periods. He quantified that as having “dozens” of discussions with Ms. Garcia about 

M.T. being in his class. 

Mr. Cleary also spoke with Ms. Quick and Mr. Studer, special education teachers, 

about M.T. Ms. Quick told him M.T. was “a great kid, does her work real fast, and she is 

less anxious in your classroom so I let her go to your class.” Mr. Studer told him that 

M.T. is the “happiest, loveliest girl on earth,” she is “nothing but smiles,” and Mr. 

Studer was happy that M.T. had somewhere (Mr. Cleary’s classroom) where she felt 

safe. Ms. Garcia told Mr. Cleary “practically the same thing” and described the LIP class 

to him as a study hall type of class. She said that if M.T. was finished with her work, she 

43 

was free to come to Mr. Cleary’s classroom. It was his understanding that M.T. was 

allowed to go where her anxiety was less. All of M.T.’s teachers were aware that M.T. 

came to Mr. Cleary’s classroom during other periods. When teachers needed M.T., they 

would come to Mr. Cleary’s classroom to get her. Of note, Ms. Quick and Mr. Studer 

were not called to testify in this hearing. 

M.T. also came to Mr. Cleary’s classroom during lunch, but so did all the other 

students. He explained that once he was on campus, his door remained open all day 

long and his room was “a very populous [sic] place.” It was primarily his students who 

came, but they often brought their friends, too. He was never alone with M.T. or with 

any student at lunch. M.T. told Mr. Cleary that K.M. was not happy that M.T. was 

spending lunch in Mr. Cleary’s classroom and not joining K.M. at the quad. Mr. Cleary 

encouraged M.T. to join K.M. , but M.T. was adamant that she wanted to be in Mr. 

Cleary’s room. 

Mr. Cleary did not allow M.T. to sit at his desk as an accommodation, but she 

did sit at the end of his desk next to the ping pong table. He never allowed her to put 

her feet on his desk or lay or sleep on his desk. K.M. also sat there on a regular basis as 

she would join M.T. at Mr. Cleary’s desk. Mr. Cleary would redirect M.T. and K.M. away 

from his desk. He never granted M.T. access to his computer, and never became aware 

of M.T. accessing his computer. Many students cursed in class, as did M.T. Mr. Cleary 

did not allow M.T. to use profanity in class, but she did, and he would go to her in 

person and have a private discussion with her about her cursing. When he asked her to 

stop, she would, but not indefinitely. Mr. Cleary used this one on one approach with 

other students who used profanity or misbehaved because he found this method of 

talking to students works best to get them to redirect their behavior. 

44 

Mr. Cleary required M.T. to do all the assigned classwork, including labs. She 

completed some of the classwork with her table group. M.T. received a very low D 

during the first semester, which he shared during her February 2022 IEP meeting. Mr. 

Cleary never gave M.T. extra credit for retrieving something for him. He allowed her to 

grade other students labs in his second semester class but did not allow her to assist 

his TA with classwork. He did not allow M.T. to grade other students’ lab reports in 

exchange for doing her own work. M.T. took an interest in the labs, and asked if she 

could grade them. Mr. Cleary allowed her to do so one time. She did a great job, so he 

let her continue. However, his TA did the majority of the grading. It was a common 

practice for TAs to grade students’ lab reports. During M.T.’s February 2022 IEP 

meeting, Mr. Cleary informed M.T.’s mother; M.T.’s case manager, Ms. Garcia; and Ms. 

Brandon, the administration’s representative; that he was allowing M.T. to grade labs. 

They were pleased she was grading labs, glad she was being challenged and given an 

opportunity to demonstrate her mastery of the subject. 

Mr. Cleary has seen M.T. exhibit anxiety, sometimes with large outbursts, but 

typically with much smaller signs of anxiety, which did not require her to leave his 

classroom. One of the most severe anxiety attacks Mr. Cleary observed was when M.T. 

learned that her case manager, Ms. Garcia, was leaving Beaumont High School, and 

then left a day earlier than M.T. expected. M.T. came in to Mr. Cleary’s fourth period 

class very upset. She was openly sobbing, sat in the black mesh chair by his desk, and 

was pounding on the table. All the other students stopped what they were doing, and 

“you could hear a pin drop” in his classroom. Mr. Cleary was on the other side of the 

room and felt powerless to do anything to help M.T. 

Mr. Cleary denied playing chase or tag with M.T. during class. He explained that 

during class he was moving constantly. He described himself as a hyperactive person 

45 

who finds comfort in movement, so he travels constantly. His class requires movement, 

and he would go around all the tables asking every student questions. However, he 

later testified that M.T. chased him in class, and that he never told her to stop. She 

would attempt to stop him, try to get where he was standing, and try to get the dry 

eraser from him, but he would try to evade her. He testified it was not hard to evade 

her and “when I wanted the game to be over I would stop and hand back to her 

whatever it was she was trying to get.” Mr. Cleary gave an extremely protracted answer 

trying to explain how this behavior was not a game of chase, but then used the word 

“game” in his testimony which supported the district’s allegation and the students’ 

observations. He also admitted there were times when he threw ping pong balls. There 

were ping pong balls “all around the room,” and “at times they spilled.” Mr. Cleary and 

students threw them, but this only occurred on a couple of occasions. 

Mr. Cleary never told M.T. that the things she said were “intriguing” or 

“interesting.” He did not tell her she was too young to be talking to boys. Quite the 

contrary, he regularly tried to get her to have lunch with her peers and cultivate those 

relationships. He never told her that he cared about her. He never shared his personal 

cell phone or email address with her. He did not engage in significant personal 

discussions with her. He did not allow her to sit on his lap, drape her leg on him, or 

cuddle with him. He did not give her face-to-face hugs. When asked if he gave her 

side hugs, he stated that he generally tries to avoid hugs with students but 

understands “it is socially awkward” if someone tries to hug him and he avoids it, so 

his approach is to give a side hug that lasts for a second or two. He explained that M.T. 

is significantly shorter than he is, so during any side hug he “may have patted her 

shoulder,” but that is all. He never had his arms around her neck or shoulders, and he 

would never allow students to put their arms around his waist. He never had his arm 

46 

around her while the two of them watched the class. He never brushed up against her. 

He never rubbed her thigh or leg, and never allowed her to do so to him. 

When asked if M.T. ever leaned her head on him, he explained this occurred 

after she entered his classroom, and “it was obvious she was not having a good day 

medically.” She was in pain, and either she had not taken her medication because she 

did not like the side effects, or she had just taken her medication and it had not yet 

taken effect. Because of their height differential, M.T.’s head reached his triceps at just 

about his elbow. He explained that if someone leans on him he does not pull away 

immediately or the person would fall so he would make sure that she was okay and 

then continue on his route. He recalls her leaning on him about three or four times 

and it lasting only a few seconds. These answers, too, sound long and protracted. 

Mr. Cleary had discussions with M.T. regarding maintaining distance. He recalls 

sitting at lunch reading emails when he noticed her chair inching closer. She 

responded by making a “vomiting sound” but did create more space between them. 

He never farted in front of her. He never made the Italian hard comment. He never 

made a comment about being hard. He never pushed M.T. on the arm, shoulder, or 

upper chest. She never pushed him on his chest. He never touched M.T. in an 

inappropriate way. He never attempted to sexualize the relationship. 

M.T. wrote “[M.T.’s nickname] was here” on several items in his class. At first she 

only wrote it on the whiteboard, but eventually he found it written on items 

throughout his classroom. He would erase it when he saw it. At first M.T. thought that 

was unfair because other students wrote on the board. He explained that he 

encouraged students to write on the board “as long as it was not self-promotion,” so 

he erased M.T.’s writings because it was self-promotion. M.T. would follow him to 

attempt to prevent him from erasing it, running to the location that he was about to 

47 

erase, and sometimes she would get there before him but he is much taller than her, 

and would reach over her and erase it. After he would erase her writing, he would 

move on. Mr. Cleary wrote “Funky Fresh” on M.T.’s cell phone and shoes, using the 

same marker M.T. used. “Funky Fresh” was a nickname he was given when teaching at 

Martin Luther King High School. He wrote on M.T.’s things “to try to get her to 

understand how it feels when your personal property is messed with.” 

M.T. never told him her stepfather was dead. He gathered that fact from 

discussions she had with other students when she was near him. The same is true for 

her medical treatment. He gathered that information from what he read in the “IEP At 

A Glance” and from what he overheard. He did reveal to all of his students that he was 

battling cancer. It was something he told his students during the first week of school. 

He explained that he did so because he thinks life skills are an important part of 

academics. He also wanted to show the students his strength and resilience to 

encourage them to face struggles in their own lives. No one at the district ever voiced 

any concerns to him about sharing his cancer story with his classes. 

Mr. Cleary first learned of this investigation when M.T. came to his classroom 

“panicked” and asked him, “Have they questioned you?” He did not know what she 

was talking about. She told him she had been questioned, and they were probably 

going to question him. He asked her what she was talking about, and she told him, 

“They think you did something inappropriate, that you did something wrong.” He told 

her he had not done or said anything wrong, so he would go clear it up, and she 

“bolted” from his classroom. Assistant Principal Joel Hudec later entered his room. 

Other students were present and he was still breaking down the lab when Assistant 

Principal Hudec asked him to step out. He did so and Assistant Principal Megan Cotton 

48 

was there in the hall. Mr. Cleary was told there had been an allegation that they 

needed to address to which he replied, “Yeah, let’s clear it up.” 

He told them he was free sixth period, and Assistant Principal Hudec arrived 

during sixth period, and walked Mr. Cleary down to the office where Security Officer 

Kevin Fowler was present. Mr. Cleary was told he had a right to a representative, which 

he immediately waived as he had nothing to hide. He was questioned for 

approximately 30 minutes. Assistant Superintendent Castillo and Domenica Bernuer, 

the district’s Director of Human Resources (HR Director) were in the office next door, 

and Assistant Principal Hudec jokingly told Mr. Cleary that he was going to have to say 

it all again with them, to which Mr. Cleary agreed. Mr. Cleary then went to speak with 

the two women, but they did not ask him any questions, instead they handed him 

paperwork, and that was the first time he realized he was being placed on leave and 

would not be returning to his classroom. 

When walking back to his classroom, Mr. Cleary told Assistant Principal Hudec 

that he had heard K.M. was frustrated with how much time M.T. was spending in Mr. 

Cleary’s classroom, so he surmised it must be her who filed the complaint. Assistant 

Principal Hudec encouraged Mr. Cleary to return to the office to tell Assistant 

Superintendent Castillo and HR Director Bernuer this fact, and he did so. However, 

they told him that they were not taking statements from him at this time. When he 

returned to his classroom Assistant Principal Hudec told him that the district was 

requesting he leave his portable hard drive for the district to inspect, something Mr. 

Cleary was reluctant to do because it contains all of his family and classroom 

photographs, as well as a large music library, which he did not want to lose. Assistant 

Principal Hudec said the district needed it for the investigation, so Mr. Cleary agreed. 

49 

On March 8, 2022, Mr. Cleary was again interviewed. Present at that meeting 

were Chase Moore, Mr. Cleary’s union representative, Attorney Kerrie McNally who 

“led the meeting,” Assistant Superintendent Castillo and HR Director Bernuer. Mr. 

Cleary was questioned regarding inappropriate touching. At the time he “had faith” 

that if he were truthful enough, the district would understand that he did not deserve 

to be investigated. He was not provided any information, just asked questions 

regarding touching in many different ways, many different times. He was asked about 

relationships with students, small talk, and what he did on his weekends. 

Mr. Cleary was questioned regarding whether M.T. had ever told him that she 

got her “ass beat.” He explained that one day M.T. entered his classroom, “threw her 

phone flippantly on her desk,” and said that she was going to have to transfer to 

Yucaipa High School. When Mr. Cleary asked her why, she told him that CPS had come 

to her home and removed her brother. He asked her if she was out of her house and 

looked to see if she had any markings indicating she had been beaten as she said she 

got her “ass beat.” She assured him that she was safe now because CPS had come and 

taken action. Mr. Cleary assumed he was hearing about this incident “in the 

aftermath.” This was the last he ever heard of this incident. He did not file a CPS report 

because CPS had already taken action so he did not feel it was necessary to contact 

CPS since they were already involved in the matter. In the past, Mr. Cleary has made 

other CPS reports. In the future he will call CPS as soon as he hears the student discuss 

CPS. He should have “played safer” and contacted them. 

During the district interview when he made the “ass beat” comment Mr. Cleary 

observed that Attorney McNally’s eyes got extremely wide, and she took a quick 

breath. He tried to explain to Attorney McNally that when M.T. made the “ass beat” 

comment to him, it was after CPS had already taken action, but Mr. Cleary did not feel 

50 

like Attorney McNally was listening to his answers. Attorney McNally said to him “I 

don’t care,” and asked if he was trained in mandated reporting protocols. During the 

interview when he tried to explain his answers, she often interrupted him, asking about 

his mandated reporter training. Mr. Cleary admitted that “in hindsight” he could have 

reported what M.T. told him, but at the time, it was his understanding that M.T. was 

out of danger, CPS was involved, and she had been removed from the home. 

Mr. Cleary did refer to M.T. as a “stray dog” during the meeting which “was 

another mistake.” He used this term in frustration. “I was in an uncontrollable slide at 

the meeting, grasping at straws, when I described the discussions with [Assistant 

Principal Hudec] I was trying to explain what I tried to do for M.T. to support her. I was 

very concerned for my financial future, and family. I was very frustrated.” After the 

March 8, 2022, meeting, Mr. Cleary was “in a panic, my confidence was eroded, it 

became apparent I was in far deeper trouble than I ever thought I would be.” When he 

began the interview he was anxious about his career. His life and his family were in 

danger, and he wanted the opportunity to tell his side of the story. However, during 

the interview he was interrupted every time he tried to explain his answers, and he left 

the interview with much higher anxiety. 

After the meeting he texted Assistant Principal Hudec. Mr. Cleary explained that 

their families are friends so that was why he texted. That afternoon after the meeting 

he “asked around” and found out that his opportunity to speak had “come and gone,” 

and the district was going to make its decision. Mr. Cleary’s “world came crashing 

down, I was losing my mind, basically I never got my chance to speak,” and he texted 

Assistant Principal Hudec to see if he could help. All that was ever mentioned during 

Mr. Cleary’s interview was “an inappropriate relationship with M.T.” He never had an 

indication of anything beyond that when he left the interview. He truly believed he 

51 

would be given a chance to speak, and once the truth was out, he would be fine. He 

still believes that. He feels bad that he put Assistant Principal Hudec in this spot by 

sending the text to him. He feels bad he put Assistant Principal Hudec “in a bad 

position with my text.” It was unprofessional for him to text, but he did it out of 

desperation. “I was thrashing and trying to save myself, I put him in a bad spot and use 

language I should not have used.” 

Mr. Cleary was invited to come to the school on April 1, 2022, and arranged for 

his representative to join him, but Assistant Superintendent Castillo told him this 

would not be necessary as the meeting was just to give him legal paperwork. She said 

he would be able to provide a response at the Skelly hearing. Mr. Cleary then reached 

out to several colleagues because he was “getting frantic,” and could not believe this 

was happening to them. His colleagues referred him to Rachel Ponce, a Beaumont 

High School science teacher, telling him that Ms. Ponce had information regarding 

M.T. Ms. Ponce told him that M.T. “has a history,” and he learned things from Ms. 

Ponce that are set forth below in the section summarizing her testimony. When Mr. 

Cleary learned this information, he was “floored,” and thought it was “a pattern of 

behavior that was enormously relevant to the charges” against him and gave that 

information to his attorney. 

Mr. Cleary never intended to give M.T. preferential treatment. His intention was 

to perform the actions legally required by her IEP. He taught his students decency and 

thought he was a person with compassion, but these charges forged him into a 

different person. He thought he was doing an amazing job, and doing all he could, but 

this has been “an eye-opening experience.” This incident has torn him up, and he 

realizes a student who needed his help (M.T.) did not get the help she needed, but his 

heart was in the right place. However, going forward he would never write on her 

52 

belongings, and not allow her to hug him. He thought he was being accommodating 

to her anxiety complaints by allowing her to stay in his classroom, but thinks that he 

can do better. “In hindsight there is plenty I believe I could have done better.” 

Mr. Cleary used to think the district owed him an apology, but now he wants to 

be part of that apology. He needs to repair both his and Beaumont High School’s 

reputation as people in the community may think that something happened. He 

believes he has “fostered lots of goodwill” during his 18 years of teaching, and he 

wants to help repair his community. He is upset that he had a hand in damaging his 

community, which is why he wants to help repair it. In the future he would also ask for 

help in addressing student behaviors. He always thought he was strong enough to 

handle things alone, but would now seek help. 

He passionately explained the joy the teaching gives him, how he would “skip 

home with a smile on my face,” and wants to return to the classroom. He shared 

screenshots of text messages and emails with parents and staff who reached out 

regarding students who needed additional support. He also shared the thank you 

letters he has received each year from students telling him he was their most 

influential teacher. 

Evidence Regarding M.T.’s Prior Allegations 

25.  M.T. made similar allegations against male teachers, accusing them of 

sexual conduct or inappropriate behavior, and engaged in similar behaviors during 

both her freshman and junior years. She was not on campus during her sophomore 

year because teaching was remote due to COVID-19. During her freshman year, the 

2019-2020 school year, M.T. claimed that a teacher, Matthew Medore, was “grooming” 

her, and she was being “swabbed” by police as part of the investigation. 

53 

ALLEGATIONS MADE DURING M.T.’S FRESHMAN YEAR (2019-2020)9 

Assistant Principal Chelsea Ramirez 

26. 

Chelsea Ramirez is currently an Assistant Principal at Glenview High 

School. During the 2019-20 school year, she was an Assistant Principal at Beaumont 

High School. She described the different areas of responsibility for each Assistant 

Principal. Her area of responsibility was primarily ninth grade. There was another 

Assistant Principal who oversaw special education students, so Assistant Principal 

Ramirez does not know why issues regarding M.T. first came to her attention. 

During the 2019-20 school year, a number of statements were made and 

confirming emails sent to Assistant Principal Ramirez regarding M.T. and her claims 

regarding Matthew Medore, an Engineering teacher. Ms. Garcia approached Assistant 

Principal Ramirez to report that M.T. was making a number of allegations that were 

highly alarming to teachers. Ms. Garcia was very upset. Assistant Principal Ramirez told 

Ms. Garcia she would speak to those teachers, which she did. 

Assistant Principal Ramirez sent an email to Principal Jesus Jimenez, Assistant 

Principal Hudec, and Shawn Mitchell regarding what Ms. Garcia disclosed. Attached to 

her email were the emails she received from the teachers with whom she spoke. 

(Those emails are summarized below with each teacher’s testimony.) In her email, 

Assistant Principal Ramirez wrote that staff members had “recent interactions with a 

student [M.T.] that were highly alarming.” She wrote further: 

9 The headings and sections summarizing the witness’ testimony will use the 

witness’ job title when the incidents occurred. 

54 

 
This student is creating and using staff members names 

[sic] in creating stories that have little to no truth, including 

that she was just interviewed by [Beaumont Police 

Department] about her relationship with Mr. Medore, 

([Beaumont Police Officer] Castro10 had no interaction with 

this student since last year) was interviewed yesterday and 

need to go back to Mr. Hudec/admin to finish being 

questioned. (did not occur) My concern is this student is 

openly telling students and staff all stories, using staff 

members names [sic] of who is doing what, about 

“investigating” her claims, of being swabbed by police for 

supposed-sexual relationship with Medore, being groomed, 

or being investigated by Mr. Hudec/admin (also did not 

occur)[.] We are holding an emergency IEP on Friday to 

discuss further, but I wanted to send to you now for 

documentation as teachers are highly concerned and 

uncomfortable. 

In her discussions with staff, Assistant Principal Ramirez learned that Mr. 

Medore was unaware of the allegations. The Beaumont police officer assigned to the 

school denied he was taking swabs of M.T. So “very quickly the claims” M.T. was 

making using staff names were discovered to be false. It was “highly alarming” 

because allegations like this do not happen often and is not common to make false 

10 Officer Castro was assigned to the school. 

55 

 
claims using staff names. Assistant Principal Ramirez described M.T.’s false claims as an 

“educator’s worst case scenario.” 

Assistant Principal Ramirez spoke with Physical Education (PE) Coach Rudy 

Gonzalez, who told her that M.T. said she would not be in class because she was being 

questioned by the Beaumont police. Coach Gonzales was very upset and concerned 

because he initially believed M.T., and thought she had been inappropriately touched. 

He was even more concerned upon learning that her claims were false because “those 

allegations are the worst for a teacher.” 

Assistant Principal Ramirez explained that because M.T. is a special education 

student, there are behavioral goals that can be created if needed. The district would 

need an emergency IEP meeting to discuss behavior goals for M.T. M.T. was creating 

false narratives and going to classrooms where she should not be. The goal in M.T.’s 

IEP was to prevent elopement, but M.T. was taking passes and going to other teachers’ 

classes so the elopement goal would need to be reviewed. 

There was an emergency IEP meeting scheduled for February 7, 2020, to 

address M.T.’s behavior issues. A short while before it was to begin, Ms. Garcia notified 

Assistant Principal Ramirez that M.T. was not in her assigned classroom, and Ms. Garcia 

did not know where she was. Assistant Principal Ramirez and Ms. Garcia went to Mr. 

Medore’s classroom, where they found M.T. hiding in the back of his classroom, under 

a desk/table. Assistant Principal Ramirez was “shocked” M.T. was there, but cannot 

recall if Mr. Medore was alarmed. Assistant Principal Ramirez called M.T.’s mom, who 

was coming to school for the emergency IEP meeting, and Assistant Principal Ramirez 

and Ms. Garcia walked M.T. to the meeting room to wait for M.T.’s mother to arrive. 

56 

During the IEP meeting, M.T.’s mother was mortified with the stories M.T. had 

created. M.T. acknowledged that she created them to get attention. Assistant Principal 

Ramirez had no evidence or reason to believe that any of M.T.’s claims were true. 

M.T.’s mother wanted to put M.T. in an independent study class, and seek mental 

health support for her. There were discussions during the IEP meeting about a 

behavioral plan, but Assistant Principal Ramirez does not know if one was ever put in 

place. 

Teacher Matthew Medore 

27.  Matthew Medore teaches engineering and manufacturing at Beaumont 

High School. M.T. was in one of his classes during her freshman year, which was a 

“weird year” because of the COVID-19 lockdown in the spring. 

Mr. Medore recalled that M.T. liked engineering, she was a good student, she 

did work outside of class, asked for extra work, and he would “infiltrate the harder 

work” from his more advanced classes for her to do. She told him her family had a 

machine shop, which is why she wanted the harder work. Mr. Medore got constructive 

feedback from M.T., as he does from many students. M.T. was a “pretty average 

student” but she was very inspired to follow her family’s career path. 

Mr. Medore recalls M.T. started acting very strangely in class. She had anxiety 

issues and would be hyperventilating. He was “absolutely” concerned for her well-

being. She was a special education student with an IEP, but he recalls nothing beyond 

what was written in the IEP or provided to him by Ms. Garcia. At the time he reviewed 

M.T.’s IEP records, the accommodation she had was to give her access to the 

bathroom. He talked with M.T., telling her that she could leave his classroom anytime 

she needed. He does not recall any accommodations regarding her taking breaks from 

57 

class. He was told M.T. was experiencing a lot of anxiety issues. She had panic attacks 

in class. The first time she had one it was “very scary for me, I didn’t know what to do, 

as teachers we are not prompted for this.” Mr. Medore’s teaching assistant was M.T.’s 

friend, and literally held her hands during the panic attack, which lasted about three or 

four minutes. Mr. Medore did not call M.T.’s mother or notify the office about the 

panic attack. 

One time there were Kaiser medical records left behind in class, and he looked 

at them to see whose records they were. The records were M.T.’s, and they referenced 

suicide and self-destruction. He was “absolutely” concerned. He did not do anything to 

accommodate her at that time and did not report it. On several occasions M.T. said 

CPS showed up at her home, and her mother told him that M.T. claiming CPS came to 

the home was “an ongoing issue,” which seemed to suggest that M.T. was lying about 

CPS visits. No evidence was offered that Mr. Medore reported M.T.’s CPS statements to 

CPS. 

Mr. Medore recalls one of the high school counselors physically walking M.T. to 

his classroom, and dropping her off during a different period than his scheduled class 

with her because “she was having a hard day at school.” Ms. Garcia would let M.T. go 

to Mr. Medore’s fifth period class, which was not her scheduled class period. When she 

came, Mr. Medore would have her grade papers or work on projects. M.T. came to his 

fifth period class approximately two or three times per week. It was something that he 

and M.T. discussed with Ms. Garcia, and it became “an unofficial thing.” He has “no 

clue” why M.T. chose to come to his class during fifth period. She would also come to 

his classroom before school, and sometimes remain for approximately 30 minutes 

after first period started. He could not get her to leave, despite directing her to do so. 

58 

Mr. Medore recalls “a weird issue in my classroom” regarding M.T. that was 

brought to his attention. There were rumors regarding him that he notified 

administration about. M.T. claimed another student was accusing him of raping that 

student in class. Mr. Medore was concerned and reported the claims to the principal 

via an email. M.T. told him she was being harassed after telling him about the other 

student’s allegations, and he reported that to the principal, too. He was never aware 

that M.T. alleged that he did any of the misconduct with her. His understanding was 

that another student was making those allegations. The district performed an 

investigation and met with Mr. Medore at the very end of it. The district found that the 

allegations against him were untrue. 

When Ms. Garcia reported M.T.’s statements to Assistant Principal Ramirez, she 

asked Mr. Medore to send an email regarding his “overall impression of M.T.,” which 

he did on February 4, 2020. In it he wrote how M.T. completed almost the entire 

semester’s work in the first month of school and “[s]ince then I have been mentoring 

her on how to develop her skills into a usable manner that would be advantageous to 

an employer.” He wrote further: 

In September, there was an alleged sexual assault that 

another female student made about me, that M.T. informed 

me about. When I reported the situation and it was 

investigated, the story was flipped onto M.T. as her being 

the victim. Since then M.T. informed me that she had been 

bullied due to the situation. When I reported this, the issue 

(to my knowledge) was unresolved. I know she has a lot of 

built up feelings about the issue. 

59 

Recently M.T.’s disposition has changed. When I have asked 

her whats [sic] going on, she’s indicated “a lot”. She has 

confided in me that she has a lot of medical issues going 

on, one of which is an anxiety issue, which recently I 

witnessed. She has indicated that because of her issues, she 

has applied for a service animal to help. M.T. one day 

mistakenly left her Kaiser documentation in my class, and I 

opened it to see what and whos [sic] it was, and at a glance 

saw that she is being treated for suicidal thoughts and self 

destruction. 

Along with her medical issues, M.T. has indicated that 

things are not going well at home. Apparently dad is back 

in her life (this happened before winter break) but has 

limited custody, and mom and step dad [sic] are in the 

middle of a divorce. About two weeks ago, M.T. expressed 

that CPS was called and now she is concerned of being 

removed from her home. Last week, Mr. Torres counseled 

her and afterwards dropped her off to my classroom said 

she was having a rough day. In addition to this, Mrs. Garcia, 

allows her to come work in my 5th period where she will 

either act as an unofficial TA or work on getting caught up 

on class work or her own projects. 

On friday [sic] 1/31/2020, M.T. had a panic attack in my 

classroom 6th period (I cannot remember the reason why 

she was in there 6th period), where myself, my TA, and her 

60 

friend in that class were able to get her settled down. 

Afterwards, I did not feel comfortable leaving her after 

school until she got picked up. I asked M.T. if she would like 

to follow me to Mr. Richie’s room where I was helping him 

with something. She did, and she remained on the phone 

the entire time will [sic] she was contacted for pickup. 

With the school’s and district’s stance of creating positive 

interactions with students, I feel like I have gone out and 

beyond with helping her through not only her school work, 

but her times of need, as I would do with any student. I feel 

like M.T. is a good resource for information regarding my 

program I have asked her opinion numerous times on 

curriculum, projects, and how I am grading students. 

Mr. Medore said he never engaged in any inappropriate behavior with M.T. He 

never hugged her, never touched her or allowed her to touch him, did not chase her in 

class or write things on her belongings. Doing so would be “crossing the boundaries” 

between the student and teacher. 

Teacher Rudolph Gonzalez 

28. 

Rudolph Gonzalez has been a Physical Education (PE) teacher at 

Beaumont High School for the past six years. He “vaguely” recalls talking with Ms. 

Ramirez in the 2019-20 school year. He was teaching sixth period PE when M.T., then a 

freshman, approached him, and told him the things he listed in his email. As soon as 

she started sharing those things with him, he immediately grabbed his cell phone and 

61 

started calling and emailing the office because of his concerns. When school ended, he 

went to administration to see if he needed to fill out a CPS report. 

The email he wrote on February 4, 2020, stated: 

During 6th period M.T. approached me with a pass from 

Mrs. Garcia. M.T. then began to explain to me why she 

hasn’t been in class and why she was late today. M.T. told 

me she was in the office being questioned by police about a 

teacher. M.T. told me that this was the second time there 

were allegations About [sic] her and the teacher. M.T. told 

me the teacher was Mr. Medore. M.T. then begin [sic] to tell 

me that principle [sic] was showing her pictures that 

another student took of her and Medore together around 

campus and in the classroom. M.T. told me that the girl was 

jealous of her and the teacher because the teacher spent 

more time helping her in engineering class. M.T. said that 

The [sic] police were trying to get a swab from her and it 

was the second time they wanted to swap [sic] her; for 

another incident that happened last semester with the same 

teacher. M.T. told me that Medore was getting accused of 

“grooming” her and that he was in with the police getting 

questioned. M.T. told me she needed to get back to the 

principles [sic] and she left. After school I went straight to 

admin and reported this to them. 

M.T. was never inappropriate with Coach Gonzalez. He believes he sets clear 

boundaries for students. He has never chased students or let them chase him. He does 

62 

not write on students’ belongings. He does not allow them to sit on his lap, or lean on 

him. If such behavior had ever happened, he would have told the student to stop and 

would have notified administration. 

Teacher Rachelle Ponce 

29. 

Rachelle Ponce is a science teacher at Beaumont High School. She had a 

student who was “giving her information” regarding M.T. The first time the student 

reported it to Ms. Ponce, she wasn’t really concerned because she hears things like 

that all the time from students. Ms. Ponce never spoke with M.T., and does not think 

she knew the student was reporting things to Ms. Ponce. However, “because there 

have been prior instances on the campus regarding teachers and students,” she “didn’t 

want it to come back on me.” Ms. Ponce reported what the student told her because 

she did not want to get in trouble for knowing something she did not report. She did 

not explain what “prior instances” had occurred on campus. 

Ms. Ponce was told other administrators were more familiar with M.T.’s issues so 

to talk to them. She spoke with Assistant Principal Ian Young and told him that a 

student reported that M.T. liked Mr. Medore. The student also reported that M.T. had 

left her jacket in class, and Mr. Medore kept it for her, so M.T. took that as a sign that 

he liked her. Either Assistant Principal Hudec or Assistant Principal Young asked Ms. 

Ponce to document the matter which she did in an email to Principal Jesus Jimenez on 

January 15, 2020, wherein she wrote:  

I am sharing some old information and new information I 

have received from a student of mine. I guess you can say 

this student is my “informant” as she likes to share 

information with me. The student’s name is [name]. The 

63 

information she gives me is about her friend and it stresses 

her out a lot and she is scared that her friend will know she 

is “telling on her.” Also, I feel that it is important to mention 

that [student] may not be such a reliable source. I say this 

because she has stated she has borderline personality 

disorder and she is in and out of the hospital due to talks of 

suicide, so she does have “mental issues.” 

Anyway, the old news…last October I spoke with [Assistant 

Principal Hudec and Assistant Principal Young] about the 

situation (I apologize that I forgot to make this email then 

which Assistant Principal Young did asked me to do). Here 

is the situation: 

[Student’s] friend is M.T., and M.T. has a major crush on Mr. 

Medore. M.T. has told [student] how she really hopes 

something could/would happen between them. Every little 

thing Mr. Medore does (smile…) Gives M.T. this hope that 

he likes her. M.T. would come in to class late at least 1-2 

times a week with a note from him. This has not happened 

in a while. When I spoke with [Assistant Principal Young and 

Assistant Principal Hudec] they were aware of this situation. 

So the new information which is not too much but I did 

think I should say something: 

[Student] shared with me yesterday (January 14, 2020) that 

she thinks M.T. and Mr. Medore are now texting. She 

64 

mentioned that M.T. sent him a text asking him if he was 

here (assuming on campus). When [student] saw the text, 

M.T. scrolled up very quickly. And that is it. I know it is not a 

lot to go on…but I am trying to cover myself. 

Principal Jimenez never spoke with Ms. Ponce, and she has no knowledge if an 

investigation regarding the Mr. Medore allegations was performed. She was never told 

to file a CPS report. 

Ms. Ponce testified that teachers are expected to set boundaries, and students 

are expected to follow the rules teachers set. If the student does not follow them, 

teachers can report it depending on the consequence or the problem. When there is a 

boundary violation the first time, the teacher should address it, but if the teacher is not 

comfortable or cannot address the matter with the student, the teacher should report 

it to administration. 

Special Education Case Manager Lindsey Garcia  

30. 

Lindsey Garcia was a special education teacher at Beaumont High School 

from August 2019 until February 2022, when she left to become a Behavioral Specialist 

in the district. M.T. remained on Ms. Garcia’s caseload when she left Beaumont High 

School. As M.T.’s case manager, Ms. Garcia was responsible for ensuring her IEP 

meetings were held, her goal progress was tracked, and her needs were met. Ms. 

Garcia communicated with teachers and service providers, and coordinated or 

facilitated IEP team meetings and meetings regarding M.T.’s needs. Teachers are given 

a document called “IEP At A Glance” at the start of each school year for the students in 

their classroom with an IEP. This document is a brief summary of information 

contained in the IEP, which lists the student’s qualifying disability, accommodating 

65 

services, academic goals, and general IEP goals. A teacher may not share a particular 

student’s accommodations with other students. Accordingly, Mr. Cleary could not tell 

other students about M.T.’s accommodations. 

M.T.’s qualifying disability for an IEP was Emotional Disturbance.11 She also had 

physical health issues, including kidney issues which required her to frequently use the 

restroom. M.T. engaged in attention seeking behaviors and she displayed anxious 

behaviors. During her freshman year she had attention seeking behaviors “when she 

brought up situations with a teacher on campus.” “Through the years there have been 

different instances” of M.T. engaging in these behaviors. There was no evidence that 

Mr. Cleary knew of these issues before being placed on leave. 

Ms. Garcia does not recall if the accommodations set out in M.T.’s IEP were 

arranged, but the IEP documents showed that individual counseling services for M.T. 

had been increased to weekly sessions from the previous bimonthly sessions. Ms. 

Garcia does not recall whether M.T. liked to answer questions in class. She is aware 

that M.T. was allowed to take longer time on schoolwork and allowed to make up 

assignments. Also, if M.T. seemed anxious, teachers could verbally prompt her to take 

a break, and M.T. could use the counseling office as a quiet place for a break. M.T. was 

also provided educationally-related mental health services as she struggled with 

regulating her emotions, especially her anxiety. 

2019-2020 School Year Issues 

31.  Ms. Garcia testified about the issues with M.T. during M.T.’s freshman 

year (2019-20 school year). Ms. Garcia allowed M.T. to go to Mr. Medore’s classroom 

11 No testimony explaining this category was offered. 

66 

 
and would have had a discussion with him regarding her going to his class. Ms. Garcia 

was questioned about the contents of Mr. Medore’s February 4, 2020, email referenced 

above. She was not aware of an incident where Mr. Torres counseled and then 

dropped M.T. off at Mr. Medore’s classroom when she was having a rough day. She 

also did not recall M.T. being an “unofficial TA” during ninth grade. 

Ms. Garcia said that special education behaviors can be addressed in the IEP 

process. M.T.’s IEP team met to discuss her attention-seeking behaviors. There was an 

IEP meeting to discuss concerns regarding Mr. Medore. Ms. Garcia remembers this 

incident involved M.T. claiming that Mr. Medore “was attempting to groom her.” Ms. 

Garcia was very concerned and shocked regarding what M.T. was telling her, which 

was why she notified administration. It was concerning that either M.T. was reporting 

inappropriate behavior, or she was lying. Ms. Garcia was concerned that “a pattern was 

developing.” In a February 4, 2020, email to Assistant Principal Ramirez regarding 

M.T.’s statements, Ms. Garcia wrote: 

Yesterday afternoon M.T. came into the [special education] 

office and told me the following: 

She asked if I had been contacted by Mr. Hudec and I told 

her no. She then proceeded to tell me that Mr. Medore is 

being investigated for “grooming” her. She also told me 

that this is the 3rd time this has happened and that Mr. 

Medore was going to get his attorney involved. When I 

asked her how she had this information she told me that 

Mr. Medore told her. 

67 

This morning I spoke with Coach Gonzales as M.T. told him 

similar things. The following is what he related to me: 

M.T. told him that a student had taken pictures of she [sic] 

and Mr. Medore in the classroom as the student was jealous 

of them. She also stated that this was the 2nd time that this 

had happened and that she did not want to be swabbed 

again. 

This information is bothersome as last week M.T. 

communicated to me the situation that had taken place at 

home when CPS and Beaumont PD were involved. After she 

relayed the info to me she said “You have to mandate 

report this don’t you?” She also spoke about the situation 

to multiple other teachers on campus. I’m concerned that a 

pattern is developing especially since we have returned 

from Christmas break. I spoke with parent regarding M.T.’s 

increased anxiety we recently held an IEP meeting where 

this topic was discussed. I will work on scheduling and IEP 

and drafting goals to address this behavior. 

A February 7, 2020, IEP meeting was held to address the issues Ms. Garcia raised 

in her email. The IEP report prepared after that meeting documented: 

The team discussed M.T.’s behavior and the escalation of 

her anxiety. [Teacher] stated that she is concerned as M.T. 

had issues with her anxiety in class. She also informed the 

team that M.T. was very distressed last Friday and talked 

68 

with her about a home visit from Child Services that had 

taken place the evening before. 

M.T. has shared with multiple team members about the 

Child Services visit and asking if now they have to “mandate 

report” what she shared. 

[Assistant Principal] Ramirez shared that M.T. has been 

telling teachers that she is involved in an investigation with 

a teacher and administrator. She has perpetuated this 

narrative and told multiple staff members a similar story. 

M.T. has shared with multiple staff members that she does 

not want to be “swabbed” again and that administration is 

investigating whether or not a staff member has been 

“grooming” her. The team is concerned about M.T.’s health 

and behavior. [Assistant Principal] Ramirez shared that no 

interview between an administrator and M.T. had taken 

place regarding the incidents that she has been reporting. 

[M.T.’s mother] shared that M.T. needs to be reevaluated by 

a neuropsychologist and she is currently working with her 

health plan to coordinate. 

[¶]. . . [¶] 

This meeting will be continued on Monday 2/10/2020. 

Ms. Garcia did not know how the administrative team addressed M.T.’s 

behaviors and claims after the February 7, 2020, IEP meeting. She was never told what 

69 

happened and she never did any follow-up. (It was unclear why she did not follow up 

because, as M.T.’s case manager at the time, she had a duty to do so.) She never saw 

any documentation regarding drafting goals to address M.T.’s behavior and does not 

recall having any discussions regarding such goals. Although the IEP indicated that a 

follow-up meeting would occur on February 10, 2020, she does not recall if one was 

held. She does not know the outcome of scheduling a neuropsychological visit, and 

does not recall any discussions regarding mandated reporting. 

2021-2022 School Year Issues 

32.  Ms. Garcia described issues with M.T. during her junior year (2021-22 

school year). Ms. Garcia was teaching an LIP class, a support class for students with 

IEP’s. M.T. was in Ms. Garcia’s fourth period LIP class. M.T. was in Mr. Cleary’s first 

period physics class, and she had discussions with M.T. regarding taking AP physics. 

M.T. initiated those discussions because she was interested in potentially taking AP 

Physics her senior year. Taking that class was discussed during an IEP meeting with the 

IEP team, but Ms. Garcia does not recall if Mr. Cleary was in favor of M.T. taking that 

class. 

LIP was a shared classroom. Mr. Cleary’s classroom was next door to the LIP 

classroom. Ms. Garcia never observed Mr. Cleary teaching. In the fall of 2021, Ms. 

Garcia was moved to teach an ELA intervention class and a new teacher, Joel Burdick, 

took over M.T.’s fourth period LIP class. All LIP students were to work in Ms. Garcia’s 

classroom. If students needed to contact another teacher, she would confirm with that 

teacher that the student could go to that teacher’s classroom. The student would have 

a pass to do so, and the student would have to come back to Ms. Garcia’s class. 

70 

Ms. Garcia does not recall during the 2021-22 school year whether M.T. went to 

Mr. Cleary’s class during LIP. She does not recall if Mr. Cleary asked her if M.T. was 

allowed to come to his class during LIP. She does “not remember specifically” that M.T. 

missed LIP class. She does not recall M.T. missing other classes. She does not recall Mr. 

Burdick asking her about M.T. missing his LIP class or her telling him that there was a 

“prearrangement” for M.T. to go to Mr. Cleary’s class during LIP. Mr. Cleary never 

asked her if it was okay for M.T. to grade other students’ schoolwork and not do her 

own work. Although M.T. did have aides in the classroom, Ms. Garcia does not recall 

any aides reporting they observed inappropriate behavior between M.T. and Mr. 

Cleary. 

M.T.’s IEP included a “preferential seating” accommodation. Ms. Garcia 

explained this meant M.T. would be “seated in an area or place most conducive to her 

learning.” Ms. Garcia said this would be “determined student by student, class by class, 

on a case-by-case basis.” It could mean placing a student at the front of the classroom, 

by a power outlet, away from doors or windows, it would “really just be on a case-by-

case basis.” Ms. Garcia said sitting at the teacher’s desk would not be preferential 

seating as that is the teacher’s space where information or documents might be 

readily available or on the computer. Mr. Cleary never asked her if allowing M.T. to sit 

at his desk satisfied the preferential seating accommodation. 

However, on cross-examination Ms. Garcia admitted that a teacher has the 

discretion to determine what is the best “preferential seating” for the student. Ms. 

Garcia acknowledged there was nothing specific in her IEP prohibiting M.T. from 

sitting at the teacher’s desk, but just based on Ms. Garcia’s “previous experiences” with 

M.T. “during her high school career, where boundaries are important and she struggles 

with boundary issues,” allowing her to sit at the teacher’s desk “would probably be 

71 

confusing to her.” There was no evidence that Mr. Cleary ever knew about M.T.’s 

“previous experiences” or “boundary issues.” 

Ms. Garcia did not recall if M.T.’s IEP had a behavior support plan in place, but 

to her knowledge, there was no such plan in M.T.’s IEP. Again, as her case manager 

and with knowledge of M.T.’s “previous experiences” and “boundary issues,” it was 

unclear why Ms. Garcia did not ensure there was a behavior plan in M.T.’s IEP. 

OTHER ALLEGATIONS DURING M.T.’S JUNIOR YEAR (2021-2022) 

Special Education Teacher Joel Burdick 

33. 

Joel Burdick is a special education teacher at Beaumont High School who 

replaced Ms. Garcia after the 2021-22 school year began when Ms. Garcia was 

promoted to Behavior Specialist in the district. During the 2021-22 school year, Mr. 

Burdick taught two LIP classes, managed special education students’ caseloads to 

ensure services were being provided, completed required paperwork, “pushed” into 

general education classes to provide extra support for students, and participated in IEP 

meetings. 

M.T. was not one of the students on Mr. Burdick’s caseload because she 

remained on Ms. Garcia’s caseload. M.T. was in Mr. Burdick’s fourth period LIP class, 

and he “pushed” into her third period math class and her sixth period history class. He 

reviewed her “IEP At A Glance” to see the services she was receiving. M.T. would also 

come by the special education office to “check in” at mornings and at lunch. Mr. 

Burdick explained that several special education teachers are assigned to the special 

education office, and “lots of students” come by the office. The “check ins” were very 

informal and at the students’ discretion. Mr. Burdick never observed M.T. interact with 

Mr. Cleary. 

72 

During LIP, M.T. often went to Mr. Cleary’s class to grade papers. On his first day 

at Beaumont High School, Mr. Burdick became aware that M.T. would often do this 

several times a week. He spoke with Ms. Garcia about it, who told him there was “a 

prior arrangement” allowing M.T. to leave LIP to go to Mr. Cleary’s classroom. If M.T. 

went to Mr. Cleary’s class, Mr. Burdick did not mark her absent because she went there 

with permission. 

During the 2021-22 school year, Mr. Burdick reported M.T.’s behavior to 

administration because she made him feel uncomfortable. M.T. would follow him 

around campus, say inappropriate things to him, and act out inappropriately if she did 

not get what she wanted. She told Mr. Burdick about her home life, and that CPS was 

involved. After Mr. Cleary was placed on leave, M.T. told Mr. Burdick she missed him 

and did not know how she could go on. She implied it was hard for her with him gone, 

and she had trouble dealing with school without him. The day after she made these 

comments, Mr. Burdick asked to have his schedule changed. 

Mr. Burdick does not know if there was a goal in M.T.’s IEP to address her 

behaviors, but her behaviors were discussed in person a number of times with her case 

manager, Ms. Garcia. Mr. Burdick explained that M.T.’s behavior concerned him. She 

attempted to get close to him or physically touch him, even after he told her to stop. 

She would walk up behind him, put her hands on his shoulders, attempt to sit on his 

desk, attempt to sit at the chair at his desk, and follow him around the classroom. She 

would act out by lying on the floor, yelling, threatening students, and destroying 

school property. Her outbursts on the floor lasted 15 to 20 minutes. She would 

threaten to throw her chrome book when she got frustrated, and when she could not 

answer questions on a test. Her behaviors “somewhat existed” before Mr. Cleary was 

placed on leave, happening “to a lesser extent, but became more extreme after Mr. 

73 

Cleary was placed on leave.” She had increased outbursts culminating in her saying 

inappropriate things, and threatening to destroy school property. Mr. Burdick tried 

various strategies to address her behavior, but it became so concerning he reported it 

to Assistant Principal Megan Cotton, his direct supervisor. 

Mr. Burdick told Assistant Principal Cotton that M.T.’s behaviors were making 

him uncomfortable, and she kept trying to close the distances between them. This 

worried him, and he wanted to change his schedule so that he was away from her. He 

asked Assistant Principal Cotton to reassign him so that he would no longer have any 

classes with M.T. After speaking with Assistant Principal Cotton, he was removed from 

M.T.’s “push in” schedule so he only had her for LIP. Assistant Principal Cotton also 

made changes to the special education office, which is a double-sized classroom with 

doorways on both sides and entrances into the hallway. Students were no longer 

allowed in the office, and the doors were to remain locked. Students would have to 

email or knock on the door to gain entrance. However, despite these changes, the 

issues with M.T. continued. She would find ways to get in the special education office 

because teachers usually did not lock the doors when they left. M.T. would also 

continue to find Mr. Burdick at lunch time. He reported these issues to his department 

chair Dawn Brandon, and she tried to keep the special education office secure. 

Assistant Principal Cotton sent a directive to Ms. Brandon to make changes to 

keep the special education office secure. There were signs posted, and Mr. Burdick’s 

schedule was changed. But the problems with M.T. remained. She would still find him 

in his office, attempt to be close to him during LIP class, and attempt to find and 

attend the open lunch periods that he hosted. He felt her attempts to get close to him 

were inappropriate, and her behaviors continued until the end of the 2022 spring 

74 

semester. Of note, this was similar conduct to how M.T. behaved towards Mr. Medore 

and Mr. Cleary. 

In March 2022 when he was asked to meet with Assistant Superintendent 

Castillo he was not told the purpose of the meeting. However based upon the 

questions, he inferred it was a regarding an investigation of Mr. Cleary. He told 

Assistant Superintendent Castillo that he was informed M.T. was allowed to go to Mr. 

Cleary’s class to grade papers, and that it had been arranged with Ms. Garcia. Mr. 

Burdick was never told there were any problems with M.T. leaving LIP and going to Mr. 

Cleary’s class. Mr. Burdick reported his issues with M.T. before his meeting with 

Assistant Superintendent Castillo. However, during his meeting he was not asked 

about his own experiences with M.T. or his concerns. 

Mr. Burdick testified that “much later” in the school year he sent an email on 

June 2, 2022, to Human Resources (HR) Director Domenica Bernuer that he copied to 

Assistant Principal Jamie Santos, Principal Jimenez, Assistant Principal Cotton, Assistant 

Principal Hudec, and Assistant Principal Ramirez. He sent the email because M.T. 

continued to make him feel uncomfortable, and he felt this needed to be 

communicated to Human Resources and administration. M.T. kept requesting that he 

administer her testing in a separate location, she was at his desk waiting for him, she 

constantly came by asking for him, and she displayed emotional reactions when he 

was not around. The procedures put in place to set boundaries with M.T. were not 

working. Mr. Burdick would be sitting at his desk working with other students or 

grading papers, and M.T. would scoot her chair and try to get as close to him as she 

could. Occasionally she would disrupt class by yelling, cursing, or being loud. He would 

try to verbally admonish her, trying to calm her down, but her behaviors were 

75 

escalating. He titled his email “Report and documentation of student harassment,” and 

wrote: 

I would like to report and document that I felt harassed and 

made to feel uncomfortable by a student this school year, 

most aggressively this week. 

This has been addressed by me in a meeting with my direct 

supervisor, [Assistant Principal] Cotton, and resulted in 

having my schedule changed. Additionally, it has been 

reported by my department chair, Dawn Brandon, who 

communicated this as an issue to her supervisor, as well as 

assisting with precautionary measures. 

These measures included the student directly being 

admonished not to enter the office by [Assistant Principal] 

Cotton, the doors to the office being locked, and signs 

posted on the doors that students are not allowed and it is 

not a direct entrance. 

The student, M.T. , continued to find ways into the [special 

education] office (E12), including alternate entrances, 

ignoring admonishments and signage. She would actively 

search for me in other classrooms I work in throughout the 

day. This continued up to the point where today and 

yesterday I had to avoid the [special education] office 

altogether. I also had to lock my classroom doors, and 

asked security to keep the E building locked for the second 

76 

period of the day. The student was reported by other 

teachers asking around where I was located for the day. 

The student often ignores prompting and coaching and 

repeatedly attempts to be inappropriately close to myself 

[sic], including things such as slowly scooting her chair 

closer when I am not looking, attempting to sit on my desk, 

and often waiting for me when I return to the office. The 

student will also physically follow me around the classroom 

during the 4th period class that I teach and deliver her 

service minutes. 

Assistant Principal Hudec replied to the email, apologizing to Mr. Burdick that 

this was happening to him, and thanking him for notifying administration. Assistant 

Principal Hudec also wrote: “Has the IEP team addressed the concern and develop [sic] 

a Behavior Goal for M.T.?” (Of note, a behavior goal was never created in M.T.’s IEP to 

address these behaviors.) Assistant Principal Hudec further advised that he would put 

in an Exclusion Lock12 on the master schedule so M.T. would not be scheduled to any 

of Mr. Burdick’s assigned sections. After these email exchanges, Mr. Burdick did not 

have any follow-up from Assistant Principal Hudec. 

In Assistant Principal Cotton’s reply to Mr. Burdick’s email, she apologized for 

what was happening, thanked him for reporting his “concerns immediately,” and 

12 An Exclusion Lock is a program that prevent students and/or teachers from 

being assigned to the same classes. 

77 

 
informed him that he would “reach out to M.T.’s case manager about a goal to address 

behavior.” Again, a behavior goal was never created in M.T.’s IEP. 

Mr. Burdick testified that even though an “Exclusion Lock” had been placed on 

the master calendar that was supposed to prevent M.T. from being assigned to any of 

his classes, in the 2022-23 school year she was assigned to him two times per day. He 

followed up with administration, and she was removed from his classroom. Mr. Burdick 

described the attempts to stop M.T.’s behavior as “ineffective.” His own attempts to 

establish boundaries did not work. He “constantly” tried to put additional space 

between himself and M.T., to no avail. He never did anything to encourage her 

behaviors. He would not allow her to sit at his desk, touch or lean on him, or hug him 

as that would be inappropriate. 

Special Education Department Chair Dawn Brandon 

34. 

Dawn Brandon is now an Assistant Principal at Beaumont High School. 

Previously, she was the department chair of the special education program at the high 

school. 

M.T. and a couple students would come through the special education office, 

even though they knew they were not allowed to do so. M.T. would come in the 

mornings and “fist bump” teachers. Some days she came at lunch. Ms. Brandon initially 

had no specific concerns regarding M.T., but given the frequency with which she was 

coming in the special education office, Ms. Brandon was concerned about maintaining 

confidentiality of the documents that were on the special education teachers’ desks. 

There were times teachers left the doors unlocked, and she wanted to ensure 

confidentiality of the office. 

78 

However, in March 2022, Ms. Brandon had specific concerns regarding M.T., and 

sent an email to Assistant Principal Cotton on March 23, 2022, in which she wrote: 

As a department, we have some significant concerns with 

M.T. [The special education classroom] has become a 

hangout for her instead of attending classes even after 

directing her to go to class. It is now at the point where she 

has made it very uncomfortable for our male and female 

teachers. She stands very close when speaking to our male 

teacher [sic]. They move themselves away, but she 

continues to attempt to move close. For example yesterday 

Mr. Simonson was getting ready to go to class, M.T. said 

“you are in [room number] right?” M.T. sought this 

information out, because she doesn’t have Mr. Simonson 

for any class. Other concerns are, she will try and hug Joel 

Burdick from behind. He will turn away and tell her “that is 

not appropriate” 

Joel is in a very uncomfortable position and he also has her 

as a student in [LIP] 4th period. She is also seeking attention 

from Vanessa Rubio and Patrick Studer. I don’t want any of 

our teachers being put in any unnecessary uncomfortable 

situations. 

I wanted to let you know, so it could be addressed 

appropriately. 

79 

Ms. Brandon was not M.T.’s case manager, and M.T. was not in any of Ms. 

Brandon’s classes. Ms. Brandon “felt a responsibility” to refer any concerns she had to 

administration, which she did. Mr. Cleary never brought any concerns to Ms. Brandon 

regarding M.T. During an IEP meeting, he recommended that M.T. be placed in his AP 

physics class her senior year. Mr. Burdick brought his concerns regarding M.T. hugging 

him to Ms. Brandon, and she told him to send an email to administration and copy the 

principal and the HR department. She thought it odd M.T. knew Mr. Simonson’s 

schedule when she did not have him as a teacher. 

Ms. Brandon expects teachers to establish and follow classroom rules and 

establish appropriate boundaries with students. If the student does not follow the 

rules, the teacher should report it to administration and the department chair. She has 

never seen an accommodation in an IEP that allows preferential seating to be at the 

teacher’s desk. 

Assistant Principal Megan Cotton 

35.  Megan Cotton is an Assistant Principal at Beaumont High School. Her 

areas of responsibility have changed since the new principal started this school year. 

During the 2021-22 school year, her duties included handling students with disabilities 

and overseeing the special education program. 

A group of staff members approached her one day during the 2021-22 school 

year to tell her their concerns regarding M.T. Afterwards, Assistant Principal Cotton 

spoke to other teachers and obtained emails from them. The first email she received 

was from Ms. Brandon, the Special Education Department Chair, referenced above. Mr. 

Burdick reported he was trying to create boundaries, but M.T. would not adhere to 

them. Assistant Principal Cotton spoke with M.T. regarding boundaries, contacted 

80 

M.T.’s case manager, Ms. Garcia, and discussed scheduling an IEP to address M.T.’s 

“behavior concerns.” Assistant Principal Cotton was not part of the IEP, and believes it 

is the case manager’s responsibility to follow up, and “they would take it from there.” 

Assistant Principal Cotton stated that teachers are expected to establish 

boundaries and rules in the classroom. Teachers are expected to comply with the rules 

they set. If a student does not respect boundaries, the first step would be discussing 

the matter with the student, and if nothing changes, calling the student’s home if that 

was appropriate. If this still did not work, the teacher should report the concern to 

administration, and seek support from the administration team. Mr. Cleary never 

brought any concerns regarding M.T. to administration. Assistant Principal Cotton 

never observed Mr. Cleary’s classroom and never observed M.T.’s behavior in the 

classroom. No one from administration went to observe Mr. Cleary’s classroom and/or 

observe M.T.’s behavior in class. 

Testimony of District Employees Regarding Mr. Cleary’s Investigation 

ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT JENNIFER CASTILLO 

36. 

Jennifer Castillo has been employed by the district since 2017 and been 

the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources since 2020. Her duties include 

recruitment, hiring, performance evaluations, negotiations and employee discipline. 

She expects teachers to always be professional; they have an obligation to set and 

enforce boundaries with students, and she referenced the district’s job description for 

high school teachers in her testimony. 

She claimed the district offered child abuse reporting and prevention to 

teachers because when she first arrived at the district, there were two incidents of 

teachers being involved with students, and so the training was given as a preventative 

81 

measure so that all teachers were aware of the expectations, as well as ways to keep 

from putting themselves in similar situations. Assistant Superintendent Castillo 

authenticated the documents related to trainings Mr. Cleary attended, and the sign in 

sheets he completed documenting his attendance, and those documents were 

received in evidence. 

When Assistant Superintendent Castillo was notified regarding the allegations 

against Mr. Cleary, she reviewed notes of student interviews, and she interviewed 

students, Mr. Cleary, and some staff members. She also spoke with K.M. ’s parents and 

M.T.’s mother. She prepared notes of her interviews which were received in evidence. 

Some of those notes were slightly different from the testimony of witnesses offered. 

For example, she did not document that D.H. told her he “looked away” when M.T. 

placed her hand on Mr. Cleary’s knee. Mr. Cleary claimed some of the notes regarding 

his interview were not an accurate summary of the statements he made. Assistant 

Superintendent Castillo testified that Mr. Cleary’s explanations regarding touching M.T. 

were “a little inconsistent” because he initially acknowledged touching her on the 

shoulder, then admitted to side hugs, then acknowledged the two hugged every day. 

He also acknowledged that M.T. leaned on his shoulder, describing her as a “leaner.” 

Mr. Cleary stated that during the first quarter of the 2021-22 school year he told 

M.T. there needed to be distance between them, but he did not follow-up after that 

time. He also initially told her to stop swearing, but that was not effective so he 

allowed her to continue. He admitted making the stray dog comment to Assistant 

Principal Hudec. Mr. Cleary also admitted he and M.T. threw ping pong balls at each 

other during class. 

Mr. Burdick told Assistant Superintendent Castillo that he thought M.T. was “like 

a TA” for Mr. Cleary because she graded papers for him, and he assumed it had been 

82 

prearranged for M.T. to go to Mr. Cleary’s class as often as she did. He said Mr. Cleary 

never reached out to him regarding M.T., and M.T. shared with him that Mr. Cleary was 

her favorite teacher. 

Assistant Superintendent Castillo spoke with Ms. Garcia, who had been M.T.’s 

case manager for approximately three years. Ms. Garcia knew there were times when 

M.T. would go to Mr. Cleary’s class, and M.T. told Ms. Garcia that Mr. Cleary was a 

good teacher. Ms. Garcia shared the incident regarding Mr. Medore, documented 

below, and that M.T. had suffered trauma including her stepfather’s death and her 

biological father abandoning her for another family. Ms. Garcia was not aware that 

M.T. was sitting at Mr. Cleary’s desk, nor was she aware that she was not going to her 

LIP class with Mr. Burdick. Mr. Rubio had M.T. for second period and said that M.T. 

would generally stop in his class and then leave and go to Mr. Cleary’s classroom. 

As part of her investigation Assistant Superintendent Castillo searched the 

district’s emails to see if there had been any emails exchanged between Mr. Cleary and 

M.T. She identified emails that she located. In one series of emails exchanged on 

February 18, 2022, M.T. notified Mr. Cleary that she would be absent, and the two 

emailed about the music he played in class, which the students enjoyed. In email 

exchanges in the Fall of 2021 and January 2022, Mr. Cleary commented about wanting 

to watch surfing, looking up a name, his blog, asking if M.T. had been practicing her 

ping pong, and commenting about the quiet. One email simply said “Bump,” which 

seemed odd, but no testimony explaining any of these emails was offered. 

When Assistant Superintendent Castillo interviewed Mr. Burdick, he told her he 

thought there was “a prearrangement” allowing M.T. to go to Mr. Cleary’s class during 

LIP. He thought it had been prearranged with M.T. and Ms. Garcia. If M.T. was up-to-

date on her classwork, she was allowed to leave LIP and go to Mr. Cleary’s classroom. 

83 

Sometimes she left LIP to go to other classrooms. Mr. Burdick was aware that M.T. 

went to Mr. Cleary’s classroom. Assistant Superintendent Castillo did not check 

attendance records to document that M.T. was in LIP or Mr. Cleary’s class. The 

attendance records she checked contained no entries that M.T. missed her second or 

fourth period classes, and there was no documentation of any unexcused absences. 

Assistant Superintendent Castillo spoke with Mr. Rubio, M.T.’s second period 

teacher, who was also aware that M.T. left class to go to the special education office, 

Mr. Cleary’s classroom, or another teacher’s classroom. The second period teacher 

stated that M.T. would go back and forth throughout the day to various classrooms 

and check in with teachers throughout the day. The teachers were all aware where M.T. 

would go when she left their classrooms. None of them told Assistant Superintendent 

Castillo that M.T. left their classrooms without permission. 

Assistant Superintendent Castillo acknowledged that at the first meeting with 

Mr. Cleary, he was placed on administrative leave. Although he tried to share 

information, she told him he would have an opportunity to do so in the future, but for 

now was being placed on leave so the district could conduct an investigation. Mr. 

Cleary was offered a Skelly meeting, but he chose not to attend and, instead, offered a 

written response. 

After conducting her investigation, Assistant Superintendent Castillo was part of 

the team that recommended Mr. Cleary be terminated, and explained her rationale for 

doing so. She admitted that M.T.’s prior false allegations made against other teachers 

did not factor into her decision. Nor did she have any concerns that K.M. ’s claims may 

have been affected by her mistaken belief that M.T. was getting an A while K.M. was 

getting a D grade. 

84 

DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES DOMENICA BERNUER 

37. 

Domenica Bernuer is the district’s Director of Human Resources. Her 

duties include recruitment and employment, as well as managing leaves, certifications, 

and the disciplinary process. She had no personal knowledge of any of the events at 

issue. She merely sat in on meetings and took notes. She had no role in investigating 

any of the allegations. 

HR Director Bernuer’s notes listed things she was going to follow up on after 

the meetings, such as getting records of M.T.’s grades and attendance. However, HR 

Director Bernuer testified that she does not know if she ever did so. She did not do 

any follow-up after the March 8, 2022, meeting with Mr. Cleary. 

HR Director Bernuer was aware that in 2019 M.T. made a similar claim against 

Mr. Medore, but she does not have any information regarding it as she started 

working in the district in 2020, the year after those events. 

ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL JOEL HUDEC 

38. 

Joel Hudec is currently a principal at an elementary school. Prior to that 

he was an Assistant Principal at Beaumont High School during the times at issue in this 

matter. Assistant Principal Hudec acknowledged there was “lots of administrative 

turnover” during this time. 

Assistant Principal Cotton notified him of the allegations against Mr. Cleary, and 

he was asked to escort Mr. Cleary off campus when Mr. Cleary was placed on 

administrative leave. During the escort, Mr. Cleary, said that he was “100 percent 

innocent,” had done nothing wrong, and that K.M. was “making lies and going to ruin 

his life.” While they were in his classroom gathering his things, Mr. Cleary asked if he 

85 

could return to the office to speak again with human resources. Assistant Principal 

Hudec escorted Mr. Cleary back to the office but did not participate in the meeting. 

Assistant Principal Hudec then escorted Mr. Cleary to his car. Assistant Principal Hudec 

was not involved in investigating the allegations against Mr. Cleary. 

Assistant Principal Hudec does not recall the statement regarding a stray dog. 

On March 9, 2022, he received a text message from Mr. Cleary. Human resources had 

previously requested that if Mr. Cleary contacted administration, they were to notify 

human resources. Thus, Assistant Principal Hudec did not respond to Mr. Cleary and, 

instead, turned over the text message to human resources, as requested. Mr. Cleary’s 

text message stated: 

Hey Joel, I had a big meeting with HR yesterday, and it went 

okay. There’s clearly no evidence to be found, but the 

district’s lawyer pushed really really hard into the stuff I did 

that they think encouraged the perception. The perception 

is all there is - nothing more, and I don’t understand why 

they’re chasing that instead of celebrating the fact that 

nothing actually happened. I don’t feel that [my union 

representative] did anything for me, and I’d like the 

opportunity to speak again with someone at my side who’s 

got a pair. I will be supremely disappointed with any result 

less than full exoneration and public apology. I don’t plan 

on accepting any slaps on the wrist, and that appears to be 

what they’re preparing. I stood patiently while this tornado 

circled me, naïvely counting on truth to prevail. The only 

righteous ending here is for me to be rewarded. I tell you 

86 

this partly to vent, but mostly to ask you to exert whatever 

influence you can help me. I fear I’m being made into a 

monster to be ceremoniously punished. Personally, I think 

we should celebrate an investigation that reveals nothing. 

Unfortunately, they don’t seem to see it that way. I am a 

completely innocent person who’s about to be told, “Well, 

you should have known better than to let it look like you 

were doing it.” I haven’t wanted to put up any fights, but 

this is not okay. I’m going bonkers. If there’s nothing you 

can do, I understand. Thank you for always being decent. 

Assistant Principal Hudec is aware that during the 2019-20 school year another 

student claimed M.T. was having an inappropriate relationship with another teacher, 

Mr. Medore. That student claimed M.T. was spreading rumors of having an 

inappropriate relationship with Mr. Medore. Assistant Principal Hudec spoke with 

witnesses, who did not corroborate any wrongdoing. M.T. denied that Mr. Medore had 

done anything wrong. Assistant Principal Hudec described how Mr. Medore came into 

his office very upset, advising that claims were being made against him, and he was 

“absolutely innocent and wanted no part of it.” Mr. Medore was told that the school 

had contacted the police department, and an investigation was going forward, and he 

would probably be contacted by police. 

Following the police investigation it was determined the allegations were 

unfounded. Assistant Principal Hudec also concluded that the claims were unfounded 

and unsubstantiated. Assistant Principal Hudec was unsure about what he shared 

regarding Mr. Medore’s investigation with those who performed Mr. Cleary’s 

investigation. He agreed that the allegations in both cases were serious. Assistant 

87 

Principal Hudec was not sure of when, during Mr. Cleary’s investigation, that he 

advised the district of Mr. Medore’s investigation or when he turned over the notes of 

that investigation. He does not know if it was after he received Mr. Cleary’s text. 

After Mr. Medore’s investigation, M.T. complained she was being harassed in 

class by other students. “Appropriate discipline” was assigned to M.T. and the other 

students, and parents were contacted. Assistant Principal Hudec spoke with M.T.’s 

mother, who told him that Mr. Medore had very similar features to M.T.’s biological 

father, and he referred M.T. to school counseling. 

In May 2022 Assistant Principal Hudec received a series of emails from Mr. 

Burdick, who was concerned regarding M.T.’s behavior and expressed feeling harassed. 

Mr. Burdick wanted preventative measures put in place to limit contact with her which 

was done. One measure was an Exclusion Lock. Assistant Principal Hudec does not 

know if an Exclusion Lock was put in place for Mr. Medore. 

Assistant Principal Hudec would expect teachers to notify their supervisor and 

set appropriate boundaries for M.T.’s behavior. He admitted administration never went 

to observe Mr. Cleary’s classroom, never observed what was happening with M.T. on 

campus, and he is unaware of any observations ever being performed. 

PRINCIPAL JESUS JIMENEZ  

39. 

Jesus Jimenez was the Principal at Beaumont High School for four years, 

including during the 2021-22 school year. He is currently the Director of Secondary 

Education with Fremont Unified School District. 

Principal Jimenez visited Mr. Cleary’s classroom when he did his “regular 

rounds,” but never did so “officially.” He did it to have a visible presence on campus. 

88 

He would stop by every classroom for approximately two or three minutes, and his 

visits were unannounced. Principal Jimenez never formally evaluated Mr. Cleary 

because he did not oversee the science department, another Assistant Principal would 

have done that evaluation. Principal Jimenez’s opinion of Mr. Cleary was that he was a 

good teacher. He never had any complaints regarding Mr. Cleary or his behavior from 

either parents or students, and he never witnessed any inappropriate behavior. Mr. 

Cleary had an outgoing personality, and his entire class was project-based where 

students worked in teams, and created a product or assignment. Principal Jimenez 

observed students engaged in the lessons in Mr. Cleary’s class. 

Principal Jimenez did not know M.T. He did not know if she was involved in a 

prior investigation. Her name “did not ring a bell.” He explained that administration 

consisted of a team of six administrators divided by different departments and grade 

levels. As such, unless there were appeals of the decisions made by Assistant 

Principals, certain matters never came across his desk. Of note, it was concerning 

Principal Jimenez was not even aware of M.T.’s name given all the allegations 

surrounding her, especially since they involved allegations of inappropriate 

relationships with male teachers. 

Principal Jimenez expected teachers to establish rules and follow them. He 

expected teachers to set and enforce boundaries. If students did not follow the rules 

or violated boundaries, he would expect teachers to report that to administration. Mr. 

Cleary never reported any issues regarding M.T. violating boundaries. Principal 

Jimenez first learned of the matter involving Mr. Cleary and M.T. while at the airport in 

Sacramento. He received a call from one of the Assistant Principals about the 

allegations. He was never involved in the investigation of Mr. Cleary but was made 

aware at the end of the investigation that Mr. Cleary was placed on administrative 

89 

leave. Principal Jimenez was never given any “particulars or details” of the 

investigation, and left to begin his new job at the end of the 2021-22 school year. 

Lindsey Garcia’s Rebuttal Testimony 

40. 

Complainant recalled Ms. Garcia as a rebuttal witness to refute other 

witness’ testimony. Ms. Garcia denied that she and Mr. Cleary had “dozens” of 

discussions regarding M.T. She does not recall any specific conversation, but “maybe 

two or three times” they talked about M.T. When she requested information from 

teachers to prepare for the IEP, she never received an email from Mr. Cleary. She 

recalled having a verbal discussion with him regarding M.T. taking the AP Physics 

Class, and a similar discussion at the IEP. 

Ms. Garcia does “not specifically recall” allowing M.T. to go to Mr. Cleary’s class, 

but she does not generally allow any of her students to do that. She was M.T.’s case 

manager from her freshman year until partially through her junior year, and during 

that time Ms. Garcia “did not have a practice of allowing students to go to other 

teachers’ classes.” She could not recall telling Mr. Burdick that there was an 

arrangement for M.T. to go to Mr. Cleary’s classroom. She did not “agree or disagree” 

she said that, she just could not recall making that statement. 

When Ms. Garcia was shown Mr. Medore’s email in which he wrote that Ms. 

Garcia allowed M.T. to come to his class during her non-scheduled class time, Ms. 

Garcia then testified that she would allow M.T. to go for class projects. However, she 

does not recall dropping M.T. off anywhere, let alone Mr. Medore’s class, and recalls 

having no discussions with Mr. Medore regarding M.T.’s work. Thereafter, when Ms. 

Garcia was pressed for specifics, she claimed the questions were “getting into the 

90 

weeds” and she could “not recall specifics” because these events happened “more than 

three years ago.” 

When confronted with Assistant Superintendent Castillo’s notes of her interview 

of Ms. Garcia, wherein Assistant Superintendent Castillo documented that Ms. Garcia 

stated that M.T. went to Mr. Cleary’s class sometimes, Ms. Garcia then changed her 

testimony to state that she “never claimed” she “was unaware” that M.T. was in Mr. 

Cleary’s class as she was “aware sometimes” that M.T. went to his class. When 

questioned further, Ms. Garcia then testified she would allow a student to go to 

another teacher’s class if there were “prior arrangements made.” 

Ms. Garcia does not recall Mr. Cleary asking her if it was okay that M.T. came to 

his class. She recalled seeing M.T. in his class one time when she was supposed to be 

in LIP, and Ms. Garcia gestured to M.T. through the window to leave and return to LIP. 

Ms. Garcia stated that she wanted M.T. to use her LIP wisely and get the additional 

support she needed. 

Ms. Garcia’s testimony was contradictory, and unsupported by other reliable 

evidence. Her demeanor made her appear hostile and defensive. In short, her 

testimony was not credible. 

Testimony of District’s Professional Education Provider 

41. 

Diane Cranley is a consultant for the district, who specializes in child 

sexual abuse. She has been training districts and community members since 2007. She 

works for Keenan and Associates, a joint powers authority/insurance company that 

offers training to its members, such as the district. Ms. Cranley described her work as 

consisting of two parts: she provides support groups for parents of children who have 

been abused and adult survivors of abuse; and she provides training for parents, 

91 

school districts, and law enforcement agencies on how to prevent sexual abuse. Since 

2014 she has been primarily providing trainings for school districts. Those include 

preventing sexual abuse in schools and providing best practices for school districts. 

Ms. Cranley provided two-hour on-site trainings for district staff in 2017 and 

again in 2018. Staff who attended her trainings were provided certificates of 

completion.13 The content of the trainings focused on understanding grooming 

behaviors, which often appear in child molestation cases before boundaries are 

crossed, and on providing her eight best practices for protecting the sexual innocence 

of children. She explained how grooming and boundary crossing have become the key 

parts of her trainings. Ms. Cranley reviewed the topics she discussed, which covered 

the stages of grooming in depth. She described the different types of boundaries that 

exist, and how violating boundaries can be precursors to grooming behaviors. She 

stated it is important for teachers to have appropriate boundaries to set students’ 

expectations regarding those boundaries. 

Expert Witness Testimony 

42. 

Deirdre M. D’Orazio, Ph.D., received her Bachelor of Arts in psychology 

from Villanova University; and her Master of Arts in clinical psychology and her Ph.D. in 

clinical psychology with a forensic psychology proficiency from the California School of 

Professional Psychology at Alliant University. Dr. D’Orazio has extensive training, 

education, and experience working with and treating sexual offenders and their 

victims. She has written numerous publications and taught several courses and 

workshops. She has received education and presented workshops and trainings 

13 Certificates attesting to Mr. Cleary’s attendance at trainings were received. 

92 

 
regarding groomers and grooming behaviors. Her credentials were impeccable, and 

she presented as an extremely accomplished and knowledgeable expert. 

Dr. D’Orazio reviewed the documents at issue in this matter, and met four times 

with complainant’s counsel. She did not interview Mr. Cleary or any of the students, 

and based her opinions on the documents and information she obtained from counsel. 

She testified about the common tactics or strategies that are used in the grooming 

process. She explained the seven steps groomers typically take with the vulnerable 

target, which include choosing the target, gaining access to the target, isolating the 

target, building trust, normalizing successive boundary violations, normalizing the 

behavior, and giving the target special treatment. Dr. D’Orazio described how Mr. 

Cleary’s interactions with M.T. satisfied those seven grooming criteria, but 

acknowledged that groomers often are not aware that their behavior is grooming 

behavior. However, the behavior becomes more intentional as the groomer proceeds 

through the seven steps, and groomers are likely to deny their behaviors. Dr. D’Orazio 

opined that M.T. was a vulnerable target, and detailed the lasting negative effects the 

grooming behavior can have on the target. 

Dr. D’Orazio was aware of “some concerns” regarding other male teachers but 

was not told any of the details other than that those allegations were unfounded and 

those teachers were not disciplined. Those incidents did not affect her opinions 

regarding Mr. Cleary. Dr. D’Orazio would not be surprised if M.T. made complaints 

against other teachers because her school records and texts chronicled a pattern of 

behaviors. Dr. D’Orazio explained that this is why it is incumbent upon adults to set 

and enforce boundaries. Adults should redirect and enforce limits when children do 

not adhere to those boundaries. 

93 

Character Witness Testimony 

43. 

Isaac Hasan is a former Beaumont High School student who is currently 

employed as a thermal design and aerospace engineer at General Atomics in San 

Diego. He graduated from Beaumont High School in 2018, and was an aerospace 

engineering major at Cal Poly Pomona where he graduated in 2022. Mr. Hassan had 

Mr. Cleary as a teacher for two years; for physics as a sophomore and then for AP 

physics during his junior year in high school. Mr. Hasan was also a teacher’s assistant 

in one of Mr. Cleary’s regular physics classes. Mr. Hasan said he was always a smart kid 

who did well in math, and when he took Mr. Cleary’s course he just loved physics and 

decided to make it a career. 

He described Mr. Cleary as “a great teacher” who “took a lot of time to take care 

of students to make sure they understood the material.” Mr. Cleary was not a 

traditional teacher and did not teach in the usual way. The students were given specific 

videos to watch and Mr. Cleary took a hands on approach to learning. Mr. Hasan said, 

“I am where I am today because of things I was taught in that class.” Mr. Cleary hosted 

the ping pong club at lunch where there were lots of students, Mr. Cleary was never 

alone with students. Mr. Cleary’s classroom was “an open and free space” were 

students were “open and could ask questions.” Mr. Cleary was never unprofessional. 

District Policies and Board Regulations 

44. 

District policies and board regulations regarding ethics, mandated 

reporting, preventing and reporting child abuse, and establishing boundaries were 

introduced. Mr. Cleary acknowledged receiving those documents. Complainant alleged 

that Mr. Cleary’s actions violated provisions of those policies and regulations. 

94 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Code Sections Regarding Dismissal Actions 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44934 and 44944.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 

permanent employee. Subdivision (a)(2) authorizes dismissal for unprofessional 

conduct. Subdivision (a)(1) authorizes dismissal for immoral conduct. Subdivision (a)(4) 

authorizes dismissal for dishonesty. Subdivision (a)(6) authorizes dismissal for evident 

unfitness for service. Subdivision (a)(8) authorizes dismissal for persistent violation or 

refusal to obey regulations and district polices. 

3. 

Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the 

process for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and 

sets forth the Commissions’ authority regarding its final decision. 

4. 

Education Code section 44938 outlines the procedures the governing 

board must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent 

employee. 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

5. 

The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, to convince the 

trier of fact that the existence of a fact sought to be proved is more probable than its 

nonexistence. (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 

1128.) The district has the burden of proof to establish cause to dismiss its employee. 

95 

6. 

The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) A preponderance of the evidence means that 

the evidence on one side of an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than, 

the evidence on the other side of the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or 

quantity, but in the convincing effect the evidence has on those to whom it is 

addressed. In other words, the term refers to evidence that has more convincing force 

than that opposed to it. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 

Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

Applicable Board Policies and Regulations 

BOARD POLICIES 

7. 

Board Policy Nos. 4119.21, 4119.21, 5141.4, 5145.3, and Administrative 

Regulation Nos. 5141.4, 5145.3 set forth the professional standards the board expects 

of its employees. As noted, the board expects district employees to “maintain the 

highest ethical standards, behave professionally, follow District policies and 

regulations,” “exercise good judgment when interacting with students and other 

members of the school community,” and “engage in conduct that enhances the 

integrity of the District, advances the goals of the District’s educational programs, and 

contributes to a positive school climate.” The board further expects its employees to 

report suspected child abuse. 

96 

Relevant Judicial Authority 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

8. 

“Immoral conduct” is conduct hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and is not confined to sexual matters. (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission 

on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) 

9. 

There are certain professions which impose upon persons attached to 

them responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action, which do not exist in 

regard to other callings. Public officials such as judges, policemen, and schoolteachers 

fall into such a category. (Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 

824.) 

10. 

“As between a teacher and his student, ‘(a)n important part of the 

education . . . is the instilling of a proper respect for authority and obedience to 

necessary discipline. Lessons are learned from example as well as from precept.’ 

(Citation.) ‘A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 

by the [students] coming under [his] care and protection. . . . The teaching by example 

as well as precept, of obedience to properly constituted authority and discipline 

necessary to a well ordered society, is an important part of education.’” (Watson v. 

State Bd. of Education (1971) 22 Cal.App.3d 559, 565.) 

11. 

“The calling of an educator is so intimate, its duties so delicate, the things 

in which a teacher might prove unworthy or would fail are so numerous that they are 

incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment. The educator’s ability to inspire 

children and to govern them, his power as an educator, and the character for which he 

stands are matters of major concern in an educator’s selection and retention. . . . An 

97 

educator in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light 

of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the students 

coming under his care and protection. (Citation.)” (San Diego Unified School District v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-64.) 

12. 

The governing board of a district is entrusted with the conduct of the 

schools under its jurisdiction, their standards of education, and the moral, mental, and 

physical welfare of the pupils during school hours. An important part of the education 

of any child is the instilling of a proper respect for authority and obedience to 

necessary discipline. Lessons are learned from example as well as from precept. “Book 

learning” is only a phase of the important lessons a child should learn in a school. 

(Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 

967, 970–71.) 

13. 

Immoral conduct cannot be considered in the abstract. It must be 

considered in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is 

hostile to the welfare of the general public; more specifically, conduct which is hostile 

to the welfare of the school community. In providing standards to guide school boards 

in placing restraints on conduct of teachers, the Legislature is concerned with the 

welfare of the school community. Its objective is the protection of students from 

corruption. This is a proper exercise of the power of a state to abridge personal liberty 

and to protect larger interests. But reasonableness must be the governing criterion. 

(Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224.) The phrase “immoral 

conduct” within the meaning of the Education Code denotes immoral or 

unprofessional conduct or moral turpitude of the teacher that renders the teacher 

unfit to teach. (Ibid. at p. 225.) 

98 

14. 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. The term “immoral 

conduct” has been defined to include conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative 

of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. “Immoral conduct” is not confined to sexual matters. It includes an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. It is sometimes 

synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (Board of Ed. of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, noting that 

no other California cases had previously defined the term “immoral conduct.”) 

15. 

Rejecting statutory terms, such as “immorality,” “unprofessional conduct,” 

or “moral turpitude” as overly broad to use as grounds for discipline of public school 

teachers, the court in Morrison, supra, created a seven-part test to assess whether a 

misbehaving teacher is fit to teach. (Broney v. California Com. on Teacher 

Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 466.) “Because terms such as ‘immoral,’ 

‘unprofessional,’ or ‘involving moral turpitude’ are too broad and amorphous to be 

used as a basis for the termination of a professional license, it must be shown the 

conduct in question indicates an unfitness to engage in the profession.” (Id. at pp. 

473-74.) 

16. 

Since the term “immoral conduct” is vague and broad, whether the 

conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach must be measured against seven criteria 

set forth in Morrison, supra. (Governing Board of ABC Unified School District v. Haar 

(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 383.) 

99 

DISHONESTY 

17. 

In Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn 

12, the Supreme Court required application of the Morrison, supra, factors to the 

determination of “dishonesty.” As the Court noted: “Dishonest conduct may range 

from the smallest fib to the most flagrant lie. Not every impropriety will constitute 

immoral or unprofessional conduct, and not every falsehood will constitute 

‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.” (Ibid.) 

18. 

In an often-cited definition, the court stated in Hogg v. Real Estate 

Commissioner (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 712, 717: 

Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of bad faith. As 

defined in the dictionaries and in judicial decisions, it means 

fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness. [Citations.] As put 

by the court in Alsup v. State, 91 Tex. Cr. 224, . . . 

‘dishonesty denotes an absence of integrity; a disposition to 

cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive and betray.’ 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

19. 

The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher dismissal cases 

is whether the person is fit to teach. “Fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact. 

(Board of Education v. Commission on Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 

555, 560-561.) 

20. 

“Evident” is defined as “clear to the vision and understanding.” “Unfit” is 

defined as “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; incapable; incompetent; and 

physically or mentally unsound” and “unsuitable, incompetent and not adapted for a 

100 

particular use or service.” (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside County v. 

Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 

21. 

In Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, the court noted the two parallel, yet 

contradictory, lines of cases regarding “unfit for service.” One line of cases equated 

that term with “unprofessional conduct” and the other line of cases distinguished the 

two definitions. In deciding that the latter line of cases was the correct way to evaluate 

“unfit to serve,” and complied with the rules of statutory construction. The Woodland 

court concluded that “unprofessional conduct” and “evident unfitness for service” do 

not mean precisely the same thing. Although conduct constituting “evident unfitness 

for service” will often constitute “unprofessional conduct,” the converse is not always 

true. Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for service be attributable to 

defect in temperament, which is not necessary for a finding of unprofessional conduct. 

Nevertheless, lower courts may not disregard the criteria for unfitness set out in 

Morrison where that court concluded that “unprofessional conduct” meant conduct 

showing a teacher was unfit to teach. These criteria must be analyzed to determine, as 

a threshold matter, whether the conduct indicates unfitness for service. If it does, the 

next step is to determine whether the “unfitness” is “evident”; i.e., whether the 

offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. (Id. at pp.1442-1445.) A 

finding of “unfit to serve” can be made if the evidence, taken in the aggregate, shows 

that retaining the employee would pose a significant danger of psychological harm to 

students and fellow teachers. (Id. at p.1456.) 

22. 

To establish a teacher is unfit to teach, Morrison, supra, requires a nexus 

between government employment and alleged employee misconduct stemming from 

the principle that “[n]o person can be denied government employment because of 

101 

factors unconnected with the responsibilities of that employment.” (San Diego Unified 

School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th1454, 1463.) 

23. 

“Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one’s conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing school district.’” (San 

Diego Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (2013) 214 

Cal.App.4th 1120, 1142-43.) 

24. 

An employee’s actions on a given day may suggest a lack of judgment 

and discretion, or may be an isolated act precipitated by an unusual accumulation of 

pressure and stress. An absence of any other incidents in the employee’s teaching 

career suggestive of lack of judgment or discretion can further distinguish the aberrant 

character of the act at issue. In such a case, a fact finder could reasonably conclude 

that the isolated incident of poor judgment was overweighed by years of 

demonstrated teaching competence, and that on balance the employee possessed the 

qualities of character necessary for teaching fitness. (Board of Education v. Jack M. 

(1977) 19 Cal. 3d 691, 696-701.) 

25. 

The nexus between an employee’s conduct and his fitness to teach is 

established when the conduct is detrimental to the mission and functions of the 

employer. Factors to consider are whether the acts demonstrate a serious lapse in 

good judgment, the teacher failed to recognize the seriousness of his misconduct, the 

teacher attempted to shift blame to parents and students who might access his 

posting, his principal had lost confidence in his ability to serve as a role model based 

upon the posting, or, most noteworthy, the teacher’s testimony that he did not think 

his postings would have any impact on his ability to teach his students if any of them 

102 

had viewed his post and that he did not view his posting as immoral. The conduct 

itself, together with the teacher’s failure to accept responsibility or recognize the 

seriousness of it, given his position as a teacher and role model, demonstrates evident 

unfitness to teach. (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1465-66.) 

26.  One act does not alone demonstrate the unfitness of the teacher, but is 

simply one of the factors to be considered. (Board of Education v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1980) 102 Cal. App.3d 555, 561-62.) 

27. 

There must be a nexus between the teacher’s conduct and his usefulness 

to the school district and only when so construed can grounds to dismiss for immoral 

conduct or unfitness to serve be constitutionally applied. (Board of Trustees v. Judge 

(1975) 50 Cal. App. 3d 920, 929.) 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF OR REFUSAL TO OBEY LAWS 

28. 

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent; 

continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly 

repeated.” (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 

Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) Education Codes section 44932, subdivision (7) pertains to 

unintentional as well as intentional transgressions, and hence the Legislature has 

decreed that a single violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal, apparently to 

allow for correction; “it is the persistent disregard” of school rules that the subdivision 

is designed to regulate. (Id. at p.84.) 

103 

Evaluation of the Causes for Dismissal  

29.  Mr. Cleary’s behavior demonstrated a lack of maturity and lack of good 

judgment. However, it did not constitute immoral conduct or an unfitness to teach. Mr. 

Cleary is a friendly, student-oriented teacher, whose classroom had little formal 

structure allowing students to freely move around the classroom, hallway, and 

outdoors as they worked on physics projects. In addition, it did not appear that Mr. 

Cleary had ever established any supportive relationships with colleagues or reached 

out to administration to address student issues. This combination of a loose classroom 

environment and lack of colleague support greatly contributed to what occurred. 

Mr. Cleary also demonstrated a naïveté of thinking he could befriend and help 

students, but was clearly in over his head with M.T. She was an emotionally disturbed, 

conniving, dishonest student who fixated on male teachers and erroneously 

interpreted their actions as demonstrating love and/or affection for her. It does not 

appear that any boundaries or behavior plans were ever put in place for M.T., and she 

was allowed to freely roam the halls of Beaumont High School causing mischief. Mr. 

Cleary was left without any support to try and help M.T. 

M.T.’s allegations as a freshman that Mr. Medore was being investigated for 

grooming her, that she was being swabbed, and confirming with teachers that they 

were required to report her comments to CPS because they are mandated reporters, 

suggested a level of awareness regarding the attention her claims would attract. 

However, that awareness possessed by a student as immature and emotionally 

disturbed as M.T., was a precarious situation as evidenced in this matter. Mr. Cleary 

was, unfortunately, unaware of M.T.’s prior behaviors and false allegations and fell prey 

to what he thought was a troubled student he could help. Similarly, Mr. Medore’s 

email, even after he was aware of the allegations made against him, also demonstrated 

104 

a naïve teacher who still praised M.T. For whatever reason, Mr. Cleary, like Mr. Medore, 

failed to appreciate how dangerous a student like M.T. could be. 

The Commission did not find K.M. to be a credible witness. The claims that she 

observed more that occurred in the classroom than other students because she was 

“looking out for M.T.” were not persuasive. K.M. participated in the plot to make Mr. 

Cleary jealous, exchanged multiple texts with M.T. regarding Mr. Cleary, erroneously 

thought M.T. was receiving an A grade for doing nothing, whereas K.M. ’s grade was a 

D, and made allegations about classroom behavior that no other students observed. In 

short, the Commission discounted much of her testimony. 

Other students observed some of the alleged behaviors, the game of tag, 

throwing ping pong balls, M.T.’s swearing, M.T. writing on objects, and M.T. sitting at 

Mr. Cleary’s desk, none of which rose to the level of immoral conduct. Rather, those 

activities supported the Commission’s finding that Mr. Cleary is immature and 

exercised poor judgment. Further, Mr. Cleary did not “allow” M.T. to swear in class. He 

would talk to her when she did so, but, like her other behaviors, it was all but 

impossible to get her to stop. It was not established that M.T. ever ate lunch alone in 

Mr. Cleary’s classroom. It was not established that M.T. informing Mr. Cleary about her 

health or him asking how she was constituted immoral conduct. It was not established 

that allowing her to grade labs constituted immoral conduct. M.T.’s IEP team was 

aware she was grading papers, as were other teachers. 

The behaviors that were concerning, Mr. Cleary writing on M.T.’s personal items, 

hugging her, and allowing M.T. to lean on him, again clearly showed Mr. Cleary 

exercised serious lapses in judgment, but did not establish immoral conduct. The one 

student who, one morning before class started, observed what looked like an 

“intimate” conversation between Mr. Cleary and M.T. while they were sitting close on 

105 

the ping pong table was concerning, as was another student’s claim that M.T. rubbed 

her hand up Mr. Cleary’s thigh. However, neither student notified administration of 

what they observed until after they were interviewed by the district after Mr. Cleary 

was placed on leave. 

The student who saw the “intimate” setting acknowledged there were six or 

seven other students in the classroom at the time, and the student who saw the thigh 

incident said it occurred during class. While the Commission was troubled by these 

two claims, in light of all the other evidence presented, the Commission could not 

conclude that these incidents occurred or, if they did, that they rose to the level of 

immoral conduct. The “intimate” incident seemed to be a teacher and student talking 

before class began in the presence of several other students. It did not appear to rise 

to the level of constituting immoral conduct. If the thigh incident did occur, the 

student said Mr. Cleary got up and walked away, which would support Mr. Cleary’s 

claims that he did nothing to encourage M.T.’s behavior. A teacher retreating from a 

student’s improper advances does not constitute immoral conduct. Again, the 

incidents showed poor judgment but not immoral conduct. 

Regarding M.T.’s actions in class, Mr. Cleary was forbidden by law to share 

M.T.’s accommodations with other students. Accordingly, he was not allowed to tell 

them why she was allowed to sit at his desk, why she did not complete her work, or 

why she came to his class during other periods. It appeared that Mr. Cleary did his 

best to implement M.T.’s IEP accommodations, and received no support from 

administration. Although at this hearing district witnesses criticized Mr. Cleary for 

letting M.T. sit at his desk, at no time was Mr. Cleary ever instructed of what to do to 

implement M.T.’s IEP accommodations and he thought he was complying with them. 

Complainant did not establish that Mr. Cleary allowing M.T. to sit at his desk was not a 

106 

“preferential seating” accommodation. Testimony from administrators criticizing Mr. 

Cleary for allowing her to do so was not persuasive or supported by any reliable 

evidence. 

In addition, all of M.T.’s teachers were aware when she was in Mr. Cleary’s class 

during her non-assigned periods. It was prearranged that she was allowed to go to Mr. 

Cleary’s classroom, and Ms. Garcia’s testimony to the contrary was not credible. As Mr. 

Burdick credibly testified, when he first began teaching at Beaumont High School, he 

asked Ms. Garcia why M.T. was not in his LIP class as scheduled, and she told him there 

was a prearrangement allowing M.T. to go to Mr. Cleary’s class during other periods. 

Complainant did not establish that Mr. Cleary allowing M.T. to be in his classroom 

during her non-schedule periods constituted immoral conduct. 

Further, despite numerous issues with M.T. and other male teachers and several 

emails indicating a behavior plan would be put in place in M.T.’s IEP, one was never 

created. The district never took effective steps to stop M.T.’s behavior towards male 

teachers. She still continued to enter the special education office and harass Mr. 

Burdick. The Exclusion Lock did not work as the following year M.T. was placed in two 

of Mr. Burdick’s classes. Despite an IEP meeting and calls for a behavior plan, nothing 

more was done. Moreover, Mr. Cleary was never given any warning about M.T.’s past 

actions or her issues, so he had no way of knowing he needed to be extra cautious 

around her. 

Although complainant’s expert, Dr. D’Orazio, was well credentialed and 

established in her field, her opinions that Mr. Cleary’s behavior constituted “grooming” 

were not persuasive. As she also acknowledged, individuals can engage in behaviors 

without realizing they are “grooming behaviors.” The Commission determined that 

107 

while Mr. Cleary’s actions showed immaturity and a lack of good judgment, he was not 

grooming M.T. 

Accordingly, cause does not exist to dismiss Mr. Cleary pursuant to Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), because complainant did not prove by a 

preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Cleary engaged in immoral conduct. 

30.  Mr. Cleary was not completely forthcoming regarding the tag/chase 

game he and M.T. played in class. His rationale for writing on her personal items was 

concerning and inexcusable. He also gave long, often rambling, answers trying to 

justify his behavior and make it sound harmless rather than owning up to his 

immaturity and poor judgment. However, his actions did not rise to level of 

constituting dishonesty. Moreover, given that the majority of the charges were not 

proven, it was not established that Mr. Cleary was dishonest when he denied engaging 

in those behaviors when interviewed. Mr. Cleary’s testimony regarding his attempts to 

explain what occurred and how his answers were misconstrued was persuasive. He 

appeared to be completely caught off guard by allegations, which inexplicably 

snowballed in the face of a student with a prior history of making similar false 

allegations and with an administration that did nothing to stop M.T. 

Accordingly, cause does not exist to dismiss Mr. Cleary pursuant to Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(), because complainant did not prove by a 

preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Cleary engaged in dishonesty. 

31. 

Complainant did not establish that Mr. Cleary had a defect in 

temperament making him evidently unfit for service. He had a good rapport overall 

with his students. He received good yearly evaluations. There was no evidence that he 

was a danger to staff or children. It appeared he had a safe environment for his physics 

108 

class, and the students looked actively engaged in the class work. It appeared that Mr. 

Cleary could use some guidance regarding establishing stronger classroom 

boundaries, establishing stronger relationships with colleagues, and not trying to be 

his students’ friend. The Commission felt that most of his issues with M.T. stemmed 

from the fact that he wanted his students to like him, but he needs to establish 

stronger teacher/student boundaries. The Commission was also concerned that 

administration never followed through to put a behavioral plan in M.T.’s IEP or notified 

Mr. Cleary about her issues with male teachers. His classroom environment, combined 

with a student with M.T.’s issues, and his wanting to be a friend to students was “a 

perfect storm” for a situation like this to occur. However, it did not demonstrate that 

he was unfit to serve. 

Accordingly, cause does not exist to dismiss Mr. Cleary pursuant to Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), because complainant did not prove by a 

preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Cleary was evidently unfit for service. 

32. 

Some of Mr. Cleary’s actions were persistent, weird, and immature. He 

did not set sufficient boundaries with M.T., and his games of chase, throwing ping-

pong balls, and writing on her personal belongings was not professional. Mr. Cleary 

could have done more to stop M.T.’s swearing, such as calling her parent, writing M.T. 

up, or reaching out to administrators for help. However, his explanation for why he did 

not file a CPS report was reasonable. He also gave M.T. a grade of D, so she was not 

receiving preferential treatment. His actions did persistently violate some of the 

district’s policies and regulations. 

Accordingly, cause exists to dismiss Mr. Cleary pursuant to Education Code 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), because complainant proved by a preponderance of 

the evidence that Mr. Cleary persistently violated district policies and regulations. 

109 

Evaluation of the Cause to Suspend Mr. Cleary Without Pay 

33.  Mr. Cleary was suspended without pay based on assertions that he 

engaged in immoral conduct. As was discussed above, complainant failed to establish 

that Mr. Cleary engaged in immoral conduct. In cases decided under former Education 

Code section 13408, from which Education Code section 44939 was derived, courts 

have historically determined that district employees are entitled to back pay, benefits 

and interest when the district failed to establish charges at hearing upon which the 

suspension was based, even if the employee was dismissed from employment on other 

grounds. (Mass v. Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District 

(1964) 61 Cal.2d 612; Board of Education of Los Angeles County v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1976) 61 Cal.App.3d 664; and Von Durjais v. Board of 

Trustees Roseland School District (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 681.) 

Therefore, having found Mr. Cleary did not engage in immoral conduct, cause 

does not exist to suspend him without pay. Mr. Cleary is entitled to back pay, benefits, 

and interest accrued during the period of his suspension. 

Morrison Factors 

34.  Having found cause to discipline Mr. Cleary, the issue becomes what 

discipline to impose. In deciding that question, the seminal case for teacher dismissals 

is Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. The Supreme Court held 

that a district “cannot abstractly characterize the conduct . . .as ‘immoral,’ 

‘unprofessional,’ or ‘involving moral turpitude’ . . . unless that conduct indicates that 

the [teacher] is unfit to teach.” (Id. at p. 229.) The Supreme Court suggested seven 

factors to consider when evaluating whether the school employee should be 

dismissed: 

110 

(1) the likelihood that the conduct adversely affected 

students or fellow teachers and the degree of such 

adversity; 

(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; 

(4) the existence of extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the 

conduct; 

(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct;  

and (7) the extent that the discipline may adversely impact 

or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the 

teacher. 

(Id. at p. 229.) 

The Supreme Court found these “factors are relevant to the extent that they 

assist the [district] in determining whether the teacher's fitness to teach, i.e., in 

determining whether the teacher's future classroom performance and overall impact 

on his students are likely to meet the [district’s] standards.” (Id. at pp. 229-230.) An 

employee can be dismissed from the teaching profession only upon a showing that his 

retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, 

school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher. The 

111 

inquiry is whether any adverse inferences can be drawn from the teacher’s conduct as 

to his teaching ability, or as to the possibility that publicity surrounding the past 

conduct may in and of itself substantially impair his function as a teacher. (Id. at p. 

235.) Those factors were considered in this decision. 

35. 

The notoriety and publicity accorded the conduct may also be 

considered. (Jack M., supra., at p.702, footnote 5.) 

36. 

The Morrison factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate. 

When a camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load 

to see which one could have done the deed. A trier of fact is entitled to consider the 

totality of the offensive conduct. (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456-1457.) 

37.  Only the pertinent Morrison factors need to be analyzed. (Broney v. 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.) 

38. 

Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct, measured by the 

Morrison factors, which indicates unfitness to teach. (Board of Education v. Jack M. (19 

70) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697; Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 

149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-1174.) 

Other Disciplinary Considerations 

39. 

An administrator’s loss of confidence in the educator and doubt 

regarding the educator’s ability to serve as a role model for students are factors that 

may be considered. (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.) 

112 

40. 

The Commission is vested with discretion not to dismiss an employee 

even if grounds for discipline exist. (Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 

45 Cal.3d 209.) 

Commission’s Determination 

41.  Having considered the charges established, and finding that Mr. Cleary 

persistently violated district policies and regulations, and considering the case law and 

applicable Morrison factors, the commission determined that cause does not exist to 

dismiss Mr. Cleary from employment in the district. The commission further 

determined that he should be reinstated with back pay with interest and benefits. 

Although it cannot order him to do so, the Commission strongly encourages Mr. 

Cleary to form stronger bonds with administration and colleagues, take additional 

training in setting classroom boundaries, and seek out more support from peers. 

ORDER 

1. 

Mr. Cleary’s appeal of his dismissal from employment with the Beaumont 

Unified School District is granted. The district’s request to dismiss Mr. Cleary is denied. 

Mr. Cleary shall not be dismissed from employment with the district. The Notice of 

Intent to Immediately Suspend Without Pay; Notice of Recommendation for Dismissal; 

and Statement of Charges filed against Mr. Cleary are hereby dismissed. 

// 

// 

// 

113 

2. 

Mr. Cleary’s appeal from the Beaumont Unified School District’s decision 

to suspend him without pay is granted. The district’s decision to suspend Mr. Cleary 

without pay pending his dismissal is reversed. The district shall pay Mr. Cleary backpay 

with interest and from the time he was suspended without pay until the date of this 

decision and restore his benefits. 

DATE:  

_________________________________ 

RAY ANDRZEJEWSKI 

Commission Member 

DATE:  

_________________________________ 

DATE: 

SCOTT RICHARDS, JR. 

Commission Member 

MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings  

114 

Ray Andrzejewski (May 5, 2023 17:49 PDT)05/05/202305/05/2023Mary Agnes Matyszewski (May 8, 2023 08:00 PDT)05/08/2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
