BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
FOR THE LOMPOC UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

GARY WEST, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2022080354 

DECISION 

Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on January 9, 10, 11, 

and 18, 2023. 

On August 12, 2022, the parties stipulated to waive their right to designate 

commissioners to hear this matter and elected to have the ALJ hear the matter alone 

pursuant to Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(1). 

Matthew P. Juhl-Darlington and Leilani Battiste, Attorneys, represented 

complainant Debbie Blow, Superintendent of the Lompoc Unified School District 

(District). Paul Bommersbach, party representative and District administrator was 

present throughout hearing. 

Jason Wojciechowski and Estephanie Villalpando, Attorneys, represented Gary 

West (Respondent), who was present throughout hearing. 

The attorneys respectively representing Respondent, and the student in 

question and his parents in Respondent’s pending civil lawsuit against the student and 

his parents, observed the hearing. The attorney for the student and his parents, 

Rebecca D. Martino, observed the hearing on January 9, 2023. Respondent’s attorney, 

Roger Fredrickson, observed the hearing on January 10, 11, and 18, 2023. 

Testimonial and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed 

and the matter was submitted for decision on January 18, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

The District seeks to dismiss Respondent on grounds of immoral conduct, evident 

unfitness for service and persistent refusal to obey school laws. Respondent disputed 

some of the factual allegations and argued that grounds for dismissal do not exist. The 

District established through a preponderance of the evidence Respondent’s dismissal 

was warranted based on his immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service. The 

evidence presented by the District was insufficient to establish Respondent persistently 

refused to obey school laws. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Introduction and Summary of Findings 

1. 

On February 1, 2022, Cabrillo High School (Cabrillo) administration 

received a complaint from a Cabrillo student’s parent that during class that day, 

2 

District employee, Respondent, had grabbed his son, BDJ (also referred to as “the 

student”), a Cabrillo student, on the student’s shirt/shoulder/neck area and pushed the 

student back two to three steps, squeezing the student’s neck in a choking manner as 

he pushed the student back. (Initials are used in lieu of full names to protect the 

students’ privacy. In some instances, first name and last name initial are used when 

students have the same initials to avoid confusion.) The incident took no more than 

several seconds. After the incident, Respondent kicked BDJ off the football team and 

then, after the student left the class, used the profane word “fuck” in front of the other 

remaining students in the class during a lecture about why he had kicked BDJ off the 

football team and the type of behavior Respondent expected from the football class 

going forward. 

2. 

The allegations against Respondent were reported and investigated by 

both Cabrillo’s School Resource Officer (SRO) on behalf of law enforcement, and 

Cabrillo’s administrators, Principal Mark Swanitz and Paul Bommersbach, a District 

administrator. During the simultaneous SRO criminal investigation and Cabrillo’s 

administration investigation, some students indicated they saw Respondent grab BDJ. 

A few students indicated they saw Respondent grab BDJ near his shoulders or neck. 

Some students also claimed they did not see anything. After a two-day investigation 

conducted between February 2 and 4, 2022, Cabrillo’s SRO determined Respondent 

did not commit a crime and closed the criminal investigation, forwarding his findings 

to the District Attorney’s office, who ultimately declined to press criminal charges 

against Respondent. (Ex. 17.) Cabrillo’s administration forwarded its inconclusive 

findings to the District. 

3. 

On or about February 7, 2022, the District, concerned with the serious 

nature of the allegations against Respondent and the quality and impartiality of the 

3 

Cabrillo administration and the SRO’s investigations, retained Public Interest 

Investigations, Inc. (PII), to conduct an outside independent investigation of the 

allegations and make factual findings. During PII’s investigation, several students again 

indicated they saw Respondent grab BDJ around the neck; a few students reported 

seeing Respondent grab BDJ near the neck or shoulder area; some students changed 

their original statements; and several students said they did not see anything. 

4. 

PII’s investigation concluded, by a preponderance of the evidence, that 

on February 1, 2022, during seventh-period football class: 1) Respondent grabbed the 

student with two hands near the neck area in an angry gesture that forced the student 

backward by several feet, in violation of District policies, and 2) Respondent used the 

word “fuck” in front of the class, in violation of District policy. 

5. 

Respondent denied grabbing BDJ and pushing him back during both 

investigations and at hearing. Respondent asserted at hearing that he did not 

remember touching BDJ and if he had touched the student on February 1, 2022, it was 

in “an insignificant way.” (Testimony of Respondent; Ex. 24, p. A3601.) Respondent 

admitted to kicking BJD off the team and then using the word “fuck” when speaking to 

the football class on February 1, 2022. 

6. 

As more fully discussed below, based on the weight of the credible 

evidence, it was established at hearing through a preponderance of the evidence that: 

1) Respondent grabbed BDJ with one hand near the neck, shoulder, and shirt area in 

an angry gesture and applied pressure to the student’s neck, shoulder, and shirt area 

which forced the student backward by between one and three feet, in violation of 

District polices, and 2) Respondent used the word “fuck” in front of the class, in 

violation of District policies. 

4 

Jurisdictional Matters 

7. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. He 

holds a physical education credential and holds a pupil personnel services credential 

for high school counseling. He has been an educator at various schools for 

approximately 39 years. 

8. 

On June 28, 2022, then-Deputy Superintendent Bree B. Valla (former DP 

Valla), recommended to the District’s Governing Board of Education (Board) 

Respondent be placed on immediate unpaid suspension and dismissed pursuant to 

Education Code sections 44932 and 44939. (Statutory references are to the Education 

Code.) The Board approved former DP Valla’s recommendation, and on June 29, 2022, 

the District notified Respondent of the Board’s decision. 

9. 

On August 12, 2022, the District filed a Statement of Charges and 

Recommendation for Dismissal and for Immediate Unpaid Suspension, seeking 

Respondent’s dismissal. The parties stipulated to waive their right to designate a 

commissioner to hear this matter and elected to have the ALJ hear the matter alone 

pursuant to Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(1). 

10. 

Respondent thereafter requested a hearing. 

11.  On October 11, 2022, Deputy Superintendent Debbie L. Blow (DP Blow), 

recommended to the Board Respondent be placed on immediate unpaid suspension 

and dismissed pursuant to sections 44932 and 44939 based on an Amended 

Statement of Charges and Recommendation for Dismissal and For Immediate Unpaid 

Suspension. 

5 

12.  On October 11, 2022, the District filed a Motion to Amend the Statement 

of Charges with OAH. The District sought to remove references to an August 25, 2010 

incident and subsequent disciplinary interventions included in the Statement of 

Charges because such reference falls outside of the statute of limitations and are 

outside of the scope of the issues to be considered by OAH at hearing. Respondent 

did not oppose the District’s motion. On October 31, 2022, the District’s motion was 

granted by the ALJ. 

13.  On November 1, 2022, the District filed and served the Amended 

Statement of Charges (Amended Charges). The Amended Charges are the operative 

pleading in this matter. (Ex. 20.) 

Background Summary 

14. 

Respondent has been a permanent certificated employee of the District 

for approximately 22 years. His most recently assignment for the past four years was 

as Cabrillo’s Athletic Director. Before teaching physical education, Respondent worked 

as a counselor for 15 years at Cabrillo and was the head basketball coach. 

15.  During his tenure at Cabrillo, Respondent taught a conflict resolution 

class to students whose class curriculum included teaching students who were in 

conflict to avoid physical confrontation by resolving conflict in a productive way. Since 

December 2021, Respondent was also the acting football coach until he was placed on 

paid administrative leave on February 3, 2022. On June 28, 2022, Respondent was 

placed on unpaid suspension pending his dismissal. 

16. 

In 2018, Respondent took over Cabrillo’s athletic director position. At 

that time, the football team had a dismal performance record of one and 29 and there 

were discipline issues with the football program. Respondent and Cabrillo’s principal 

6 

conducted an extensive search for a football coach, who was unsuccessful in turning 

the team around after two years and was not brought back as a teacher. As a result, in 

December 2021 after the football season ended, Respondent assumed the position of 

the interim football coach while he looked for a new football coach and he and the 

principal interviewed potential football coach replacements. Respondent took on the 

interim football coach position because he believed he was good at building culture 

and weight training instruction. His goal in assuming the interim football coach 

position was to build a “winning” football team. (Testimony of Respondent; Ex. 24, p. 

A3604.) 

17. 

As part of his acting football coach duties, Respondent taught a seventh-

period physical education class for football players (football class or class). The class 

consisted of approximately 40 students some of whom were members of the Cabrillo 

football team. At the time Respondent became the interim football coach, the Cabrillo 

football team had lost approximately 48 football games in a row. Respondent’s 

primary goal in assuming his duties as the interim football coach was to help the 

football team turn their losing streak around. To achieve that goal, Respondent, who 

believed in strict discipline as a coaching tool, introduced the football team to his 

winning philosophy which consisted of four things: positive attitude, commitment, 

discipline, and work ethic. Because it was the off season, the team did not practice the 

game of football. 

18. 

Instead, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, Respondent took the 

football class to the weight room for the seventh period and for an additional 45 

minutes after school. On Tuesdays and Thursdays, Respondent led the football class in 

a classroom setting where the team discussed goals and engaged in team culture 

building. Respondent read out of a book called, “Championship Mindset,” as a tool to 

7 

help the football class change their mindsets to a winning mindset. The remainder of 

the class period was a study hall where the football class could work on their grades. 

19. 

The typical classroom routine on the Tuesday and Thursday study hall 

days consisted of students coming in, putting their cell phones in a filing cabinet 

located at one of the back corners of the classroom so they would not be interrupted 

or attempt to be on their phones, and then taking their seats. By all accounts, the 

beginning of the football class was somewhat chaotic because approximately 40 

students entered all at once and made their way to their seats after depositing their 

phones in the file cabinet. To assist in football class management and to promote 

leadership roles by football team members, Respondent placed several football team 

members in positions of authority, assigning four of the football class team members 

captain positions. The job of the football team captains in the football class included, 

among other things, locking the filing cabinet with the cell phones and quieting down 

the football class. The football team captains included AC, TJ, JZ, and RH. 

20. 

Respondent’s daily custom and practice was to greet the students at the 

classroom door and then take roll by either walking through the rows by the students’ 

desks or waiting until the bell rang and all the students were seated in their seats. One 

to two students sat per desk in the classroom. Respondent’s daily habit and custom 

when greeting students as they entered the football class or when he worked with the 

students in the weight room included touching most students with “a pat, a tap, a 

handshake, a fist bump, a high five or whatever it might be.” (Testimony of 

Respondent; Ex. 24, p. A3644.) 

21. 

After Respondent took roll, either he or a student he chose would go to 

the head of the classroom and read a portion or section the “Championship Mindset” 

book and then discuss the book reading for about five to ten minutes. The remaining 

8 

time would consist of a study hall. Respondent allowed those football class students 

who were in season in winter sports, such as basketball, or had another sport they 

were working on to leave the football class early to go to either their games or 

practice. Cabrillo student athletes generally carry two backpacks at school, one for 

their schoolbooks and one for their athletic equipment. 

22. 

BDJ was a then-14-year-old freshman at Cabrillo on the junior varsity (JV) 

football and basketball teams. BDJ had been a District student since kindergarten at 

the time of the incident. He was under an Individual Education Program (IEP) since 

approximately elementary school based on struggles with memory and retaining 

information. 

23. 

At the time of the hearing, BDJ was no longer a District student, having 

left Cabrillo high school in April 2022 due to the February 1, 2022 incident and 

subsequent negative fall-out from BDJ’s accusations against Respondent. The 

accusations caused Respondent, a well-like long-standing Cabrillo teacher, to be 

placed on leave, to the detriment of the Cabrillo’s football program. BDJ now attends 

high school in Nevada and resides with his grandparents. The rest of BDJ’s family, 

including his parents, continue to reside in Lompoc. 

Applicable Board Policies and Administrative Regulation 

BOARD POLICY 4119.21/4319.21 

24. 

Board Policy (BP) 4119.21/4319.21 is the District’s statement of 

Professional Standards. It specifies the Board’s expectations for how employees are to 

behave. The preamble of this policy states: 

9 

The Governing Board expects district employees to 

maintain the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional 

behavior, follow district policies and regulations, abide by 

state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment when 

interacting with students and other members of the school 

community. Employee conduct should enhance the integrity 

of the district, advance the goals of the district’s 

educational programs and contribute to a positive school 

climate. . . . 

(Ex. 20, p. A675.) 

25. 

BP 4119.21/4319.21 also outlines what is considered inappropriate 

employee conduct by the District, providing that “any employee who is found to have 

engaged in inappropriate conduct in violation of law or Board policy shall be subject 

to disciplinary action and, in the case of a certificated employee, may be subject to a 

report to the Commission on Teaching Credentialing.” (Ex. 20, p. A675.) According to 

BP 4119.21/4319.21, the District considers inappropriate employee conduct to include, 

but not be limited to, “engaging in any conduct that endangers students,” “engaging 

in harassing or discriminatory behavior towards students,” and “physically abusing . . . 

or otherwise willfully harming or injuring a child.” (Ibid.) The use of “profane, obscene, 

or abusive language against students” is also considered inappropriate. (Id. at p. A676.) 

ADMINISTRATIVE ETHICS REGULATION E 4127 

26. 

Administrative Regulation E 4127 (E 4127) is the District’s Code of Ethical 

Conduct for Athletic Team Coaches and states, in relevant part: 

10 

5. Respect – treat all people with respect all of the time and 

require the same of student athletes. [¶] . . . [¶] 

10. Profanity – don’t engage in or permit profanity or 

obscene gestures during practices, sporting events, on team 

busses, or any other situation where the behavior could 

reflect badly on the school or the sports program. 

11. Positive Coaching – use positive coaching methods to 

make the experience enjoyable, increase self-esteem and 

foster a love for the sport. Refrain from physical or 

psychological intimidation, verbal abuse and conduct that is 

demeaning to student athletes or others. 

(Ex. 20, p. A684, emphasis in original.) 

BP 5137 

27. 

BP 5137 is the District’s statement dedicated to fostering a positive 

school climate and prohibits discrimination, harassment and bullying of students. The 

policy focuses on creating “an orderly, caring and nurturing educational and social 

environment in which all students can feel safe and take pride in their school and their 

achievements.” (Ex. 20, p. A689.) Pursuant to BP 5137, “[A]ll staff are expected to serve 

as role models for students by demonstrating positive, professional attitudes and 

respect toward each student and other staff members. Teachers shall use effective 

classroom management techniques based on clear expectations for student behavior.” 

(Id.) 

11 

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATION 5131.41 

28. 

Administrative Regulation (AR) 5131.41 is the District regulation that 

prohibits the use of seclusion and behavioral restraint to control student behavior by 

District staff. (Ex. 20, pp. 691-695.) AR 5131. 41 provides that “[S]eclusion and 

behavioral restraint of students shall not be used in any form as a means of coercion, 

discipline, convenience, or retaliation. (Education Code 49005.8)” (Id. at p. A692.) 

29. 

Pursuant to AR 5131.41, “behavioral restraint” is defined, in relevant part, 

as: 

physical restraint used as an intervention when a student 

presents an immediate danger to self or to others. 

Behavioral restraint does not include postural restraints or 

devices used to improve a student’s mobility and 

independent functioning rather than to restrict movement. 

(Education Code 49005.1) 

(Ex. 20, p. A692.) 

30. 

Pursuant to AR 5131.41, “physical restraint” is defined, in relevant part, as: 

a personal restriction that immobilizes or reduces the ability 

of a student to move the torso, arms, legs, or head freely. 

Physical restraint does not include a physical escort in which 

a staff member temporarily touches or holds the student’s 

hand, wrist, arm, shoulder, or back for the purpose of 

inducing a student who is acting out to walk to a safe 

location. (Education Code 49005.1) 

12 

(Ex. 20, p. A692.) 

31. 

Pursuant to AR 5131.41, “seclusion,” is defined, in relevant part, as “the 

involuntary confinement of a student alone in a room or an area from which the 

student is physically prevented from leaving. (Education Code 49005.1.)” (Ex. 20, p. 

A692.) 

32. 

AR 5131.41 provides for the limited use of seclusion or restraint by 

District staff, providing: 

Staff shall avoid the use of seclusion and behavioral 

restraint of students whenever possible. Seclusion or 

behavioral restraint may be used only to control student 

behavior that poses a clear and present danger of serious 

physical harm to the student or others, which cannot be 

prevented by a response that is less restrictive. (Education 

Code 49004.4, 49005.6, 49005.8.) 

(Ex. 20, p. A693.) 

February 1, 2022 Incident 

33. 

Respondent considered BDJ to be a class disruption who interfered with 

Respondent’s goal of creating a disciplined winning culture for the football team. 

Respondent’s assessment of BDJ as a “disruptive” student was shared by many 

students in the football class. Between the time Respondent became the interim 

football coach in December 2021 and the February 1, 2022 incident (February 1 

incident) described below, Respondent had spoken to BDJ’s father on one occasion 

about BDJ being late to class and wearing his earrings to class. At no time prior to 

13 

kicking BDJ off the football team on February 1 did Respondent speak with BDJ’s 

school counselor about BDJ’s classroom behavior. At hearing, Respondent testified he 

was not aware BDJ was under an IEP while BDJ was a student in Respondent’s football 

class and became aware of BDJ’s IEP after the February 1 incident. 

34. 

Around the time of the incident, Respondent was increasingly frustrated 

and annoyed with BDJ’s behavior in football class. The day prior to the February 1 

incident, on January 31, 2022, when the football class was in the weight room, 

Respondent described BDJ as disrupting the class when BDJ asked Respondent three 

times to go to the restroom while Respondent was taking roll and trying to get the 

weight programs organized. 

35. 

At hearing, Respondent described how he ordered BDJ to leave the 

football class on February 1 and go to see his counselor because Respondent wanted 

BDJ out of his class and, hence, off the football team. Respondent referenced BDJ’s 

repeated requests to go to the restroom during class on January 31, 2022 as a basis 

for his decision to kick BDJ off the football team on February 1. Respondent testified, 

“[A]nd [BDJ] wouldn’t sit down. [BDJ] kept asking [Respondent] and asking 

[Respondent]. So it was just kind of enough is enough. [BDJ] was being a disruption, 

and it was kind of taking the time away from what we needed to get done.” 

(Testimony of Respondent; Ex. 24; p. A3601.) 

36. 

In sum, by the time BDJ arrived to football class on February 1, 

Respondent was already frustrated and annoyed with BDJ’s ongoing behavior in the 

football class, which Respondent viewed as an impediment to his goal of forming a 

disciplined winning football team. It was in this context that Respondent’s intentional 

application of physical force on BDJ occurred on February 1, as follows. 

14 

37.  On February 1, Respondent was in the process of assigning new seats to 

the football class students. BDJ arrived at football class before the bell rang and 

realized he had forgotten his second backpack, containing his basketball equipment, in 

his prior class. BDJ wanted to get the bag because he had a basketball game that day 

and needed to leave the football class early to attend the game. As BDJ was walking to 

the filing cabinet to put his cell phone in the cabinet, he told Respondent he forgot his 

backpack and asked to get it from his last class. While BDJ had forgotten his backpack 

previously, this was the first occasion when BDJ asked Respondent to get his backpack 

from another class. 

38. 

Respondent denied BDJ’s request, telling BDJ to take his seat and wait for 

a more appropriate class time to get his bag. BDJ did not take his seat as instructed 

and continued to ask Respondent to get his bag. Respondent became increasingly 

annoyed and angry with BDJ. BDJ was standing in the aisle and Respondent was 

walking towards BDJ, taking classroom roll. The two met in the middle of the aisle, 

with BDJ again asking Respondent if he could get his bag from the other class. In 

response, Respondent angrily grabbed BDJ with one hand by the shirt/shoulder/neck 

and applied physical force and pressure, shoving the student back one to two steps 

towards his seat. 

39. 

Respondent’s physical attack on BDJ was brief, lasting seconds. BDJ’s 

breathing was not obstructed by Respondent’s grabbing and shoving him, and 

Respondent’s hand did not leave a mark on BDJ’s neck where he grabbed and shoved 

him. BDJ was scared, shocked, and embarrassed by Respondent’s grabbing and 

shoving him as many of the football class who witnessed Respondent’s actions 

laughed. 

15 

40. 

After Respondent grabbed and shoved BDJ, BDJ sat down in his seat as 

other students continued to come into the classroom. Based on the brevity of the 

physical attack and the typical daily chaotic nature of the football classroom when 

students first arrived in class, some students witnessed Respondent grab and shove 

BDJ while other students did not witness the incident. Some of the students who 

witnessed Respondent grab and shove BDJ initially laughed, not realizing the 

seriousness of the incident and shocked by Respondent’s actions. 

41. 

After the physical attack on BDJ and all the students were in their seats, 

Respondent angrily addressed BDJ, ordering BDJ to go to the counselor’s office and 

switch out of Respondent’s class. BDJ and the rest of the football class who heard 

Respondent order BDJ out of the class accurately understood Respondent’s instruction 

to mean Respondent was kicking BDJ off the football team. Prior to leaving quietly as 

instructed, BDJ asked Respondent if he could retrieve his cell phone from the filing 

cabinet. Respondent answered “yes.” BDJ gathered his belongings and left the 

classroom as instructed. 

42. 

Respondent’s use of force against BDJ, a student, on February 1, was not 

reasonable and necessary to protect himself, students, staff, or other persons. By 

grabbing and pushing BDJ on February 1, Respondent’s violated applicable District 

policies and regulations BP 4119.21/4319.21, BP 5137, E 4127, and AR 5131.41, as set 

forth in Factual Findings 24 through 41. 

43.  No evidence was presented at hearing that Respondent previously used 

physical force against any student in violation of District policy prior to his physical 

attack on BDJ on February 1. Accordingly, insufficient evidence was presented at 

hearing to establish that Respondent’s February 1 physical attack on BDJ constitutes a 

16 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the rules governing Respondent’s 

employment. 

44. 

Because Respondent was talking loudly when he ordered BDJ to leave 

the classroom and then cursed after BDJ left when addressing the football class, 

Cabrillo Assistant Vice Principal Brian Grimnes (AP Grimnes), who was passing the 

classroom, heard Respondent speaking and stopped outside the classroom. 

(Testimony of AP Grimnes; Ex. 24; p. A2902.) AP Grimnes heard Respondent order BDJ 

to leave the class, and BDJ passed AP Grimnes when he exited the classroom. AP 

Grimnes then heard Respondent lecture the class in ”a kind of animated” way after BDJ 

left about his disappointment with the football class’s behavior and lack of 

responsibility. (Id. at pp. A2903-A2904.) During his lecture, Respondent used profanity, 

stating that if any of the other football class students did not grow the “fuck” up and 

behave they could get out of the class because Respondent was not going to babysit 

them. After his lecture, Respondent walked from the back of the class towards the 

front of the class and saw AP Grimnes standing in the classroom doorway. Respondent 

had not previously seen AP Grimnes because he was at the back of the class and did 

not know he was listening to Respondent address the class. Respondent then asked if 

AP Grimnes had heard Respondent use profanity and apologized to him after AP 

Grimnes responded that he had heard Respondent use the word “fuck.” (Id. at pp. 

A2905-A2906.) AP Grimnes took no action against Respondent for using profanity in 

the classroom in violation of District policies. During his angry lecture to the class, 

Respondent also told the class they needed winners and that BDJ did not have that in 

his DNA. (Ex. 14, p. A188; Testimony of JA, p. A3101.) 

45. 

At hearing, Respondent admitted he used the profane word “fuck” when 

addressing the football class on February 1. Respondent testified he could not recall 

17 

using profanity on prior occasions when speaking with students. TJ, one of the football 

captains, testified at hearing Respondent used profanity, such as the word “pussy,” 

daily when addressing students. (Testimony of TJ; Ex. 24, pp. A3356-A3357.) Other 

student witnesses also testified Respondent’s habit and custom was to use profanity 

for emphasis when addressing his student athletes. However, no evidence was 

submitted at hearing that Respondent was previously counseled or disciplined by the 

District for his use of profanity in violation of District policies during his tenure at 

Cabrillo. 

46. 

By using the word “fuck” during the February 1 incident when angrily 

lecturing the football class about their behavior and his disciplinary expectations for 

the team, Respondent violated District policies BP 4119.21/4319.21 and E4127, as set 

forth in Factual Findings 24 through 26, 44, and 45. In the absence of evidence 

regarding prior counseling or discipline regarding Respondent’s use of profanity when 

communicating with students, however, insufficient evidence was presented to 

establish the District’s allegation that Respondent’s use of profanity on February 1 in 

violation of District policy amounts to Respondent’s persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey the rules governing Respondent’s employment. 

47. 

After football class concluded on February 1, Respondent went to the 

counselors’ office to see if BDJ switched out of his football class. BDJ, however, did not 

go see his counselor as ordered by Respondent because he did not want to miss his 

basketball game. Instead, BDJ went to the other classroom to retrieve his basketball 

bag and then sat on a bench near the football class waiting for other members of the 

basketball team who were also in the football class (including students BG, CZ, TK, and 

JA) to leave Respondent’s classroom so he could go to the basketball game with them. 

18 

48. 

After they arrived at the gym for their basketball game, BG told Cabrillo’s 

basketball coach, Todd Zarkovacski (Coach Zarkovacski), about what had occurred in 

football class that day. However, Coach Zarkovacski was already aware Respondent 

had grabbed and shoved BDJ and then kicked BDJ off the football team, having been 

told about the incident by a football player who was not on his basketball team as the 

coach was hurrying across the Cabrillo campus to the basketball game. (Testimony of 

Coach Zarkovacski; Ex. 24, p. A3189.) While describing the incident to the coach, BG 

exaggerated the extent of Respondent’s physical assault of BDJ, describing 

Respondent as choking BDJ. Once BG began describing the incident, other football 

class students who witnessed the incident, including JA, interjected to correct BG’s 

exaggeration to the coach, accurately characterizing Respondent as grabbing and 

shoving BDJ, not choking him. According to Coach Zarkovacski, BDJ sat silent with his 

head down and “seemed upset” while the other students described the February 1 

incident to the coach and mocked BDJ about the incident. (Id. at p. A3185.) 

49. 

CZ is Coach Zarkovacski’s son. Later that evening, Coach Zarkovacski 

asked CZ to describe to him what happened that day in football class. CZ corroborated 

what the coach had been told that day by other football class student witnesses—

Respondent had grabbed and pushed BDJ in football class on February 1. (Testimony 

of Coach Zarkovacski; Ex. 24, p. A3187.) Coach Zarkovacski testified at hearing that CZ 

was “upset” by the February 1 incident “because [CZ] saw his teammate and friend 

[BDJ] assaulted.) (Id. at p. A3188.) 

50. 

Respondent went to the basketball game after visiting the counselors’ 

office. He approached and spoke to BDJ’s parents, AD and BD Sr. Respondent told 

them there had been an incident that day in football class and that he had kicked BDJ 

out of the football class and told him to go to his counselor’s office and switch to 

19 

Physical Education (PE) class. Respondent did not tell BDJ’s parents that he had 

grabbed and pushed BDJ. When BDJ’s father asked why he had removed BDJ from the 

football class, Respondent stated it was because BDJ had forgotten his backpack. 

51.  When BD Sr. questioned whether merely forgetting a backpack caused 

Respondent to react by removing BDJ from the football class and team, Respondent 

told BDJ’s parents that he was sick of BDJ’s behavior. As examples of BDJ’s 

unacceptable behavior, Respondent cited some examples to BDJ’s parents, such as BDJ 

forgetting to remove his earrings prior to football class the week before and asking to 

use the bathroom. During their conversation, Respondent added that BDJ could come 

back to play football next year, but that BDJ needed to mature and understand he 

cannot keep forgetting his things and being late. Respondent then offered to change 

his decision kicking BDJ out of the football class and have BDJ come back to football 

class the following Monday. (Testimony of Respondent; Ex. 24, p. A3605.) AD refused 

Respondent’s offer to have BDJ return to football class, telling Respondent she 

believed BDJ needed to learn a lesson from the experience. AD and BD Sr. both 

testified at hearing that at the end of the conversation Respondent jokingly stated 

they should take BDJ home that night and “whoop his ass.” At hearing, Respondent 

admitted speaking to BDJ’s parents prior to the basketball game but denied making 

the latter statement to them during their conversation. 

52.  When BDJ saw his parents after his basketball game, he asked AD if she 

had heard what happened with Respondent. AD cut BDJ off before he said anything 

more, believing BDJ was asking about Respondent kicking him off the football class for 

forgetting his backpack, and responded that she had heard what happened in football 

class. As punishment, AD told BDJ that he was not allowed to stay to watch the Junior 

Varsity and Varsity basketball games after his freshman basketball game was over. She 

20 

texted Coach Zarkovacski to let him know BDJ was in trouble and would not be staying 

for the other games and lectured BDJ about his class behavior while they drove home. 

After receiving AD’s text notifying the coach she was taking BDJ home early, Coach 

Zarkovacski called AD and told her that some of the other basketball players had told 

him Respondent had grabbed BDJ by the neck. After she hung up, AD asked BDJ 

whether Respondent had grabbed him, BDJ immediately started crying and confirmed 

Respondent had grabbed him. BDJ told his parents that he had forgotten his backpack 

and asked Respondent to get it, and, in response, Respondent had grabbed him by the 

neck and pushed him back. 

53. 

Upon hearing what Respondent had done to BDJ in football class, BD Sr. 

turned the car around and drove back to Cabrillo with AD and BDJ. BD Sr. wanted to 

confront Respondent about touching BDJ. BD Sr. could not find Respondent, who had 

already left the gym. He spoke to Coach Zarkovacski, who offered to get the students 

who told him about the incident so that BD Sr. could speak to them. The students, one 

of whom was JA, did not want to talk to BD Sr. 

54. 

AD, in the meantime called BD Sr.’s parents, who advised her to call the 

sheriff’s department, which she did. As a result of AD’s call to the sheriff’s department, 

Dennis Thomas (SRO Deputy Thomas), a deputy employed by the Santa Barbara 

County Sheriff’s Department, who is contracted to work for the District as Cabrillo’s 

SRO, was notified at home by one of the sheriff deputies who responded to AD’s call 

that a student had told his parents that he was choked by a Cabrillo teacher. (SRO 

Deputy Thomas coached basketball at Cabrillo for many years and had an existing 

friendly relationship with Respondent.) 

21 

Cabrillo February 1 Incident Investigation 

55. 

SRO Deputy Thomas told the sheriff’s deputy who informed him of the 

incident to ask BDJ’s parents to come in the following day to Cabrillo so he could 

investigate the incident. BDJ’s parents followed sheriff deputies’ instructions and left 

Cabrillo with the intention of reporting the incident the next day at Cabrillo. Later that 

evening, after sheriff’s deputies notified SRO Deputy Thomas about the incident, he 

contacted Cabrillo’s principal, Mark Swanitz (Principal Swanitz), and told him that the 

allegation was that Respondent had choked BDJ and that BDJ’s parents would likely be 

in the following morning to report the incident. Principal Swanitz contacted former DP 

Valla on the evening of February 1 to notify her BDJ’s parents were alleging that there 

was a physical altercation between Respondent and BDJ. 

56. 

The District is a small one where teachers know each other. The District 

was concerned that the circumstances surrounding the accusations against 

Respondent would become “politically charged” with two strong camps, some for and 

some against Respondent. (Testimony of former DP Valla; Ex. 24, p. A2927.) In 

addition, there was also a perception that the District’s then-Superintendent had a 

fondness for athletics which could result in the favoring of coaches and anything 

having to do with athletics. (Id. at p. 2928.) As a result, former DP Valla requested 

District administrator Paul Boomersbach (Administrator Boomersbach) be involved in 

the Cabrillo investigation. 

57.  On the morning of February 2, SRO Deputy Thomas went to Cabrillo and 

spoke to Principal Swanitz about whether he had received any phone calls or had 

spoken to BDJ and his parents. Principal Swanitz told SRO Deputy Thomas he had not 

and that he would first be talking to BDJ and his parents before he contacted 

Respondent about the incident. SRO Deputy Thomas did not wait to interview BDJ and 

22 

his parents prior to speaking with Respondent. Instead, SRO Deputy Thomas went to 

Respondent and asked Respondent whether he had choked a student, telling 

Respondent that there was an allegation that he had choked BDJ. Respondent denied 

choking BDJ and described BDJ to the deputy as a disrespectful and disruptive student 

who had tested his patience until he felt compelled to kick him out of class. 

58. 

Later that day, after first obtaining Respondent’s version of the February 

1 incident, SRO Deputy Thomas interviewed BDJ and his parents. During his interview, 

BDJ did not simply tell SRO Deputy Thomas that Respondent had “choked” him. 

Rather, while BDJ used the word “choking” as part of his explanation for what 

Respondent did to him, he explained to SRO Deputy Thomas that when Respondent 

grabbed his shirt/shoulder/neck and slightly squeezed, BDJ felt “as if” Respondent 

were “choking” him. (Ex. 261, p. B521 (emphasis added).) The subtle distinction 

between BDJ’s use of the word “choked” to describe his feeling from being grabbed 

and pushed by Respondent during the incident morphed into a simplistic 

characterization of the incident. Namely, both the school administration and SRO 

Deputy Thomas focused their investigation on whether BDJ was accusing Respondent 

of choking him and whether Respondent had, in fact, choked BDJ, which he had not. 

The fact that Respondent had grabbed and pushed BDJ during the February 1 incident 

was obfuscated as the narrative that BDJ had accused Respondent of choking him 

quickly spread through the Cabrillo student and administration community. 

59. 

BDJ also completed a “Cabrillo Incident Report” (incident report) 

describing the February 1 incident on February 2. (Ex. 13, p. A155.) In the incident 

report he wrote as follows: 

I was walking to the back of the class to put my phone in 

the back of the class. I was headed to my seat and me and 

23 

[Respondent] met in the middle of the class. than [sic] I told 

him that I forgot my bag then [Respondent] grabbed the 

side of my neck. While [Respondent] was grabbing my neck 

[Respondent] was forcing me to go back [sic] 

(Ibid.) 

60. 

In addition to BDJ’s incident report, BDJ was also interviewed by District 

Administrator Bommersbach and Principal Swanitz on February 2. According to 

Administrator Bommersbach’s notes from the interview, BDJ described the February 1 

incident as follows: 

Right when I told [Respondent] I forgot my bag he put his 

hand on my neck and pulled my shirt for about 2 seconds, 

then walked back. [Respondent] forced me to walk back. At 

the beginning of class. Grabbing my neck and shirt. I was 

just shocked. It didn’t affect my breathing. [Respondent] 

didn’t say anything. I walked to my seat, [Respondent] said 

you can see your counselor about leaving the class. I saw 

mr grimness (sic). When this happened were all the 

students in there? Yes. There might be some who didn’t see 

it but most saw it. Has [Respondent] touched you before? 

Yes, he touched my ribs before. Just to have fun, not 

because he was mad. [Respondent] was upset with me 

yesterday. 4 weeks ago he touched my ribs. I still want to be 

there in football even if [Respondent] is there. Do you feel 

safe with [Respondent]? Yes. [Respondent] probably won’t 

do it again. No marks from yesterday. Law enforcement 

24 

took pictures. Did it hurt when he grabbed you? No, not 

really. [AH, JA] saw what happened. 

(Ex. 14, p. A187.) 

61. 

According to Principal Swanitz’s notes from the February 2 interview, BDJ 

described the February 1 incident as follows: 

Entered classroom, put phone in box, told [Respondent] he 

forgot backpack, [Respondent] grabbed throat (thumb 

across air pipe), pushed him back toward door, [BDJ] went 

to his desk when [Respondent] was at the back of the 

classroom. [Respondent] then told [BDJ] to leave class and 

go see his counselor to get out of the class. No prior 

physical interaction between the two. Student feels safe 

with [Respondent]. Wants to stay in the class and on the 

team. Potential witnesses [AH] (sitting down right next to it), 

[JA] (sitting down up front) 

(Ex. 15, p. A191.) 

62. 

Principal Swanitz and Administrator Bommersbach also interviewed 12 

other student witnesses on February 2 who were in the football class on February 1. 

According to their notes, eight of the students interviewed (JZ, AC, AW, RH, RR, BY, 

MM, TJ) told them they did not see a physical interaction between Respondent and 

BDJ. (Exs. 14 and 15.) JZ also told the Cabrillo administrators Respondent did not use 

inappropriate language and described Respondent as “pretty chill.” (Ex. 14.) AC 

described Respondent as “calm” when he told BDJ to go to the counselor and get out 

of the football class. AW described Respondent as “yelling” during the class and RH 

25 

described Respondent as “stern” and “angry, borderline yelling” when he told BDJ to 

leave. (Exs. 14 and 15.) MM stated that he was late to class, was not really paying 

attention, and focuses on himself, but that Respondent was “definitely pissed off.” (Id.) 

63. 

According to their notes, three of the twelve students (JA, CZ, and GM) 

told Principal Swanitz and Administrator Bommersbach that Respondent grabbed and 

pushed BDJ during the February 1 incident. (Exs. 14 and 15.) GM described BDJ as a 

“troublemaker” who “messes around all the time” and “deserved to be kicked out.” 

(Ibid.) He saw Respondent “push [BDJ] back a few steps in anger before kicking him 

out” with “one hand near throat.” (Ex. 15.) CZ stated Respondent “was pretty mad” and 

that he saw Respondent “grab [BDJ’s] shirt for a few seconds” and hold BDJ by his 

shirt. CZ further stated that Respondent grabbing and pushing BDJ was discussed in 

the team room before the basketball game with his father, Coach Zarkovacski, who 

called BDJ’s parents and told them about the February 1 incident. (Exs. 14 and 15.) 

64. 

As documented by Principal Swanitz and Administrator Bommersbach, JA 

stated during his interview that BDJ had been messing around all year. (Ex. 14.) On 

February 1, JA heard Respondent talking to BDJ about him not having his bag, so JA 

turned around in his seat to listen and that’s how he saw what happened; Respondent 

grabbed BDJ by his shirt collar and “kind of” turned BDJ so that JA saw the entire 

incident, which lasted two to three seconds. (Ex. 14.) After Respondent grabbed and 

pushed BDJ, JA stated BDJ went back to his seat but Respondent “said go to the 

counselor because I want you out of this class” and “was yelling this.” (Ex. 14.) After 

BDJ left Respondent told the class that BDJ did not belong on the team and that all of 

them are winners, but that BDJ did not have that in his DNA. (Exs. 14 and 15.) 

According to Principal Swanitz’s notes, JA told him during his interview that some 

students who witnessed Respondent’s actions against BDJ will definitely not say 

26 

anything about what happened in football class during the February 1 incident. (Ex. 

15.) TK told the administrators he saw BDJ kicked out of class and heard about the 

physical part of the interaction but did not witness it. (Exs. 14 and 15.) 

65. 

Later that February 2 school day, SRO Deputy Thomas handed out blank 

incident reports to the students in the football class while all the students were 

assembled in the football classroom. Neither BDJ nor Respondent was present. The 

football class was the last class of the school day. By the seventh-period football class 

on February 2, rumors about the February 1 incident had spread through the members 

of the football class, with students discussing that Respondent was on leave because 

he had touched BDJ. (Testimony of TJ.) Before passing out the blank incident reports 

to the class, SRO Deputy Thomas told the class they needed to take filling out the 

incident reports seriously; that the students were to describe what they saw in football 

class on February 1; that the incident reports they filled out could potentially be used 

in a case or lawsuit that would determine if Respondent continued to be a teacher at 

Cabrillo. (Testimony of MM; Ex. 24, p. A3424.) 

66.  While SRO Deputy Thomas was asking the football class students to write 

statement, students discussed that they would say they “saw nothing.” (Testimony of 

MP; Ex. 24, p. A3770.) In addition, some of the football team captains, TJ, JZ and AC, 

instructed the other football class students to write they did not see anything on their 

incident reports because they were loyal to Respondent, they did not want 

Respondent’s potential dismissal due to his actions against BDJ to end Cabrillo’s 

football season, and they viewed BDJ in unfavorable terms. (Testimony of JC; Ex. 24, p. 

A3143.) The football team captain instructions to lie about the February 1 incident 

when writing the incident reports affected student witnesses’ accounts of the February 

1 incident. For example, the evidence established BG, JC, and RR falsely wrote in their 

27 

written incident statements that they did not witness Respondent have physical 

contact with BDJ during the February 1 incident when, in fact, they had observed 

various degrees of physical contact between Respondent and BDJ. (Ex. 12, pp. A135-

136, A138; Testimony of JC, Ex. 24, p. A3131; Ex. 16.) 

67. 

There were 38 incident report statements (in addition to BDJ’s incident 

report) written by the football class witnesses which were submitted into evidence. (Ex. 

13.) Most of the incident reports, 27 in total, were not submitted by students during 

the football class on February 2, but were submitted by students the following day, on 

February 3, 2022. Nine of the football class student incident reports corroborate BDJ’s 

assertion and establish, through a preponderance of the evidence, Respondent 

physically touched BDJ during football class on February 1 to an extent and in a 

manner which violated relevant District policies. Though the descriptions of where and 

how Respondent touched BDJ vary in the incident reports (JA, JB, AH, LM, GM, SM, NR, 

and CZ), the written statements credibly refute Respondent’s denials that he 

significantly touched BDJ during the February 1 incident. (Id. at pp. A148, A149, A159, 

A169, A171, A172, A176, and A185.) 

68. 

In summary, the incident reports variously describe Respondent as 

engaging in the following physical contact with BDJ: grabbing BDJ’s shirt collar and 

shaking BDJ around; grabbing BDJ “by the collar like playing around”; grabbing BDJ’s 

shirt and putting BDJ in his chair; not putting Respondent’s hands around BDJ’s neck 

but on Respondent’s shoulder; “[making] contact with [BDJ’s] throat and . . . pushing 

[BDJ] towards the back of the room” and choking him; “kinda [moving] [BDJ] so 

Respondent could walk away”; putting Respondent’s hands on [BDJ’s] “shoulder not 

neck”; seeming “mad” as Respondent “grabbed [BDJ’s] shirt collar and twisted it and 

28 

was talking to [BDJ] and walked [BDJ] back to his seat.” (Ex. 13, pp. pp. A148, A149, 

A159, A169, A171, A172, A176, and A185.) 

69. 

Twenty-nine of the incident reports stated the football class student 

witnesses did not observe any physical contact between Respondent and BDJ. (Ex. 13, 

pp. AA150-AA158, AA160-168, AA170, AA173-AA175 A177-A184, and AA186.) (The 

evidence subsequently established three of the 29 student witness statements were 

false and that the students had, in fact, witnessed Respondent have physical contact 

with BDJ (BG, RR, and JC).) The students’ descriptions notably vary. Thirteen of the 29 

statements stated the student witnesses either did not know what occurred or did not 

see what happened on February 1. The 13 statements state variously: “I didn’t see 

anything”; “I did not see anything”; “I didn’t see what happened [sic]” “I didn’t witness 

anything.” “I don’t know what happened.”; “I didn’t see anything happen I don’t [sic] 

know when it happened but when he got kicked out he was across the room”; “I didn’t 

[sic] see anything.”; “I didn’t see”; “Didn’t see anything.”; “I don’t know anything.”; “I 

was sleeping, so I don’t know whats [sic] happening.” (Ex. 13, pp. A150 (JC), A151 (FC), 

A 156 (CE), A157 (BG), A158 (CJH), A162 (JH) A165 (CL), A166 (SL) A167 (BL), A168 (JLJ), 

A179 (IR), A180 (ES), A181 (MS).) 

70. 

Six of the twenty-nine student witness statements affirmatively denied 

Respondent touched BDJ. (Ex. 13, pp. A152, A153, A154, A161, A163, A173.) JC wrote 

“BDJ always [sic] a “trouble maker” who “was spreading false information by saying 

[Respondent] grabbed [BDJ] by the throat.” (Id. at p. A152.) TC wrote “[Respondent] 

did not put his hands on [BDJ]. I think [BDJ] said that to get [Respondent] in trouble 

because [BDJ] was mad.” (Id. at p. A 153.) AC wrote “[T]here was no physical action 

between the persons involved in incident.” (Id. at p. A154.) CH wrote, “I didn’t see 

anyone get hit.” (Id. at p. A161.) TJ’s statement described his February 2 interview with 

29 

Principal Swanitz and Administrator Boomersbach and stated, “[Principal Swanitz] 

asked me if I knew anything about people that would be against [Respondent] and I 

stated [AH] . . . I was asked if I had seen any physical altercation and I replied no.” (Id. 

at p. A163.) MP wrote “there was no physical contact between the two at least from my 

perspective only [Respondent] telling the student to leave the classroom. In my 

opinion any accusations made was probably made out of anger from the student.” (Id. 

at p. A173.) 

71. 

Some of the statements described Respondent kicking BDJ out of 

football class on February 1 because BDJ was misbehaving again, frequently forgot his 

bag, and distracted his teammates. Some statements describe Respondent as yelling 

and angry when he instructed BDJ to leave the class. (Ex. 13, pp. A160, A175, and 

A182.) 

72.  On February 3, 2022, Respondent was interviewed by Principal Swanitz 

with his union representative and Administrator Bommersbach present. According to 

Administrator Bommersbach’s notes of the interview, Respondent stated he did not 

touch BDJ on February 1. (Ex. 14, pp. A189-A190.) Respondent stated he was arranging 

the football classroom for seating on February 1 when Respondent came and asked if 

he could get his bag. Respondent told BDJ no and told him to wait until roll. BDJ 

continued to ask to get his bag. After the third time BDJ asked to get his bag and 

Respondent answered no, Respondent told BDJ to go to his counselor and get out of 

the football class. (Ibid.) 

73. 

As recorded in Bommersbach’s notes of the February 3 interview, 

Respondent and his union representative questioned how the investigation was being 

conducted and suggested to Principal Swanitz how the allegations against Respondent 

should be investigated. In response to Respondent and his union representative’s 

30 

questioning and suggestions, Principal Swanitz fully disclosed the details about the 

pending investigation to Respondent and his union representative by discussing, 

among other things, what BDJ’s parents had told him when they had called to report 

the February 1 incident, what BDJ had told investigators, what other student witnesses 

had said (i.e., “[W]hen we interviewed kids it was more of a grab or push”), which 

“good kids” they could interview, and the number of kids who said they saw 

“something” and those who did not. (Ex. 14, pp. A189-A190.) 

74.  On February 3, 2022, after Respondent was placed on administrative 

leave, BG’s mom called BDJ’s mom, AD, to discuss the February 1 incident. In response 

to her questions, AD told BG’s mom what had occurred. BG’s mom expressed concern 

that if Respondent was dismissed because of the incident, Cabrillo would not have a 

football team next year and urged AD to speak with Respondent in person to discuss 

the matter. Approximately a week after Respondent was placed on leave, BDJ was 

removed from the football team’s Instagram chat group, which had begun to post the 

hashtag “@coachteam[Respondent]” prior to BDJ being removed from the group. 

PII Investigation 

75.  On February 7, 2022, the District retained PII to conduct its independent 

investigation of what occurred during the February 1 incident. PII completed its 

investigation on April 8, 2022. 

76. 

PII’s investigation concluded, by a preponderance of the evidence that: 

“1) [Respondent] grabbed [BDJ] with two hands near the neck area in an angry gesture 

that forced [BDJ] backward by several feet, in violation of District policies, and; 2) 

[Respondent] used the word “fuck” in front of the class, in violation of District policy.” 

(Ex. 12.) As part of its investigation, PII’s investigators interviewed BDJ with his parents; 

31 

AP Grimnes; Coach Zarkovacski; 12 students from the football class who were present 

on February 1 (GM, AH, JA, CZ, CJH, JC, BG, TJ, JZ, AC, AW, BY), and Respondent, with 

his union representative, Mr. Alvarez, present. (Id.) PII also reviewed the following 

documents in reaching its investigative conclusions: Administrator Bommersbach’s 

notes from witness interviews; Principal Swanitz’s notes from witness interviews 

(incorrectly identified as SRO Deputy Thomas notes in PII’s report); the 39 incident 

reports from students present in the football class on February 1; a note from Cabrillo 

teacher Lisa Torina regarding her conversation with two students (AH and RR) and 

from the football class (Ex. 16); and BP 4119.24/4219.24/4319.24 (Maintaining 

Appropriate Adult-Student Interactions), BP 4119.21/4319.21 (Professional Standards), 

and AR 5131.41 (Use of Seclusion and Restraint). (Exs. 11 and 12.) 

77. 

The PII finding that Respondent grabbed BDJ with both hands, rather 

than one hand, as BDJ had previously indicated, was based primarily on BDJ’s account 

of the incident to investigators. In all other respects, BDJ’s statement to investigators 

was consistent with his written incident report and prior statements to SRO Deputy 

Thomas, and Principal Swanitz and Administrator Boomersbach. As recorded by PII 

investigators, during BDJ’s February 16, 2022 interview with PII investigators Keith 

Rohman and Alissa de Vogel, BDJ told the investigators that on February 1, 

Respondent put both his hands on BDJ’s neck during the incident and “started putting 

pressure” on BDJ’s neck. (Ex. 12, p. A126.) BDJ said Respondent pushed him and 

“forced him back,” “two or three steps” “while [Respondent’s] hands were at his neck. 

BDJ used his mother to demonstrate to PII’s investigators how Respondent had 

grabbed him by “[grasping] Ms. Dunson’s neck with both hands, [placing] his thumb 

on her windpipe, and [pushing] her back.” BDJ told investigators that while 

Respondent had closed his hands “tightly around his neck,” Respondent did not leave 

a bruise or any type of mark. (Ibid.) BDJ also told PII investigators that, prior to this 

32 

incident, he and Respondent had always “gotten along” and had a “friendly 

relationship” and that “[BDJ] would like to return to football even if [Respondent] was 

coaching the [football] team.” (Ex. 12, p. A127.) 

78. 

At hearing, both BDJ and AD testified that BDJ did not demonstrate to PII 

investigators during his February 8, 2022 interview that Respondent had grabbed him 

with both hands around the neck on February 1. However, PII investigator Mr. Rohman 

credibly testified that BDJ reported Respondent grabbed him with two hands during 

his February 8 interview. Respondent argues that BDJ’s varying account of a one versus 

two hands grabbing undermines the allegations against Respondent. This argument is 

unconvincing. BDJ’s February 8 statement to PII investigators that Respondent 

grabbed him with two hands, rather than one hand, is not material and does not 

change the ultimate finding in this matter that the preponderance of the evidence 

demonstrates Respondent physically grabbed and pushed BDJ during the incident on 

February 1. 

79. 

JC’s written incident report to SRO Deputy Thomas stated, “I did not see 

anything, all I heard was that [BDJ] has to drop the class.” (Ex. 13, p. A150.) However, 

during his PII interview on February 28, 2022, JC told PII investigator Ms. de Vogel the 

following: 

[JC] said that he was pulling out his computer to begin 

study hall when he looked behind him and saw [BDJ] and 

[Respondent] arguing. JC said that he turned a bit to get a 

better view of [BDJ] and [Respondent]; he saw [Respondent] 

grab [BDJ’s] upper body, but he could not tell whether 

[Respondent] grabbed [BDJ’s] collar or [BDJ’s] shoulders. 

[JC] said that he saw [BDJ] move about five to seven feet 

33 

back while [Respondent] was grabbing [BDJ], but he could 

not tell whether [Respondent] was pushing [BDJ] or if [BDJ] 

was walking backward on his own. . . [JC] said that [BDJ] left 

the class immediately after the incident with [Respondent]. 

(Ex. 12, p. A135.) 

80. 

JC was not the only football class student witness who changed his 

account of the February 1 incident when interviewed by PII investigators; at first 

writing in their incident reports that they did not see anything and then stating to PII 

investigators during their interviews that, in fact, Respondent had physical contact with 

BDJ on February 1. For example, BG, the football class student who had first reported 

Respondent having physical contact with BDJ during the February 1 incident when he 

recounted it to Coach Zarkovacski during the basketball game, characterizing the 

contact as a “choking,” changed his account in his incident report, writing “I did not 

see anything.” (Factual Findings 48 and 68; Ex. 13, p. A157.) However, on February 28, 

2023, when he was interviewed by PII investigator Ms. De Vogel, BG reported that 

Respondent “nudged” [BDJ] toward his seat by placing his hand on [BDJ’s] back and 

guiding [BDJ] toward his seat.” (Ex. 12, p. A135.) BG’s mom was present during BG’s PII 

interview and, as reported by Ms. De Vogel, expressed concern that Respondent’s 

dismissal would lead to the end of football at Cabrillo. (Ex. 12, footnote at pp. A136-

A137.) 

81. 

CJH submitted a written incident report to SRO Deputy Thomas in which 

he wrote, “I didn’t see what happened.” (Factual Finding 68, Ex. 13, p.158.) However, 

when he was interviewed by PII interviewer Ms. de Vogel, he changed his account, 

stating that “at some point after [BDJ] returned from getting his bag, [Respondent] 

34 

grabbed [BDJ] by the shirt, walked [BDJ] back two steps, and told [BDJ] to go to [BDJ’s] 

counselor.” (Ex. 12, pp. A134-A135.) 

82. 

To support his allegation that BDJ and his friends fabricated the 

allegations against him, Respondent provided the written statement of fellow Cabrillo 

teacher Linda Torina to PII investigators. As reported by Ms. Torina’s February 8, 2022 

written statement, she “overheard” student AH and RR discuss what they were going 

to say about the February 1 incident if they were called in for questioning. (Ex. 16.) Ms. 

Torina reported RR stated, “I think [Respondent] just grabbed the front of his shirt” 

and demonstrated on himself, “pulling lightly on the front of [RR’s] own shirt several 

inches below the collar.” (Ibid.) She reported AH stated he did not know what he was 

going to say. Ms. Torina concluded, based on the conversation on which she 

eavesdropped between AH and RR, that “both boys seemed to be planning their 

stories, as if they were considering possibly fabricating their stories.” (Ibid.) After 

reporting the February 2 conversation between AH and RR to Respondent, Ms. Torina 

then took it upon herself on February 3, 2022, to “casually” ask AH and RR “what was 

going on” and “why students were being called out of class for questioning.” (Ibid.) 

Ms. Torina recorded AH telling her “[I]t wasn’t anything” and RR as responding it was 

“nothing,” as support for her conclusion that “both boys replies clearly indicated they 

believed that [Respondent] had done nothing unprofessional that would warrant 

ongoing attention.” (Ibid.) 

83.  Ms. Torina’s statement does not, in fact, support Respondent’s narrative 

that BDJ and his friends fabricated the fact that Respondent grabbed and pushed BDJ 

on February 1. When RR’s various statements are considered, Ms. Torina’s account 

supports the conclusion there were student witnesses in the football class who were 

reluctant to be honest and forthright with investigators about seeing Respondent grab 

35 

and push BDJ. Ms. Torina heard RR tell AH that Respondent grabbed BDJ and 

physically demonstrate on himself how he witnessed Respondent grab BDJ on 

February 1. (Ex. 16.) However, in the incident report RR provided to SRO Deputy 

Thomas, RR wrote, “All I saw was [Respondent] yelling at [BDJ] but multiple other 

people said that [Respondent] coached out [BDJ].” (Ex. 13, p. A175.) Accordingly, PII 

investigators correctly dismissed Ms. Torina’s conclusion that RR and AH were 

considering fabricating their accounts when they were discussing the February 1 

incident in her class. 

84. 

At hearing, Respondent admitted to using the word “fuck” in front of the 

class and disputed the allegation he touched the student in any manner other than in 

an insignificant manner. Respondent alleged the student and any football class 

student who stated he grabbed and shoved BDJ fabricated any other type of touching 

in retaliation against Respondent because Respondent threw the student off the 

football team based on the student’s ongoing disruptive class behavior. 

85.  On March 18, 2022, Respondent was interviewed by PII investigators, Mr. 

Rohman and Ms. de Vogel with Mr. Alvarez, Respondent’s union representative 

present. (Ex. 12, P. A141.) As reported, consistent with his prior statements to SRO 

Deputy Thomas and Principal Swanitz, Respondent again denied “touching” [BDJ], 

stating there was a distance of five to ten feet between himself and [Respondent] 

during the February 1 incident. Respondent also told investigators that he was holding 

a clipboard the entire time that would have prevented him from using both hands to 

touch or grab [BDJ]. (Ibid.) 

86. 

Based on their investigation, PII did not find Respondent’s denial of 

physical touching of BDJ during the February 1 incident credible because it was 

contradicted by 12 of the 39 students in the football class, including GM, AH, JA, CZ, 

36 

CJH, JC, BG, LB, JB, NR, and RR. PII’s investigation considered whether some witnesses 

were biased towards BDJ and noted, as part of their investigation that two of the six 

witnesses who reported significant touching by Respondent indicated they were 

friends with BDJ, including AH and CJH. PII investigators, however, rejected the 

suggestion that BDJ’s friends provided biased accounts, concluding that even BDJ’s 

friends’ accounts were critical of BDJ, which gave their account of Respondent’s 

conduct more credibility.” (Ex. 12, p. A142.) As examples, PII cited that both GM and JA, 

BDJ’s then-friends, respectively described BDJ as a “a troublemaker” who had been 

“messing around” all year. (Ibid.) 

87. 

PII found no support for AC, MP, and TC’s written incident report 

speculative allegations that BDJ made a false accusation against Respondent. (Exs. 12, 

p. A142 and 13, pp. A152, A153, and A173.) In fact, the totality of the evidence 

indicated BDJ had no negative feelings towards Respondent at times proximate to the 

February 1 incident. For example, he made positive statements about his relationship 

with Respondent to both SRO Deputy Thomas and Principal Swanitz. Similarly, as 

reported by PII, BDJ told PII “he had always had a good relationship with [Respondent] 

and that [BDJ] would like to return to football, even if [Respondent] was coaching.” (Ex. 

12, p. A142.) 

88. 

PII discussed that 27 of the witnesses reported they did not observe any 

physical contact between Respondent and BDJ. However, PII noted that the accounts 

differed, with some stating affirmatively they did not observe Respondent touching 

BDJ and denying it occurred, while others stated they did not know what happened or 

did not see what happened. For the latter category of witnesses, PII concluded that not 

knowing what happened or not seeing what happened does not indicate Respondent 

did not touch BDJ during the February 1 incident. Based on the chaotic nature of the 

37 

football classroom and the brevity of the February 1 incident, PII stated that “[I]t is 

reasonable to assume that students may have viewed the incident from different 

vantage points or simply not seen what happened.” (Ex. 12, pp. A142-A143.) 

89. 

Finally, PII discussed BDJ’s status as a freshman who was relatively new to 

the football team and was viewed by some in unfavorable terms as a behavior 

problem and distraction. That set of circumstances, coupled with some of the football 

class students concern that Respondent’s dismissal could lead to the end of the 

football program at Cabrillo, could have reasonably impacted witness accounts and 

their willingness to accurately report Respondent’s physical aggression against BDJ 

during the February 1 incident. 

90. 

As set forth in Factual Finding 4, PII’s investigation concluded, by a 

preponderance of the evidence, that on February 1, 2022, during seventh-period 

football class: 1) Respondent grabbed the student with two hands near the neck area 

in an angry gesture that forced the student backward by several feet, in violation of 

District policies, and 2) Respondent used the word “fuck” in front of the class, in 

violation of District policy. With the exception that Respondent grabbed BDJ with one, 

rather than two, hands near the neck area, the remainder of PII’s investigative findings 

are credited and corroborate the findings of this Decision. 

Hearing 

DISTRICT WITNESSES 

91. 

BDJ, AD, BD Sr., former DP Valla, DP Blow, AP Grimnes, Coach 

Zarkovacski, JA, JC, CZ, and PII Investigator Mr. Rohman credibly testified on behalf of 

the District at hearing. The percipient witness’s testimony is addressed below. 

38 

Testimony of BDJ 

92. 

BDJ testified at hearing. He is now a tenth grader who attends Liberty 

High School in Las Vegas, Nevada. After the February 1 incident, BDJ stopped 

attending Cabrillo in April 2022. BDJ credibly testified that on February 1 Respondent 

angrily grabbed him by the neck with one hand with Respondent’s thumb in the 

middle of his neck and the rest of the hand towards BDJ’s shoulder and pushed BDJ 

back so that BDJ was forced to step back one or two steps. BDJ’s testimony about 

Respondent’s actions on February 1 is consistent with BDJ’s written incident report, 

and with what BDJ reported after the incident on February 1 to his parents, SRO 

Deputy Thomas, Principal Swanitz, and Administrator Bommersbach. At hearing, BDJ 

described Respondent’s physical assault as scary, shocking, and embarrassing. Almost 

a week after the February 1 incident, BDJ told PII investigators that Respondent 

grabbed him with two hands, rather than one hand, on February 1. At hearing, BDJ did 

not recall telling PII investigators during his February 7 interview that Respondent 

grabbed him with two hands and testified that Respondent grabbed him with one 

hand. Based on a variety of reasons, including BDJ’s memory issues and the shocking 

effect of the February 1 incident, BDJ may have exaggerated the extent of 

Respondent’s physical assault during his interview with PII investigators. Nevertheless, 

whether Respondent grabbed BDJ with one or two hands is immaterial to the ultimate 

finding that Respondent angrily physically grabbed BDJ and pushed him back on 

February 1 without reasonable justification in violation of District policies. 

39 

Testimony of JA, JC, CZ 

JA 

93. 

JA is a tenth grader who continues to attend Cabrillo. He testified at 

hearing in a forthright and credible manner. By all accounts, JA is an honest individual. 

JA’s hearing testimony was consistent with his prior contemporaneous statements 

about the February 1 incident as contained in his written incident report and 

statements to SRO Deputy Thomas, Principal Swanitz, Administrator Bommersbach, 

and PII. At hearing, JA testified that BDJ “was kind of my friend last year but that’s not 

true anymore.” (Ex. 24, p. A3903.) JA described the February 1 interaction he observed 

between Respondent and BDJ as follows: 

So, BDJ walked into the classroom and he told 

[Respondent] that he forgot his basketball bag because we 

had a game that day for basketball and he had forgotten 

his basketball bag in another room. And he asked 

[Respondent] if he could go retrieve his basketball bag from 

the other - - for the last classroom. And [Respondent] told 

him no and to wait for a more appropriate time to go get 

the bag and [Respondent], also, said to go sit down in your 

seat. And BDJ did not listen and he just continued to stand 

and not listen to [Respondent]. So, then, [Respondent] kind 

of like - - he started getting angrier and more annoyed with 

BDJ. And, then, it led to [Respondent] grabbing BDJ’s like 

neck, like collar, and shook him around into a – he did like a 

180 so then BDJ was then - - he was facing me because 

before I was seeing his back. And then, [Respondent] after 

40 

that he told him to go see his counsel and get - - and 

change his schedule so you’re not in this class anymore. 

And then - - so, then BDJ left the class and that’s what 

happened. 

(Ex. 24, pp. A3097-A3098.) 

94.  No convincing evidence was presented by Respondent to support his 

assertion that JA’s testimony was fabricated or biased because of his friendship with 

BDJ. Indeed, JA’s credible hearing testimony is sufficient evidence, standing alone, to 

establish through a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent physically 

assaulted BDJ on February 1 in violation of District policies. (Evid. Code, § 411.) 

JC 

95. 

JC is an eleventh grader at Cabrillo who credibly testified at hearing. JC is 

not and was not friends with BDJ at the time of the February 1 incident. JC testified at 

hearing that on February 1 he observed BDJ and Respondent “arguing” and that 

Respondent “pushed or was grabbing BDJ and they took a step back.” (Ex. 24, p. 

A3130.) JC’s testimony was consistent with his prior statements to PII investigators. 

However, as set forth in Factual Finding 78, JC initially wrote in his incident report that 

he did not see anything on February 1 and only heard that BDJ had to drop the class. 

At hearing, JC explained he had previously provided a false statement in his incident 

report because the football captains (TJ, JZ, and AC) wanted him “to lie for 

Respondent.” (Ex. 24, p. A3133.) Specifically, JC testified that “the people who I was 

sitting next to kind of pressured me into not saying what I saw and I kind of fell into 

that pressure.” (Ex. 24, p. A3131.) 

41 

96.  No credible evidence was presented by Respondent to impugn JC’s 

testimony. JC’s admission that he previously lied about the February 1 incident due to 

peer pressure from other football class students is a statement that is clearly against 

his self-interest. Accordingly, JC’s testimony lends credence to the District’s argument 

that some football class student witnesses failed to be forthcoming about what 

occurred on February 1 to protect Respondent. In addition, JC’s credible hearing 

testimony is sufficient evidence, standing alone, to establish through a preponderance 

of the evidence that Respondent physically assaulted BDJ on February 1 in violation of 

District policies. (Evid. Code, § 411.) 

CZ 

97. 

CZ is a tenth grader at Cabrillo who is BDJ’s friend and Coach 

Zarkovacski’s son. CZ’s hearing testimony was consistent with his prior 

contemporaneous statements about the February 1 incident to Coach Zarkovacski, his 

written incident report, statements to SRO Deputy Thomas, Principal Swanitz, 

Administrator Bommersbach, and PII. At hearing, CZ described the February 1 

interaction he observed between Respondent and BDJ as follows: 

[BDJ] walked into the classroom and asked [Respondent] if 

he could grab his bag and, then, [Respondent] didn’t really 

give him a full response, he just kind of gave him a look. 

[BDJ] walked back to his desk. He didn’t sit down all the way 

or he was standing up and then he asked him again. 

[Respondent] got mad and walked over to him. [BDJ] wasn’t 

at his desk, he was standing near a desk but he wasn’t at his 

desk. [Respondent] grabbed his shirt like this (indicating), 

he was saying something to him, I couldn’t hear what he 

42 

saying, but I could hear his tone he was very angry, and he 

walked [BDJ] back down to his desk and kind of pushed him 

down by his shirt. 

(Ex. 24, pp. A3152-A3153.) 

98.  No convincing evidence was presented by Respondent to support his 

assertion that CZ’s testimony was fabricated or biased because of his friendship with 

BDJ. CZ’s credible hearing testimony is sufficient evidence, standing alone, to establish 

through a preponderance of the evidence that Respondent physically assaulted BDJ on 

February 1 in violation of District policies. (Evid. Code, § 411.) 

RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE 

99. 

Respondent, TJ, MP, AC, MM, JZ, Ms. Torina, and SRO Deputy Thomas 

testified on behalf of the Respondent at hearing. 

Ms. Torina and SRO Deputy Thomas 

100.  Ms. Torina and SRO Deputy Thomas’s hearing testimony is afforded little 

evidentiary weight because neither of them observed what occurred on February 1 in 

the football class. In addition, Ms. Torina and SRO Deputy Thomas’ hearing testimony 

is not credited because it is biased towards Respondent. SRO Deputy Thomas, charged 

with conducting an independent criminal investigation of what occurred on February 

1, engaged in private text messages with Respondent between February 4 and 22, 

2022 regarding the details of the investigation. (Ex. B241.) The informal tone and 

nature of the text message exchanges support former DP Valla’s hearing testimony 

that the criminal investigation clearing Respondent of wrongdoing was unreliable 

because it was influenced by SRO Deputy Thomas’s personal bias towards Respondent. 

43 

Similarly, SRO Deputy Thomas’s police report includes subjective positive statements 

about Respondent which are irrelevant to the February 1 incident. (Ex. 261, p. B253.) 

101.  Ms. Torina is a Cabrillo English teacher who has known Respondent since 

2006. On February 2, 2022, she overheard a conversation between two football class 

students (AH and RR) in her English class who witnessed the February 1 incident. 

(Factual Finding 81-82.) Ms. Torina then reported the conversation to Respondent who 

instructed her to write down what she heard because he would likely need her 

statement. Ms. Torina followed Respondent’s instructions. She also solicited additional 

information from the two students about what they said to investigators about the 

February 1 incident by approaching the students directly and questioning them. Ms. 

Torina documented her investigative efforts in a written statement, dated February 8, 

2022, she gave exclusively to Respondent for his personal use. (Ex. 16.) Ms. Torina’s 

conclusion that the two students intended to fabricate their statements was dispelled 

by the evidence at hearing, as set forth in Factual Finding 81 and 82. 

102.  Ms. Torina testified at hearing that the motivation for her actions in 

documenting what she overheard and soliciting information from the football class 

witnesses was to ascertain the truth. Her testimony is not credited. Ms. Torina did not 

ask BDJ, a student in the same English class, what occurred on February 1. During her 

testimony, Ms. Torina exhibited a bias against BDJ by negatively referencing BDJ’s 

tardiness to her English class, an alleged cheating incident, and the additional time he 

was afforded to complete schoolwork due to his IEP. Ms. Torina did not notify 

Cabrillo’s administration about the conversation she overheard between the two 

students or about the written statement she provided to Respondent. Ms. Torina’s 

actions illustrate her motivation was not, as she maintains, to ascertain the truth of 

44 

what occurred on February 1, but to aid Respondent in the pending allegations against 

him by BDJ. 

Testimony of TJ, MP, AC, MM, and JZ 

TJ 

103.  TJ is now a twelfth grader at Cabrillo. At the time of the February 1 

incident, TJ was an eleventh grader and one of the football team captains Respondent 

appointed. The team captains acted as leaders in the football class with TJ assuming 

the role, at Respondent’s instruction, to quiet down the class on a regular basis. TJ is 

the son of Cabrillo Coach “Dano” Jacobson, who coached football with Respondent 

and coached football at Cabrillo during the 2022/2023 school year. Coach “Dano” was 

present during TJ’s hearing testimony but was not visible on videoconference. TJ 

confirmed Coach “Dano” was present during his testimony after the administrative law 

judge observed TJ looking off camera during his hearing testimony and asked if 

anyone was present in the room while he was testifying. The administrative law judge 

then instructed TJ to answer questions based on his own independent recollection and 

to stop looking off-camera because it created the impression he was looking to Coach 

“Dano” for input during his testimony. 

104.  At hearing, TJ denied any physical contact between Respondent and BDJ 

occurred and described the February 1 interaction he observed between Respondent 

and BDJ as follows: 

[Respondent] - - I mean I walked into the classroom and 

[Respondent] was standing at his desk with his clipboard. 

That day we were moving seats. He told me to quiet the 

class up and so I asked everybody to be quiet. And we 

45 

started to like use the new seating arrangement, and 

[Respondent] was moving people around to their new seats. 

[Respondent] got to [BDJ’s] table which is directly behind 

mine, and [Respondent] asked [BDJ] to move one seat over. 

[BDJ] did not want to and complained and argued and 

that’s when I said, hey, can you just move, please. And [BDJ] 

rolled his eyes and then moved. And then after that 

[Respondent] got the class to completely go silent. 

[Respondent] asked everybody to be quiet and he told 

[BDJ] to pack up his stuff, leave the room, and go to the 

office and get P.E. moved to his new seventh period 

because he wasn’t going to be in football anymore. 

(Ex. 24, p. A3334.) 

105.  During cross-examination by District counsel, TJ testified that 

Respondent was around three feet away when he leaned over BDJ to tell BDJ to move 

seats because BDJ was refusing to move seats. (Ex. 24, pp. A3345-A3356.) TJ confirmed 

Respondent was angry during his interaction with BDJ, describing Respondent as “very 

frustrated.” (Id. at p. A3335) However, on cross-examination, TJ denied Respondent 

was angry during the interaction and characterized Respondent as disappointed. (Id. at 

p. A3334.) TJ testified Respondent used the word “fuck” after BDJ left on February 1 

when addressing the football class. 

106.  TJ testified that after the February 1 incident “[E]very student was talking 

about it.” (Ex. 24, p. A3336.) He described sides forming among the students, with AH, 

IR, and CZ “claiming that something had happened.” (Ibid.) During his testimony, TJ 

admitted to being “annoyed with [BDJ] because he would constantly disrupt the class.” 

46 

(Id. at p. A3344.) He described BDJ in unfavorable terms, testifying BDJ “was a very 

disruptive student,” who “would constantly go against the coaching,” “cause problems 

on the field and in the weight room,” “wouldn’t participate in football,” and “wasn’t a 

good listener.” (Id. at pp. A3336-A3337.) In contrast, TJ described Respondent in 

positive terms and testified he was “well-liked on our campus because [Respondent] 

was a very good AD for us in sports during the Covid-19 outbreak.” (Id. at p. A3338.) 

107.  TJ was present when SRO Deputy Thomas came to class on February 2, 

2022 to ask the football class to fill out written incident reports about what they 

observed on February 1. TJ testified that despite SRO Deputy Thomas instructions to 

be quiet when they filled out their written incident reports, students were talking while 

filling out the incident reports. On February 2, 2022, TJ was interviewed by Principal 

Swanitz and Administrator Boomersbach about the February 1 incident. TJ prepared a 

February 3, 2022 dated incident report detailing their February 2 interview. In his 

February 3 incident report, TJ did not mention Respondent leaning over BDJ on 

February 1 during their interaction, as he testified at hearing. He also made no 

mention of Respondent cursing during the February 1 class. (Ex. 13, p. A153.) During 

his subsequent interview with PII investigators, TJ also told investigators Respondent 

did not touch BDJ during their interaction, but included the assertion Respondent 

leaned over BDJ while BDJ was seated, stating to PII investigators that Respondent 

“got in on [BDJ], though.” (Ex. 12, p. A136.) 

108.  After Respondent was placed on leave, TJ, JR, DR, and AC met with 

Principal Swanitz in or around March/April 2022 to find out the status of Respondent’s 

suspension. The students met with Principal Swanitz because they were upset about 

not having a football coach and wanted Respondent back or for someone to be put in 

his place to get the football season going. TJ and the other players were notified a 

47 

Board meeting would be held regarding Respondent. TJ told the football class about 

the Board meeting and that students could go to the meeting to express support for 

Respondent. TJ attended the Board meeting remotely, and wrote a statement in 

support of Respondent, which was submitted to the Board. (Ex. B503.) At hearing, TJ 

testified he wrote the statement “because I was frustrated that for a long period of 

time we did not have a coach and so our athletic director had to take over the 

classroom and control all of our lifting and everything. But we didn’t have a teacher, 

we didn’t have a grade, so it was very frustrating to not have someone there 

representing us.” (Ex. 24, p. A3340.) 

109.  Based on Factual Findings 102 through 107, TJ’s testimony about 

Respondent and BDJ’s interaction of February 1 is not credited. TJ’s description of the 

basis of the conflict on February 1 as BDJ refusing to move seats is unsupported by 

any other credible evidence. In addition, TJ’s bias towards Respondent and against BDJ 

is evident throughout his testimony and conduct. 

MP 

110.  MP is a twelfth grader at Cabrillo. MP’s mother is Cabrillo’s athletic 

director and has known Respondent for the past 21 years. Respondent, MP, and his 

mom see each other socially outside of school. At hearing, MP testified he did not 

witness any physical contact between Respondent and BDJ on February 1, testifying 

“[A]ll I saw was [Respondent] telling BDJ to leave the classroom and without any back 

and forth BDJ left the classroom and everything resumed like normal.” (Ex. 24, p. 

A3362.) MP’s football class seat was located at the back right-hand corner of the 

classroom. He testified BDJ and Respondent were 15 feet apart when Respondent 

ordered BDJ out of class on February 1 and that Respondent did not lean over BDJ’s 

desk. MP described Respondent’s tone as “angry” when he ordered BDJ to leave the 

48 

class. (Ex. 24, p. A3363.) MP testified he could not recall Respondent curse during class 

on February 1, testifying “everything resumed like normal” after BDJ left the classroom. 

(Id. at p. A3363.) 

111.  MP testified that after the incident on February 1 he learned that there 

were accusations he believed were untrue against Respondent including “there was 

strangulation and like hitting and physical contact in a harmful attempt.” (Ex. 24, p. 

A3363.) During his testimony, MP described BDJ in unfavorable terms as a “very 

misbehaved” student who “would goof off often in the class.” (Ibid.) MP described 

Respondent in positive terms as a coach whom he liked who was “funny” and “tough.” 

(Id. at p. A3365.) 

112.  MP testified that on February 2 when SRO Deputy Thomas handed out 

the incident reports for the football class students to fill out about what they observed 

in class on February 1, students said to each other “that they would say they saw 

nothing.” (Ex. 24, p. A3370.) MP wrote in his incident report that “there was no physical 

contact between the two at least from my perspective” and opined “any accusations 

made was probably made out of anger from the student.” (Ex. 13, p. A173.) 

113.  During MP’s testimony the administrative law judge heard someone 

speak to MP prior to him answering a question that was being posed to him by 

District’s counsel on cross-examination. As a result, the administrative law judge 

instructed whoever was in the room speaking to MP as he testified not to speak or 

coach MP while he was answering questions. MP testified his mother would relay 

information about the District’s recommendation for Respondent’s dismissal to him 

after Respondent was placed on leave in February 2022. At his mother request, MP 

dictated a May 4 statement to his mom, which she typed, providing his perspective on 

the February 1 incident and to “help Respondent,” whom he liked as a coach and 

49 

friend. (Ex. 24, p. A3376.) MP testified that the football class student athletes were 

divided in two sides, with one side trying to protect their friend and the other side 

trying to protect their coach. When asked which side he was on, MP testified, “I’m 

trying to protect my coach.” (Ex. A3337.) 

114.  MP’s testimony that he did not witness Respondent have physical contact 

with BDJ on February 1 is credited. However, the fact that MP did not witness the 

physical contact between Respondent and BDJ does not mean that no physical contact 

occurred on February 1. In fact, the contrary has been established by a preponderance 

of the credible evidence. Further, based on his admitted bias in favor of Respondent as 

illustrated by his failure to be forthcoming about Respondent’s use of the word “fuck” 

when addressing the class on February 1, MP is an unreliable witness whose 

willingness to be truthful as to what occurred on February 1 is compromised by his 

loyalty to Respondent. 

AC 

115.  AC is now a twelfth grader at Cabrillo. At the time of the February 1 

incident, AC was an eleventh grader and one of the football team captains Respondent 

appointed. AC testified at hearing that nothing happened on February 1 and that there 

were no unusual interactions between Respondent and another student that day aside 

from Respondent kicking a student out of class. AC testified BDJ was kicked out of 

class by Respondent because “[BDJ] was constantly distracting the class.” (Ex. 24, p. 

A3382.) AC described Respondent was “very calm” and that he “wasn’t angry in any 

sort of way” when Respondent kicked BDJ out of class. (Id. at p. A3384.) AC testified 

that the class “carried on the day normally like any other day” after BDJ left the class 

on February 1. (Id.) AC denied Respondent used profanity in class on February 1 and 

50 

testified he had not heard Respondent use profanity in the past in front of him or 

other students. AC testified he liked Respondent as a coach. 

116.  AC testified that Principal Swanitz told him, JZ, AR, DR, and TJ during a 

meeting in March or April 2022 that Respondent was probably going to be put on 

leave for an extended period and “was most likely not coming back.” (Ex. 24, p. A3389.) 

According to AC, the football players met with Principal Swanitz because “[w]e were 

very upset because we were about a month in to having no football coach, and we 

wanted [Respondent] back or we wanted someone to be put into place so we could 

get this football season going.” (Ibid.) 

117.  On February 2, AC wrote an incident report at the request of SRO Deputy 

Thomas in which he wrote “there was no physical action between the persons involved 

in incident.” Subsequently, AC drafted a second statement describing the February 1 

incident, dated May 5, 2022. (Ex. B502.) According to AC, he was asked to write the 

May 5 statement by Cabrillo campus liaison, Ms. Watson, who works with Principal 

Swanitz while he was in his third period class at Cabrillo. AC testified he did not recall 

why he was asked to write the May 5 statement and did not know how his statement 

was to be used. 

118.  AC’s testimony that he did not witness Respondent have physical contact 

with BDJ on February 1 is credited. However, the fact that AC did not witness the 

physical contact between Respondent and BDJ does not mean that no physical contact 

occurred on February 1. The contrary has been established by a preponderance of the 

credible evidence. Further, based on AC’s failure to be forthcoming about 

Respondent’s observed emotional state and use of the word “fuck” when addressing 

the class on February 1 and vague testimony about his recollection regarding his May 

5, 2022 written statement, AC is an unreliable witness whose willingness to be truthful 

51 

as to what occurred on February 1 is compromised by his allegiance to Respondent 

and unfavorable views of BDJ. 

MM 

119.  MM is a twelfth grader at Cabrillo and was present in class on February 1. 

MM testified at hearing that he did not observe any physical contact between 

Respondent and BDJ on February 1, but only observed Respondent kick BDJ out of 

class after BDJ interrupted Respondent and caused a “ruckus.” (Ex. 24, p. A3408.) The 

next day, February 2, 2022, MM testified he learned “[t]hrough chitchat from the team” 

that BDJ had accused Respondent “of choking him.” (Ex. 24, p. A3411.) During his 

February 2, 2022 interview with Principal Swanitz and Administrator Bommersbach, 

MM is recorded by Administrator Bommersbach as stating he had arrived late to class 

on February 1 and was not really paying attention to what happened between 

Respondent and BDJ. (Ex. 14.) In his incident report, MM wrote he “walked in close to 

the tardy bell,” put his phone away, and “kept to myself.” (Ex. 13, p. A170.) 

120.  MM testified at hearing he and Respondent communicated after 

Respondent was placed on administrative leave, using personal email addresses, and 

that Respondent asked MM to write a statement about what he observed on February 

1 for Respondent to use as part of a court case. MM did as Respondent requested, 

preparing a written statement of the February 1 incident, dated May 4, 2022. (Ex. 

B250.) Contrary to his prior representations that he was late to class and was not 

paying attention to what occurred, MM wrote, among other things, in the statement 

that on February 1 he “walked into class a few minutes before the bell rung.” (Ibid.) 

MM also wrote that after Respondent told BDJ to leave class and switch to P.E., BDJ 

left “after some arguing.” (Ibid.) 

52 

121.  MM’s testimony is unreliable as to what occurred on February 1. Based 

on his prior representations, MM arrived to class late and, most likely, did not witness 

Respondent grab and push BDJ, but only witnessed the later part of the incident, in 

which Respondent kicked BDJ out of class. Further, MM provided inconsistent 

statements and was vague about the nature of his ongoing communications with 

Respondent after the latter was placed on leave. In addition, MM’s allegation that BDJ 

argued with Respondent after being ordered out of class is inconsistent with MM’s 

prior statements and unsupported by the credible evidence, which established BDJ left 

class without any argument after being instructed to do so by Respondent. 

JZ 

122. 

JZ is now a twelfth grader at Cabrillo. At the time of the February 1 

incident, JZ was an eleventh grader and one of the football team captains Respondent 

appointed. His role in the football class was to lock and unlock the filing cabinet where 

the students placed their cell phones prior to class. JZ testified that on February 1 

Respondent asked BDJ to leave class because he had previously “messed around” and 

had “kind of been a distraction.” (Ex. 24, p. A3455.) JZ testified Respondent did not 

touch BDJ on February 1 and was not angry when he ordered BDJ out of the class. JZ 

confirmed Respondent used the word “fuck” in addressing the class after BDJ left the 

classroom and had previously used profanity “fairly often.” (Id. at p. A3476.) 

123. 

JZ testified that after the February 1 incident he was told BDJ had “told 

others that [Respondent] had grabbed him by the throat and shoved him out of the 

room.” (Ex. 24, p. A3458.) JZ’s February 2 incident report makes no mention of the 

established fact that Respondent kicked BDJ out of class after Respondent refused 

BDJ’s requests to retrieve his backpack and describes Respondent as suddenly 

53 

deciding to kick BDJ out of class on February 1 because of BDJ’s general “lack of 

discipline . . . and commitment.” (Ex. 13, p. A186.) 

124. 

JZ testified that he and the other team captains told everyone in the 

football class to attend a Zoom meeting after Respondent was placed on leave to talk 

about the effects on Cabrillo athletics since Respondent had been gone. In addition, 

after Respondent was placed on leave, he and other members of the football team 

continued to communicate via text in a group chat. JZ described the text message 

communications as “words of encouragement,” such as “hang in there, Coach. We’re 

doing the best we can to keep the program together.” (Ex. 24, p. A3483.) 

125. 

JZ testified Respondent texted him to ask JZ to write a statement of what 

he observed during the February 1 incident, which was to be provided to Respondent’s 

lawyer. JZ drafted the statement and emailed it to Respondent using their private 

email addresses on May 3, 2022 (Ex. B249.) In his statement, JZ writes that he “cannot 

recall what or if there was anything specifically that was the final straw resulting in 

[BDJ] being asked to transfer that day, but there were several events leading to 

[Respondent] finally requesting [BDJ] to leave.” (Id.) 

126. 

JZ’s account of the February 1 incident is unreliable and inherently 

improbable. JZ’s statement and hearing testimony omit Respondent and BDJ’s 

exchange regarding BDJ’s backpack and present a scenario where Respondent 

suddenly chose to kick BDJ out of class on February 1 because of BDJ’s past disruptive 

behavior. His account is inconsistent with the credible evidence to the contrary 

presented by the District. The reasonable conclusion is that either JZ did not witness 

Respondent grab and push BDJ, and only observed the aftermath of Respondent 

kicking BDJ out of class, or JZ intentionally failed to be forthcoming about Respondent 

54 

grabbing and pushing BDJ on February 1 because of his loyalty towards Respondent 

and unfavorable views towards BDJ. 

Respondent’s Additional Evidence 

127.  Respondent takes no responsibility for his physical aggression against 

BDJ and maintains he did nothing wrong aside from using the word “fuck” on February 

1. Respondent’s self-serving testimony denying that he grabbed and pushed BDJ on 

February 1 is unconvincing based on the weight of the credible evidence to the 

contrary established at hearing. Respondent credibly testified that he is a committed 

educator who would like to continue to be employed at Cabrillo. 

128.  Respondent submitted character reference letters from former students, 

Cabrillo teachers and administrators in support of his assertions that he possesses the 

requisite skills, integrity, and character to continue to be a teacher at Cabrillo. The 

evidence was reviewed and considered in rendering this Decision. (Exs. 207-211; 213, 

215, and 221-236.) 

129.  Except as set forth in this Decision, all other allegations in the Amended 

Charges and all other contentions by the parties lack merit or constitute surplusage. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

The District has the burden of proving cause for dismissal by a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) A preponderance of the evidence means 

“‘evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.’ [Citation.]” (People 

55 

ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

Preponderance of the evidence also means that “the evidence on [the District’s] side 

outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, the evidence on the other side.” (Glage 

v. Hawes Firearms Co. (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 325.) 

Causes for Dismissal 

2. 

The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent 

certificated employee if one or more of the causes described in section 44932, 

subdivision (a), are established. Here, the District seeks Respondent’s dismissal based 

on subdivisions (a)(1) [immoral conduct], (a)(6) [evident unfitness for service], and 

(a)(8) [persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her]. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

3. 

The phrase “immoral conduct” as used in the Education Code is to be 

construed according to the common and approved usage, having regard for the 

context in which the legislature used it, as “conduct which is hostile to the welfare of 

the school community.” (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 

224-225 (Morrison), citing Jarvella v. Willoughby-Eastlake City School District (1967) 12 

Ohio Misc. 288, 289; Palo Verde Unified School Dist. of Riverside County v. Hensey 

(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967; see, e.g., Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. 

Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808 [falsifying attendance records for purpose of 

securing continued employment and defrauding state and district].) The term “immoral 

conduct” in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), “stretch[es] over so wide a range” of 

behavior that it “embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct. (Morrison at pp. 224-225.) 

56 

Accordingly, a teacher’s conduct is considered “immoral” pursuant to section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(1), when that conduct negatively impact the school community in a 

manner that demonstrates the teacher is “unfit to teach.” 

4. 

The “immoral conduct” charges against Respondent are based on 

District’s allegations 1) Respondent used physical force against the student on 

February 1, 2022, which was not reasonable and necessary to protect himself, students, 

staff, or other persons, when he grabbed the student with two hands near the neck 

area in an angry gesture that forced the student backward several feet, in violation of 

District policies, and 2) Respondent used the word “fuck” in front of class on February 

1, 2022, in violation of District policy. 

5. 

Based on Factual Findings 1 through 98, the District failed to establish 

Respondent grabbed the student with two hands near the neck area in an angry 

gesture that forced the student backward several feet, in violation of District policies. It 

was also not established Respondent put his hands around the student’s neck and 

applied pressure. 

6. 

The District did, however, establish through a preponderance of the 

evidence at hearing Respondent used physical force in grabbing the student with one 

hand near the neck and shoulder area in an angry gesture that resulted in pressure 

being applied to the student’s neck as Respondent forced the student backwards at 

least a couple of feet, in violation of District policy. It was further established 

Respondent used the word “fuck” in front of class on February 1, 2022, in violation of 

District policy. Accordingly, cause for dismissal was established pursuant to sections 

44932, subdivision (a)(1). 

57 

Evident Unfitness for Service 

7. 

Evident unfitness for service means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. [Fn. omitted.]” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (Woodland).) This cause for 

discipline connotes a “fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 

receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 

school district.” (Ibid.) “‘Unprofessional conduct’ is, as it were, often a lesser included 

form of proscribed behavior within ‘evident unfitness for service.’ Thus, conduct 

constituting ‘evident unfitness for service’ will often constitute ‘unprofessional 

conduct.’ But the converse is not true. ‘Evident unfitness for service’ requires that 

unfitness for service be attributable to a defect in temperament – a requirement not 

necessary for a finding of ‘unprofessional conduct.’” (Id. at p. 1445.) 

8. 

Based on Factual Findings 1 through 98, the District established through 

a preponderance of the evidence Respondent’s evident unfitness for service as a 

District teacher. Accordingly, cause for dismissal was established pursuant to section 

44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

Persistent Violation Of Or Refusal To Obey The Rules Governing 

Respondent’s Employment 

9. 

Persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed by the governing board of one’s employing school 

district is another independent basis for dismissal. (§ 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Persistent 

refusal requires a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.” (San 

Dieguito Union High School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 

58 

174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) The term “persistent” in this context can be defined as 

“refusing to relent; continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; 

persevering . . . constantly repeated.” (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School 

Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82 (Seaman).) Isolated incidents or incidents 

involving an issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered 

“persistent.” (Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 

Cal.App.3d 317; Seaman, supra.) 

10. 

Based on Factual Findings 1 through 98, the District failed to establish 

Respondent persistently violated or refused to obey the rules governing his 

employment within the meaning of section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), i.e., BP 4119.21, 

5137, Administrative Regulations E 4127, 5131.41, and sections 49000 and 49001. No 

evidence was presented that Respondent was given any prior verbal or written 

directives not to engage in the type of violent behavior against a student and use 

profanity he engaged in on February 1, 2022. Accordingly, Respondent’s conduct, 

including angrily grabbing and pushing the student on February 1, 2022 was 

established to be an isolated incident. In addition, in the absence of evidence of prior 

counseling, Respondent’s use of the word “fuck” on February 1, 2022 does not 

constitute his persistent and willful disregard for applicable policies, regulations, and 

education code sections. 

Analysis of Morrison Factors 

11. 

In deciding whether cause for dismissal exists based on Respondent’s 

immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service, it also must be established that a 

teacher’s misconduct relates to her fitness to teach, within the meaning of Morrison. 

(Id. at pp. 227-230.) The Morrison factors were considered and compared to the facts 

established above. Not all “Morrison factors” need be present for the Morrison test to 

59 

be satisfied. (Governing Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 

369.) Further, the Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact 

established but is applicable to the collectively established facts. (Woodland , supra, 2 

Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.) 

12. 

The applicable factors demonstrate Respondent’s misconduct had a 

direct relationship with teaching and Respondent’s unfitness to teach. (Factual 

Findings 1-98.) 

1.  THE LIKELIHOOD THE CONDUCT MAY ADVERSELY AFFECT STUDENTS OR 

FELLOW TEACHERS. Respondent’s misconduct, subjecting BDJ to physical 

aggression and humiliation, and his subsequent failure to be honest about his 

conduct, adversely affected BDJ, other students, the school administration, and 

the school community. 

2.  THE DEGREE OF SUCH ADVERSITY. The adversity was severe; the February 1 

incident polarized the football class witnesses, the Cabrillo school 

administration and teachers, and the student victim who transferred out of the 

District as a direct result of the fall-out from the February 1 incident. Some 

football class student witnesses were greatly bothered by Respondent’s 

conduct, and some students lied to protect Respondent. Overall, Respondent’s 

behavior on February 1, 2022, failure to take responsibility, and actions 

negatively impacted the Cabrillo environment. 

3.  THE PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT. The 

misconduct is proximate. 

60 

4.  THE TYPE OF TEACHING CERTIFICATE HELD BY THE PARTY INVOLVED. 

Respondent holds a physical education credential and a pupil personnel 

services credential. The type of teaching certificates held by Respondent require 

Respondent to be able to handle the day-to-day stressors of teaching, including 

dealing with a disruptive student in a temperate manner and to exhibit integrity 

in his dealings with students. Respondent’s physical aggression on February 1 

and subsequent failure to take responsibility for that conduct preclude his 

ability to function as a teacher in an effective manner and indicate that he is 

unable to provide the requisite safe school environment for students. 

5.  THE EXISTENCE OF EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES, IF 

ANY, SURROUNDING THE CONDUCT. Neither aggravating nor extenuating 

circumstances were proven. 

6.  THE PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES 

RESULTING IN THE CONDUCT. Respondent’s conduct is blameworthy. He is a 

veteran teacher with decades of experience as both a teacher and counselor. He 

knew or should have known his violent actions towards BDJ and use of profanity 

on February 1, 2022, were dangerous, inappropriate, and unproductive. He 

refused to accept any responsibility for his violent actions against BDJ and 

minimized in the significance of using the word “fuck” when addressing 

students. 

7.  THE LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE OF THE QUESTIONED CONDUCT. It is 

highly likely Respondent would engage in the same activity if put back in a 

District classroom. Respondent took no responsibility for his physical 

misconduct and demonstrated no remorse for his actions. 

61 

8.  THE EXTENT DISCIPLINE MAY CAUSE ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT 

UPON THE CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF THE TEACHER INVOLVED OR OTHER 

TEACHERS. This is not foreseeable. No teacher has a constitutional right to use 

physical force without any reasonable justification against a student and use the 

word “fuck” when addressing students in a classroom. 

ORDER 

The dismissal of respondent Gary West from employment with the Lompoc 

Unified School District is sustained. 

DATE: 

IRINA TENTSER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

62 

04/24/2023 
 
 
