BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
RIVERSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

BRENDA CHAVEZ, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022030354 

DECISION 

On August 1 through 4, 2022, the Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) heard this matter by videoconference. The Commission consisted of the 

following members: Administrative Law Judge Kimberly J. Belvedere, Amanda E. 

Carlson, and Cherise Bonsell.

Christopher Keeler and Amanda Georgino, Fagan, Friedman & Fulfrost, 

represented complainant Kyley Ybarra, Superintendent, Riverside Unified School 

District (RUSD or “the district”).

Arthur Four, Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented respondent Brenda Chavez, who 

was present. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record was held open for the 

panel to review evidence and conduct deliberations. The record closed and was 

submitted for decision on August 26, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1.

Ms. Chavez is credentialed as an education specialist, with an 

authorization in early childhood special education and an EL (English Language) 

authorization (bilingual). She is currently employed by RUSD as an early childhood 

special education preschool teacher (ECSE teacher) at the Sunshine Early Childhood 

Center in Riverside (Sunshine). 

2. 

According to the duty statement for the position of ECSE teacher for 

RUSD, Ms. Chavez is responsible for providing a comprehensive and developmentally 

appropriate preschool program to students with a variety of disabilities. Instruction 

shall be designed to meet the individual needs of each student in accordance with 

their Individualized Education Program (IEP) and foster development in the areas of 

preacademic, academic and functional academic skills, as well as communication, self-

care, social/emotional and behavioral functioning, motor skills, and leisure/play. 

3. 

Ms. Chavez started as an instructional assistant in 1999 and, by her own 

words, “fell in love with” teaching special needs children. Ms. Chavez started at RUSD 

as a preschool teacher in her own classroom in 2005, and has been teaching moderate 

to severe autistic children for almost 17 years. 

4.

Ms. Chavez has received positive evaluations over the years, and has 

never been disciplined. In fact, there was no evidence that Ms. Chavez has ever had 

any problems in connection with her teaching special needs children during her career. 

Ms. Chavez has received numerous awards over the years for her teaching (2010, 2015, 

2016, 2017, and 2018), specifically, in recognition for her personal commitment, 

2

dedication, and performance. For the 2017 to 2018 school year, Ms. Chavez was 

honored with the distinction of being named “Teacher of the Year.” 

5. 

During the 2021-2022 school year at Sunshine, Ms. Chavez taught the 

morning session in Room 4; another preschool teacher, Griselda Revollo, taught the 

afternoon session. Following a complaint by an Intensive Behavior Intervention (IBI) 

assistant on October 14, 2021, RUSD launched an investigation into alleged 

misconduct that had been occurring in Room 4 during the 2021-2022 school year (not 

only purportedly by Ms. Chavez, but also by other IBI assistants (Vanessa Chavez, 

Odette Cilluffo and Marina Quezada) as well as Ms. Revollo. The district hired an 

outside investigator to conduct the investigation. 

6. 

On January 25, 2022, following its investigation, the district served Ms. 

Chavez with a Statement of Charges, immediately suspending her without pay and 

providing her with notice of its intent to dismiss her as a permanent certificated 

teacher. (Ed. Code, § 44932.) 

7. 

As grounds to dismiss Ms. Chavez, the facts generally alleged the 

following misconduct: the inappropriate enforcement of COVID-19 mask policies; 

withholding of food from children; improper use of sanitizer; utilization of a “ski chair” 

(restraint chair) when not authorized; being unduly harsh and restrictive in the 

classroom; making inappropriate or derogatory remarks towards students and/or staff; 

not requesting functional behavioral analysis for special needs students when required; 

dishonesty during the district’s investigation; and not following district policy or 

applicable laws as a result of the above-referenced conduct. 

8. 

The Statement of Charges alleged the following causes for dismissal as a 

result of the above-referenced conduct: immoral conduct; dishonesty; evident 

3

unfitness for service; persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the 

state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by 

the state board or by the governing board of the school district; and willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 

rules and regulations of the employing school district. 

9. 

Ms. Chavez timely filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of Defense.

10.  On February 24, 2022, Ms. Chavez filed a Notice of Motion and Motion 

for Immediate Reversal of Suspension to challenge her immediate suspension without 

pay. (Ed Code, § 44939, subd. (c).) The motion, which is decided based solely on the 

pleadings, was denied, and Ms. Chavez remained suspended without pay. 

11. 

This hearing followed. 

Evidence Presented by the District 

TESTIMONY OF KYLEY YBARRA AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN HER 

TESTIMONY 

12. 

Kyley Ybarra is the Assistant Superintendent of Personnel, Leadership & 

Development for the district. She has held many prior positions in the field of 

education, including Director of Certificated Personnel, middle school principal, 

elementary school principal, middle school counselor, special day class teacher in 

fourth through sixth grade, resource teacher for disabled students, and a middle 

school history teacher. Ms. Ybarra holds a Bachelor of Arts in psychology with a minor 

in physical education and a Master of Science in counseling with an emphasis on 

educational counseling. Ms. Ybarra also holds a clear and multiple subject teaching 

credential, a pupil services credential, and an administrative credential. Ms. Ybarra 

4

testified at the hearing and authenticated exhibits; her pertinent testimony and 

documents she testified about are summarized below. 

At the beginning of the 2021 school year (fall) there was a mask mandate in 

place due to COVID-19. Employees were required to wear masks; students also had to 

wear masks unless their individualized Education Program (IEP) or a doctor’s note said 

otherwise. That policy was created as part of the return to school plan. Sunshine had 

been shut down in March 2020 because of the pandemic, but as part of a limited 

return to campus, the school re-opened in November 2021. Ms. Ybarra referred to an 

e-mail that was purportedly sent to all employees in the district on July 22, 2021, prior 

to the start of the school year, although the e-mail only showed it was sent to an e-

mail address entitled, bcde@riversideunified.org. The e-mail greeting was to “RUSD 

Staff and Families.” The e-mail indicated that masks would be required for all students 

indoors “unless exempt.” The e-mail did not indicate what constituted an exemption, 

rather, it contained a hyperlink to the California Department of Public Health guidance 

on COVID-19. 

The RUSD “COVID-19 Safe Return to In-Person Instruction and Continuity of 

Services Plan 2021-2022,” which Ms. Ybarra said all employees received, similarly 

contained information regarding masking. In this document, which is more detailed, 

masks are noted as required in all indoor settings. This document also indicated:

The face covering guidance recognizes that there are some 

people who cannot wear a face covering for a number of 

different reasons. People are exempted from the 

requirement if they are under age 2, have a medical or 

mental health condition or disability that would impede 

them from properly wearing or handling a face covering, 

5

those with a communication disability, or when it would 

inhibit communication with a person who is hearing 

impaired. Those with communication disabilities or 

caregivers of those with communication disabilities will 

wear a clear mask or cloth mask with a clear panel. 

Persons exempted from wearing a face covering due to a 

medical condition, as confirmed by school district health 

team and therapists, must wear a non-restrictive alternative, 

such as a face shield with a drape on the bottom edge, as 

long as their condition permits it. 

Ms. Ybarra confirmed the above was the RUSD policy during Fall 2021, and that 

the district had a website set up as well to address any COVID-19 issues. Finally, RUSD 

offered voluntary Zoom meetings if employees had any questions about COVID-19 

policies.  

Ultimately, aside from the masking problems that were allegedly observed in 

Ms. Chavez’s classroom, following its investigation, RUSD decided that termination 

rather than progressive discipline was appropriate. 

TESTIMONY OF MICHELLE CORTEZ AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN HER 

TESTIMONY 

13.  Michelle Cortes is the Director of Certificated Personnel and her primary 

duties include employee discipline. She has held many prior positions in the field of 

education, including principal, assistant principal, and elementary school teacher. Ms. 

Cortes has a Bachelor of Arts in Spanish, and a Master of Science in Educational 

Administration. Ms. Cortes also holds a multiple subject credential with BCLAD 

6

(bilingual cross-cultural language acquisition development) which authorizes her to 

teach elementary school in Spanish, and an administrative credential. 

On October 14 and 15, 2021, she had some complaints forwarded to her 

concerning employee behavior in Room 4. One complaint was from Cindy Matus, an 

IBI assistant in Room 4. Ms. Matus testified at this hearing. Another was from Marissa 

Cook-Nevarez, who did not testify at this hearing. The third was from Pamela 

Tomassene, a Speech Language Pathologist, who testified at this hearing. The last 

complaint was from Kaley Weakly-Orozco, who also testified at this hearing. The 

complaints were mostly concerning issues in Room 4 during the afternoon sessions 

and alleged improper conduct by Ms. Revollo and various IBI assistants; Ms. Chavez 

was mentioned only a few times. The subjects were: food being withheld, improper use 

of a ski chair (restraint chair), children being forced to wear masks including having the 

masks tied around their ponytails, and distressing a child with a microwave aversion by 

purposely turning on the microwave.

After receiving these complaints, Ms. Cortes interviewed Ms. Chavez and Ms. 

Revollo. Ms. Chavez denied withholding food from children; she said she does not 

have any behavioral problems with children so she does not need to use any restraints; 

she said she was not aware of the microwave “triggering” any students; and generally 

denied all other allegations. 

Following the complaints and interviews, Ms. Cortes spoke with Ms. Ybarra and 

the decision was made to place Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo on paid leave and hire an 

outside investigator. Ms. Chavez was placed on paid leave on October 18, 2021. The 

district hired Susan Liberati, Ed. D., of Liberati & Associates, to conduct the 

investigation. Following Dr. Liberati’s investigation, the decision was made to dismiss 

Ms. Chavez from her employment. Ms. Cortez informed Ms. Chavez of the intent to 

7

dismiss her from her employment by letter dated January 6, 2022, and included a draft 

of the charging document. 

TESTIMONY OF CYNTHIA HARTSHORN AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN 

HER TESTIMONY 

14. 

Cynthia Hartshorn is the Coordinator for Pupil Services and Special 

Education Local Plan Area. She has held many other positions in the field of education 

including program specialist in special education department, and teaching in a 

moderate to severe structured autism classroom at the preschool level. She holds a 

Bachelor of Arts in psychology and a Master of Science in Special Education. She also 

has an education specialist credential for students with moderate to severe disabilities, 

K through 12, an administrative services credential, and an early childhood special 

education authorization. Ms. Hartshorn’s testimony is summarized below. 

Classrooms at Sunshine are structured so there is a morning and an afternoon 

session. Each session has one teacher but there are overlaps because it is required by 

the teachers’ contracts. Each session is 3.75 hours, and the overlap time is when the 

other teacher helps the teacher whose class is not currently in session. According to 

the class roster for the 2021 to 2022 school year, Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo each had 

eight students in their classroom. All students in their moderate to severe special 

education classrooms had a primary disability of autism or related disorder with similar 

characteristics. Every student in both classrooms had an IEP. 

Ms. Hartshorn has observed Ms. Chavez teaching on several occasions. She 

described Ms. Chavez as running a “very tight routine” in her classroom. The same 

routine is followed on a day to day basis. Ms. Chavez “tends to have a “strict style” 

with students and is “firm and straightforward” when teaching. Ms. Hartshorn used to 

8

teach a moderate to severe special education classroom and she would normally be on 

the floor playing with students, but Ms. Chavez is not as “warm and fuzzy” as she is or 

as other teachers normally are. 

Ms. Hartshorn identified a photograph of what is commonly known as a ski 

chair. It is essentially a metal chair with a footrest. The purpose of the ski chair is to 

support a student who may not be able to sit up on his own. It is not designed to be a 

restraint chair because limiting a student’s freedom of movement is not permitted 

unless the student is in imminent danger to himself or others. If a student needed a ski 

chair, it would be in the student’s IEP. Wedging a ski chair against a table would never 

be appropriate as this action would be considered a forbidden physical or mechanical 

restraint. 

The Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) is a system of teaching 

that involves using pictures that represent an object or emotions that a student would 

normally communicate, but, because of his special needs and inability to verbalize, the 

student can use pictures (icons) to communicate. All students have access to their 

lunch and if PECS were used at lunch and a student did not use the correct icon to 

communicate he or she wanted a specific item, it would not be appropriate to 

withhold that item of food. The students are not required to use PECS or communicate 

correctly to get their food.  

During any instruction in a special education classroom, if there is a problem, 

the teacher can seek more training, speak to the school psychologist, have a 

behavioral analyst come into the classroom, obtain a functional behavioral assessment, 

or call an IEP meeting to address the problem. No adverse strategies (like withholding 

food) are to be used in teaching special education children. Special education teachers 

focus on positive behavior interventions to teach alternative strategies in addressing 

9

problematic behaviors. The district provides countless training opportunities and an 

autism symposium three to five times per year to help special education teachers 

utilize proper teaching techniques to address student behavior. Ms. Hartshorn 

reviewed the various exhibits provided that detailed the subjects addressed at the 

various trainings and autism symposiums confirming that the district did indeed 

provide comprehensive training to assist its special education teachers in the 

classroom. 

TESTIMONY OF TASCEAIE CHURCHWELL AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN 

HER TESTIMONY 

15. 

Tasceaie Churchwell, Psy.D., is the principal at Sunshine. Dr. Churchwell 

has held many other positions in the field of education, including elementary school 

principal, assistant principal, and special education elementary school teacher. Dr. 

Churchwell holds a Doctor of Psychology degree and a Master of Arts in Special 

Education. She also has a special education credential and an administrative credential. 

Dr. Churchwell testified at this hearing. Her testimony and documents she referred to 

are summarized below. 

Dr. Churchwell is Ms. Chavez’s direct supervisor. During the 2021-2022 school 

year, masks were mandatory due to COVID-19. The district posted signage everywhere 

around the school and communicated the mandatory mask policy to employees at 

meetings. Most of the special education students who could wear masks did, but there 

were some exceptions. If a special education student took a mask off, the teacher was 

expected to prompt the student to wear the mask properly, but if the student refused, 

the teacher would be expected to let it go and accommodate the student’s need. Dr. 

Churchwell said the issue should never be pressed. She also said there was never a 

requirement to wear more than one mask.

10 

During the 2021 to 2022 school year, Ms. Chavez was very organized, very 

structured, and worked very closely with Ms. Revollo, her co-teacher in Room 4. Dr. 

Churchwell expressed that she could not even tell the difference at times who was the 

AM teacher and who was the PM teacher because Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo worked 

so well together. Initially, Dr. Churchwell had some questions regarding why Ms. 

Chavez was “so firm” with the students. She also had concerns about using PECS 

during lunch and did not understand why some students might not get their food (like 

chips, for example), and when she asked Ms. Chavez, Ms. Chavez would tell Dr. 

Churchwell that the student had eaten enough already or that they were “working on 

other foods.” Dr. Churchwell found this odd because lunchtime should be a time where 

food is given “freely.” Dr. Churchwell also said she would ask why students were in the 

ski chair and pushed up against the table, and Ms. Chavez would tell her it was “for 

safety.” 

In Room 4 during the 2021 to 2022 school year, there were at least four IBI 

assistants. On October 14, 2021, one of the IBI assistants (Cindi Matus) expressed 

concerns regarding what she perceived was happening in Room 4. Ms. Matus was 

distraught. Ms. Matus explained to her that Ms. Revollo was “stuffing a meatball” in 

one of the student’s mouths and she “just couldn’t take it anymore.” Ms. Matus then 

told Dr. Churchwell about other things she observed that she felt were problematic. Dr. 

Churchwell reported the alleged misconduct to Ms. Cortes, who told her to have Ms. 

Matus provide a written statement. 

Dr. Churchwell referred to an exhibit that contained the written statement 

provided by Ms. Matus, and said that all of the things in that statement were the 

complaints Ms. Matus raised with her orally on October 14, 2021. A review of that 

statement revealed that the complaints detailed alleged incidents that began around 

11 

11:40 a.m., and ended around lunch time, which all occurred after the morning session 

in Room 4 ended. However, all of the complaints had to do with other IBI assistants or 

Ms. Revollo, and not Ms. Chavez. The complaints were troublesome, and if true, 

showed appalling conduct by the IBI assistants and Ms. Revollo. Regarding the only 

instances pertaining to Ms. Chavez, the written statement indicated the following:  

  One student, who is not on the 2021 to 2022 roster for Ms. Chavez’s class, is 

distressed by the microwave and will cry, cover his ears, or run to the 

bathroom when it is in use; all IBI assistants and teachers know this; and 

both Ms. Revollo and Ms. Chavez would “purposely” turn on the microwave 

and make a comment in Spanish that it is done so he gets used to it. 

However, in the next sentence of her written complaint, Ms. Matus wrote she 

“did not see who kept restarting the microwave.”  

  One of the IBI assistants made a comment about a student needing an 

attitude check and specifically needed a “good spanking” and both Ms. 

Revollo and Ms. Chavez “agreed.” However, the statement did not say how 

she knew that Ms. Revollo or Ms. Chavez “agreed.” 

Ms. Matus testified at the hearing and more findings regarding her complaint 

will be discussed below in connection with her testimony. 

Dr. Churchwell also asked others to write statements. She received a statement 

from Marissa Cook-Nevarez, who wrote about problems in the “afternoon class” of 

Room 4, and described things such as “the afternoon teacher” withholding food from 

a student named “N

” (who is a student on the roster in Ms. Revollo’s class) 

until he used the right gesture to receive that food item, and similar things happening 

12 

during snack time. There was no mention in Ms. Cook-Nevarez’s written statement to 

Dr. Churchwell about Ms. Chavez. 

Regarding Dr. Churchwell’s own observations, she did see students wearing two 

masks in Room 4, and said she was told that it was just for “extra protection” and that 

they were being “very cautious.” She also did hear Ms. Chavez make a comment at 

some point about one mask being for “eating” and the other for “protection.” Dr. 

Churchwell explained that for some special needs students, the mask is a sensory issue 

and they sometimes chew them, so likely that comment meant that since a student 

was chewing one mask, another would be placed on to provide protection from 

COVID-19. She noted that if a student is “resisting” a mask it would “never be 

appropriate” to force a mask on a student. However, she did not testify she ever 

witnessed Ms. Chavez force a mask on a student. 

Dr. Churchwell also said that during COVID-19, teachers were supposed to 

“sanitize and hand wash a lot” and that Ms. Chavez used a sanitizer in her classroom 

other than the one that was provided by the district. 

Dr. Churchwell collected several other statements regarding alleged incidents 

that happened in Room 4, all of which will be discussed below in connection with the 

testimony of those witnesses. 

TESTIMONY OF CINDY MATUS AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN HER 

TESTIMONY 

16. 

Cindy Matus is a special education teacher in a moderate to severe 

autism classroom for the Redlands Unified School District. She previously worked as a 

substitute teacher and an IBI assistant for RUSD. Ms. Matus has a Bachelor of Arts in 

13 

liberal studies and holds an education specialist credential in moderate to severe 

autism. 

Ms. Matus worked as an IBI assistant in September and October 2021 in Room 

4. In addition to Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo being in the classroom during their 

sessions, there were other IBI assistants and a speech and language pathologist, as 

well. Additionally, she would see Ms. Hopewell and Dr. Churchwell come into the 

classroom on occasion. 

On October 14, 2021, she began writing down incidents that had been 

occurring in the afternoon session of Room 4 on that date. She felt “overwhelmed” 

and decided she needed to talk to Dr. Churchwell. It was “emotionally disturbing” for 

her, she was “distraught," and said “I literally brought my Bible hoping” the situation 

would improve before she went to talk to Dr. Churchwell. 

Ms. Matus confirmed that the document provided in the exhibits and 

authenticated by Dr. Churchwell previously was the letter she gave to Dr. Churchwell 

on October 14, 2021. She further elaborated on the incidents in the letter as follows: 

Regarding the incident in her letter that occurred around 11:40 a.m., which 

occurred during “tabletops,” and where one of the IBI assistants, “Vanessa,” was 

putting students’ hair in ponytails even though they do not like it, and spraying one 

student with water when he tried to take his ponytail down, Ms. Chavez was “present,” 

although she did not indicate whether Ms. Chavez knew what was happening in 

relation to those students.

Regarding the “microwave” incident that she described in her letter as occurring 

around 11:40 a.m., at approximately the same time as the above-referenced incident, 

she noted that one student has sensory issues with the microwave and someone 

14 

would turn it on and off. She felt this was being done to distress the student since she 

would go to the microwave and there would be nothing in it. However, she did not see 

who turned it on and off. She also said sometimes Ms. Chavez would “turn it on and 

off” and also turn the bathroom lights on and off knowing that those things annoyed a 

particular student. Later she testified that she never saw Ms. Chavez turn the 

microwave on and off but “she was there.” She also said that both Ms. Chavez and Ms. 

Revollo have made the statement that it is done “so he gets over it” to each other. In 

her opinion, it is not an appropriate way to address behaviors; something else such as 

noise cancelling headphones or having the student go on a walk or leave the area 

when the microwave is on is what should have been done. 

Regarding the incident in her letter at 11:44 a.m. about a statement one of the 

IBI assistants made to Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo about a student needing an attitude 

check and a spanking, Ms. Matus said this type of talk was “typical.” 

Regarding the incident that occurred at lunch and snack time where a student 

was not given a preferred meal item unless the student did specific hand gestures, 

which pointed to Ms. Revollo as the perpetrator in Ms. Matus’s letter, at the hearing 

Ms. Matus testified that Ms. Chavez was “in the room” when these things happened. 

She said it is not appropriate to withhold food from students.

Ms. Matus testified about other concerns regarding Room 4 that were not 

noted in her written statement. She did not explain why these allegations were not in 

her letter. Regarding the use of the ski chair, she said Ms. Chavez would use the chair 

when a student would not sit. She explained that the chair depicted in the exhibit 

photo is the same chair, but the chair in the photo does not have the belt/strap 

around the middle. She said when students would have tantrums, Ms. Chavez would 

put them in the chair, hold them by their arms and “yell” at them. She felt the chair 

15 

was used as a restraint to keep the student at the table to make them do certain 

activities. “Other IBIs in the classroom also did this.” She described it as “very 

common.” 

Ms. Matus testified that Ms. Chavez would “forcefully” put food in students’ 

mouths that they did not like, even with students who were not aggressive. 

There was a “lot” of “namecalling” in the classroom. For example, students were 

referred to as “diabolito,” meaning “little devil,” “she-demon,” and as being 

overweight. Another student who had thick eyebrows was referred to as “Frida Kahlo.” 

It was not clear from the testimony precisely who made these statements (i.e. Ms. 

Chavez, Ms. Revollo, or IBI assistants). Ms. Revollo called one student a “little asshole” 

but again, it was not established whether Ms. Chavez was present or heard the 

comment. 

Ms. Matus’s “biggest concern” was that “both teachers” in Room 4 were 

“teaming up” to convince another teacher that one student needed to be removed 

from the classroom because he was not autistic. Ms. Matus did not agree with this 

because the student made progress on all of his goals when she worked with him, and 

he worked very well with discrete teaching, so this was simply not true. 

Regarding masks, Ms. Matus testified that Ms. Chavez “forced” students to wear 

masks. Students were often restrained so they could have masks “forcefully” put on 

them and forced to wear multiple masks because they chewed a single mask. Masks 

were also being tied around students’ hair if their ears would not hold the mask. If a 

student tried to remove a mask, Ms. Chavez would try to “restrain” them from doing 

so. Ms. Matus said staff had been instructed at the beginning of the year during 

orientation that students do not have to wear masks if they cannot tolerate them. 

16 

During the school year it was common for Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo to say 

things to each other like “fuck that bitch” when referring to other teachers.

TESTIMONY OF MELODY HOPEWELL AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO DURING 

HER TESTIMONY 

17.  Melody Hopewell is an IBI Supervisor for RUSD. She has a Bachelor of 

Arts in psychology and sociology and a Master of Arts in psychology. She is a board-

certified behavior analyst. Ms. Hopewell is responsible for putting on training sessions 

for teachers and IBI assistants teaching students with autism. Ms. Hopewell 

authenticated multiple exhibits concerning the types of training the district has 

provided at Sunshine for teachers and IBI assistants teaching special needs students. 

Ms. Hopewell testified at the hearing. Her testimony is summarized below. 

Regarding PECS, she described it as a formal system that uses pictures to help 

supplement and encourage language for students. During the 2021 to 2022 school 

year, she would visit Room 4 during the morning and afternoon sessions. At one point, 

in 2020, the appropriateness of using PECS during lunchtime was discussed with Ms. 

Chavez (as noted in Ms. Hopewell’s IBI Consultation Notes from March 3, 2020), but 

Ms. Hopewell found Ms. Chavez to have a “general resistance to teaching protocols.” 

Neither the Consultation Notes nor testimony was clear on precisely how Ms. Chavez 

showed a “general resistance” to specific protocols.

Ms. Hopewell said that PECS icons should be available for students to use at all 

times and should be used to interact with students. Ms. Chavez did use PECS icons to 

communicate with students. The PECS icons, however, should not be used during 

mealtime and Ms. Chavez made students use PECS to request their meal items. This 

was brought to the attention of the principal, it was addressed, and following that 

17 

time, she never saw it happen again. Ms. Hopewell did not indicate when it was she 

brought it to the attention of the principal or when the last time was that Ms. Chavez 

used the PECS during mealtime, so it was unclear whether this was during the 2020 to 

2021 school year or the 2021 to 2022 school year.

Ms. Hopewell explained that if an instructor deviates in any way from the PECS 

protocol, then he or she really is not using PECS because that is a standardized 

communication tool. Anything used outside of the formal PECS setting would be 

considered just a basic communication exchange icon. There are many communication 

methods used with students, but none are appropriate to be used during mealtime to 

require a student to request food. 

Regarding the use of the ski chair, Ms. Hopewell said these were used on a 

“regular basis” by Ms. Chavez. Ms. Hopewell visited Room 4 at least every other week 

(two or three times a month). “Restraint” is defined as a student not being able to 

control their limbs. So, if a chair is pushed up against a table, the student’s legs would 

be trapped. After she spoke with Ms. Hartshorn about seeing the ski chair in use, she 

saw Ms. Chavez use it on another occasion to get a student named “V

” who was 

“flailing” and “engaging in behaviors” to sit by the table. On that occasion, she 

intervened and told Ms. Chavez not to do it because there are other ways to address 

behavior. Ms. Hopewell said this occurred during the 2020 to 2021 school year, but 

was not specific as to when. Ms. Hopewell described the chairs as “very heavy” and 

constructed in such a way that a student would not be able to easily push himself 

away from the table. She feels that using the chair would therefore qualify as a 

restraint because the way the chair was pushed up against the table a student would 

not be able to get out of the chair. 

18 

Regarding play time, in her statement to Dr. Liberati, Ms. Hopewell stated that 

the rules in Room 4 were overly restrictive, the teachers and aides were too rigid, and 

the students did not play at all. The investigation did not elaborate on what Ms. 

Hopewell meant by this, nor did she elaborate on it in her testimony. 

TESTIMONY OF PAMELA TOMASSENE AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO 

DURING HER TESTIMONY 

18.

Pamela Tomassene has been a speech and language pathologist at RUSD 

for four years. She has also worked as a behavioral therapist and flight attendant. Ms. 

Tomassene has a Bachelor of Science in psychology and Master of Arts in

Communication Disorders. Ms. Tomassene is also a licensed speech and language 

pathologist. Ms. Tomassene testified at the hearing. Her testimony and documents she 

referred to in her testimony are summarized below. 

During the 2020 to 2021 and 2021 to 2022 school year she worked primarily at 

Sunshine, although she left in the fall of 2021. On average, she went into Ms. Chavez’s 

classroom 45 minutes twice per week. Ms. Tomassene wrote a statement for Dr. 

Churchwell on October 15, 2021, regarding what she had observed in Room 4 [errors 

in original]: 

I am writing in regards to a situation I witnessed on October 

14, 2021, in Mrs. Rovello’s class at Sunshine between 1:00 

AM to 1:45 PM. I was doing a speech therapy session in the 

classroom. A student named N

 was brought to my 

table by an aid who was physically directing him. N

was visibly upset and protesting to sit down. He was 

physically placed in a “ski” chair (a chair with metal arms 

19 

 
and a flat bottom) and he immediately began pulling at his 

face mask. I noticed he was wearing three face masks over 

his nose and mouth and a fourth one was around the back 

of his neck which kept all of them tied together in a knot on 

top of his head. He kept trying to reach for the knot while 

he was crying and flailing his arms. The [aide] (whose name 

I don’t know) kept firmly telling him, “No, stop it.” He was 

then physically restrained by holding both of his arms down 

on the table. When I asked why he was wearing three 

masks, the aid stated, “He won’t keep his mask on.” I sensed 

the aid [

] was very irritated with him. N

 has a 

disability and is only able to use a few words. He is not able 

to verbally state when he is having difficulty breathing or 

uncomfortable, so behaviors are likely to be exhibited when 

he tries to communicate his wants and needs.

To reiterate: N

 was wearing two light blue paper 

masks and a thick light blue cloth mask over the top. All of 

them covered his nose and mouth. The mask on the back of 

his neck was a light blue paper mask and the elastic loops 

were somehow attached to the masks in front and tied into 

a knot on the top of his head. 

As the next group came to my table, I noticed two students 

wearing two masks, when I asked why they were wearing 

two masks Mrs. Chavez (the morning SDC teacher) stated, 

“One to eat and one to wear” (while laughing) and Mrs.

20 

Revollo stated, “Yep, they always want to stick it in their 

mouth, so they get two” (while smiling). 

I have witnessed students in this class being forced to wear 

masks and then physically restrained when they try to 

remove them. Now, it has escalated to some students 

wearing two to three masks. I feel it is my duty to report 

this situation and help rectify it. 

Please contact me if you have further questions. 

Ms. Tomassene’s testimony elaborated on her written statement. She said that 

students had been seen wearing multiple masks in Room 4 and that Ms. Chavez had 

stated one was to “eat” and one to “wear.” She also felt that Ms. Revollo was 

condescending to students and physically restrained them when they did not want to 

wear masks and that it happened in the AM and PM sessions. Ms. Tomassene 

explained that when a student would take down his mask, “they would be restrained 

by holding their hands down by their sides.” Ms. Tomassene said at the beginning of 

the school year, Dr. Churchwell had given instructions that teachers should “do their 

best” regarding masks but not to force students if they did not want to wear one. In 

her letter she also referred to one incident where a student was wearing three masks 

and one student had it “tied” on above his ears.

Ms. Tomassene said that she believed there was a lack of behavioral 

management and ability to work as a team in Room 4, and that Ms. Chavez “not 

intervening” was a problem. She did not elaborate on what she meant by this. 

Ms. Tomassene said that the ski chair weighs 20 to 30 pounds and was in use 

“almost every time” she was in Room 4 and it was used for different students. It was 

21 

used in a “restraining manner” where the student would be pushed up against the 

table. It was also used at snack time. She said it was used by Ms. Chavez and two aides.  

Regarding the use of Lysol in the classroom, she saw one aide use it. They were 

not supposed to use Lysol in the classroom. The district does not allow the use of 

chemicals around the students because children with autism are “very oral” and put a 

lot of things in their mouths. Even during COVID-19, it is not allowed. There is an 

alternative disinfecting solution available for use. She never saw Ms. Chavez use it but 

the Lysol was on a shelf in plain sight. 

TESTIMONY OF MAYRA AVILA-RIVERA 

19.  Mayra Avila-Rivera has been an IBI assistant at Sunshine for five years. 

She holds a Bachelor of Science in Early Childhood and Adolescent Development. Ms. 

Avila-Rivera testified at the hearing and her testimony is summarized below. 

She has never worked with Ms. Chavez. Ms. Avila-Rivera had the opportunity to 

observe Ms. Chavez and students during “bus circle” time, which happens daily for 

about 15 minutes during drop off and pick up. During the 2019 to 2020, 2020 to 2021, 

and 2021 to 2022 school years, she has heard “comments” regarding autistic students’ 

behavior and appearances. The comments were made where students would have 

been in a position to hear them. She did not recall which students were the subject of 

the comments or the specificity of the comments, just that Ms. Chavez had made 

“comments” about behavior and hygiene.

22 

TESTIMONY OF KAYLEY WEAKLY-OROZCO AND DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO 

DURING HER TESTIMONY

20. Ms. Weakly-Orozco is a teacher in a moderate to severe autism 

classroom (Room 5) at Sunshine. She has been a morning session teacher for four 

years and prior to that she was an afternoon teacher. Ms. Weakly-Orozco holds a 

Bachelor of Arts in liberal studies and a Master of Arts in special education. She has a 

preliminary administrative services credential and an early childhood special education 

teaching credential.  

Ms. Weakly-Orozco wrote a letter at Dr. Churchwell’s request regarding what 

she observed in Room 4. Her written statement mostly concerned conduct by 

individuals other than Ms. Chavez, which are omitted. She wrote: 

I, Kaley Weakly-Orozco, have witnessed multiple actions 

against the students in Room 4 performed by staff 

members Griselda Revollo, Brenda Chavez, and Vanessa 

Chavez. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

[Regarding Brenda Chavez]1 I am more recently concerned 

with how often she is sanitizing the student’s hands, and 

that she demands that our preschool students wear not one 

1 One incident involving Ms. Chavez was omitted because in the letter Ms. 

Weakly-Orozco stated it occurred 10 years ago, which is outside the scope of this 

proceeding and barred from consideration by statute. 

23 

 
but two and sometimes three masks in order to keep their 

mouth and nose covered, while the third is being chewed or 

sucked on. The students are having their hair pulled back 

and masks are being tied to the student’s hair to keep them 

on. . . . 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

These are only incidents that I have personally witnessed, 

and they span over the course of years. . . . 

Ms. Weakly-Orozco’s testimony echoed her letter. She added at the hearing 

that she had “witnessed” Ms. Chavez spraying some sort of hand sanitizer on students’ 

hands during the day and this is forbidden because they had been instructed to only 

use hand sanitizer after drop off and at pick up and to only use district provided 

sanitizer. She was also concerned about masks because during the bus circle time she 

observed Ms. Chavez pull a student’s mask down over their mouth after the student 

had moved it. She also saw students at the bus circle wearing masks that were too 

large so they were tied around pony tails and she saw students wearing multiple 

masks. She did not, however, know who tied the masks on the students. She also 

would overhear yelling and “firm” comments being made in Room 4 that were 

inappropriate but did not specify precisely what the comments were, when they were 

made, who made the comments, or to whom they were made, only that if the 

comments were made to her child, her child would be upset to be spoken to that way.

Finally, Ms. Weakly-Orozco testified that she did see Ms. Chavez on one occasion at 

the bus circle physically restrain a student by putting a hand on the student’s shoulder 

or putting her leg in front of the student so the student “could not escape.” Ms. 

Weakly-Orozco stated that the proper way to handle this situation would be to squat 

24 

down to the student’s level and tell him to wait for the bus, not to restrain him. The 

bus was 20 to 30 feet away and behind a gate so there was no need for restraint.

TESTIMONY OF JAMIE SALTER 

21. 

Jamie Salter’s testimony and her curriculum vitae are summarized as 

follows: she has a Bachelor of Arts in psychology with a double minor in education and 

social relations. She has a Master of Education degree, an Educational Specialist 

degree in School Psychology (Ed.S.), and is a nationally certified school psychologist. 

She holds a preliminary administrative credential, a pupil personnel services credential, 

and is a board-certified behavior analyst. Ms. Salter has had significant work over the 

past 20 years in the field of special education and specifically has done a tremendous 

amount of work concerning autism. She has served as an autism specialist, conducted 

functional behavioral assessments, and conducted multi-faceted psychological 

assessments to determine the needs of developmentally disabled students in school. 

Ms. Salter has published, though not in peer-reviewed journals, and has provided 

many trainings and presentations in various areas pertaining to behavioral 

interventions and autism.  

Under both state and federal law, positive interventions are always favored over 

negative interventions when it comes to addressing behaviors of special needs 

students. For example, you cannot use noxious sprays, deny sleep, deny food, deny 

water, ridicule them, or deprive them of their senses as a way to control behavior. 

Regarding physical restraint, the only time it would ever be possible would be if a 

student was in “clear and present danger of physical harm” and all other lesser 

methods have been tried and failed. Restraint cannot be used for coercion, discipline, 

retaliation, or convenience. If there is a student having a behavioral outburst that 

constitutes an emergency, the proper way to handle it would be to report it, and 

25 

conduct a functional behavior assessment to determine if a behavior plan should be 

put into place. A ski chair, specifically, should never be used for anything other than 

stability and its use should be written into a student’s IEP. It is not a device to control 

behavior. Ms. Salter feels that a ski chair should not even be in a classroom unless 

there is a student who needs it. 

Regarding masks, if a student is resistant to wearing a mask, there are ways to 

try to help them wear it. For example, have them build up to it, get one that has 

Sponge Bob or Mickey Mouse on it, or try a different material (cloth mask versus paper 

mask). It is never appropriate to wrap a mask around a student’s hair. 

Regarding the allegations concerning a microwave, it is not appropriate to 

expose a child to an offending noise with the hope that he will get over it, unless a 

behavior specialist specifically writes a plan for that. A teacher should be doing 

everything she can to avoid whatever trigger a student has. 

Yelling or scolding students is not an effective behavioral intervention because 

yelling or scolding are not positive interventions.  

Regarding food in a classroom, each district has different policies. Generally, the 

use of food as reinforcement is prohibited. However, in more severely impacted 

classrooms, food may be used as a reinforcement. Ms. Salter was not familiar with 

RUSD’s policy. Regardless of policy, however, at mealtime, food should never be used 

in a negative way because students have a right to eat. 

TESTIMONY OF SUSAN LIBERATI 

22. 

Dr. Liberati testified at the hearing concerning her investigation. She also 

testified about why she felt Ms. Chavez was dishonest during the investigation. 

26 

However, credibility determinations are for the Commission to make; not witnesses. 

Thus, other than authenticating her investigation, Dr. Liberati’s testimony, though 

considered, was not relied upon in making any credibility determinations regarding 

any witnesses. 

STATEMENT OF MS. REVOLLO

23.  Ms. Revollo did not testify at the hearing. As such, her testimony 

constitutes administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513, 

subdivision (d), and may be used to supplement or explain other evidence. Dr. Liberati 

interviewed Ms. Revollo during her investigation. Ms. Revollo’s statement not only 

indicates that she admitted many of the types of allegations contained in the 

Statement of Charges, but notably, did not implicate Ms. Chavez with respect to any 

particular conduct (date, time, name, student involved, etc.). For that reason, the 

statement supplements and explains Ms. Chavez’s statement to Dr. Liberati and 

testimony at hearing denying misconduct, as well as the testimony of some of the 

other witnesses regarding what they heard in Room 4, and is reproduced, in its 

entirety below: 

Ms. Revollo has worked in the District in various positions 

including as a tutor, Special Education Aide, junior high 

school teacher, and for the last three years she has served 

as a teacher at Sunshine. The first two years in room five 

and one year in room four. Initially, Ms. Revollo noted that 

the only training she has received is a one hour training she 

referred to as IDI. Ms. Revollo later stated that she has 

received ProACT training, however, she does not consider 

ProACT relevant because "that's more like restraining 

27 

students if they're super elevated, and we don't really 

restrain our students. We don't use those procedures on 

our students. They're too little."

Ms. Revollo noted that she has attended Special Education 

symposiums when they were offered topics such as lesson 

planning and classroom management strategies. She found 

the symposiums to be helpful. 

Ms. Revollo noted to not have received any training or 

instruction via her formal education in the value of play and 

social emotional growth for preschool children.

She explained that goals for the children include 

“requesting wants and needs, following a teacher's directed 

task and then just some of them have academics, like 

numbers, or colors, or shapes. But very basic like that." 

"Social emotional goals for some students include peer 

interaction." 

Ms. Revollo noted that the students' IEPs are maintained in 

the classroom in separate files in a box. The teachers 

explain the goals and the daily objectives each day for the 

Aides. She stated to have completed one functional 

behavior analysis in her first year of teaching. Ms. Revollo 

has not noticed any behaviors for which she would 

recommend a functional behavior analysis. 

28 

Ms. Revollo stated to not know if the sound of the 

microwave is a trigger for a student in her class; however, 

he does cry and sometimes cover his ears when it is in use 

“but that's about all he does." She stated that the 

microwave needs to be used by the staff to heat up lunch 

or make popcorn. There is another microwave in the faculty 

lounge. 

Ms. Revollo has been trained in the use of PECS and noted 

to have used it during snack and/or lunchtime although she 

has not used it recently. Ms. Revollo noted that she has 

never held food back from a child who was not pointing to 

the icon. Upon further questioning, Ms. Revollo recalled 

using PECS with E

 for about a two-week period. Ms. 

Revollo explained that E

 would hand the icon to her and 

then he would receive whatever he was asking for. 

Ms. Revollo noted that if PECS were being used during the 

snack or lunch period, as when they were using PECS for 

E

, if he did not point to the correct icon on the PECS 

board they would give him the optional item. As it relates 

to food, the staff allow the students to use the "hand over 

hand" strategy to get food. As it relates to PECS, the 

student needs to point to the icon for each bite of a 

sandwich, for instance. 

Ms. Revollo noted that "the teachers and aides in room four 

would use the ski chairs for safety reasons. So, with E

, 

29 

would get up, run around the classroom, hit staff, hit 

students, run towards the door, and leave. And a lot of 

times, our chairs are so flimsy that some of our kids tilt the 

chairs and would fall. So, once they fell several times, we're 

like, they're going to hit their head, we would put them in 

the ski chair, and they would sit in it until we went to the 

next activity, then they would sit on a different chair." 

Ms. Revollo noted that "it is not a restraint for the child 

because no one is sitting next to them or behind them... it's 

just harder for them to slide out or tilt the chair." The chair 

is then pushed against the table. Ms. Revollo stated that the 

ski chair is not written in E

's IEP, nor has she requested a 

functional behavioral analysis be conducted. 

The ski chair is also used for N

 because he has a 

tendency to tilt his chair and fall back. The ski chair works 

because when they return to their regular chair, they learn 

not to tilt and fall. Ms. Revollo is not aware of the California 

Education Code regarding child restraint.

Ms. Revollo noted that they keep a water spray bottle in the 

classroom to spray the student's hair to comb it out of their 

eyes so that they can see. She stated she has never 

observed a staff member spray water in the face of a child 

in room four. 

30 

Ms. Revollo stated that she has never held food, including 

strawberries, from I

 or asked him to point to an icon or 

use hand over hand because he can talk. Ms. Revollo 

continued by noting that she has never refused snacks or 

food for a child because they would not say the name of 

the food item or cooperate. 

N

 will usually wear one mask but sometimes needs 

two if one is too big and falls off. Ms. Revollo said she never 

considered the safety implications of wearing two masks. 

Ms. Revollo stated that she calls O

 "a little devil" as a 

joke because of the sounds he makes; he bites and 

scratches. She admits it is not respectful, but "it's not 

meaning harm." There are other adults, but Ms. Revollo is 

not aware of messages she may be sending to the aides by 

making such comments, nor has she requested a functional 

behavioral analysis be conducted. 

Ms. Revollo could not recall her interaction with A

 and if 

she physically restrained him from standing up from a 

seated position as she has a difficult time remembering 

things that far back; in this case, two years.

Ms. Revollo finds that she needs to place two masks on a 

student because they chew on one, and the other covers 

their mouth and nose. She cannot see if the student has 

swallowed or is still chewing on the first mask but does not 

31 

consider it a safety issue, although she admits that it could 

be a safety issue if the first mask breaks apart. 

Ms. Revollo stated that she has never seen Vanessa [Chavez 

– the IBI assistant] put a student's t-shirt over a chair to 

keep them in their seat or put a boy's hair in a ponytail. 

Evidence Presented by Respondent 

TESTIMONY OF BRENDA CHAVEZ

24. 

The following is a summary of Ms. Chavez’s testimony, which was very 

short and presented by discrete issues, rendering it somewhat “choppy”: During the 

2021-2022 school year, Ms. Chavez had approximately 10 students in her class. One 

student, “J

,” who was discussed in the allegations concerning being triggered by 

the microwave, was not in her class and was not her student.

25.

Regarding the “ski chair,” there was one in her class that did not contain 

a belt, like the photograph depicted in one of the hearing exhibits. Ms. Chavez was 

never instructed on how to use a “ski chair,” never discussed with anyone how to use a 

“ski chair,” and it was never used to restrain a child. She did recall seeing a child 

named “E

” sitting in it during “circle” time in the afternoon class taught by Ms. 

Revollo, but he was not her student. 

26. 

Regarding the use of PECS or any kind of picture icon during mealtime, 

she did use it depending on who needed to use it based on their IEP goals and it was 

used after consultation with a speech therapist. She has been trained in the use of 

PECS. Her understanding (from the speech therapist) is that it could be used during 

mealtime to receive a highly preferred item. There were some students who had 

32 

difficulty because they did not quite grasp the use of the icons, but if a student was 

struggling with using the icon, she would never withhold any food item.

27. 

Regarding the use of masks, Ms. Chavez recalled receiving an e-mail 

regarding the mask policy. But it was never communicated to her how they were to 

make exceptions (i.e. what procedure was to be used for exceptions). Ms. Chavez 

asked for a clarification on the mask policy and was informed that the only exception 

was if the student had a doctor’s note indicating that the child did not need to wear a 

mask. Ms. Chavez never tied any masks to a student’s hair and never joked about 

students wearing two masks because they usually eat one mask. 

28. 

Regarding sanitation, Ms. Chavez noted that children’s hands were 

supposed to be sanitized when they arrived, whenever they switched areas within the 

classroom, if there was a recess, and between activities. Ms. Chavez and other teachers 

were given instructions that all things needed to be cleaned and sanitized. 

29.  Ms. Chavez never called a student a “little asshole” or “little devil.” She 

never discussed any kind of "chancla” therapy with any of the IBI assistants. Ms. 

Chavez recalled Ms. Matus being frustrated on one occasion while walking to the 

playground and, after a child ran away from her, she may have said something like 

“Miss Cindy sometimes we always need a chancla in our life.” Ms. Chavez explained 

that the word “chancla” was a word used specifically in Hispanic cultures, usually 

among Mexicans. It is a very common phrase. 

30.  Ms. Chavez first learned of the allegations in this matter on October 18, 

2021, when she was pulled out of her classroom by Dr. Churchwell. Ms. Cortez was 

there as well, and they had about a 45-minute discussion. 

33 

31.  When Ms. Chavez spoke with Dr. Liberati during her investigation, she 

felt the questions were very vague and she was not made aware of precisely what the 

allegations were about. Nonetheless, she was honest with Dr. Liberati. 

32. 

During Dr. Liberati’s investigation, Ms. Chavez provided a statement. Dr. 

Liberati did not state in her report what questions were asked and there were no 

transcripts provided concerning the interview with Ms. Chavez. The statements 

attributed to Ms. Chavez in Dr. Liberati’s report were conclusory, and are viewed with 

caution. Nonetheless, Ms. Chavez’s statements to Dr. Liberati were reported as follows: 

Ms. Chavez started teaching in 2005 and in the last six or 

seven years in the autism-specific program. She noted to 

have attended a whole series of classes specific to autism 

that included everything from discrete trial training to 

structure teaching in a variety of strategies for autism 

specific students. She also attends the District's Autism 

Symposiums each year. The symposiums include a variety of 

useful topics, everything from speech to how to use play in 

the preschool classroom to enhance learning. Miss Chavez 

indicated that the symposiums have been very helpful.

The goals that are followed for the students are contained 

in the EIP [

]. Ms. Chavez stated that her students usually 

work on teacher-directed tasks, working in groups, learning 

how to feed themselves, academic, skill-building, and 

social-emotional skills depending on each student's goals. 

Ms. Chavez reported that the aides in her classroom are 

aware of each student's goals as she has had a discussion 

34 

with each Aide. She has not shown the aides the IEP as she 

believes that would be a violation of confidentiality. 

Strategies used in the classroom include using pictures, 

modeling, and hand over hand. She has never initiated a 

functional behavior analysis with any of her students. Ms. 

Chavez recalled that Melody Hopewell would also provide 

classroom support and guidance. Free play is incorporated 

into the day for her students to provide for a less structured 

environment and reduction of stress.

Ms. Chavez noted to take into consideration triggers for 

students to minimize anxiety or frustration. She noted not 

to be familiar with a student in the afternoon class by the 

name of J

. Ms. Chavez noted that she had seen J

cry while she was heating her food in the microwave but did 

not know him because he is not her student, nor has 

anyone discussed what J

's trigger is with her. 

Ms. Chavez stated to have been trained in ProACT and 

PECS. If a student cannot use the picture to ask for a snack, 

she, or the employee sitting next to the student, will help 

the student by using the hand-over-hand technique. Ms. 

Chavez noted that most of her students, except for two who 

need hand over hand, will ask for what they want before 

needing to use the hand over hand strategy. 

35 

 
Ms. Chavez noted that the tray of food is placed directly in 

front of the child, within arm's length, and the child can 

grab and eat or drink whatever is on the tray. At the same 

time, the teachers and aides are also working with the 

students and asking them to tell them which food or drink 

item they want and, if they get it correct, they "give the 

food or drink item to them." 

Ms. Chavez stated that she has one ski chair in her class and 

that she has not had to use it for her class. She explained 

that "if there are students that are a little bigger and then 

the chairs are a little flimsy, if they're the kind that they can 

easily tip over sometimes we will use them for them to sit 

better, but we really don't, at least with my class I don't 

have any part right now. The ski chair is used to help 

students sit better because it is sturdier." 

Ms. Chavez noted that Griselda [Revollo] used the ski chair 

for a student in her class by the name of E

 because he is 

"a really big boy who was functioning at a much younger 

cognitive level and he didn't sit very well, and he was 

tipping back in the regular chairs we use in the classroom." 

She noted that they used the ski chair and the little table in 

the circle area to help E

 stay in the chair. Ms. Chavez 

stated that the ski chair was used on a daily basis for E

. 

She is not aware if E

 has the use of the ski chair noted in 

his IEP. Ms. Chavez stated that she has received training via 

36 

ProACT and defines restraining as "pulling a student down." 

She clarified by stating that when E

 was placed in the ski 

chair and pushed up against the table, they were not 

restraining him because no one was sitting behind him, 

holding him there. Ms. Chavez noted that the ski chair used 

daily was not effective "because he was able to get out of 

it." 

Ms. Chavez noted that she "brought Lysol spray into the 

classroom to sanitize the workboxes when we're done." She 

explained that she did not check if she were allowed to 

bring Lysol spray but felt it would be effective with COVID 

prevention. "I've only used it when we're done with work 

boxes. We have a little partition where we put all of the 

workboxes then, and then I just kind of lightly spray." 

Regarding V

, Ms. Chavez said, "I yelled at him and, 

well, not yelled, but I've used a firm voice no hitting, do not 

hit me because he has. And that this has been recent. He 

had a new baby come into the fold, so we've seen a little bit 

of changes." 

Ms. Chavez stated that she has never pushed a student 

down to make them sit or stay seated but, she explained 

that she had used deep messaging for sensory input as it 

helps students with anxiety. "V

 wears several face 

masks with the first one as the mask he is allowed to chew 

and the second one for protection." Ms. Chavez noted that 

37 

she did not question if the aforementioned behavior is safe 

because the first one is in his mouth and he's chewing on 

it." She did not consider V

’s behavior a choking 

hazard, albeit they cannot see the mask he is chewing on 

under the mask he is wearing for protection. 

Ms. Chavez recalls saying to the adults in the room and as a 

joke that certain students need "chancla therapy." She 

admits that her comment is probably not appropriate. 

Ms. Chavez acknowledged that she did discuss her private 

life, including drinking on the weekends, “I had 5 

Micheladas this weekend” in front of students while 

teaching; her children, and her husband possibly being 

homosexual, saying that “he should just come out of the 

closet.” She stated that this type of personal conversation, 

in hindsight, is inappropriate in front of students.

CHARACTER WITNESSES 

Charli Shipman 

33. 

Charli Shipman is a speech and language pathologist in charge of the 

preschool intervention program at Sunshine, and has worked for several different 

districts in her career. Ms. Shipman started working with Ms. Chavez in Ms. Chavez’s 

classroom during the 2013 to 2014 school year and worked as a speech pathologist 

assigned to Ms. Chavez’s class until the 2018 to 2019 school year. She consulted with 

Ms. Chavez on occasion during the 2019 to 2020 school year. 

38 

During the 2020 to 2021 school year, the campus was closed due to the COVID-

19 pandemic. During the 2021 to 2022 school year, Ms. Shipman would help out in the 

mornings if she could because she liked Ms. Chavez’s class. 

Ms. Shipman described the children in Ms. Chavez’s class as “happy” and felt 

Ms. Chavez treated the students as her own kids. Ms. Chavez is “firm,” but uses a 

“mommy” kind of voice and that is good because children need that kind of structure. 

Ms. Shipman never witnessed any abuse and had she witnessed such abuse, she would 

have immediately reported it because she is a mandated reporter.  

During mealtime, the children always had their PECS icons available to ask for 

specific items. Ms. Shipman helped out during lunchtime and noted that the IBI 

assistants would have certain preferred items of food and Ms. Shipman would facilitate 

communication by encouraging the students to use the right icon. However, all of the 

food was in front of each child and no child was ever denied food; rather, they were 

encouraged to ask for items with the icons. 

Regarding the use of masks due to the COVID-19 pandemic, all teachers were 

required to “encourage” mask use. Students were not really fidgeting, were not ripping 

masks off, and she did not see anything inappropriate regarding how masks were used 

in Ms. Chavez’s classroom. In fact, most students at the school tolerated masks well. 

Ms. Shipman never saw students wearing multiple masks; never saw students with 

masks tied to their heads; never saw masks wrapped around a child’s pony tail; and 

never saw students chewing a mask and wearing another mask over the chewed mask. 

Ms. Shipman explained that her understanding was masks were required for students 

unless they had a doctor’s note. She recalled receiving a “Safe Return to School” plan 

and some e-mail communications, and was aware that special needs students could be 

39 

exempt from the mask requirement, however, she believed it still required a doctor’s 

note for the exemption. 

Finally, Ms. Shipman never saw any child improperly restrained by Ms. Chavez. 

Ines Anderson 

34.

Ines Anderson is a school psychologist at Sunshine and has been a 

teacher and psychologist at other schools as well. Her duties as a school psychologist 

include assessment of students, consulting with teachers, and recommending student 

placement. Ms. Anderson has known Ms. Chavez since 2019. During the 2019 to 2020 

school year classes were virtual because of the pandemic, but they returned to 

classrooms in December 2020. 

Ms. Anderson described Ms. Chavez’s classroom as “very well run,” where 

students were “always engaged” and learning. Ms. Anderson did not see any problems 

that concerned her in Ms. Chavez’s classroom. Ms. Anderson did observe the use of 

picture icons for communication but never saw Ms. Chavez withholding or denying 

food. Regarding masks, students were encouraged to wear them but they were not 

sent home if they did not wear a mask. She never saw students wearing multiple masks 

and never saw students with masks tied to their heads. She recalled getting something 

from the school regarding the mask policy but was not certain what it was. Finally, Ms. 

Anderson has never known Ms. Chavez to make disparaging comments against 

students. 

40 

dismissed for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

5. 

Upon the charge of “willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing school district,” a district may immediately suspend the employee from his 

or her duties. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 

Applicable District Policies 

6. 

The district submitted various documents that constitute policy for RUSD 

employees, including the most recent Certificated Bargaining Agreement between 

RUSD and the Riverside City Teacher’s Association; RUSD policies relating to 

professional standards; and the RUSD Early Childhood Special Education Preschool 

Teacher job description. Several documents concerning the RUSD policies relating to 

masking during COVID-19 were also submitted, as detailed in the testimony of Ms. 

Ybarra. These documents were all reviewed and considered. 

Evaluation 

7.

For the reasons discussed below regarding the allegations in each 

paragraph of the Statement of Charges, a preponderance of the evidence did not 

establish that Ms. Chavez engaged in the charged conduct. 

8. 

Statement of Charges Paragraphs 6 through 10, 28, 29, and 30 pertaining 

to the use of a “ski” chair, sanitation, and masking of students:  

Regarding the use of the ski chair: It was not established Ms. Chavez did 

anything inappropriate with the ski chair. For further discussion as to why this 

42 

allegation was not established, refer to the discussion below in Legal Conclusions 

paragraphs 14 and 15. 

Regarding the allegations concerning improper sanitation: Ms. Weakly-Orozco 

testified that she had “witnessed” Ms. Chavez spraying some sort of hand sanitizer on 

students’ hands during the day and this is forbidden because staff had been instructed 

to only use hand sanitizer after drop off and at pick up and to only use district 

provided sanitizer. Ms. Tomassene testified she saw an aide using Lysol in the 

classroom but she never saw Ms. Chavez use Lysol. Ms. Chavez testified that children’s 

hands were supposed to be sanitized when they arrived, whenever they switched areas 

within the classroom, if there was a recess, and between activities. Dr. Churchwell said 

that during COVID-19, teachers were supposed to “sanitize and hand wash a lot” but 

that the district provided the sanitizer. No documentary evidence (at least none that 

was pointed out) showed that district sanitizer was required, and insufficient evidence 

showed that Ms. Chavez did anything improper regarding how she used sanitizer or 

sprays. 

Regarding the allegations concerning improper masking of students: it was not 

established that Ms. Chavez did anything inappropriate regarding masking of students. 

The COVID-19 pandemic was a unique and trying time for everyone. Mask guidance at 

the city, county, state, and federal levels was constantly changing. Agencies had their 

own specific guidance. The Center for Disease Control put out both recommendations 

and mandatory “guidelines.” The California Department of Public Health put out its 

own guidance and mandates. The Governor of the State of California issued executive 

orders regarding mask guidance, recommendations, and mandates. At certain points 

during the pandemic, one mask was required. At other times, two masks were 

recommended. Later, N95 or K95 masks were recommended. With the inconsistent 

43 

guidance, recommendations, orders, mandates, regulations, etc. across the state, it was 

virtually impossible at any given time to know what, as an employee, one was required 

to do.

The same can be said for the RUSD guidance. According to Ms. Ybarra, at the 

beginning of 2021 school year (fall) there was a mask mandate in place due to COVID-

19. Employees were required to wear masks; students also had to wear masks unless 

their individualized Education Program (IEP) or a doctor’s note said otherwise. Ms. 

Ybarra referred to an e-mail that was purportedly sent to all employees in the district 

on July 22, 2021, prior to the start of the school year, although the e-mail only showed 

it was sent to an e-mail address entitled, bcde@riversideunified.org. The e-mail 

greeting was to “RUSD Staff and Families.” The e-mail indicated that masks would be 

required for all students indoors “unless exempt.” The e-mail did not indicate what 

constituted an exemption, rather, it contained a hyperlink to the California Department 

of Public Health guidance on COVID-19 – which was constantly changing during the 

pandemic. The website set up by the district similarly was not reproduced at the 

hearing so that it could be established at any given time whether mask rules were 

being followed. 

The RUSD “COVID-19 Safe Return to In-Person Instruction and Continuity of 

Services Plan 2021-2022,” which Ms. Ybarra said all employees received, similarly 

contained information regarding masking. In this document, which is more detailed, 

masks are noted as required in all indoor settings. This document also indicated 

persons would be exempt if they had a medical or mental health condition or a 

disability that would impede them from properly wearing or handling a face covering 

and that persons exempted from wearing a face covering due to a medical condition 

must be confirmed by school district health team and therapists. It did not state that 

44 

special needs students could forgo a mask; or provide to what extent a teacher should 

attempt to encourage mask wearing. In that respect, each teacher seems to have been 

left to use his own judgement regarding what was appropriate. 

Ms. Chavez testified that she asked for a clarification on the mask policy and 

was informed that the only exception was if the student had a doctor’s note indicating 

that the student did not need to wear a mask. This assumption would be consistent 

with the documents noted above. Most of the witnesses, as well, testified that mask 

wearing was to be encouraged but not forced. However, the term “encourage” is very 

broad; if a student was chewing on a mask or continuously taking it off, Ms. Chavez’s 

method of encouraging mask wearing might have been to put a fresh mask on (that 

would not be chewed) over the one the student was chewing. Another teacher might 

have felt no masking should be forced, in other words, once a student takes a mask off 

or starts chewing it, to not make any effort to replace it or put on another mask. Again, 

this is a judgement call and it cannot be said that Ms. Chavez did anything wrong if 

she permitted students to wear two masks (even the guidance from the state and local 

levels at times recommended two masks be worn). 

Ms. Chavez testified she never tied any masks to a student’s hair. No evidence 

established that she did. While there may have been students with masks tied in an 

unusual way, in this case, it needed to be established that it was Ms. Chavez and not 

someone else who did it. Ms. Matus testified that Ms. Chavez “forced” students to 

wear masks, that students were forced to wear multiple masks because they chewed a 

single mask, that masks were tied around students’ hair if their ears would not hold 

the mask, and that Ms. Chavez would try to “restrain” them from chewing masks. Ms. 

Matus’s perceptions, however, contradict Ms. Chavez’s credible denial regarding that 

conduct. It is also noted that Ms. Tomassene, when describing October 14, 2021, also 

45 

described a student wearing multiple masks and masks tied in an odd way on a 

student, however, she attributed the conduct to one of the IBI assistants. It simply was 

not established that Ms. Chavez engaged in any of that conduct (or that the conduct 

was improper).

There was also testimony that at the bus circle students were seen wearing two 

masks, which raises a second issue: nobody considered the possibility that parents 

may have sent their children to school with two masks or with masks fastened in a way 

(i.e. around ears, hair, or knotted) so that they would not come off. Thus, what some 

witnesses may have seen in Room 4 were children masked exactly the way they were 

sent to school. 

Finally, Ms. Chavez said she never “joked” about students wearing two masks 

because one was for wearing and the other was for eating. But, joking is different than 

simply making a comment. Ms. Chavez may have made the comment, but there is 

nothing wrong with such a comment. Even Dr. Churchwell testified she heard Ms. 

Chavez make a comment at some point about one mask being for “eating” and the 

other for “protection.” Dr. Churchwell explained that for some special needs students, 

the mask is a sensory issue and they sometimes chewed them, so likely that comment 

meant that since a student was chewing one mask, another would be placed on to 

provide protection from COVID-19. Given that teachers were required to encourage 

mask use, it seems if one mask was being chewed, it would be reasonable for a teacher 

to feel that putting a new mask on might be consistent with the district’s policy of 

encouraging mask use. 

In sum, the evidence on all issues concerning masking was insufficient to show

Ms. Chavez did anything wrong concerning masks. 

46 

9. 

Statement of Charges Paragraph 11 pertaining to “speaking in an 

aggressive and negative” way towards students: Ms. Matus testified there was a “lot” 

of “name calling” in Room 4, mainly, students referred to as “diabolito,” “she-demon,” 

being overweight, and “Frida Kahlo.” It was not clear from the testimony, however, 

precisely who made these statements given that there were many people in the 

classroom (i.e. Ms. Chavez, Ms. Revollo, or IBI assistants). Ms. Matus testified that Ms. 

Revollo called one student a “little asshole,” but again, it was not established whether 

Ms. Chavez was present or heard the comment and this case is not about what Ms. 

Revollo did. Ms. Matus testified that Ms. Chavez made a comment regarding a student 

needing “chancla” therapy, which is essentially a spanking. Ms. Chavez easily explained 

that comment, however, recalling Ms. Matus being frustrated on one occasion while 

walking to the playground and, after a child ran away from her, possibly telling Ms. 

Matus something like “Miss Cindy sometimes we always need a chancla in our life.” 

This is not a derogatory or inappropriate comment regarding a student, it was a 

comment to another teacher expressing a personal opinion – not advocating anything 

inappropriate or shown to be directed towards a student. Ms. Tomassene felt that Ms. 

Revollo was “condescending” to students, and in her written statement to Dr. 

Churchwell, which mostly had to do with Ms. Revollo, the only comment she claimed 

Ms. Chavez made had to do with the wearing of masks, which was not established to 

be disrespectful, derogatory, or inappropriate, for the reasons discussed above in 

Legal Conclusions paragraph 8. Ms. Avila-Rivera testified that during the 2019 to 2020, 

2020 to 2021, and 2021 to 2022 school years, she has heard “comments” regarding 

autistic students’ behavior but did not recall what the comments were, just that Ms. 

Chavez had made comments about behavior and hygiene – which is too vague to 

sustain an allegation. Finally, Ms. Weakly-Orozco only overheard what she construed 

to be yelling and “firm” comments being made in Room 4 that were inappropriate but 

47 

did not specify precisely what the comments were, when they were made, by whom 

they were made, or to whom they were made. The weight of the evidence, therefore, 

did not establish the allegations in the Statement of Charges Paragraph 11. 

10. 

Statement of Charges Paragraphs 12 through 15, 19, 21, 27 concerning 

withholding of food, the use of a “ski” chair, and masking of students:

Regarding withholding of food: The allegations concerning withholding food 

mostly had to do with the use of PECS during mealtime. Ms. Chavez testified that while 

she may have used PECS or picture icons during mealtime for students to request 

highly preferred items, as she was informed she could do by a speech therapist, she 

never withheld food from a student even if the student struggled with the icon. Her 

testimony was credible. In contrast, the statement of Ms. Revollo in Dr. Liberati’s 

report, wherein she not only appeared to admit that she used PECS during lunch and 

snack time but also that a student needed to point to an icon for each bite of food, 

showed this act was done by Ms. Revollo. Again, as with many of the allegations in the 

Statement of Charges, the issue regarding withholding food from students did not 

appear to involve Ms. Chavez. Ms. Matus’s written statement to Dr. Churchwell and 

testimony seemed to confirm as much. Regarding the incident that occurred at lunch 

and snack time where a student was not given a preferred meal item unless doing 

specific hand gestures, Ms. Matus’s letter essentially points to Ms. Revollo as the 

perpetrator, and at hearing Ms. Matus merely said that Ms. Chavez was “in the room” 

when these things happened. Being “in the room” is not the same as being the 

individual who committed misconduct nor does it establish that Ms. Chavez observed 

the conduct. Marissa Cook-Nevarez’s written statement to Dr. Churchwell also pointed 

to the “afternoon teacher” as the one who withheld food from students. It is also 

noted that the evidence did not establish it would be inappropriate to use picture 

48 

icons during mealtime. While some witnesses testified it was not, other witnesses 

testified it would be acceptable to do so as long as it was not done in a way to 

withhold food. Thus, it cannot be said Ms. Chavez did anything wrong concerning 

PECS or picture icons as it pertained to mealtimes.

Regarding the use of the ski chair: It was not established Ms. Chavez did 

anything inappropriate with the ski chair. For further discussion as to why this 

allegation was not established, refer to the discussion below in Legal Conclusions 

paragraphs 14 and 15. 

Regarding the masking of students: It was not established that Ms. Chavez did 

anything inappropriate, as discussed above in Legal Conclusions paragraph 8. 

11. 

Statement of Charges Paragraphs 16 and 17 concerning the refusal of 

staff to follow her recommendations for addressing students’ behavioral difficulties 

and the inappropriate use of PECS: There was a lot of confusion regarding the 

allegations in this paragraph as to whether there was an issue with the use of PECS or 

an issue with the use of regular icons for communication, as they are two separate and 

distinct things. Witnesses seemed to use the terms interchangeably; while it might be 

inappropriate to use PECS during mealtime, it would not be inappropriate for a 

student or teacher to use picture icons to communicate. It certainly would not be 

appropriate to withhold food from a student if the student did not use a correct icon. 

However, based on the testimony, what was not clear was whether Ms. Chavez 

improperly used PECS or picture icons during mealtime. 

12. 

Statement of Charges Paragraph 18 regarding Ms. Chavez’s classroom 

being “overly restrictive,” “rigid,” and allowing “little to no free play” during the school 

year: Insufficient evidence was presented on this issue, if at all. The Commission did 

49 

not locate any testimony concerning not allowing “free play.” Further, this paragraph is 

vague and ambiguous regarding the concepts of “rigid” and “overly restrictive,” and 

what conduct was problematic. For further discussion as to why these allegations were 

not established, refer to Legal Conclusions paragraphs 14 and 15. 

13. 

Statement of Charges Paragraph 20 concerning an IBI assistant who felt 

the classroom environment was “harsh and uncomfortable” and who reported 

students being placed in a chair and yelled at until they cried, and that Ms. Chavez and 

others spoke “excessively harshly [

]” to students and were “rough”: The Statement of 

Charges is vague and ambiguous – it did not indicate what was meant by being 

“rough” with students, what speech was excessively harsh, and did not indicate who 

the IBI assistant was who made these allegations. The Commission could not ascertain 

from the evidence the identity of the IBI assistant being referred to in this paragraph.

Ms. Weakly-Orozco, who is not an IBI assistant (she is a teacher in the classroom 

next to Ms. Chavez) said she overheard yelling and “firm” comments being made in 

Room 4 that were inappropriate but did not specify precisely what the comments 

were, when they were made, who made them, or to whom they were made. Ms. 

Hartshorn, who is not an IBI assistant, noted that in her opinion, Ms. Chavez “tends to 

have a “strict style” with students, is “firm and straightforward” when teaching, and is 

not as “warm and fuzzy” as other teachers normally are. This did not establish anything 

other than the fact that some teachers do not appear to like Ms. Chavez’s style of 

teaching. It is also in stark contrast to the testimony of Ms. Shipman, a speech and 

language pathologist familiar with Ms. Chavez’s classroom, who testified that the 

students in Ms. Chavez’s class were “happy and she treated the students as if they 

were her own children.” Ms. Shipman explained that Ms. Chavez is “firm” but uses a 

“mommy” kind of voice that is good for the classroom. And there was the testimony of 

50 

Ms. Anderson, the school psychologist, who described Ms. Chavez’s classroom as “very 

well run,” where students were “always engaged” and learning.

Regarding students being placed in a chair until they cried, again, this was a 

very vague allegation and there was insufficient evidence to support it. Though some 

of the witnesses testified in their opinion students were placed in a ski chair, the chair 

in the room did not have a strap like the one depicted in the photograph submitted as 

an exhibit. Thus, a child could not be restrained in the chair. Ms. Matus testified that 

Ms. Chavez would use the chair when a student would not sit or would have tantrums. 

However, given that it was not a restraint chair, it was not established that Ms. Chavez 

used the chair as anything other than a regular chair. Ms. Hopewell testified that she 

saw Ms. Chavez use the chair with a student named “V

” who was “flailing” and 

“engaging in behaviors” to get her to sit by the table. However, this allegedly occurred

during the 2020 to 2021 school year and Ms. Hopewell’s opinion regarding why she 

felt the student was restrained was because the chair was “very heavy” and 

constructed in such a way that a student would not be able to easily push themselves 

away from the table. That is not the same thing as restraining a student in a ski chair. 

Ms. Tomassene said that the ski chair weighs 20 to 30 pounds and was in use “almost 

every time” she was in Room 4 and it was used for different students. She felt it was 

used in a “restraining manner” where the student would be pushed up against the 

table and that it was used by Ms. Chavez and two IBI assistants. Yet, in her written 

statement to Dr. Churchwell on October 15, 2021, Ms. Tomassene said the ski chair 

was being used with a student in Ms. Revollo’s class and by the IBI assistants; she did 

not mention Ms. Chavez. The testimony concerning the ski chair use was, therefore, 

inconsistent and problematic, at best. The evidence simply did not establish that Ms. 

Chavez used it as a restraint device. 

51 

14. 

Statement of Charges Paragraphs 22 through 26 concerning specific 

derogatory comments and “disrespectful remarks” allegedly made by Ms. Chavez and 

paragraphs 31 through 33 regarding Ms. Chavez making certain inappropriate 

comments regarding conduct towards students and her private life: Again, as with 

most of the testimony in this case, insufficient evidence established the allegations in 

these paragraphs. 

Regarding disrespectful remarks, derogatory comments, and inappropriate 

comments about and towards students: The testimony as to this issue was inconsistent 

and vague, as explained in detail in Legal Conclusions paragraph 9. 

Regarding comments about her private life. Ms. Chavez told Dr. Liberati that in 

hindsight she may have made comments about her private life in front of students, 

and that doing so might have been inappropriate. However, while Ms. Chavez may 

have had some personal discussions with others within earshot of students, and this 

may reflect poor judgement, it does not fit into any category of professional 

misconduct as charged.

15. 

Statement of Charges Paragraph 34 concerning Ms. Chavez being 

dishonest about not knowing a student being triggered by the microwave and 

claiming free play was regularly incorporated into her classroom when it was not: As 

noted above regarding “free play,” the Commission did not locate any specific 

evidence on this issue. Nobody described what “free play” was and when it allegedly 

was not used, and therefore, there was nothing to show whether Ms. Chavez was 

dishonest about it. In her statement to Dr. Liberati, Ms. Hopewell stated that the rules 

in Room 4 were overly restrictive, the teachers and aides were too rigid, and the 

students did not play at all. The investigation did not elaborate, however, on what Ms. 

Hopewell meant by this, nor did she elaborate in her testimony. Further, all that 

52 

statement showed was that Ms. Hopewell did not observe free play; it did not establish 

free play was never used. Ms. Matus’s testimony was similarly problematic; she 

testified that Ms. Chavez was not “warm and fuzzy” and did not get down and play 

with students like other teachers did. But, again, this does not mean Ms. Chavez did 

anything improper in how she ran her classroom; and it is contradictory to the 

testimony of Ms. Chavez’s character witnesses who found Ms. Chavez’s room to be 

perfectly fine. 

Regarding the microwave, although there was some witness testimony from Ms. 

Matus concerning a student being sensitive to the microwave, insufficient evidence 

showed that Ms. Chavez was, in fact, by way of an IEP, informed that any child was so 

triggered. The microwave issue also involved one of Ms. Revollo’s students, not one of 

Ms. Chavez’s students. The testimony was further problematic because Ms. Matus on 

one hand said that sometimes Ms. Chavez would turn the microwave on and off, but 

later she said she did not know who turned it on, but Ms. Chavez “was there.” Ms. 

Matus also said that both Ms. Chavez and Ms. Revollo have made the statement that it 

is done “so he gets over it” but that the statement was made to each other. That 

statement, if it occurred, did not establish anything other than a conversation occurred 

between two people; not that Ms. Chavez, specifically, turned on a microwave to 

torment a student with a sensitivity. 

16. 

Paragraph 35 regarding the failure to request Functional Behavioral 

Analyses for students whose behavior indicated they “were entitled to such 

assessments by law”: Again, this paragraph was vague and ambiguous, did not indicate 

which students allegedly had behavioral problems or which students would have been 

entitled to a functional behavioral analysis that should have been requested by Ms. 

Chavez. Ms. Chavez did not note any behavioral problems with students in her class. 

53 

This case involved many different individuals and many different allegations spread 

across two years regarding a classroom shared by two teachers. There was no evidence 

that showed there were any students in Ms. Chavez’s class who had specific behavioral 

problems such that a functional behavioral analysis should have been requested. 

Indeed, virtually all the allegations concerned students in Ms. Revollo’s class or during 

the afternoon session; and it was not established that Ms. Chavez had any issues with 

behavioral problems during her morning session. 

17. 

Statement of Charges paragraphs 36 through 38 regarding violations of 

law and district policy: For the reasons discussed above, claimant did not establish by a 

preponderance of the evidence the alleged factual violations in the Statement of 

Charges, it was not established that Ms. Chavez violated any district policy or the 

Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. 

18.  Notably, when Dr. Liberati conducted her investigation, Ms. Revollo 

admitted problematic conduct that would sustain many of the allegations contained in 

the Statement of Charges (such as using PECS during lunch or snack time, using the ski 

chair, making derogatory comments regarding students, using multiple masks on 

students, and using the microwave even though she knew it made one of her student’s 

cry). However, Ms. Revollo’s statements did not name any specific incident or conduct 

implicating Ms. Chavez specifically; most of Ms. Revollo’s statement pertained to her 

conduct, her observations, and her opinions. What Ms. Revollo’s statement did reveal 

was that any problematic conduct in Room 4 appeared to be attributable to Ms. 

Revollo and Ms. Revollo’s aides, and not Ms. Chavez. 

54 

Conclusion 

19.

All witnesses seemed to be putting forth their best efforts to provide 

competent and credible testimony, albeit much of the district’s witnesses testimony 

was belied by the documents. Ms. Chavez, however, was also credible, had impeccable 

character references that refuted the testimony of RUSD’s witnesses, and has been 

teaching special needs students since 1999, first as an instructional aide and later as a 

credentialed teacher, without issue. While it is possible that some of the events 

described by the district’s witnesses occurred in the manner they said they did, it is 

equally, if not more plausible, that the events, statements, and conduct allegedly 

observed was misconstrued, taken out of context, or did not occur at all, as 

respondent asserted in most instances.  

20. 

In closing arguments, counsel for complainant argued, correctly, that the 

“preponderance of the evidence” standard is, essentially, “50 percent plus a feather.” In 

other words, no matter how slight it is, as long as the evidence preponderates ever so 

slightly in complainant’s favor, the allegations are deemed established.  

Ultimately, the “feather” in this case is what was missing. The evidence 

presented by the district, though credible, was not sufficient to overcome Ms. Chavez’s 

equally credible denial of culpability or explanations refuting culpability under 

applicable law, and thus, a preponderance of the evidence did not establish the 

allegations in the Statement of Charges. Given that the facts underlying each of the 

allegations were not established by a preponderance of the evidence, it renders 

unnecessary the need to discuss whether any conduct fits into each of the alleged 

causes for discipline (immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness, etc.) 

55 

