BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LYNWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

PAMELA FINLEY, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2022010263 

DECISION 

This matter was heard on May 9 through 13 and May 16, 2022, by 

videoconference before the Commission on Professional Competence (Commission). 

The Commission consisted of Erika Herrera, Venneka Powell-Shannon, and Nana Chin, 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State 

of California, who presided.

Complainant Lynwood Unified School District (District or Complainant) was 

represented by Paul A. Aguilar, Olivarez Madruga Lemieux O’Neill, LLP. 

Respondent Pamela Finley (Respondent) was self-represented. Jonathan Taylor

assisted Respondent on May 9 through 12, and May 16, 2022, and Linda Woolen

assisted Respondent on May 13, 2022. 

Testimony and documents were received into evidence. The record closed and 

the matter was submitted for decision on May 16, 2022 

The Commission considered the entire record in executive session on May 17, 

2022. After due consideration of the entire record herein, the Commission makes the 

following Factual Findings, Legal Conclusions, and Order. 

PRELIMINARY MATTERS 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), “An employee who 

has been placed on suspension pursuant to this section may serve and file with the 

[OAH] a motion for immediate reversal of suspension. . . . [¶] (2) The motion shall be 

served upon the governing board of the school district and filed with [OAH] within 30 

days after service upon the employee of the initial pleading in the matter.”

On April 25, 2022, Respondent filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (MIRS). ALJ Howard W. Cohen heard oral argument on the MIRS during a 

May 20, 2022 telephonic conference.

Noting that Respondent had been placed on suspension on April 20, 2016, and 

served with the Notice of Board Approval & Intent to Dismiss and Statement of 

Charges on November 1, 2021, ALJ Cohen determined that the ”MIRS must be denied 

because it was not timely filed and served.” ALJ Cohen further determined that, “[e]ven 

if the motion had been timely filed and served, the District has alleged facts in the 

2

Statement of Charges which, if true, would be sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under section 44939, subdivision (c).” (

On June 1, 2022, ALJ Cohen issued an Order Denying Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension (Order). 

On June 6, 2022, Respondent filed a letter in response to the Order and 

requested that “the motion be set for appeal and an investigation for reporting false 

information.” In the letter, Respondent appeared to be asserting that: (1) the 

suspension should be reversed by default as the District failed to answer the MIRS; and 

(2) the District did not provide evidence of the allegations contained in the Statement 

of Issues. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(6), “The grant or 

denial of the motion is not subject to interlocutory judicial review.” Therefore, OAH is 

without jurisdiction to consider Respondent’s appeal. 

Had jurisdiction been established, the District’s failure to file an answer is not 

grounds upon which to grant a MIRS. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(2), 

grants the District the right to serve and file a written response to the motion before 

or at the time of hearing; it does not require the District to respond to the MIRS. 

Further, an ALJ, in determining whether to grant a MIRS, does not assess 

whether the District has evidence to support the allegations in the Statement of 

Charges. The review of a timely filed MIRS is limited “to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, 

 are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Emphasis added.) (Ed. Code, § 

44939, subd. (c)(1).) 

3

 
As OAH is without jurisdiction to consider an appeal of the Order, the relief 

requested in Respondent’s June 6, 2022 letter is denied. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

The Board of Education (Board) is the duly elected, qualified and acting 

governing board of the District, organized, existing and operating pursuant to the 

provisions of the California Education Code and other laws of the State of California. 

2. 

Respondent was, at all times relevant herein, a permanent certificated 

employee of the District assigned to Lincoln Elementary School (Lincoln Elementary) 

and employed as a Pre-School Teacher/Site Supervisor.

3. 

On October 7, 2021,  Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources Brian 

Lucas, Ed.D., signed the Notice of Proposed Dismissal and Statement of Charges 

(Statement of Charges) in his official capacity. The charges contained in the Statement 

of Charges are for (1) evident unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(6); and (2) physical or mental condition unfitting the employee 

to instruct or associate with children pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(7). 

4. 

On November 1, 2021, the District served Respondent with a written 

Notice of Board Approval & Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges.

4

Background 

5.

Between the 2013-2014 to 2015-2016 school years, Respondent was 

reported to have engaged in concerning behavior and conduct, including, but not 

limited to: (1) submitting sign-in sheets that represented students who had been 

present but late as absent; (2) refusing to correct the incorrect sign-in sheets (Exhs. R1, 

p. B1, R5, p. B14-15); (3) sending emails during instructional time instead of providing 

students supervision and instruction (Exh. 9, pp. A364, 365, 367); (4) threatening to 

record District staff and administration without their consent (Exh. R14); (5) failing to 

participate in observations and quality reviews (Exh. 9, pp. A366, 369); (6) attributing 

untrue statements and actions to District employees; (7) acting in a hostile manner to 

District administrators and staff; and (8) refusing to comply with supervisor directives. 

6. 

On February 9, 2016, the Board, believing Respondent’s conduct showed 

she was suffering from a mental illness that rendered her incompetent to teach, voted 

to suspend Respondent. 

7. 

On February 12, 2016, the Board issued Respondent a Notice of 

Suspension Pursuant to Education Code section 44942 (Notice of Suspension), 

notifying Respondent of the Board’s determination to suspend her from service and 

providing her the opportunity to appear before the Board to explain or refute the 

charges that gave rise to her proposed suspension in closed session. (Exh. 1, p. A80.)

Respondent was also offered, in writing, the opportunity to be examined by a panel 

consisting of three psychiatrists or psychologists. Respondent was provided with a list 

of psychiatrists and psychologists from which she could select her panel. (Exh. 1, p. 

A85.) 

5

8. 

On February 19, 2016, the Board met with Respondent and her 

representative. During Respondent’s presentation, she requested an extension of time, 

which the Board denied. Following her appearance, the Board elected to proceed with 

suspending Respondent. On February 22, 2016, Respondent was issued a Notice of 

Board Action, which referred to the February 12, 2016 notice and reiterated that 

Respondent had the option of participating in a fitness examination and was given a 

list of professionals from which she could select her three-person panel.

2016 Panel Evaluation 

9. 

Respondent decided to participate in the fitness examination. The day 

before the February 24, 2016 examination, Respondent notified the District of her 

selection. Respondent selected Laura Dorin, Ph.D., Paul Lane, Ph.D., and Lawrence 

Warick, M.D. (Exh. R45.) Because Dr. Lane was not available to participate in the 

February 24, 2016 panel, the District arranged for Brian P. Jacks, M.D., to serve as the 

third panel member. 

10. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44942, subdivision (c), the panel 

must be provided with a list of duties from which the employee was suspended or 

transferred. As there is nothing within that provision that prevents the Board from 

supplying panel members with more information,  Respondent’s panel members were 

provided the following documents: (1) a report from John Ayvazian, Ph.D, dated 

November 18, 2014; (2) a certificate of Job Description of Preschool 

Teacher/Supervisor; (3) the Notice of Suspension; (4) a Notice of Board Action; and (5) 

a copy of Education Code section 44942.

11.

Before the panel began their evaluation of Respondent, the panel met to

discuss how they would conduct the evaluation in a manner so as not to overwhelm 

6

Respondent. It was decided that Dr. Jacks would take the lead in questioning and that 

Dr. Dorin and Dr. Warwick would ask additional questions as they saw fit.

12. 

The February 24, 2016 evaluation took place from approximately 1:00 

p.m. until 3:00 p.m. and included: (1) an interview and (2) two tests – the Minnesota 

Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI-2) and the Millon Clinical Multiaxial 

Inventory-IV (MCCMI-IV). Because it was late in the day, Respondent was allowed to 

take both the MMPI-2 and MCCMI-IV home to complete. However, neither test could 

be scored as Respondent stated she was confused by the questions and returned them 

with many of the answers left blank. 

13.

The panel members unanimously concluded Respondent was suffering 

from mental illness of such a degree as to render her incompetent to perform her 

duties and issued reports containing their conclusions on March 1 and 14, 2016, and 

April 12, 2016. 

14. 

Two of the panel members, Dr. Dorin and Dr. Jacks, testified at the 

hearing. 

LAURA DORIN, PH.D. 

15. 

Dr. Dorin is a Clinical Psychologist at the Center for Professional Recovery 

and has been licensed as a psychologist in California since 1990. Dr. Dorin specializes 

in performing forensic fitness-for-duty evaluations requested by licensing boards, 

regulatory agencies, and professional organizations. Respondent’s fitness evaluation 

was the first she has performed for the District; however, over her career, she has 

conducted 500 to 700 psychological evaluations and 50 to 100 fitness-for-duty 

evaluations. 

7

16.

During the interview, Respondent was asked about her perceptions of 

her interactions and each of the allegations. During questioning, Respondent 

manifested an “adaptive inflexibility” and an “inclination of misinterpreting the actions 

of others as being malevolent.” 

17.  On March 1, 2016, Dr. Dorin issued a report of her findings, concluding 

Respondent was not fit for duty. Dr. Dorin explained the interview data and as well as 

her review of Dr. Ayvazian’s report suggested that Respondent had certain 

characterological issues  that prevented Respondent from taking responsibility for her 

actions, consider the perspective from another’s viewpoint, and/or take direction from 

authority figures. 

BRIAN P. JACKS, M.D. 

18. 

Dr. Jacks is a clinical professor of psychiatry at the University of Southern 

California. Dr. Jacks has performed 70 to 80 fitness evaluations for school districts. In 

addition, he has performed fitness for duty evaluations for various state  agencies 

including the medical board, pharmacy board, and the Workers’ Compensation 

Appeals Board. 

19.

During the interview, Dr. Jacks noted that Respondent refused to answer 

questions and discuss certain parts of her history as she felt these were "too personal"

and would only talk about her concerns about what was happening at the school. 

20.

On March 14, 2016, Dr. Jacks issued a report of his findings, concluding 

Respondent was not fit for duty. Dr. Jacks noted that, due to Respondent’s

“psychological problems, she would have difficulties performing as a teacher for 

preschool students, to properly use instructional materials, to be able to evaluate 

academic and social growth of pupils, to create an effective environment for learning 

8

with various means such as displays, bulletin boards, and interest centers, to perform 

basic attendance and accounting and business services, to evaluate new materials, to 

select and requisition books, to supervise pupils out of classroom, to participate in 

curriculum and other developmental programs, to plan and coordinate the work of 

aides. She would also have difficulties being supervised.” (Exh. 10, p. A646.) 

LAWRENCE H. WARWICK, M.D., PH.D. 

21. 

Dr. Warwick did not testify at the hearing. Dr. Warkwick’s report, issued 

on April 12, 2016, also found that Respondent “is not fit to return to her duties as a 

preschool teacher.” (Exh. 10, p. A643.) Dr. Warwick noted that Respondent did not take 

responsibility for any of the charges against her and became quite defensive and was 

"on the attack” during the interview. (

.) In addition, the records reviewed by Dr. 

Warwick indicated that Respondent had serious personality issues, as well as 

interpersonal problems, while employed as a preschool teacher. 

Court Rulings 

TRIAL COURT JUDGEMENT 

22.  On April 15, 2016, the District provided Respondent with notice that the 

panel conclusively determined  she was not fit for duty and recommended she not 

return to her duties as a preschool teacher. In accordance with Education Code section 

44942, the District continued her suspension and placed her on mandatory sick leave, 

effective April 15, 2016. 

23. 

Respondent demanded a hearing under Education Code section 44942, 

subdivision (g). Subsequently, on May 11, 2016, the District filed a complaint in the 

Superior Court, in the matter entitled 

9

(Super. Ct. L.A. County, Case No BC 620026), asking the court for a judgment in its 

favor finding: (1) the charges against Respondent are true; (2) the charges against 

Respondent constitute sufficient grounds to place Respondent on mandatory sick 

leave of absence; and (3) for such other and further relief as the court may deem just 

and proper. (Exh. 1, p. A106.) 

24.  On April 12, 2017, the Superior Court matter was called for hearing, The 

District’s unopposed motion for summary judgement was granted and an Order 

Granting Lynwood Unified School District’s Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the 

Alternative, Motion for Summary Adjudication of the Issues (Trial Court’s Order) was 

issued. (Exh. 1, p. A108-112.) The trial court found  the charges that Respondent 

“suffers from mental illness of such a degree as to render her incompetent to perform 

her duties as a preschool teacher have been established and constitute sufficient 

grounds for placing her on mandatory sick leave.” (Exh. 1, p. A112.) On May 2, 2017, 

the trial court entered judgment against Respondent.

COURT OF APPEAL 

25. 

Respondent filed a Notice of Appeal on July 12, 2017, with the Court of 

Appeal, Second Appellate District (Court of Appeal), appealing the trial court's 

judgement.

26. 

The Court of Appeal found that by failing to oppose the District’s motion 

for summary judgment, Respondent forfeited any contention that the trial court erred 

in granting judgment to [the District].” (Exh. 1, A123.) Noting that Respondent’s brief 

“fails to provide any coherent argument, other than vague, unsupported references to 

having been denied due process,” the Court of Appeal affirmed the trial court’s 

judgment on August 1, 2019. 

10 

Second Panel Evaluation 

27.

Respondent had two years from the date she had been placed on 

mandatory sick leave of absence, to request a new panel to review the previous panel’s

conclusion. After the two-year period, the Board could either reinstate Respondent or 

serve Respondent with a notice of intention to dismiss her and proceed according to 

Education Code section 44943. 

28.  On April 18, 2018, and May 9, 2018, Tom Pinkava, Respondent’s union 

representative from the Lynwood Teachers Association (LTA), corresponded with the 

District inquiring as to  Respondent’s employment status. On June 21, 2018, the 

District responded by offering to convene a new panel (Second Evaluation) to review 

the original conclusion reached by the first panel. Respondent was to remain on an 

unpaid leave of absence while the review was being completed. 

29.  Mr. Pinkava replied on June 25, 2018, stating that he disagreed with the 

District’s decision to keep Respondent on unpaid status, asserting that as the two 

years had elapsed with the Board failing to either serve Respondent with a notice of 

intention to dismiss or reinstate Respondent as a teacher, she should be placed back 

on paid status and immediately reinstated as an early childhood education teacher. 

Mr. Pinkava further notified that District that a Level 2 grievance had been filed to 

resolve the issue. (Exh. 1, p. A132) 

30.

The District sent letters on August 28, 2018, April 5, 2019, and June 11, 

2019, attempting to schedule the second evaluation. (Exh. 1, pp. A136, A140, A142.)

31. 

Respondent did not select a second panel and, on October 9, 2019, the 

District served Respondent with a Notice of Intent to Discipline – Dismissal. The 

11 

District advised Respondent that, before the action was finalized, Respondent was 

entitled to a 

 hearing. (Exh. 1, p. A149.) 

32.

The District and Respondent ultimately agreed to a 

hearing on 

November 6, 2019, to provide Respondent the opportunity to respond to the Notice of 

Intent to Dismiss. Respondent was represented at the 

 hearing by Lawrence 

Trygstad, Attorney at Law, her legal counsel at the time. Mr. Trygstad alleged during 

the 

 hearing that dismissing Respondent amounted to disability discrimination

and that Respondent believed she was qualified to return to her position as a Pre-

School Teacher/Site Supervisor. The District notified Mr. Trygstad on January 23, 2020,

that the District contacted Rachel Shaw from Shaw HR Consulting (Shaw Consulting) to 

coordinate and facilitate the FEHA/ADA disability interactive process (interactive 

process). There is no evidence that Respondent objected to the District’s retention of

Shaw Consulting to facilitate the process. On May 12, 2020, the District notified Mr. 

Trygstad that the District would procced with the interactive process with Shaw 

Consulting. 

33. 

An interactive process meeting was scheduled to proceed with Shaw 

Consulting on May 18, 2020. Respondent contacted Shaw Consulting on May 8, 2020, 

requesting the meeting be rescheduled to June 8, 2020. The District agreed to the 

rescheduled meeting and on June 1, 2020, Shaw Consulting sent Respondent notice 

that her telephonic interactive process meeting was scheduled for June 8, 2020. On 

June 5, 2020, Mr. Taylor, Respondent’s representative, contacted the District to request 

that the meeting be rescheduled. Shaw Consulting sent notice on June 5, 2020, 

confirming the cancellation of the June 8 meeting. 

34.  On June 22, 2020, the first telephonic facilitated meeting took place. The 

meeting participants were Respondent and her representative Mr. Taylor, Assistant 

12 

Superintendent Brian Lucas, the District’s Representative Chuong Nguyen, Esq., and 

Ms. Shaw. During the meeting, Mr. Taylor requested that he be allowed to audio 

record the meeting. The parties agreed to the recording. 

35. 

An interactive process meeting is the process in which an employer and 

employee explore options to reasonably accommodate an employee’s disability. 

During the June 22, 2020 meeting, Respondent, through Mr. Taylor, asserted that she 

had been removed from her position because she had refused to “perform what 

appeared to be an illegal alteration” and suggested that she was being discriminated 

against because of her race. (Exh. 1, p. A163.) Respondent further insisted that she did 

not agree with the first evaluation and did not believe she was medically restricted. 

Based on her representations, “it was unclear if [Respondent] believes she has a 

disability requiring reasonable accommodations or not.” (Exh. 1, p. A169.) During the 

meeting, the District advised Respondent that, as there is “medical reporting, from 

2016, that indicates she cannot medically work as a Pre-School Teacher,” the District is 

unable to consider her return to work as a Pre-School Teacher, and offered to 

assemble a new panel “to obtain an updated set of opinions to support revisiting a 

return to work as a Pre-School Teacher.” (Exh. 1, pp. 169, 171.) 

36.

On July 7, 2020, Respondent notified the District that she is "not a 

candidate for interactive process of accommodation," as she had "not requested any 

accommodation nor. . . expressed a disability." (Exh. 10, p. 728.) 

37.  On July 21, 2020, the District sent Respondent a letter stating that it 

understood that Respondent was not seeking an accommodation and was merely 

seeking to be reinstated. The District advised Respondent that the District could not 

reinstate her to her position unless the District received new medical findings 

13 

supporting a medical release. The District notified Respondent on July 21, 2020, that it 

would be convening a new panel to conduct a second mental health examination.

38.  On September 2, 2020, the District provided Respondent  a list of 

scheduled appointments for the examinations with Dr. John Stalberg, a psychiatrist on 

September 10; Kim Tangen, Ph.D., a psychologist on September 11; and Dr. Jack 

Schnel, a psychologist on September 17, 2020. The District also offered to coordinate 

transportation for Respondent, at no cost, to further assist her in this regard. The 

District reiterated that Respondent would remain on an unpaid leave of absence while 

the process continued. 

39.  On September 4, 2020, Respondent notified the District that she would 

not be responding to the District’s September 2, 2020 correspondence until 

September 15, 2020. Based on her response, the District cancelled the scheduled 

evaluations.

40.

On September 16, 2020, Respondent sent a response complaining about 

her treatment by the District and the manner in which the initial evaluation was 

conducted and stated that she was “going to allow the Equal Employment Opportunity 

Commission (EEOC) and other Government/State officials to take over this matter, the 

ensure a non-bias resolution.” (Sic.) (Exh. 1, p. A218.) 

41.  On October 9, 2020, the District advised Respondent that it was unclear 

from her September 16, 2020 response if she would be rescheduling and/or attending 

the examination. The District provided Respondent with two (2) date options for each 

provider the District had selected, to allow Respondent the option to select her 

preferred date and time  for the respective evaluations. Respondent was required to 

respond to the District by October 19, 2020, with her  selections and request for 

14 

transportation. Respondent responded by e-mail on October 19, 2020, attaching her 

written response from September 16, 2020. 

42. 

The second panel proceeded with the scheduled evaluations, and the 

panel members submitted their completed questionnaires  on October 29, 2020, 

November 19, 2020, and November 20, 2020, respectively. Due to Respondent’s 

refusal to attend the evaluations, the panel members deferred to the prior medical 

findings from the first evaluation, confirming Respondent remains unable to return to 

work as a Preschool Teacher/Site Supervisor.

43. 

The District scheduled a meeting with Respondent for December 17, 

2020, to ascertain whether she would be interested in a vacant alternative position. 

Respondent failed to attend. The District nevertheless identified three vacant non-

teaching positions as possibilities for Respondent and asked her to apply by December 

29, 2020. She did not do so. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

44. 

At the hearing, Respondent did not refute the charges made by any of 

the District’s witnesses. Instead, Respondent: (1) repeatedly asserted that the District’s 

attempt to get her to submit accurate sign-in sheets constituted tampering of 

documents; (2) asserted that the Board, when determining whether to take disciplinary 

action, chose to illegally meet in closed session; (3) asserted that the District violated 

her Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)by initiating the 

interactive process that was requested by her attorney at the Skelly hearing; and (4) 

asserted that she is an effective teacher who has received positive work performance 

evaluations in the past and is supported by her coworkers and teachers.

15 

SIGN-IN SHEETS 

45.

Pamela Kimball wrote a letter on Respondent’s behalf dated January 28, 

2018, which was admitted as Exhibit R4a. Ms. Kimball has been a teacher at Lincoln 

Elementary for 35 years. In her letter, Ms. Kimball explained that when the school used 

preprinted paper to take attendance, everything was marked with a pen. There was a 

small box for the attendance of each student that was divided with a diagonal. If the 

child was not present when the teacher first took attendance, the sign-in sheet  was 

marked with an A above this diagonal. If the student was tardy, it was marked with a T 

below the diagonal. If a mistake was made, the mistake  was crossed out and initialed. 

46. 

Respondent did not follow this procedure. Instead, Respondent wrote 

“absent,” covering the sign-in sheet’s signature line, which prevented any changes to 

be made to show that students who were tardy were in fact present. Accordingly, 

Respondent submitted sign-in sheets that were false. The District provided 

Respondent with alternative ways to correct the erroneous sign-in sheets, but 

Respondent refused to correct the errors. Respondent had no alternative plan for 

correcting sign-in sheets that had been marked incorrectly. 

CLOSED SESSION

47.  On January 26, 2019, the Board was schedule to meet in closed session to 

discuss Respondent’s employment status. Pursuant to Government Code section 

54957, subdivision (b), the Board has the discretion to meet in closed session when 

considering  “the appointment, employment, evaluation of performance, discipline, or 

dismissal of a public employee or to hear complaints or charges brought against the 

employee by another person or employee unless the employee requests a public 

16 

session.” There is no evidence that the Board did, in fact, meet on that day to consider 

Respondent’s employment or that Respondent requested a public session. 

EVALUATIONS 

48.  On January 14, 2014,  Los Angeles Universal Preschool (LAUP) conducted 

an evaluation of Respondent’s classroom. There were 22 children present that day. 

(Exh. R23.)

49. 

The evaluator noted that Respondent scored in the “MID” range for 

Positive Climate, Teacher Sensitivity Regard for Student Perspective, Behavior 

Management and Instructional Learning Formats. (Exh. R23, pp. B72-B77.) 

Respondent’s classroom scored “LOW” for Negative Climate and “HIGH” for 

Productivity,  which were both considered areas of strength for Respondent’s 

classroom. (Exh. R23, pp. B72, B76.) Respondent’s classroom scored “LOW” in Concept 

Development, Quality Feedback, and Language Modeling, which were all considered 

areas of growth for Respondent’s classroom. (Exh. R23, pp. B78-B80.) 

50.  On February 12, 2013, LAUP conducted an Early Childhood Environment 

Rating Scale-Revised (ECERS-R) assessment of Respondent’s classroom. The 

assessment is designed to measure the quality of group programs and contains an 

observation component and an interview component. 

51. 

The ECERS-R is constructed with 43 items organized into seven subscales, 

including Space and Furnishings (8 items), Personal Care Routines (6 items), Facilitation 

of Children’s Language-Reasoning (4 items), Learning Activities (10 items), Teacher 

Interactions (5 items), Program Structure (4 items), and Supports for Parents and Staff 

(6 items). An overall ECERS-R score is computed by averaging all the item scores to 

yield a score between 1.0 (inadequate) and 7.0 (excellent). The overall ECERS-R score 

17 

for Respondent’s classroom was 5.10; the Class Dimension Score in Emotional Support 

was 5.94; the Classroom Organization Score was 5.50; and the Instructional Support 

Score was 2.42. (Exh. R25.) 

CHARACTER REFERENCES

52.

Respondent submitted character reference letters from former coworkers 

and student’s parents. 

Ms. Kimball wrote a letter of reference for Respondent on February 21, 2016. 

Ms. Kimball attributes the success of the Lincoln Elementary pre-school program to 

Respondent. (Exh. 55A.) 

Patricia Reveles and Mira Haley, Child Care Assistants in the Lincoln Elementary 

pre-school program, worked with Respondent for approximately six years. On February 

28, 2016, they wrote a letter on Respondent’s behalf. They believed she did a “great 

job in preparing the children for kindergarten.” (Exh. R55B.) They described 

Respondent as someone who “made sure [the children] felt welcome and secure” while 

making “learning a fun experience.” (

) 

Larry Nezhni, a former coworker, described Respondent as “a competent 

teacher and good person.” (Exh. R55C.) Mr. Nezhni believed the charges by the District 

administrators were “wrongful,” had nothing to do with her ability to be a teacher, and 

accused the administrators of acting maliciously. (

)

Lenora Anson, a “Teacher Leader” at Lincoln Elementary, worked with 

Respondent for five years found Respondent to be a person of “commendable 

character and capability” who “demonstrated professionalism with staff and appeared 

even-toned, collective and confident with her students.” (Exh. 55D.) 

18 

Angel and Rosa Elizondo are parent who has had two children in Respondent’s 

class. He and his wife believe Respondent to be “a great teacher that [sic] handles kids 

well and is always working on getting the students and parents ready for their next 

step.” (Exh. 55E.) Mr. Elizondo states that he has known Respondent for 10 years and 

he has never heard any complaints about her from any of the parents of the students 

in her class. (

) 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1.

The District has the burden of proving the charges by a preponderance 

of the evidence. (

(1985) 164 

Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) Preponderance of the evidence means “the evidence on 

one side outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, the evidence on the other side.” 

(

. (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 325.)

Cause for Termination 

2. 

A certificated employee may be dismissed for evident unfitness for 

service or for having a mental condition unfitting the employee to instruct or associate 

with children. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932 subd. (a)(6) & (7), 44942.) 

3. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “'Evident unfitness for service' connotes 

19 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (

) 

4. 

A panel of three psychiatrists/psychologists found respondent unfit for 

duty as a teacher due to a mental condition. The panel’s conclusion, reached in 2016, 

was subsequently confirmed by the  Superior Court’s entry of judgment on May 2, 

2017, and affirmed on appeal by the Court of Appeal on August 1, 2019. A second 

panel was convened that confirmed the determination in 2020. Respondent  presented 

no medical or expert evidence suggesting she is fit for duty as a teacher. 

Analysis of Morrison Factors  

5. 

In deciding whether cause for dismissal exists under the concept of 

evident unfitness for service, it also must be established that a teacher’s misconduct 

relates to her fitness to teach, within the meaning of 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230. 

6. 

While it is unclear whether the 

analysis applies to the cause for 

dismissal of mental unfitness to instruct children, the Commission assumes it does for 

purposes of this case out of abundance of caution.

7.

Not all “

factors” need to be present for the 

test to be 

satisfied. (

(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Moreover, the 

analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can be 

applied to the accumulated facts established collectively. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 

1457.) 

20 

 
 
8. 

The 

 factors include: (1) the likelihood that the conduct 

adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the degree of such adversity; (2) the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of teaching certificate 

held by the teacher; (4) the existence of extenuating or aggravating circumstances; (5) 

the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) 

the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (7) the extent that the 

discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 

the teacher; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.

9. 

In this case, the Commission has analyzed the 

factors and 

concludes the District established by a preponderance of the evidence that 

Respondent’s misconduct makes her unfit to teach pursuant to Education Code 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), and that Respondent suffers from a physical or 

mental condition unfitting her to instruct or associate with children, pursuant to 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(7). Specifically, Respondent is a Pre-

School Teacher/Site Supervisor. Respondent was found to have a mental illness to 

such a degree that it rendered her incompetent to perform her duties. Respondent 

failed to present any evidence  suggesting that her condition has resolved and 

therefore the conduct is current. If Respondent is returned to the classroom, it is highly 

likely that it will adversely affect the ability of students to obtain competent 

instruction. 

10. 

The District’s decision to dismiss Respondent from employment is 

reasonable and supported by a preponderance of the evidence.

21 

ORDER 

The dismissal of respondent Pamela Finley from employment with the Lynwood 

Unified School District is sustained. 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

DATE: 

DATE: 

DATE: 

ERIKA HERRERA 

Commission Member

VENNEKA POWELL-SHANNON 

Commission Member 

NANA CHIN 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings 

22 

 
