BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
FOR THE PERRIS UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

DAVID BAKER, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022080699 

DECISION 

On December 5 to 9, 2022, and February 21 to 22, and 24, 2023, a Commission 

on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by videoconference. The 

Commission consisted of the following members: Administrative Law Judge Jami A. 

Teagle-Burgos, Christopher Bourke, and Matthew Rainwater. 

Dean T. Adams and Samantha M. Koopersmith, Attorneys at Law, Adams Silva & 

McNally LLP, represented Perris Union High School District (District). 

Carlos R. Perez and Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorneys at Law, Law Office of 

Carlos R. Perez, represented respondent, David Baker. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record was closed, and the 

matter submitted for decision on February 24, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Procedural Background 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated teacher employed by the District 

as a secondary classroom teacher at Liberty High School (LHS). 

2. 

By letter dated June 28, 2022, the District notified respondent that a 

Statement of Charges for Dismissal and Immediate Suspension (Statement of Charges), 

dated April 29, 2022, had been filed with the District’s governing board (board), at 

which time the District recommended respondent’s dismissal from employment within 

the District and immediate suspension without pay. The District notified respondent 

that the board approved the District’s recommendation, and respondent may request 

a hearing within 30 days. 

3. 

The Statement of Charges alleges the following four causes for dismissal: 

(1) immoral conduct; (2) dishonesty; (3) evident unfitness; and (4) “persistent violation 

of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed 

for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board 

of the school district.” (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. (a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The 

District also alleges respondent was subject to immediate suspension without pay 

based on immoral conduct. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 

1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

indicated. 

2 

 
4. 

In support of the above causes for discipline and the request for 

immediate suspension, the Statement of Charges alleges the following: 

• 

In or around the first week of the 2021-2022 school year, respondent 

assigned a bible verse to students in his College and Career Foundations 

(CCF) classes. On November 8, 2021, the parent of student N.H. complained 

that respondent required students to watch and take notes of VeggieTales2, 

a Christian children’s animated show, in his classroom. 

•  Prior to the start of the 2021-2022 school year and during many other 

occasions, the District notified staff members of the California Department 

of Public Health (CDPH) mandate regarding COVID-19 and the requirement 

that all employees wear a face mask while indoors and in the presence of 

students. The District received several complaints that respondent regularly 

pulled down his face mask or failed to wear a face mask during class. 

•  On multiple occasions during the 2021-2022 school year, respondent 

deviated from the curriculum in his CCF and world history classes by 

referring to the parable of the Good Samaritan, asking students questions 

regarding religion and Jesus, referring to the COVID-19 vaccine as “the 

juice,” sharing his personal beliefs about the COVID-19 vaccine, using 

2 VeggieTales is an American Christian media, computer generated musical 

children's animation, and book franchise. The series sees fruit and vegetable characters 

retelling Christian stories from the Bible, with episodes presenting comedy, life lessons 

according to a biblical world view. 

3 

 
political content from social media in the classroom from sites such as 

PragerU3, and sharing his political beliefs and opinions with students. 

•  Respondent failed to maintain and update his grade books in a timely 

manner in Infinite Campus resulting in the District receiving many 

complaints and students being unaware of decreases in their grades. 

•  On November 29, 2021, a student shared a photo on social media of 

respondent near his classroom Promethean Board4 that displayed an image 

of a video titled, “Philosophy of Oral Sex.” Respondent discussed 

inappropriate topics in class such as his ability to tie a cherry stem with his 

tongue that meant he was a good kisser. 

•  On multiple occasions during the 2021-2022 school year, respondent 

accessed the website “DuckDuckGo.com” on his District laptop. 

3 PragerU is an American advocacy group that creates videos and content to 

promote a conservative viewpoint on various political, economic, and sociological 

topics. PragerU is short for Prager University. It is not an academic institution and does 

not hold classes, does not grant certifications or diplomas, and is not accredited by 

any recognized body. Historians and political scientists have criticized PragerU's videos 

for containing misleading claims about various topics. 

4 A Promethean Board is an interactive whiteboard onto which you can project 

images from a computer, tablet, or external camera. 

4 

 
Duck.Duck.Go.com5 is a website used to enable users to conduct private 

searches, block tracking, and enforce encryption. 

•  On or about February 2, 2022, respondent inappropriately placed his hands 

on student B.C.’s hips and physically moved her to the side while he walked 

behind her, and by doing so, respondent rubbed the front of his body 

against the back of B.C.’s body. Student L.M. observed respondent’s conduct 

and reported it was “strange.” B.C. felt uncomfortable. At a meeting about 

this incident, respondent dishonestly claimed he did not recall the incident. 

•  After February 3, 2022, other female students reported concerns about 

respondent’s conduct including he paid close attention to certain female 

students, he had female favorites who were treated differently, he 

complimented the attire of female students and made comments like “you 

look pretty today,” “I love your pants,” and “you look really good.” Student 

Y.H. reported that respondent complimented her attire when she wore less 

clothes, stared at her, and stopped staring at her when her cleavage was 

covered. Y.H. reported that respondent assigned her seat next to his desk 

and engaged in long conversations during class, discussed his personal life, 

and shared his opinion that women should be “presentable, wear high heel 

shoes, apply makeup, and do their hair.” This conduct constitutes grooming 

behavior by respondent. Other students reported that respondent discussed 

topics of a sexual nature in class such as “the five things a human needs are: 

5 DuckDuckGo.com is an internet privacy company that offers products for 

people to protect their privacy online, most notably, a private search engine, a browser 

and browser extension, email protection, and app tracking protection. 

5 

 
drink, eat, sleep, . . . and sex.” Several students reported respondent did not 

provide instruction during class and described his class as “easy,” “boring,” 

“useless,” and “out of control,” and he was regularly off topic and discussed 

matters of religious and political nature in class causing students to feel 

uncomfortable. At a meeting to discuss these issues, respondent dishonestly 

reported he did not recall the incidents of him rubbing against the back side 

of Y.H. and making comments to female students, and repeatedly 

commented that he could not answer the questions “without context” and 

he asked, “What is the context?” 

5. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing before a Commission, and this 

hearing followed. 

The District’s Evidence 

6. 

The following findings are based on the relevant testimony of witnesses 

and documentary evidence. 

THE VERBAL AND WRITTEN DIRECTIVES 

7. 

On or about the first week of school in August during the 2021-2022 

school year, Erika Tejeda, Ed.D., principal of LHS, met with respondent to discuss his 

class assignment involving a bible verse. Dr. Tejeda issued a directive to respondent to 

refrain from using any and all religious content in his classes, and notified him it was 

inappropriate to share his personal and political beliefs with students. 

8. 

On or about August 20, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with respondent to discuss 

concerns that he was not complying with the face mask policy and issued him a 

directive to adhere to the CDPH face mask mandate. Dr. Tejeda issued respondent a 

6 

written Conference Summary, dated September 3, 2021, which summarized the 

meeting and directive. 

9. 

At a staff meeting on November 29, 2021, Dr. Tejeda reminded staff 

members, including respondent, to maintain and update their grade books, in a timely 

manner, in Infinite Campus. 

10.  On December 14, 2021, Dr. Tejeda issued respondent a Written 

Reprimand indicating his following conduct violated Board Policy 4119.21 and Section 

V of the Perris Union Educators Handbook: assigning a bible verse to his students; 

sharing his personal political and religious beliefs with students in class; requiring his 

students to watch VeggieTales; his failure to comply with the CDPH and District face 

mask policies; deviating from the curriculum for his CCF and world history classes by 

discussing bible parables, sharing his personal beliefs about the COVID-19 vaccine, 

and utilizing political content from social media including from PragerU; and failing to 

maintain his grade books. 

11.  Dr. Tejeda issued the following directives to respondent: (a) maintain a 

“positive, supportive, and encouraging classroom environment at all times to promote 

student learning free of all personal political and religious beliefs”; (b) maintain grade 

book in a current and accurate manner; (c) wear a face mask at all times while indoors 

and in the presence of students in accordance with CDPH guidelines; (d) follow all 

curriculum guidelines and pacing guides to ensure continuity of instruction 

throughout the departments and content areas; (e) refrain from using social media 

accounts as a sole source for academic information and instruction; and (f) utilize 

proper judgment and conduct yourself in an appropriate and professional manner at 

all times. 

7 

12.  On January 12, 2022, Nicholas Hilton, the District’s director of human 

resources, at the time, met with respondent regarding his conduct of displaying an 

image of the video titled “Philosophy of Oral Sex” on his class Promethean Board and 

using DuckDuckGo.com on his District laptop. Mr. Hilton issued respondent the 

following directives: (a) review and adhere to the District’s responsible use policy; (b) 

refrain from discussing matters of a sexual or romantic nature with students; (c) 

contact technology for assistance with the proper setup of the District YouTube 

account to minimize risk of the display of inappropriate videos on his screen; (d) 

conduct himself in a professional manner at all times; (e) comply with District Board 

Policies 4119.21, 5137, and 4040; and (f) ensure appropriate interactions with students. 

On February 18, 2022, Mr. Hilton issued respondent a Written Reprimand, which 

summarized these same directives. 

13.  On February 3, 2022, Dr. Tejeda met with respondent regarding his 

conduct of placing his hands on B.C.’s hips and rubbing his front side on her back side 

as he moved behind her. Also in attendance were Scott Moore, LHS athletic director 

and dean, and Diana Pales, union representative. At the meeting, respondent 

“dishonestly claimed” he did not recall the incident with B.C. 

14.  On March 7, 2022, Mr. Hilton and Dr. Tejeda met with respondent. Also in 

attendance was Ms. Pales. The following concerns about respondent were discussed: 

touching the hips of B.C. and rubbing along her back side with his front side; having 

“female favorites” in his classes; complimenting female students about their attire, 

making comments to female students like “you look really good,” complimenting 

female students when they wear less clothing, and no longer complimenting female 

students when their cleavage is covered; assigning Y.H.’s seat next to his and engaging 

in long conversations about his personal life and his opinion that women should wear 

8 

high heel shoes and wear make-up; discussing topics in class that are sexual in nature; 

having out of control classrooms that were off topic; and discussing matters in class 

that were political and religious in nature causing students to feel uncomfortable. At 

this meeting, respondent repeatedly stated he could not answer questions about these 

assertions without “context,” and he often asked, “What is the context?” 

TESTIMONY OF THE DISTRICT’S WITNESSES AND OTHER SUPPORTING 

EVIDENCE 

15. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Dr. Tejeda, as well as 

documents prepared by Dr. Tejeda, which are consistent with her testimony. She has a 

Bachelor’s degree in Spanish, Master’s degrees in education and administration, a 

Doctoral degree in organizational leadership, a single subject credential in Spanish, 

and an administrative clear credential. She has been the principal at LHS since it 

opened in the fall of 2021. Prior to working at LHS, she worked in the District as a 

principal and assistant principal at another high school, an assistant principal at a 

middle school, a teacher, and a school aide. She is also an alumna of the District. 

16. 

LHS is a new school that opened in the 2021-2022 school year, and had 

its grand opening on August 5, 2021. It initially opened for ninth and tenth graders, 

and the grade levels will increase over a four-year period. The students were returning 

to in-person school after doing distance learning because of COVID-19. It was 

important they felt safe and “belonged to the school community.” Dr. Tejeda was 

involved in the hiring of teachers for LHS, and teachers could only be hired within the 

District in a transfer capacity. Sixty percent of the LHS teachers were hired due to their 

seniority, and the other forty percent were hired because they had some level of lesser 

seniority. All teachers were required to follow the job description for a secondary 

classroom teacher, and all new hires participated in an onboarding process. She had 

9 

previously worked with respondent at Pinacate Middle School (Pinacate). He was 

assigned to teach CCF at LHS because he was qualified to work with ninth graders 

since he had been a middle school teacher. CCF is for ninth graders and helps with 

social-emotional lessons, job analysis, researching colleges and careers, public 

speaking, and preparation for the next three years in high school. Respondent was also 

assigned to teach world history because he had a credential in social studies. 

17.  During the first few weeks of school in August 2021, Dr. Tejeda was 

approached by a parent who showed her a screenshot of a class assignment by 

respondent about the parable “Who Is My Neighbor.” The parent asked Dr. Tejeda if 

LHS taught religion, and she replied, “No.” She met with respondent and told him that 

the District employees “do not talk about religion in school,” to remove the 

assignment, and to not penalize students for not completing this assignment. 

Respondent informed Dr. Tejeda that it would not happen again. 

18.  On August 27, 2021, Dr. Tejeda received an email from parent T.H., who 

is a superintendent of a different school district, who inquired why respondent taught 

religion in class and requested his child be removed from respondent’s class. Dr. 

Tejeda removed T.H.’s child from respondent’s class. About the same time, Dr. Tejeda 

began following a LHS parent group on Facebook and she was “taken back as a 

principal” when she read a parent complaining and asking other parents about 

respondent teaching religion in his class at LHS. 

19. 

At the beginning of the 2021-2022 school year, Dr. Tejeda observed 

respondent at LHS with his face mask below his chin and hanging on his ear. However, 

the District had issued a memo to all staff on July 23, 2021, notifying them of the 

requirement to wear a face mask indoors when students were present. In addition, on 

July 30, 2021, Kirk Skorpanich, assistant superintendent of human resources, and Perris 

10 

Secondary Employee Association (PSEA) sent a joint communication to all District staff 

that reiterated the face mask requirement. Dr. Tejeda had discussed this requirement 

at staff meetings, and staff were given face masks and wipes. On September 3, 2021, 

Mr. Skorpanich and Thomas LaRochelle, assistant principal at LHS, observed 

respondent teaching in his classroom without a face mask. On the same day, Dr. 

Tejeda met with respondent about the administration’s concerns that he was not 

wearing a face mask. He informed her that his eye glasses would fog up when he wore 

his face mask. She talked with him about tips, such as wearing his mask higher on the 

bridge of his nose and using shaving cream on his eye glasses. She was aware of 

several other teachers who wore eye glasses and had no problems wearing a face 

mask. Respondent did not mention having a physical or mental condition, or religious 

reason, as to why he was not able to wear a face mask. She prepared a written 

conference summary and issued him a directive to wear a face mask indoors when 

students were present. 

20.  On October 5, 2021, Dr. Tejeda was contacted by the parent of S.M. who 

was concerned because S.M. complained that, in class, respondent shared his personal 

thoughts on COVID-19 vaccine and referred to it as “the juice,” he did not wear a face 

mask, and he shared his political views. Respondent made S.M. feel uncomfortable in 

his class. On October 6, 2021, S.M. reported that although respondent was supposed 

to be teaching world history, he was teaching “mainly about politics” and showing the 

students “videos on Instagram” that “kinda make fun of the President.” S.M. reported 

that respondent will “talk bad” about the COVID-19 vaccine and about how people 

should not be forced to take it and people have rights. Dr. Tejeda was concerned 

about the reports of S.M. and her parent, and she was concerned because Instagram is 

not a District-approved platform for teaching and it has a lot of “misinformation.” 

11 

On October 25, 2021, S.M.’s parent contacted respondent and Dr. Tejeda in an 

email titled, “DONALD TRUMP.” The parent wrote: 

I am confused as to why you keep showing Trump videos to 

my child. What does a video of Trump have to do with the 

colonization of Africa? You need to find some other 

material. It is your job to educate and not force your 

personal opinion on others . . . Between your love of Trump 

and vaccine misinformation this is unacceptable. Honestly, 

you should no longer be employed and allowed to force 

your fake news and vaccine propaganda on children. . . . 

On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with S.M. who relayed the same 

issues as above. Dr. Tejeda received another statement from S.M. on November 9, 

2021, that indicated S.M. thought respondent was following her. 

21.  On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student T.D. who 

reported that respondent “shows us videos not related to world history [that] 

sometimes are biased” and are about “conservatives and liberals” and are Instagram 

videos. T.D. stated respondent referred to the COVID-19 vaccine as “the juice.” 

22.  On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student J.K. who 

reported that respondent showed the class a YouTube video titled, “What is a liberal?”, 

and that he talked a lot about politics and the COVID-19 vaccine, but had not yet 

taught with a history book. 

23.  On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student A.H. who 

reported that respondent showed a VeggieTales (religious animated content) video to 

the class. Dr. Tejeda was taken back because she had already spoken with respondent 

12 

at the beginning of the school year about not using religious-based content in the 

classroom. 

24.  On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student A.D. who 

reported, “I sometimes feel uncomfortable with the things he says.” 

25.  On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student C.N. who 

reported that he did not feel like he was learning in respondent’s CCF class, and 

respondent referred to the COVID-19 vaccine as the “virus cocktail,” respondent 

showed the class an Instagram video that referred to Canada and Italy as being 

“fascist,” and respondent wore a mask that looked like it was falling apart. 

26.  On or about November 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student A.N. who 

reported that respondent referred to the United States military as a “killing machine,” 

and he showed a VeggieTales video to the class, he shared his personal beliefs about 

COVID-19 and the vaccine, he compared President Biden to Adolf Hitler, and he rarely 

wore a face mask. Dr. Tejeda obtained two videos and one image, via AirDrop6, from 

A.N. In the first video, respondent used the term “killing machine” and discussed 

Blacks and gays being in the military. In the second video, respondent was “going off 

on a tangent.” Dr. Tejeda spoke with A.N. about the inappropriateness of taking videos 

in a classroom, but she did not discipline A.N. any further because A.N. took the videos 

to show her mother and A.N. did not share them with others. The photo was an image 

of the Promethean Board in respondent’s class that showed content from PragerU 

6 AirDrop is a service that can transfer files among supported Macintosh 

computers and iOS devices by means of close-range wireless communication. 

13 

 
having to do with President John F. Kennedy and abortion. Dr. Tejeda was concerned 

about all of this content. 

27.  On November 4, 2021, Dr. Tejeda received an email from the parent of 

A.N. titled, “Urgent teacher concern: DAVID BAKER.” The parent wrote that “ENOUGH 

WAS ENOUGH,” and that for the last 12 weeks, her child listened to respondent refer 

to President Biden as a Nazi, COVID-19 as a hoax, vaccines as useless, and wearing a 

face mask as pointless. The parent indicated the “last straw” was a tweet from PragerU 

because it is known as an “extremist conservative website.” Dr. Tejeda was 

embarrassed as a principal and as a parent. 

28.  On November 14, 2021, Dr. Tejeda was copied on a lengthy email from 

the parent of A.D. to respondent, which was titled, “Serious Concerns About 

Instruction.” The parent, who is a principal at another high school in the District, 

shared her concerns about “safety and failure to follow district mask mandate,” 

“gradebook updates,” and “religious content & non-related C&C content covered 

during class.” 

29.  On November 16, 2021, Dr. Tejeda received an email from the parent of 

A.D. who was concerned because respondent had shared her November 14, 2021, 

email with other teachers at LHS. The parent was also concerned because her son was 

not in a “good head space.” 

30.  On November 18, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with respondent and discussed 

the following complaints from multiple students and parents: 

•  Respondent was not using the CCF curriculum in PowerPoint and Google 

Docs, and he was not using any available curriculum from other CCF 

teachers. Respondent replied that he was not aware if he had been given a 

14 

curriculum guide, and the CCF lead teacher, Erin Winston, encouraged the 

use of “outside supplemental sources.” This concerned Dr. Tejeda because 

none of the other CCF teachers told her they did not have what they needed 

to teach the class including respondent. 

•  Respondent calling the COVID-19 vaccine “the juice.” He replied that he may 

have said that, but he did not recall. 

•  Respondent using his personal Instagram feed in the classroom that showed 

PragerU content. He replied that he used his personal Instagram, but he was 

not familiar with PragerU and his Instagram feed was not political, and he 

became more aloof when he was asked more questions. Respondent was 

not aware that Dr. Tejeda was shown a photo of PragerU on his Instagram 

feed from his class Promethean Board. 

•  Respondent calling the military a “killing machine.” He replied that he did 

not believe he ever said that. He was not aware that Dr. Tejeda was shown a 

video of him telling his class that the military is a “killing machine.” She was 

also concerned because LHS had a large population of students from 

military families. 

•  Respondent using religious materials in his class. He replied that he does not 

use religious materials in class. He was not aware that Dr. Tejeda had been 

told he showed a VeggieTales video in his class. He later admitted that he 

did show a VeggieTales video, but he was not intentionally showing religious 

content. 

•  Respondent sharing his political beliefs with students. He replied that he 

encourages his students to “think.” When asked if he used YouTube videos 

15 

to teach the classes, he first replied that he did not think he showed any 

such videos, but then he remarked that he did not think the videos “strayed” 

from the “content.” 

•  Respondent failed to use a world history textbook. He replied that he had 

just received the textbook about a month ago and he used it that day for the 

first time. 

•  Respondent failed to maintain his gradebooks. He replied that he checked 

them “intermittently.” This concerned Dr. Tejeda because he was supposed 

to update his gradebooks every 10 days and he had been a teacher in the 

District for over 20 years. 

•  Respondent had shared a parent email with other teachers. He replied that 

he only shared the email with Frank DeAnda, but then he remarked that he 

told Ms. Winston that he would not speak any more about that student – 

who happened to be Ms. Winston’s nephew. 

As Dr. Tejeda proceeded through her meeting with respondent, she noted “he 

kind of had a smirk” and became more “aloof” as the questions went on, and by the 

end of the meeting, his demeanor “completely changed.” 

On November 29, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student K.N. who came to speak 

with her about her concern about a YouTube tile that recommended a video titled, 

“History of Oral Sex,” which was shown on the Promethean Board in respondent’s 

class. K.N. reported she was in respondent’s class when she saw this image on the 

Promethean Board. K.N. was visibly upset and became “a little inconsolable.” K.N. had 

submitted written statements to the counseling department about her concerns about 

respondent, but she felt her concerns had not been taken seriously, so she came to 

16 

speak with Dr. Tejeda. K.N. had taken photos on her phone of her written statements 

and shown them to Dr. Tejeda. Dr. Tejeda was appalled and very upset about what she 

heard from K.N., and also because it seemed there was no urgency on respondent’s 

part to take down the YouTube page. Dr. Tejeda contacted the counseling department 

for copies of any written statements submitted to their office, and she discovered 

written statements concerning respondent had been submitted by K.N. on October 11, 

2021, by student P.M. on October 11, 2021, by student V.H. on October 11, 2021, and 

by student S.L. in the “fall of 2021.” Dr. Tejeda contacted the human resources office of 

the District. 

31.  On November 29, 2021, Mr. Hilton came to LHS and met with respondent 

in the presence of Dr. Tejeda. Mr. Hilton placed respondent on paid administrative 

leave. At that time, Dr. Tejeda began to conduct her first investigation regarding the 

concerns about respondent. 

32.  On December 2, 2021, Dr. Tejeda met with student D.P. who came to 

speak with her and submitted a written statement. D.P. shared that recommendations 

had been displayed on respondent’s Promethean Board in his class, including “The 

History of Oral Sex” and “ways to pleasure a women in bed.” He said he could tie 

cherry stems with his tongue that showed he was a “good kisser.” D.P. also shared that 

respondent has his “favorites” and only talks to certain female students, he does not 

talk to male students, he talks about God and politics and personal topics, he teaches 

from YouTube, and he has “zero” classroom management. Dr. Tejeda was “disgusted” 

and felt that none of this had “any place in a comprehensive public high school with 

children.” Dr. Tejeda contacted the human resources office of the District. 

33.  On December 14, 2021, Dr. Tejeda issued a written reprimand to 

respondent, as referenced above, regarding her concerns about religion and politics 

17 

being discussed in his classes, him sharing his personal beliefs in his classes, his failure 

to comply with the face mask mandate, his use of social media including PragerU in his 

classes, and his failure to maintain his gradebooks. 

34.  On or about January 7, 2022, after the winter break, the District returned 

respondent to work from being on paid administrative leave. 

35.  On February 2, 2022, Dr. Tejeda received an after-hours call from Joshua 

Rushing, a campus supervisor who was with Stephanie Solorio, campus security, 

because they were clearing a hall when they overheard a conversation coming from a 

girls’ restroom at LHS. They heard student B.C. telling another student that during 

class, respondent grabbed her hips in order to walk past her, and asked her friend if 

that was “weird.” When B.C. exited the bathroom, Mr. Rushing and Ms. Solorio asked 

B.C. about what they overheard and she informed them the incident occurred the 

Friday before, on or about January 28, 2022. 

36.  On February 3, 2022, Dr. Tejeda met with B.C. to discuss the incident 

reported by Mr. Rushing and Ms. Solorio. B.C. reported that respondent had gone 

behind her when he grabbed her hips. Dr. Tejeda met with B.C. a second time on this 

day, and asked B.C. to show her what happened by using Dr. Tejeda and a secretary to 

act-out what occurred. B.C. instructed Dr. Tejeda to get close to the wall, the secretary 

to place her hands on Dr. Tejeda’s lower hips, and for the secretary to rub herself 

between the wall and Dr. Tejeda’s “rear end.” B.C. informed Dr. Tejeda that, at the time 

of the incident, she had been leaning on the desk of another student L.M. to help him 

with an assignment. Dr. Tejeda met with L.M. who acknowledged that he witnessed the 

incident and thought it was “very strange” that respondent put his hands on B.C. and 

“squeezed” over her. L.M. described that respondent’s hands were on B.C.’s lower waist 

and the closeness of his touching on B.C.’s body. L.M. reported there was no 

18 

emergency during the incident, and there was space for respondent to walk a different 

path. Dr. Tejeda called B.C. to her office a third time, in order to contact B.C.’s mother 

and inform her of what had occurred. B.C.’s parents asked that B.C. be immediately 

removed from respondent’s classroom and because they were also concerned that 

respondent had called B.C. his “favorite student.” Dr. Tejeda felt “sick” and “physically 

ill,” and she “could not wrap her brain around why a teacher would rub his private 

parts” on a female student. She cried while giving her testimony. 

37.  On February 3, 2022, Dr. Tejeda met with respondent, and Mr. Moore and 

Ms. Pales were present. She asked respondent about the incident involving B.C., and 

he replied that he had “no recollection of that happening.” She was concerned with 

this response because she felt that if something like this did not occur, the answer 

would be more like “absolutely not” and not “no recollection.” Respondent did not 

seem appalled by her inquiry, and he asked if he had to “go home again.” She told him 

to contact Mr. Skorpanich. The next day, on February 4, 2022, Mr. Skorpanich placed 

respondent on paid administrative leave. 

38.  On February 18, 2022, Mr. Hilton issued respondent a written reprimand 

regarding him sharing his social media on the Promethean Board that recommended a 

video titled, “Philosophy of Oral Sex,” discussing inappropriate topics in the classroom, 

and using his District-issued laptop to access DuckDuckGo.com that enables users to 

search privately, block tracking, and enforce encryption. 

39. 

After the meeting with respondent on February 3, 2022, Dr. Tejeda began 

a second investigation, which concerned the hip grabbing and body rubbing incident 

involving B.C. She interviewed the following students: 

19 

•  S.B. reported that respondent rambled in class about the Bible, Elvis, the 

COVID-19 vaccine, income tax, and that hammers were the number one 

murder weapon in the United States. 

•  A.W. reported that respondent’s favorite students were females, and he 

moved Y.H.’s seat next to his desk. 

•  Y.H. reported that respondent always complimented her outfits and would 

tell her, “you look really pretty today” and “you look really good.” He told 

her that he was very handsome when he was younger, and made sure she 

was sitting next to him. She stopped wearing a regular bra and started to 

wear a sports bra so respondent would stop looking at her chest. He talked 

to her about his daughters and complained about his wife. He talked about 

sex in the class. He talked about how Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs included 

sex, and this made her uncomfortable. He would tell another student E.C. 

that she looked “amazing” – E.C. wore low-cut tops that showed lots of 

cleavage. Y.H. noticed that female students who wore lower-cut tops got 

more attention from respondent. He really liked her “style.” He told female 

students that girls should be presentable and do their hair and make-up. He 

would only talk to the “pretty girls.” 

•  S.L. reported that respondent’s class was chaotic. He would sometimes put 

on his headphones and ignore the class. He would complement her about 

her outfits but only when she wore a dress. He would call her an endearing 

version of her name, but it is not her actual name. 

40. 

Finally, on March 7, 2022, Mr. Hilton met with respondent, and Dr. Tejeda 

and Ms. Pales were present. Respondent reported that he did not recall the incident 

20 

with B.C., he did not recall saying things to female students like “you look really good.” 

Respondent had a “smirk” on his face when he replied that he “did not recall.” He did 

not inform them about having any physical condition such as a “lazy eye” that would 

impede his vision or make it appear like he was staring. Dr. Tejeda testified that 

respondent does not appear to have a lazy eye and he never appeared to be staring at 

her. During the meeting, Dr. Tejeda asked respondent if he was familiar with the term 

“grooming” and she read him the definition from the District’s employee handbook 

that references “grooming” as discussed in an annual mandatory staff training by 

Keenan Partners in Safety (Keenan). Respondent responded that he completed this 

annual training. Dr. Tejeda observed that respondent was curt and arrogant with his 

answers. She informed him that female students reported he stared at their cleavage, 

he commented when they wore low-cut tops, and he made comments to them about 

looking pretty. When asked about these assertions, he asked if “we are in the realm of 

public perception.” 

41. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Joshua Rushing, as well 

as his written statements, which is consistent with his testimony. He has been 

employed as a campus supervisor for the District for ten years. He has worked at LHS 

since it opened a year and a half ago. His job duties include providing a safe learning 

environment for students and staff. He has completed the annual training by Keenan 

and he is familiar with grooming and what it entails. He is familiar with respondent as 

they have both worked at LHS since it opened. There are windows along the outside of 

the classrooms, and he noticed respondent played a lot of videos/movies. 

42. 

Concerning the incident on February 2, 2022, Mr. Rushing was clearing 

the hall at the end of a school day, along with a campus supervisor. The hall floor is tile 

and the area is “echo-y” and they were about two feet from the girls’ restroom when 

21 

they overheard a student tell another student that respondent grabbed her by the 

hips, and ask if that was “weird.” He and the campus supervisor called the students out 

of the bathroom, and asked, “What did you say?” He knew that was “not normal” for a 

staff member to grab a student by the hips. He recognized the student as B.C. and she 

repeated to him and the campus supervisor what she had told the other student in the 

bathroom. She asked Mr. Rushing and the campus supervisor if “that was weird.” He 

was familiar with B.C. because he had escorted her to the wellness center one time for 

a mental health referral. He called Dr. Tejeda because he was concerned about what he 

heard and felt he needed to report it immediately. 

43. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Kirk Skorpanich. He has a 

Bachelor’s degree in diversified education, a Master’s degree in leadership, a multiple 

subject teaching credential, and an administrative credential. He has been the assistant 

superintendent of human resources at the District for six years. His duties include 

overseeing investigations, complaints, and trainings. Prior to his current position, he 

worked as an assistant superintendent for another school district, a director of human 

resources, an elementary school principal and assistant principal, and an elementary 

school teacher. 

44.  Mr. Skorpanich also earned a certificate from Cornell University in 

conducting internal investigations. In his capacity as an educator, he is familiar with 

the term “grooming” and completed trainings on the topic where he learned about 

sexual exploitation of students and signs of grooming. Every employee of the District 

is mandated to complete the Keenan training each year. He understands grooming to 

be an “escalated pattern of inappropriate boundary invasions” and the following to be 

examples of grooming: providing students with special privileges; spending time with 

students during non-instructional time; trying to be the “cool” teacher; special 

22 

attention to one student over others; talking about marital and personal issues with 

students; allowing students to get away with things; talking about sex when it is not 

part of the curriculum; pet names for students; touching in an inappropriate manner; 

and making “eyes” with students. Keenan teaches that inappropriate adult-student 

interactions include sexual advances, flirtations, requests for sexual favors, 

inappropriate comments about a student’s body or appearance, or other verbal, visual, 

or physical conduct of a sexual nature. Keenan teaches, “The supervision of children 

and teens NEVER includes sexual contact, sexual behavior, flirting or innuendos. 

PERIOD!” Keenan lists prohibited behavior between students and staff as telling sexual 

jokes, making eyes, discussing sex life, sitting too close, finding ways to be alone with 

students, conditioning by discussing personal issues, giving personal gifts, and 

unnecessary touching. Keenan also describes the fallout of using social media, such as 

Instagram, YouTube, Facebook, and Snapchat, as it can include inappropriate adult-

student interactions. 

45.  Mr. Skorpanich is familiar with respondent and he is aware respondent 

transferred from Pinacate to LHS. Pinacate is different from LHS, in that it is a middle 

school and about 90 percent of its students are designated as socially-economically 

disadvantaged and there is much less parent involvement. In contrast, LHS was highly 

anticipated as a new high school being built with a lot of community involvement in 

that process that continued since its opening in the 2021-2022 school year. There is a 

high amount of parent involvement at LHS. Mr. Skorpanich recalled when he visited 

LHS at the beginning of the 2021-2022 school year, he walked the halls and noticed 

respondent was teaching in his classroom without a face mask. The only person he has 

ever had to talk to an administrator about face mask compliance was respondent. 

23 

46.  Mr. Skorpanich noted the District’s records show that, between 2014 and 

2021, respondent completed courses about boundary invasion/grooming, youth 

suicide, sexual harassment prevention, child abuse, and child neglect. His concern with 

respondent, in this case, is that he sees an “escalating pattern with respondent . . . 

alarming at the least and extremely concerning.” He testified about the incidents of 

respondent using his District laptop to access his personal YouTube account that 

showed a video recommendation of a video titled, “Philosophy of Oral Sex,” to access 

his personal Instagram account, and to access “DuckDuckGo.com” that permitted 

block tracking and encrypted searches. This conduct was also a violation of the board 

policy regarding employees’ use of technology. He noticed in email correspondence 

between respondent and Mr. Hilton, respondent’s personal email address was 

“Baadaddy@gmail.com,” which he later learned respondent had given to his students. 

Mr. Skorpanich concluded to uphold the charges and send them to the board to adopt 

the Statement of Charges, as respondent had an ongoing pattern of refusing to 

comply, being dishonest in his communications with administrators, and having 

immoral conduct as his conduct met the examples of grooming. He met with 

respondent on June 28, 2022, to explain the board upheld the charges and he was 

being placed on unpaid leave. He was surprised about respondent’s response because 

he was not upset and he did not ask why, and instead respondent said something 

similar to “oh okay” and that was it. He also testified that respondent does not 

currently have a valid teaching credential, as his expired on August 1, 2022. 

47.  Mr. Skorpanich testified about prior reprimands7 issued by the District to 

respondent, which Dr. Tejeda was not aware of when respondent was hired at LHS. On 

7 A motion in limine was filed by respondent to exclude Exhibits 74 through 79, 

as these documents reference prior reprimands that occurred more than four years 

24 

 
April 13, 2009, respondent was issued a warning of unsatisfactory performance and 

placed on administrative leave, as a result of an assertion that he placed a Pinacate 

male student in a choke hold or bear hug and broke the student’s chain necklace. On 

June 9, 2015, respondent was given a verbal directive and conference summary write-

up, as a result of an assertion that he asked a Pinacate female student if she “liked 

looking at her crotch.” He was directed to only make appropriate comments to 

students and refrain from referring to parts of students’ bodies and their appearances. 

On November 17, 2015, respondent was given a warning of below-standard 

performance for telling a Pinacate student to “get it together and stop doing this shit.” 

On August 15, 2017, respondent was given a verbal directive and conference summary 

write-up for using religious materials in his class – a handwritten note on his signature 

line indicated “refused to sign received 9/5.” 

48. 

Finally, Mr. Skorpanich testified that he considered respondent’s lengthy 

employment history with the District, history of discipline and directives, and 

escalating pattern of inappropriate boundary invasions and refusing to follow the 

District’s directives and policies. He can only determine that dismissal is appropriate 

because he cannot allow anyone else’s child to be subjected to these things. 

before the service of the Statement of Charges. An order denying the motion found 

these exhibits may be introduced, but not be used as a basis for the decision, as they 

are permissible because they are regularly held records by the District and they relate 

to the issue of persistent refusal to obey school laws. 

25 

 
49. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of several students and 

parents. Their testimony is consistent with written statements and/or correspondence 

they shared with LHS or District staff and/or administrators. 

•  A.K. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s CCF third period 

class when she was in ninth grade. He discussed religion and the class 

watched a VeggieTales video. A class assignment was to read a Bible verse 

and write a paragraph about it. She was “kind of weirded out” because this 

did not relate to the curriculum of the class. Respondent also discussed 

politics in class and compared President Biden to Adolf Hitler in the context 

of vaccines being mandated. He showed the class his personal Instagram 

feed with a post from PragerU that portrayed President John F. Kennedy as 

being the “left wing” and “how far they have shifted” basically insinuating 

Kennedy’s beliefs lined up with the current beliefs of the Republican party. 

She took a photo of the Instagram feed with the PragerU post and shared it 

with Dr. Tejeda. Respondent referred to the United States military as “killing 

machines” and commented if transgenders should be in the military and 

have different “facilities” and if women should be in the draft. He questioned 

if we needed things like that if we are supposed to have a killing machine. 

She knew what respondent was doing was wrong, so she began taking 

videos and photos of what he was saying and showing the class. She wanted 

to try and stop what he was doing. She also testified that respondent “50-

50” followed the COVID-19 face protocol because he would either have his 

face mask hanging on one ear, under his nose, or on his chin. He made her 

feel like he did not care about his students’ safety or his own. He called the 

COVID-19 vaccine “the juice.” He treated some male students in ways that 

were not fair. She described his class as “unexpected” because students 

26 

would not know what to expect at each class. He only occasionally assigned 

work from Thrively8, but he never elaborated on the assignment. When 

respondent left LHS and Mr. Baca took over the class, Mr. Baca followed the 

curriculum on Thrively. 

•  S.B. is a male student at LHS. He was in respondent’s CCF fifth period class 

when he was in ninth grade. Respondent discussed religion in class and gave 

assignments about David and Goliath and the Good Samaritan, and showed 

a VeggieTales video. Respondent discussed COVID-19 and politics in class 

by showing a graph of places with Centers for Disease Control (CDC) 

mandates had fewer cases of COVID-19, calling the COVID-19 “the jab,” 

saying people who created taxes “sold their soul,” and stating hammers were 

the number one murder weapon in the United States so handguns are “less 

bad” than what people say. Respondent spent most of the class talking 

about things not related to college and career options. Respondent mostly 

had his face mask off, and it was made of a mesh material that was see-

through and open. Respondent shared his personal Instagram feed on the 

Promethean Board that showed his profile name was something like 

“BigDaddyBaker”, and S.B. thought it was inappropriate. Respondent 

assigned an assignment about Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs that discussed 

sex. Respondent discussed bizarre stories in class such as when he slashed a 

woman’s tires who pulled into a college parking spot before he could and 

Elvis died on a toilet. S.B. perceived respondent as being “unprofessional, 

8 Thrively is a website with different features including an assessment for 

students’ interests and teacher-contributed lesson plans and ideas. 

27 

 
indoctrinating, unintelligent” because he talked to students about religion 

and politics, and his beliefs such as hammers being the number one murder 

weapon in the country, “don’t seem like beliefs intelligent people would 

have.” 

•  A.W. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s fifth period CCF 

class when she was in ninth grade. Respondent talked about religion in class 

about once or twice a week and more than half the class time would be 

taken up with these discussions. They watched VeggieTales videos. It made 

her feel weird and she preferred to be talking about college readiness. He 

talked about politics about once or twice a week and more than half the 

class time would be devoted to these discussions. He told the class to not 

use computers when he was talking about these topics, so they could not 

get their work done. She did not have a problem with his beliefs, but she 

“felt like he was trying to push it upon us.” He did not wear a face mask in 

class, but when adults walked in, he would put on his mask or fix it. He was 

“meaner to boys” and would ignore male students to speak with a female 

student. She thought that was “strange.” He treated Y.H. differently and put 

Y.H.’s desk close to his – within a couple of feet - and engaged in long 

conversations with Y.H. She thought this was “weird.” 

•  H.M. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s CCF class when she 

was in ninth grade. Respondent brought up religion in class and would 

“sometimes compare two religions” or bring up his beliefs of Christianity. He 

gave an analogy about a Jewish person walking past a dying person on the 

street and the Jewish person would keep walking, and said a Christian 

person would have stopped to help. She thought it was “inappropriate” for 

28 

him to talk about religion and she and her friends were “getting 

uncomfortable.” He talked about politics and brought up Democrats and 

Republicans, and used the words “liberal” or “Trump.” He would touch B.C.’s 

shoulders about two to three times during each class. He did not touch 

other students. She felt “really grossed out towards him” especially because 

she knew B.C. He would share his personal Instagram feed on the 

Promethean Board and students could see he was having conversations with 

“women like in their 20’s” and he would leave a specific “convo” open with 

one particular woman. He did not enter grades until the end of the year and 

this made her “grade like plummet like really bad.” She had a “bunch of 

missing stuff” and did not understand why. He told another student in a 

similar situation something like, “That’s just what your grade is . . . there is 

no missing work.” He was not a good teacher because when he was not 

talking about religion or politics, he was talking about personal stuff. 

•  A.D. is a male student at LHS. He was in respondent’s third period CCF class 

when he was in ninth grade. Respondent made religious comments in class 

and showed religious videos. He felt uncomfortable knowing other students 

did not have the same religious beliefs. Respondent talked about politics in 

class, including discussing Presidents Biden and Trump. Respondent said the 

COVID-19 vaccine could harm some people, but not all. Respondent had his 

Instagram feed on the Promethean Board and would scroll through so the 

students could see it. The feed had a female with a bikini top. This made him 

feel uncomfortable. Respondent told the class he was a good kisser. As a girl 

wearing crop top walked into class, respondent said something like, “That’s a 

really nice top you have on there.” The comments came off in a “very weird 

way.” He felt like he “learned nothing” in respondent’s class. He once asked 

29 

for help in class and respondent told him something like “figure it out 

yourself.” 

•  S.D. is the parent of A.D. She is a high school principal in a different school 

district. Her sister, Ms. Winston, was previously an employee at LHS and 

coordinated the curriculum for the CCF class. Her son, A.D., was in a “bad 

place – mental health wise and academically” as he seemed depressed, he 

had D’s and F’s, and their family was battling her husband’s health as her 

husband is a heart transplant recipient. She was concerned when she learned 

respondent did not really wear a mask in class and spoke negatively about 

the COVID-19 vaccine, and of the implications of her husband being 

exposed to COVID-19 because of his immune compromised state. She was 

concerned because respondent talked about religion in class. She was 

concerned about respondent’s grading practices, as she noticed her son did 

not have many grade updates in his CCF class. She thought her son’s CCF 

grade was okay until closer to the end of the semester, in November, his 

grade “all of a sudden” was an F. Her son’s CCF grade dropped several 

grades in one evening. She was familiar with Facebook posts by other LHS 

parents who were also concerned about respondent’s grade maintenance 

and their own students’ plummeting grades. She emailed respondent about 

her “serious” concerns about his instruction, as she was frustrated. 

Respondent did not reply to her email. Her son was moved out of 

respondent’s class. She emailed respondent a second time a few days later. 

Her sister, Ms. Winston, called her saying that multiple LHS teachers were 

wondering why she was “going so hard for Mr. Baker.” She admits her email 

was stern, but she was frustrated with respondent’s class discussions, 

30 

grading, and management, and concerned that her son was struggling in 

respondent’s class, school in general, and emotionally. 

•  Y.H. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s fifth period CCF 

class when she was in ninth grade. Respondent discussed religion in class 

and had them watch VeggieTales videos, which are based on the birth of 

Jesus and not related to the class. He was “always off topic.” He often talked 

about his wife and children, and how he was “hot” and “good looking” in 

high school. He always complained about his wife and how he had to “fix 

things for her” like a coffee pot he brought to his classroom. He spoke to the 

class more like a “friend” rather than a teacher. He would not wear a face 

mask in class and told students they did not have to wear a face mask, but if 

anyone walked in, to put on their face masks. This made her lose respect for 

him because as a teacher he was not supposed to let students know they 

could break rules. He used the Promethean Board to display his personal 

YouTube account and showed videos that were “always so random” and 

“videos about the pandemic.” He displayed his Instagram feed on the 

Promethean Board that showed his username was “BadDaddy” with 

numbers, which was “a weird user name.” When he first showed the class his 

Instagram, he told the entire class they could follow him. He often “made 

fun of the boys” and would “compliment the girls” He would make fun of a 

boy’s jacket or hair. 

• 

(Y.H. Continued) Respondent would be sure to compliment at least one of 

the girls each day and say things like “you look very nice today” or “I like 

what you did to your hair.” She described herself as having a “strong fashion 

sense” with “flary and bold” clothes. He made comments to her like “I love 

31 

your pants,” “you look beautiful,” and “you look pretty.” When she wore a 

particular pair of pants, he would say, “Oh, you’re wearing the pants that I 

like.” He always found a reason to compliment her almost every day. He 

made these comments to her almost every day when she walked into class 

or was sitting at her desk. He would also compliment her in front of the 

whole class. She would often catch him looking at her and he would smile. 

Her desk was next to his and she does not know why. She knows what a 

“lazy eye” is and he did not have a lazy eye. On the days he made comments 

about her clothing, she was wearing more revealing clothes that were low 

cut and her cleavage was showing. This made her feel uncomfortable. She 

started to cover up more by wearing a sports bra instead of a regular bra 

and turtle necks. 

• 

(Y.H. Continued) After she would present a topic to the class, respondent 

would tell the class that her presentation skills were better than the rest of 

the class – this made her feel strange. He would often tell her that she did 

not need to complete an assignment or she could walk out of class. At first, 

she appreciated his comments, but when other students began talking about 

the comments or other “weird stuff” he was doing, her appreciation faded 

and she began feeling more uncomfortable. He discussed the things that are 

needed in life are food, water, sex, and something else. When she exited the 

class, he would say “goodbye [her name]” and make sure she heard him. She 

felt uncomfortable because she was being singled out by him. When he 

manually changed the seating chart, he would place her desk a couple of 

feet from his desk. When he randomly changed the seating chart via the 

computer, she was seated further away but he told her that next time he 

32 

would make sure she was seated close to him. He would have five-minute 

conversations with her about three times each week. 

• 

(Y.H. Continued) Respondent would put his hands on her shoulders when 

she was doing assignments. She would be seated and he would “slightly 

grasp her shoulders.” This happened every other day. He would leave his 

hands on her shoulders for a few seconds. She never had another teacher do 

that to her. 

•  K.N. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s second period 

world history class when she was in tenth grade. Respondent talked about 

religion, which had nothing to do with the class material. She did not feel 

comfortable with him talking about religion and did not know if it was 

appropriate for teachers to discuss religion. She thought it was taking away 

from her curriculum time. She testified next about what she saw on the 

Promethean Board in class and she became visibly shaken and extremely 

tearful. Respondent would display his personal YouTube account on the 

Promethean Board. She had been working on homework when she heard 

whispers about what was on the Promethean Board, when she looked up 

and saw a suggested a video titled, “Philosophy of Oral Sex.” The screen was 

up for at least 20 seconds and the students all noticed it and started taking 

photos of it. She took a photo of what she saw on the Promethean Board. 

Respondent “didn’t seem really startled as much as he should have been.” 

He took down the screen, but did not say anything. She is aware of the 

YouTube algorithm, and what happened made her feel very uncomfortable 

because YouTube adapts and makes recommendations based on what a 

person watches. After this happened, she did not want to talk to respondent 

33 

again. K.N. also testified about how she noticed respondent was 

“appreciating” female student V.H. and saying how amazing V.H. is and how 

he is really glad to see V.H. This weirded her out. After the bell rang, 

respondent would talk to V.H. but she would try to pull away V.H. because 

she did not want respondent to keep V.H. there. In October 2021, she had 

submitted a written statement to the counseling office about what she 

observed about respondent, but no staff reached out to her. She had taken a 

photo of her written statement and showed it to Dr. Tejeda when they met 

in late November 2021. She thought respondent’s behavior was “odd” and 

his interactions with V.H. were “kind of creepy.” This is why K.N. switched out 

of respondent’s class. She was uncomfortable seeing how respondent was 

interacting with V.H. and she was worried this would happen to other girls. 

During this part of her testimony, K.N. again became quite emotional as she 

struggled to talk, she was crying, and she needed to take a 10 minute break. 

•  D.P. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s world history 

second period class when she was in tenth grade. Respondent said things 

about prayer, God, and the Bible in class, and his assignments in the 

beginning of the school year had to do with religion. They were not part of 

the class curriculum. He talked about politics by referencing President Trump 

and his opinion about inflation. He wore his face mask the “wrong way” 

because it was under his nose. He also used a mesh face mask but it did 

nothing to protect or cover his mouth and/or nose. He did not require 

students to wear face masks, so 30 to 45 percent of the students did not 

wear face masks in the class. She felt unsafe in his class. His personal social 

media feeds were displayed on Promethean Board and recommended a 

video that was about “how to please a woman in bed.” Another video 

34 

recommendation on the Promethean Board was titled “Philosophy of Oral 

Sex,” and she took a photo of the screen. These video recommendations 

were on the screen of the Promethean Board for some time. She felt really 

uncomfortable with respondent. She talked to her mother and showed her 

mother the photo she took. Respondent also discussed topics in class that 

were sexual in nature. He told the class that he could tie a cherry stem with 

his tongue and he was a good kisser. He shared that he and his wife were 

not on good terms. He treated female students differently because he gave 

them more attention. He sat the female students closer to his desk and the 

male students closer to the back of the room. He treated female student 

S.M. differently and sat her near his desk. She noticed the female students 

would seem upset when respondent was talking to them. 

•  C.P. is the parent of D.P. She saw the photo D.P. took in class that showed a 

“child’s silhouette in front of a white board in the background was 

‘Philosophy of Oral Sex’ on the screen.” When D.P. was telling C.P. about 

what she saw in class, D.P. was shaking her legs and walking in circles. She 

looked up “Philosophy of Oral Sex” on the internet and took screenshots of 

what she saw - a female lying naked and a male with a female on top of him. 

She was angry. She went to LHS and shared the photos with the assistant 

principal, Mr. LaRochelle, and she reported that what happened was 

“inappropriate from all standpoints.” She learned from D.P. that respondent 

displayed his Instagram username, “BigDaddyBaker,” on the Promethean 

Board. She has a background as a recreational therapist in jails and she has 

worked with pedophiles. She felt respondent’s conduct was akin to 

grooming because he allowed his personal social media to display a video 

recommendation of “Philosophy of Oral Sex” and he shared his personal 

35 

Instagram username. She was concerned that respondent’s conduct was 

“testing of boundaries.” She informed LHS that respondent was not 

permitted to be around her daughter. 

•  A.B. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s CCF class when she 

was in ninth grade. Respondent discussed religion and the history of 

Christianity and Judaism, the role of Jesus in religion, and had the class 

watch a VeggieTales video, which had nothing to do with the class and was 

awkward. He discussed the “five things to survive in the world” and engaged 

in a “whole conversation” for about 10 minutes about how sex is one of 

those things. He shared his personal Instagram account on the Promethean 

Board that displayed his username as “BigDaddy” – he said his daughter 

picked his username, but she thought that was “a little weird.” Her other 

teachers have not shared their Instagram accounts with their students. She 

saw a photo taken by a student in another class of respondent that showed 

his personal YouTube account was on the Promethean Board with a 

recommended video titled “Philosophy of Oral Sex” – this made her feel 

“kind of gross” and “weird.” In her class, respondent would “talk a lot” and 

spend less than half the time on class assignments, and the rest of the time 

she would be on her phone or doing work for other classes. Her class did 

not have any assignments about community service or financial literacy. 

When Mr. Baca started to teach her class, they started researching and 

making posters about colleges and future careers. 

•  B.C. is a female student at LHS. She was in respondent’s sixth period CCF 

class when she was in ninth grade. Respondent would discuss politics in 

class including abortion and vaccine laws that corresponded to his political 

36 

views. He brought up Democrat’s stance on abortion of “my body, my 

choice” and said the same should be for vaccines. He had a preference of 

Christianity over other religions. Religion and politics had nothing to do with 

the CCF course, and when she finally got switched out of his class, she had 

no idea what her new class was talking about because they were doing 

public speaking. She felt bad for her friends who were stuck in his class. 

Respondent went on other “tangents” in class like going through his mail 

and coupons. He often shared his personal Instagram handle with students 

and would “kind of get us to follow him without saying it.” He had his 

Instagram feed on the Promethean Board and he would click on his 

messages and students could see his conversations with “sex bots” – which 

had links for the photos of who he was conversing with. He would not take 

down the conversations right away, and one time, a student went to help 

him take down the screen because the class realized he was not taking it 

down. She testified, “Part of me thought maybe he didn’t know these 

weren’t real women, but also it should have been done on his personal time 

and not shared with his class.” Respondent complimented her clothing when 

she wore outfits that had lower cut shorts, super ripped jeans, or skirts. On 

the days she was more covered, he would not compliment her. Sometimes in 

the hall, respondent would make comments to her or stand “so close” to her. 

He noticed that when he was sitting, his “eyes would wander” like he was 

“looking at [her] up and down.” It seemed “purposeful” like he was “taking in 

the outfit.” He complimented her about her smile and he loved her smile 

After his first suspension, she was seated near his desk and she “started 

somewhat connecting the dots, that this was not good and I was not liking 

being in his class anymore.” He started talking to her more than the other 

37 

students. He called her his “favorite student.” He invited her to join him in 

the morning for coffee. Two weeks later, she experienced an incident with 

respondent when he placed his hands on her lower hips while he was trying 

to get past her in the classroom. He slid his lower stomach to upper thigh 

area past her lower back and butt. He held her in a “tight enough grip” for a 

few seconds. His fingers were on the front of her waist and his thumbs were 

on her lower back. She had been wearing jeans or sweat pants and was 

leaning over the desk of a male student L.M. who saw what happened. Her 

elbows were on L.M.’s desk and she was writing. After school, she was in a 

school bathroom and telling a friend about what happened, and a security 

guard overhead her conversation and reported it to Dr. Tejeda. She felt like 

respondent violated her. This affected her a lot mentally. She realized that 

respondent “never had good intentions” with her and it was an unsafe 

environment for her and others. This “would have kept going on” if the 

security guard had not overhead her conversation. 

•  C.C. is the parent of B.C. In August 2021, she noticed one of respondent’s 

class assignments was “heavily geared towards the Bible and seemingly 

didn’t have anything to do with CCF.” In a post on a Facebook page for 

parents of LHS, she asked about respondent referencing Bible stories in his 

CCF class. There were other parents who were concerned. Respondent did 

not post any grades in the gradebook until about 12 weeks into the 

semester, and B.C.’s grade went from an A to a D or F. This was alarming. 

B.C. was under the impression that some of the assignments were not going 

to be graded and respondent had told the students it was going to be a 

“free period.” Other parents commented on the Facebook page about the 

same thing happening to their children. She is concerned about how 

38 

respondent treated B.C. At the beginning of the school year, she was 

concerned that respondent called B.C. his “favorite student” in an email. He 

complimented her when she wore certain clothes and seated her near his 

desk. He displayed his Instagram feed on the Promethean Board that 

showed his conversations with “those bots” that send “inappropriate photos 

and stuff.” She was not sure why a teacher would share their social media 

accounts with students. He invited B.C. to have coffee alone with him. He 

then put his hands on B.C.’s waist and pressed against her back side as he 

walked by. B.C. has become reserved around men and teachers. She was 

“disgusted that a teacher would take advantage” of a student the way he 

did. She started to piece it all together and was thinking this was grooming 

behavior. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

TESTIMONY OF RESPONDENT AND OTHER SUPPORTING EVIDENCE 

50. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of respondent and other 

supporting evidence. After high school, he started the fire program at Santa Ana 

Community College. He changed his course because firefighting was impacted, and 

earned an Associate’s degree in business at Fullerton Community College. He 

transferred to Cal State Fullerton and earned a Bachelor’s in business administration. 

He returned to the fire academy and was substitute teaching. He was issued a multiple 

subject credential that expired about 2014. His single subject credential in social 

studies expired about August 2022. His credentials are under review and he is in the 

process of renewing them. He went into education after he was offered a full-time 

position at a school in San Jacinto. In 2000, he began his career in the District when he 

accepted a position at Pinacate, a middle school, where he taught world history for 

39 

seventh grade, U.S. history for eighth grade, and physical education. He remained at 

Pinacate until he transferred to LHS when it opened in August 2021. He had applied 

over the years to other high schools in the District, and he was excited when he got 

the news that he was transferring to LHS. 

51. 

Respondent was ready for a challenge and a different audience. He did 

not know how to use a Promethean Board and had to “look it up.” He anticipated a 

“little bit” of a change in the curriculum for history class from middle school to high 

school because “history doesn’t change,” but “lately it has.” He assumed he would be 

assigned classes within his social sciences credential. Mr. LaRochelle contacted him a 

couple of days before school started and told him that he was assigned to teach two 

world history classes for tenth graders and 4 CCF classes for ninth graders. He was not 

given a course outline or syllabus for the world history class, so he collaborated with 

two history teachers who referred him to a student-edition textbook in the library. The 

librarian issued him his own copy in October 2021. He was surprised that he was 

assigned to teach CCF, and he was told there were “no resources” for CCF but they 

would be forthcoming. Dr. Tejeda and Mr. LaRochelle arranged for ice breakers during 

the first few days of school in the CCF classes. The CCF teachers were encouraged to 

do activities that promoted student interaction like musical chairs. There was no 

textbook for CCF, but in the second week of school, the CCF lead, Ms. Winston, 

provided a “pacing guide” that was interactive and “cool.” The CCF classes were also 

taught by four other teachers. Ms. Winston told the CCF teachers they could use 

“supplemental materials” or change the pacing guide if they wanted. He spoke to Dr. 

Tejeda about supplementing the CCF syllabus with a financial literacy component. In 

his mind, the CCF class was about “life skills” and “decision-making all together.” 

40 

52. 

Concerning the allegations of references to religion, respondent testified 

he assigned the parable of the Good Samaritan in August 2021 because he wanted 

students to learn about biases and working with those we sometimes do not want to 

work with. He explained it was a story about a traveler who was beaten and the first 

and second persons who walked by were professionals who did not help, but the third 

person helped and he was the Good Samaritan. He also explained the Pharisees and 

how Jesus said, “I should love my neighbor as I love myself.” He discussed the parable 

with all six of his classes, but he did not grade the assignment. He told Dr. Tejeda that 

he did not share a Bible verse about the parable because it “turns out it’s become a 

secular parable and we have a Good Samaritan law today.” She told him to not use 

religious materials or religious connotations in class. He did not believe he was 

promoting religion by promoting a parable. In November 2021, respondent showed a 

VeggieTales video to his CCF classes because he thought it had to do with “life 

decision making.” The video was about Esther who was one of the wives of the king 

and she was Jewish, but the king was encouraged to “get rid of the Jews” and she had 

to decide if she would “violate the rules of her position and talk to the king.” He 

encouraged the students to take notes so they could reflect on a personal decision 

they made that “they felt was a big deal.” A few days later, Dr. Tejeda told him that he 

did not follow her directive to not use any religious materials and VeggieTales was 

considered religious. He told her that he did not think he was encouraging anything 

religious and he “had not put enough thought about the video” and he felt terrible 

and would not do it again. 

53.  On cross-examination, respondent was asked about a conference 

summary from Pinacate, dated August 15, 2017, where he was given a directive to not 

use religious resources without prior administrative approval. He recalled meeting with 

Dr. Tejeda in August 2021 when he was given a verbal directive to not use religious 

41 

materials in class after giving an assignment about the parable of the Good Samaritan. 

He testified the parable is now secular and he did not refer to the Bible. However, the 

District’s counsel read the Good Samaritan parable and played the VeggieTales video 

about Esther into the record, to show they derive from the Bible. The District’s counsel 

also played two videos recorded by student S.B., dated August 19, 2021, of respondent 

speaking to his class about God giving a blessing to the shepherd boy in the story of 

David and Goliath and saying, “God trust in me – will not forsake you.” 

54. 

Concerning the reference to politics in class, respondent testified that he 

utilized PragerU, two to three times, for a basis of discussion in class, and PragerU is 

an organization that is conservative. He used a PragerU post about presidents and 

their impact, and compared them to today and “shifts” in “ideas.” He found this post 

useful for his class curriculum. He testified the PragerU post about President Kennedy 

fit into the District’s course of study for world history, section 10.1.2. He recalled 

discussing President Biden’s administration’s consideration of a vaccine passport was a 

“similar idea” to Hitler’s regime requiring Jews to carry “papers to travel.” He was there 

to “encourage” his students “to think” and “not what to think.” He discussed some 

people believe the intent of the U.S. military is to be a “well-oiled killing machine.” He 

does not recall the curriculum because he no longer has access to the book, but he 

referenced section 10.7.3 of the course of study. He testified, “I do not myself believe 

the military is a well-oiled killing machine.” 

55. 

Further on cross-examination, the District’s counsel played a video taken 

by a student of respondent who had told his class that the U.S. military is a “well-oiled 

killing machine,” and the recording audio taped him saying, “Take people and make 

then the device of evil for other people . . . that’s the idea.” When asked why he told 

42 

Dr. Tejeda that he did not believe he called the U.S. military a “well-oiled killing 

machine,” he replied only a short clip was played and it “depends on the context.” 

56. 

Concerning allegations of certain conversations about COVID-19 and the 

vaccine in class, respondent testified he told students that the COVID-19 vaccine was 

being referred to as “the juice” and “the jab.” He discussed the vaccine in world history 

class because it was in the “context of history” and in CCF class because it was in the 

“context of decision making.” He testified that he did not share his opinion, but 

encouraged students to explore this “really hot issue” of the vaccine, as some people 

“thought it was amazing” and “the other side [was] questioning it.” He did notice some 

kids were “visibly upset” when talking about the vaccine, and others were “starting to 

think about it.” 

57. 

The District’s counsel also asked respondent on cross examination if he 

told students that getting the COVID-19 vaccine would make people sterile. He 

replied, “I did not make a statement the vaccine would make people sterile.” The 

District’s counsel then played a video by student S.B. wherein respondent is telling 

students that for “some people for your age, getting the vaccine is more of a challenge 

than getting sick.” He went on to tell his students, “Statistics are saying the vaccine is 

worse than getting COVID. Some studies [are] saying some kids are getting sterile – no 

babies for you.” In addition, when asked if he recalled the parent of A.D. stating her 

husband was a heart transplant recipient. He stated, “I don’t recall that.” 

58. 

Concerning allegations of failure to comply with the face mask mandate 

and policies, respondent testified there were times in fall 2021 when he did not wear a 

face mask in class because he was struggling to breathe, his glasses would fog, and he 

had a “little anxiety.” He did not defy the directive by Dr. Tejeda to wear a face mask, 

but he would sometimes pull it down or put it on his ear so he could talk. He used 

43 

black face masks that were issued by LHS, but a student gave him a “gauze mask” that 

was easier to use and he used it until it decomposed. He never denigrated the use of 

face masks in the classroom, and he required his students to wear them in class. 

59. 

Respondent was asked why, again on cross, at a meeting in November 

2021, he did not tell Dr. Tejeda that he had trouble breathing or anxiety when wearing 

a face mask after students reported he was not wearing one or lowering it. He replied, 

at that meeting, he did not saying anything about trouble breathing or anxiety, but he 

had mentioned it to her at a meeting in August 2021. However, the District’s counsel 

cited a conference summary in September 2021 regarding his failure to wear a face 

mask, and that he never contacted the District’s human resources office to discuss his 

concerns about hyperventilating, breathing, or anxiety. 

60. 

Concerning allegations of failure to maintain gradebooks in a timely 

manner, respondent testified he occasionally, at least every six weeks, he maintained 

his gradebooks. He stated, “I hate to admit it – I was not aware of a guideline.” He 

learned about the gradebook guideline after Dr. Tejeda gave him a written reprimand 

in December 2021. He found it challenging because he was “trying to get the grades in 

one application and put them in another.” Just before Thanksgiving break, another 

teacher told him about a way for grades in Canvas to sync to the gradebooks. He then 

was placed on leave from November 29, 2021, until the beginning of January 2022, 

and did not have his District-issued laptop to enter grades. When he returned in 

January 2022, there was “not much” in his gradebooks. He started looking for the 

assignments in Canvas and Google Classroom and entered what he could find. He was 

on campus for 13 to 14 days before he was placed on leave again in February 2022. On 

cross-examination, respondent acknowledged that before Dr. Tejeda gave him a 

written reprimand about his gradebooks in December 2021, he never told her that he 

44 

was having difficulties entering grades in Infinite Campus. He acknowledged that he 

had become aware of the other way to enter grades through Canvas. 

61. 

Concerning the allegations of grooming/inappropriate boundary 

invasions and displaying inappropriate content and personal social media content with 

students, respondent testified as follows: 

62. 

Regarding the incident involving “Philosophy of Oral Sex” and the 

Promethean Board, on November 29, 2021, respondent was teaching a lesson about 

Freud. He had no experience with Promethean Boards before working at LHS. He 

attended a 10-minute session on how use them at the beginning of the school year. A 

tech employee, Pierre, had told him the Promethean Board could be accessed by 

logging into your Google account or by projecting your computer screen to the 

Promethean Board. He was using his District-issued laptop and tried to project his 

computer screen, but it kept dropping out. Pierre had mentioned that teachers were 

using cables to project their screens, but a glitch was happening. So, respondent 

logged into his Google account and he was able to open the Promethean Board. He 

brought up YouTube on his screen and went back to his desk. He was not aware there 

was a recommendation on the screen for a video titled, “Philosophy of Oral Sex.” He 

heard some students snickering or laughing. A student indicated to him that 

“something” was on the Promethean Board, so respondent pushed an “X” at the top 

right of the screen to close YouTube. He did not know exactly what was on the 

Promethean Board until Dr. Tejeda called him to her office and showed him the photo 

a student had taken. He never played the “Philosophy of Oral Sex” video to the class or 

talk about it because that would not be appropriate. He was not aware that any 

student was upset at what they saw, until hearing the students’ testimony at this 

45 

hearing. He stated, “I feel it’s devastating it happened, to hear the testimony of how 

troubling it was to see that . . . it just hurt my heart.” 

63. 

The District’s counsel showed respondent a photo taken by a student of 

his Promethean Board with the YouTube video recommendation of “Philosophy of Oral 

Sex.” Respondent confirmed the laptop that connected to the Promethean Board was 

his District-issued MacBook. When asked if he viewed pornographic material on his 

District-issued laptop, he answered, “No.” When asked if he used DuckDuckGo.com as 

a search engine on his District-issued laptop, he answered, “Yes.” DuckDuckGo.com 

allows for internet searches to not be tracked. When asked about the District’s 

Educator’s Handbook section titled, “Internet Access & Use,” respondent replied that 

he did not how his use of DuckDuckGo.com violated this section and stated, “When I 

used it, I wouldn’t know that I was not complying with the procedures and systems.” 

He also replied that “Philosophy of Oral Sex” was not on his computer, but “came up 

on the Promethean Board.” 

64. 

Regarding his comments to students about being able to tie a cherry 

stem with his tongue and being a good kisser, respondent testified there was a school 

dance coming up and the Associated Student Body (ASB) director asked him to 

promote the dance. So, he shared with his students a story about the one dance he 

went to in high school, and how he and his friends were at a fancy restaurant and he 

made an ice-breaker comment about being able to tie a cherry stem with his tongue. 

On cross examination, respondent stated that he recalled telling this story to his 

students, but he “did not recall the circumstances.” 

65. 

Regarding his personal email address of BadDaddy@gmail.com, 

respondent testified that the moniker “Bad Daddy” started when he first told his 

daughter, “no,” and she called him, “Bad Daddy.” His second daughter called him the 

46 

same thing, so he embraced the moniker. He did not use his BadDaddy@gmail.com 

address during class, and instead used his District-issued email address. On cross-

examination, the District’s counsel asked about his Instagram username, “BadDaddy,” 

being displayed on the Promethean Board for students to see. Respondent replied that 

a male student contacted him through Instagram and wanted to follow him, but he 

told the class that was not appropriate. He called another student reaching out to him 

on Instagram. He believes he had two or three Instagram accounts. 

66. 

Regarding Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, respondent testified he 

assigned CCF homework about this theory to explain that people have certain needs 

including sex. He clarified to the students that “reproduction meant sex.” He asked the 

students to “form an opinion about what they thought about Maslow’s theory.” 

67. 

Regarding the allegation of him staring at students for long periods of 

time, respondent testified that he never engaged in the practice of staring at female 

students. He was born with amblyopia in his left eye, known as “lazy eye,” and he had 

three surgeries as a child to correct his eye tracking. His left eye often does not track 

correctly. He had Pinacate students over the years ask if he was starting at them, but 

none of his LHS students asked him, so he never explained it to anyone at LHS. Mr. 

Hilton told him that students reported they believed respondent had been starting at 

them. He explained his condition of amblyopia to Mr. Hilton, but Mr. Hilton “seemed 

unfazed.” Respondent submitted a letter into evidence from his optometrist, Bradley 

Sirois, O.D., who wrote that because of amblyopia, respondent had surgeries to align 

his eyes “so they both look at the same object at the same time” and “other people 

may feel like [respondent] may or may not be looking at them.” On cross-examination, 

respondent acknowledged that he had never asked the District for an accommodation 

related to his vision concerns. 

47 

68. 

Regarding the allegations of complimenting and/or inappropriately 

engaging with female students, respondent testified the following: He never moved 

seating for female students to sit next to him. He did not compliment female students 

about their “physical appearance,” but if their style stood out, he gave “affirmations.” 

There was a focus on being “successful” and “dressing for success” is encouraged. He 

did not have female “favorites” in class. He complimented Y.H. about her clothing 

because she had a “distinctly different style than other students.” Her style was “very 

bold” and “almost like stuff that you’d see models wear on a runway.” He never told 

Y.H. that she looked pretty. He did compliment her when she wore a particular pair of 

pants that flared and were shorter than bell bottoms. He never touched any students 

on their shoulders. He never told students that women should be “presentable” and 

wear high heels and makeup. He did have a conversation with Y.H. about how people 

used to be more formal and men wore suits and women wore dresses and heels. He 

never had a sexual interest in any of his students. He never offered B.C. or any student 

to have coffee with him. He thinks that B.C. asked him for a cup of coffee, and he told 

her if he fixed the coffee machine, she could have a cup of coffee. He never got the 

coffee machine fixed. He never had an interest in having a personal relationship with 

B.C. He had an email correspondence with B.C. where she called herself his “favorite 

student,” and he replied to her and called her his “favorite student” but not in a 

“personal way.” 

69. 

Respondent acknowledged in response to a question from District’s 

counsel that he completed the annual and mandatory training by Keenan on 

grooming/inappropriate interactions with students. He was asked about the “multiple 

female students” who reported he complimented them about their style of dress and 

when they wore less clothing. When asked about Y.H.’s assertion that she stopped 

48 

wearing regular bras and started wearing sport bras because respondent stared at her 

cleavage, he stated that he was not aware of this prior to her testimony. 

70. 

Regarding the alleged incident of grabbing, walking behind, and moving 

his body against B.C., respondent testified that he never touched B.C. in any way and 

the alleged incident did not happen. On cross-examination, respondent was asked 

about his responses in a meeting with Dr. Tejeda on February 3, 2022, when he 

reported that he had “no recollection of that happening” and he asked if he had to go 

home again. 

71. 

At the hearing, respondent testified the last teacher evaluation he 

received was on March 3, 2020, when he was teaching eighth grade at Pinacate. It was 

a “successful” evaluation. He testified about his “letters of affirmation” at Pinacate. 

These were from students, undated; and various colleagues including a rookie teacher 

who appreciated his guidance, undated; a history department chair who thanked him 

for “another great year,” undated; an athletic director who thanks him for coaching the 

girls’ volleyball team, undated; a teacher who observed strategies he used in his class 

in 2001; and other teachers, in 2019 and undated. On cross-examination, respondent 

testified that staff were encouraged to submit letters of affirmation. 

72. 

In conclusion, respondent testified he hoped to have “cleared things up 

long before it got to this point.” It has made him self-evaluate what he does and the 

impact he has in the classroom. He understands there are “a lot of variables and 

factors” that may have been “received in a way” he did not intend. He is human. He 

regrets some of the things he said and did. He can use “some self-reflection and some 

professional guidance” to make sure he does not use references or ideas that are not 

useful and helpful. He has pursued such professional guidance and continues to do so. 

He has taken for granted his opportunity as an educator. He will “take it much more 

49 

seriously,” “follow the rules,” and not deviate from the curriculum and be compliant. 

He is troubled by what he heard in testimony from students, and he would “never 

endanger students or reduce or take away their safety.” He testified, “I categorically 

deny that I ever had the intent to touch . . . or just approach any student in anything 

other than an educational purpose.” He spent his whole life being a role model for his 

own children and to be here today is “terrible.” He is sorry and stated, “I’d like to say 

more . . . forgive me, it’s such a big deal for me . . . thank you for bearing with me . . . .” 

TESTIMONY OF RESPONDENT’S SUPPORTING WITNESS 

73. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of David Siurek. He is a 

long-time friend of respondent. They met in 1992 when they were in college and both 

worked at a health food store. He works as a detective supervisor with the Los Angeles 

Police Department. He and respondent were in each other’s weddings and continue to 

be friends. They know each other’s wives and have daughters who are about the same 

age. His daughters are ages 22 and 19. He has no reason for concern about 

respondent’s behavior around his daughters. If he did, he would not be a character 

witness. He has never doubted respondent’s truthfulness. He described respondent as 

“completely honest, trustworthy, and forthcoming.” He does not believe respondent 

has exhibited any characteristics of grooming. He never felt respondent imposed 

religious beliefs upon him. He met with respondent in 2022 and respondent told him 

about the allegations. 

TESTIMONY OF RESPONDENT’S EXPERT WITNESS - DR. BLAK 

74. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Richard Blak, Ph.D., a 

designated expert witness who testified on behalf of respondent. He earned his 

Bachelor’s, Master’s, and Doctorate degrees in psychology at Wayne State University. 

50 

He became a licensed clinical psychologist in Michigan in 1979, and in California in 

1981. In his clinical practice, he diagnoses and treats individuals with mental disorders. 

He also works as a forensic psychologist for legal matters where he evaluates 

individuals for competency, not guilty by reason of insanity, sexual offense upon 

minors under age 14, offenders to be released into to the community, and evaluations 

for fitness for duty. He has testified in more than 250 cases in Superior Court and 

federal court. He has conducted about 750 mental evaluations pursuant to court order, 

and about 15 percent of those were for sexual predators. He has testified in one other 

case before the Commission in 2020. When he conducts an evaluation, he performs a 

mental status examination wherein he meets face-to-face and he reviews the 

background information provided by the individual, and he conducts psycho-metrics 

that consist of psychologist tests to establish a treatment plan and modalities. 

75.  Dr. Blak testified that grooming behaviors are a “relatively new concept,” 

and grooming is different from predatory and sexual offending behaviors. Grooming 

seems to be particular to teachers and has “different definitions” that include 

engaging in behavior that is secretive or where trust comes into play, testing the limits 

of trust, and a person being groomed will value the relationship. Dr. Blak stated, 

“Behavior might look like grooming, but might not be the intent of the person 

engaging in that behavior.” He added grooming involves “inappropriate manners with 

the ultimate intent to eventually have a sexual kind of relationship with a target.” Dr. 

Blak referenced Penal Code section 288 for molestation of minors regarding lewd and 

lascivious acts, and stated the Penal Code does not reference grooming. 

76.  Dr. Blak evaluated respondent on November 7, 2022, in a face-to-face 

interview and reviewed a background questionnaire completed by respondent. Upon 

51 

mental status examination, respondent, who is 56 years old, was found to be initially 

restrictive, he had situational stress in day-to-day functioning, and a normal affect. 

77. 

Upon Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-3 (MMPI-3) testing, 

Dr. Blak found that respondent was not suffering from any major mental disorder, 

although he was diagnosed with a “fairly subtle” adjustment disorder due to some 

anxiety and mild depression related to stress from being off work and going through 

these hearings. Respondent’s MMPI-3 testing was elevated in RC6 because he is being 

charged with violations and “he believes that people are out to do him harm.” 

78. 

Upon Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory-III (MCMI-III) testing, Dr. Blak 

found respondent had a “schizoid personality style” but “not necessarily a diagnosis.” 

He explained in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), an 

individual can have “features or characteristics” that do not reach a degree that 

impairs in significant ways, and the individual “[does not] deserve the diagnosis, but 

can have that particular style.” He explained “a style may become problematic if it 

interferes” with day-to-day life. Dr. Blak stated, “These types are difficult to treat 

because they are not willing to change their style.” Respondent had a “moderately 

elevated scale on schizoid” and compulsive behavior. He had a reliable self-image. 

Respondent was not overly critical of himself, and saw himself as capable and doing a 

good job, which does not mean that he picks up on subtleties or social cues. 

79.  Dr. Blak was asked if the following alleged conduct by respondent is 

evidence of grooming: Displaying a video recommendation on YouTube of 

“Philosophy of Oral Sex” and telling students he can tie a cherry stem with his tongue: 

Dr. Blak replied, “No.” Moving a female student “to the side”: Dr. Blak replied 

respondent denied touching B.C. and had no recollection of passing/touching B.C. in 

class, and while this might be an indication of grooming, it would not lead to the 

52 

determination that he is a groomer. Telling a female student she “looks pretty” or “I 

like your pants”: Dr. Blak replied this does not indicate in itself that respondent is a 

groomer, and respondent was thinking of connecting her with another teacher. Female 

students reporting respondent was starting at them: Dr. Blak replied respondent has 

an eye condition causing him to look like he is staring at somebody, and staring is a 

“matter of perception.” Relating personal information about his daughters and wife: 

Dr. Blak replied that “sharing private information is a touchy topic”, but he “does not 

think it says whether respondent is a groomer or not.” Telling female students they 

should be presentable and wear high heels: Dr. Blak replied this might be grooming 

behavior because respondent is discussing his preference as to how a female should 

present herself and what he finds attractive, but he needs to look at other variables 

and behaviors. Discussing Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and “sex”: Dr. Blak replied this 

is about “affiliation not necessarily sex” and procreation rather than sex. Students 

remarking that respondent is weird: Dr. Blak replied this does not indicate respondent 

is a groomer, but is consistent with his findings about respondent’s personality style. 

Dr. Blak found no evidence respondent is a groomer or engaged in grooming 

behavior, and he found no indication respondent is a pedophile or had a particular 

preoccupation with children. 

80.  On cross-examination, Dr. Blak testified that the display of the video 

recommendation for “Philosophy of Oral Sex,” was “inappropriate” in a classroom and 

whether respondent was aware of it or not, it is “dangerous to the class” because the 

students “might certainly explore the reference.” Dr. Blak testified he had one client 

who was accused of grooming behavior, but in his deposition, he stated he never had 

a patient that was a groomer. He stated his scholarly studies were 32 years ago and 

there were “no grooming issues back then.” He has “kept up with the science of 

psychology as it relates to forensic issues, but not specifically with reference to 

53 

grooming.” The behaviors of grooming have “been around forever,” but he has not 

paid “particular attention” to the “particular focus” on grooming in the last 10 years or 

attended training regarding grooming. He has not read any journal articles relative to 

groomers versus non-groomers. 

81. 

Continuing on cross-examination, the District’s counsel asked Dr. Blak 

about his report that states, “Investigator Shakeshaft 4/5/2022, studied hundreds of 

cases of alleged sex abuse with teachers and did not find any evidence of an educator 

who groomed a student.” The District’s counsel asked Dr. Blak if this study is the same 

as the publication titled, “Educator’s Sexual Misconduct,” by Charol Shakeshaft, M.D., 

which cites to grooming cases from more than 10 years ago. Dr. Blak testified she is 

“to some degree a reliable source” about grooming. 

The District’s Rebuttal Argument 

82. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Charol Shakeshaft, Ph.D., 

who was not called as an expert witness, but as a rebuttal witness for the District. The 

District submitted Dr. Shakeshaft’s 34-page curricula vitae to identify her as the author 

of the research cited by Dr. Blak, and not to qualify her as an expert witness. 

83.  Dr. Shakeshaft testified that she authored the publication titled, 

“Educator’s Sexual Misconduct.” She has studied hundreds of cases involving sex 

abuse and grooming where there has been a conviction. In almost every case she has 

studied, there has been a finding of grooming and it is the “overwhelming pattern.” 

84.  Dr. Shakeshaft was asked about Dr. Blak’s report where he wrote, 

“Investigator Shakeshaft 4/5/2022, studied hundreds of cases of alleged sex abuse 

with teachers and did not find any evidence of an educator who groomed a student.” 

54 

Dr. Shakeshaft replied, “I don’t know where this would have come from . . . it isn’t 

accurate at all.” She testified that she also did not know what “4/5/2022” refers to. 

85. 

In conclusion, Dr. Shakeshaft testified that it is “almost always that the 

educator grooms the student before their contact.” 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

A school district seeking to dismiss a permanent certificated employee 

from employment bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 

(Gardner v. Comm’n on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035; Bevli v. 

Brisco (1989) 211 Cal.App.3d 986.) The term preponderance of the evidence means 

“more likely than not.” (Sandoval v. Bank of Am. (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (§§ 44932, 44934, & 44944.) 

3. 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, one may only 

vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking 

dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (§ 44944, subd. (d)(1).) 

4. 

A school district may discipline a permanent certificated employee for 

“immoral” conduct. (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1).) In San Diego Unified School District v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466, the court 

explained: 

55 

A teacher may . . . be dismissed for “[i]mmoral or 

unprofessional conduct.” (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1).) “‘The term 

“immoral” has been defined generally as that which is 

hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 

good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education v. 

Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 4 Cal.Rptr. 286.) 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” (Board of Trustees 

v. Stubblefield, supra, 16 Cal.App.3d at p. 824, 94 Cal.Rptr. 

318.) 

5. 

Upon the charge of “immoral conduct,” a district may immediately 

suspend the employee from his or her duties. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 

6. 

“A permanent employee shall not be dismissed except for one or more of 

the following causes: . . . dishonesty . . . “ (§ 44932, subd. (a)(4).) 

7. 

A permanent certificated teacher may be dismissed for “[p]ersistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

56 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the 

governing board of the school district employing him or her.” (§ 44932, subd. (a)(8).) 

8. 

A school district may discipline a permanent certificated employee for 

“evident unfitness for service.” (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6).) That term means, “clearly not fit, 

not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental 

defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Comm’n on 

Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term “connotes a fixed 

character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s 

conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) The 

court held that the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold 

matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.” (Id. p. 1445.) As the 

court in Woodland explained, “[i]f the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to 

determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is 

caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.) 

Applicable District Policies and Government Mandates 

9. 

Board Policy 4040 titled, “Employee Use of Technology” provides: 

The Governing Board recognizes that technological 

resources enhance employee performance by offering 

effective tools to assist in providing a quality instructional 

program; facilitating communication with 

parents/guardians, students, and the community; 

supporting district and school operations; and improving 

access to and exchange of information . . . 

57 

Employees shall be responsible for the appropriate use of 

technology and shall use district technology primarily for 

purposes related to their employment. . . . 

Employees shall not use district technology to access, post, 

submit, publish, or display harmful or inappropriate matter 

that is threatening, obscene, disruptive, sexually explicit, or 

unethical or that promotes any activity prohibited by law, 

Board policy, or administrative regulations. . . . 

Harmful matter includes matter, taken as a whole, which to 

the average person, applying contemporary statewide 

standards, appeals to the prurient interest and is matter 

which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, 

sexual conduct and which lacks serious literary, artistic, 

political, or scientific value for minors. . . . 

Inappropriate use of district technology may result in a 

cancellation of the employee’s user privileges, disciplinary 

action, and/or legal action in accordance with law, Board 

policy, and administrative regulation. . . . 

10. 

Board Policy 4119.21, titled, “Professional Standards” provides: 

The Governing Board expects district employees to 

maintain the highest ethical standards, behave 

professionally, follow district policies and regulations, abide 

by state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment 

when interacting with students and other members of the 

58 

school community. Employee shall engage in conduct that 

enhances the integrity of the district, advances the goals of 

the district's educational programs, and contribute to a 

positive school climate. . . . 

Inappropriate employee conduct includes, but is not limited 

to: 

1. Engaging in any conduct that endangers students, staff, 

or others, including, but not limited to, physical violence, 

threats of violence, or possession of a firearm or other 

weapon. . . . 

2. Engaging in harassing or discriminatory behavior towards 

students, parents/guardians, staff, or community members, 

or failing or refusing to intervene when an act of 

discrimination, harassment, intimidation, or bullying against 

a student is observed. . . . 

3. Physically abusing, sexually abusing, neglecting, or 

otherwise willfully harming or injuring a child. 

4. Engaging in inappropriate socialization or fraternization 

with a student or soliciting, encouraging, or maintaining an 

inappropriate written, verbal, or physical relationship with a 

student. 

5. Possessing or viewing any pornography on school 

grounds, . . . 

59 

6. Using profane, obscene, or abusive language against 

students, parents/guardians, staff, or community members. . 

. . 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

9. Being dishonest with students, parents/guardians, staff, 

or members of the public, . . . 

10. Divulging confidential information about students, 

district employees, or district operations to persons or 

entities not authorized to receive the information. . . . 

11. Using district equipment or other district resources for 

the employee’s own commercial purposes or for political 

activities. 

12. Using district equipment or communication devices for 

personal purposes while on duty, . . . 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Any reports of employee misconduct shall be promptly 

investigated. Any employee who is found to have engaged 

in inappropriate conduct in violation of law or Board policy 

shall be subject to disciplinary action and, in the case of a 

certificated employee, may be subject to a report to the 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing. . . . 

11. 

Board Policy 5137 titled, “Positive School Climate” provides: 

60 

The Governing Board desires to enhance student learning 

by providing an orderly, caring, and nurturing educational 

and social environment in which all students can feel safe 

and take pride in their school and their achievements. The 

school environment should be characterized by positive 

interpersonal relationships among students and between 

students and staff. . . . 

All staff are expected to serve as role models for students 

by demonstrating positive, professional attitudes and 

respect toward each student and other staff members. 

Teachers shall use effective classroom management 

techniques based on clear expectations for student 

behavior. . . . 

The district’s curriculum shall include age-appropriate 

character education which includes, but is not limited to, 

the principles of equality, human dignity, mutual respect, 

fairness, honesty, and citizenship. . . .  

12. 

The Perris Union Educators Handbook, section V, titled “Student 

Evaluation” provides employees shall maintain grade books to ensure they are current 

and accurate. 

13. 

The District publication “Risk Management – Partners in Safety 2021-

2022,” sections titled, “Appropriate Adult-Student Interactions,” “Child Abuse 

Prevention Program; Grooming,” and “Staff & Student Relationships,” provides 

employees shall not engage in unlawful or inappropriate interactions with students 

61 

and avoid boundary-blurring behaviors, and describes the “grooming process” by 

school employees, on-site and off-site behavioral boundaries, electronic and social 

media boundaries, and the definition of grooming. 

14.  During most of the 2021-2022 school year, the California Department of 

Public Heath (CDPH) issued a mandate titled, “Guidance for Use of Face Coverings,” 

which stated that “[m]asks are required for all individuals in the following indoor 

settings, regardless of vaccination status . . . indoors in K-12 schools, childcare.” 

Evaluation 

15. 

The Commission must resolve two issues in this case. First, it must 

determine whether respondent engaged in the conduct alleged in the Statement of 

Charges. If so, it must then determine whether that conduct indicates that respondent 

is unfit to teach. 

RESPONDENT’S CONDUCT 

16. 

The District alleged respondent engaged in multiple acts of misconduct. 

17. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 6 through 85, respondent engaged in the 

following grooming/grooming behavior/inappropriate boundary invasions and/or 

displaying inappropriate content and/or inappropriate personal social media content 

with students: Respondent accessed his personal YouTube account on his District-

issued laptop and used a Promethean Board that displayed a video recommendation 

titled, “Philosophy of Oral Sex,” to his class and displayed his personal YouTube 

username that was a variation of “BadDaddy.” He accessed his personal Instagram 

account on his District-issued laptop and used a Promethean Board that displayed his 

personal username that was a variation of “BadDaddy” and allowed for students to 

62 

contact him personally on this social media platform, and displayed his personal 

Instagram conversations with “sex bots.” He accessed his personal YouTube and 

Instagram accounts on his District-issued laptop for class assignments/lessons 

including about Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and he referenced sex as being one of 

the needs. He accessed his personal YouTube and Instagram accounts on his District-

issued laptop and used the Promethean Board that displayed videos recommendations 

about how to please women in bed and about the different types of sex. Respondent 

shared a personal story to his class about his ability to tie a cherry stem with his 

tongue and that meant he was a good kisser. He moved the seating for some female 

students so they were seated very close and/or next to his desk and engaged in long 

conversations with them that were often personal in nature as he shared personal 

information about his wife including references that his marriage was not stable and 

she was always asking him to do things. Respondent looked at female students in ways 

that made them feel uncomfortable and stared at them when they wore clothing that 

was more revealing and/or showed their cleavage, which caused one female student to 

change her clothing habits from wearing a regular bra to a sports bra. The female 

students and other witnesses testified they did not believe that respondent had a lazy 

eye and his staring did not appear to be caused by any medical condition, but rather it 

was intentional. He often commented on female students’ attire when they were 

wearing more revealing clothing and would not comment on their clothing when it 

was not more revealing. He treated female students better than male students, and he 

sometimes demeaned male students by commenting negatively about their hair 

and/or ignored their requests for help. Respondent touched the shoulders of female 

student Y.H. Respondent grabbed female student B.C. by her hips, moved his body 

behind hers while she was leaning over a desk and near a wall, and rubbed his upper 

thigh area against her back side and buttocks. He did this despite there being other 

63 

paths for him to walk to where he was going. The female student’s testimony about 

the grabbing/rubbing incident was corroborated by her statements and statements of 

staff on the same day of the incident and a male student’s statement who witnessed 

the incident. 

18. 

In addition, the totality of the evidence is given more weight than the 

testimony of expert witness Dr. Blak whose opinion was not consistent with the 

evidence discussed above. Dr. Blak’s opinion was found to have a glaring discrepancy 

when Dr. Shakeshaft testified briefly as a rebuttal witness, not as an expert witness, 

and testified that Dr. Blak’s reference to her study that no teachers have been found to 

have engaged in grooming was gravely inaccurate because, to the contrary, as in 

almost every case she studied involving teachers, there was an “overwhelming pattern” 

of grooming. Furthermore, Dr. Blak referenced her as “Investigator Shakeshaft” instead 

of “Dr. Shakeshaft,” and Dr. Blak referenced a date in his citation to her publication 

that she had no idea what and/or why he cited that date. 

19. 

Respondent also engaged in the following misconduct related to politics, 

religion, and the COVID-19 vaccine and face masks: Respondent used his personal 

Instagram and YouTube accounts on his District-issued laptop to access videos and 

images that were not part of the curriculum for his CCF and/or world history classes 

and/or not approved by LHS administration that included videos with religious content 

by VeggieTales, images/diagrams with political content from PragerU and other 

resources that referenced comparisons of President Biden and Hitler and discussed 

President Trump and liberals and conservatives, and COVID-19 “data” from resources 

like PragerU and other social media resources that caused students to become very 

uncomfortable in class and/or request to be removed from respondent’s class. 

64 

20.  When considering all the evidence, the Commission finds that 

respondent’s conduct establishes cause to dismiss on the basis of immoral conduct 

pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 

21. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 6 through 85, respondent engaged in the 

following conduct that was dishonest: Respondent, at times and often, replied that he 

either did not recall, had no recollection, or needed more “context” to answer 

questions throughout the District’s investigations. When he was asked about why he 

was diverting from class curriculum, respondent told Dr. Tejeda that he did not have 

enough curriculum even though he, and the other CCF teachers, were given the CCF 

curriculum guide created by Ms. Winston and the CCF syllabus, and he had the 

resource of help from the other CCF teachers. Respondent used DuckDuckGo.com on 

his District-issued laptop to bypass District policies on accessing inappropriate content 

on the internet and his personal social media accounts. Respondent claimed he had 

trouble with the grading software as the reason why he was not maintaining his 

gradebooks, yet he did not ask for assistance until several weeks into the school year 

and only after he was questioned by Dr. Tejeda about his gradebooks when parents 

complained. Respondent testified he did not call the United States military a “killing 

machine” in class, yet a video recording by a student indicated he did make that 

statement. When respondent was given an oral directive, in the beginning of the 

school year, about needing to wear a face mask, his reason for non-compliance was 

that his glasses fogged up and he did not mention having trouble breathing or anxiety 

until months later. When considering all the evidence, the Commission finds 

respondent’s conduct establishes cause to dismiss on the basis of dishonesty pursuant 

to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4). 

65 

22. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 6 through 85, respondent engaged in the 

following pattern of misconduct despite warnings from the District: Respondent 

continued to discuss religion in class despite being told in verbal and written directives 

to not do so. Respondent continued to engage in inappropriate interactions with 

students after he was given a directive and placed on leave for displaying a YouTube 

video recommendation of Philosophy of Oral sex, and he returned from leave and 

within two weeks he had inappropriate physical contact with student B.C. and it was 

discovered that he engaged in other inappropriate contact and interactions with other 

female students. In addition, respondent continued to not wear a face mask when 

indoors with students despite being seen violating the face mask mandate by Mr. 

Skorpanich in the first week or two of the school year, and continuing to not wear or 

not properly wear a face mask or wear a mesh face mask throughout the school year. 

Respondent did not maintain his gradebooks, in an ongoing violation, despite being 

informed about the gradebook policy in staff meetings, and causing students’ grades 

to plummet overnight from A’s to D’s and F’s at the end of the semester. When 

considering all the evidence, the Commission finds respondent’s conduct establishes 

cause to dismiss based on his persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws 

of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public 

schools by the state board or by the governing board of the District pursuant to 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

FITNESS TO TEACH – MORRISON FACTORS 

23. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 

(Morrison), the California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from 

the teaching profession only upon a showing that [his] retention in the profession 

poses a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others 

66 

who might be affected by his actions as a teacher.” The court listed the following 

factors as relevant when determining whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that he is 

fit to teach: 

[1] the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, [2] the degree of such 

adversity anticipated, [3] the proximity or remoteness in 

time of the conduct, [4] the type of teaching certificate held 

by the party involved, [5] the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, [6] the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct, [7] the likelihood of the recurrence 

of the questioned conduct, and [8] the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved 

or other teachers. (Id. at pp. 229-230.) 

As set forth below, when respondent’s conduct is considered in light of the 

Morrison factors, the District established that he is unfit to teach. 

Adverse Effect on Students or Fellow Teachers 

24. 

“A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 

by the children coming under her care and protection.” (Bd. of Education v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552.) Respondent violated the District’s and students’ trust in him 

when he grabbed and rubbed himself against a female student and when he engaged 

in other inappropriate behaviors with other female students. This resulted in, among 

67 

other things, students not wanting to be in his class because they felt very 

uncomfortable, filing written statements with the counseling department and with Dr. 

Tejeda, and being transferred out of his class. One female student now struggles to 

trust other male teachers and does not want to be touched by male family members. 

Degree of Adversity Anticipated 

25. 

There is a substantial likelihood that respondent’s conduct had a 

significant adverse effect on the students and teachers involved and those who 

observed his conduct. 

Proximity or Remoteness in Time 

26.  When the facts are considered in their entirety, respondent’s misconduct 

began the very first week of the 2021-2022 school year, at the beginning of August 

2021, and continued almost continuously until he was placed on paid leave the second 

time in February 2022, and did not return. The events, in totality, are not remote. 

Type of Teaching Certificate Held 

27. 

Respondent held a single subject credential in social sciences. As a 

teacher, respondent is expected to display appropriate adult behavior. Instead, 

respondent engaged in ongoing inappropriate behaviors with female students, he 

inappropriately discussed religion, politics and the COVID-19 vaccine, and he failed to 

maintain class gradebooks that resulted in students’ grades suddenly crashing to D’s 

and F’s towards the end of the semester. In all, respondent, exhibited a pattern of poor 

judgment for an educator of high school students. 

68 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

28. 

There are aggravating circumstances of respondent being repeatedly told 

to follow school laws and/or policies while he was teaching at LHS, yet he disregarded 

those verbal and/or written directives concerning his use of religious materials in class, 

his failure to wear or properly wear a face mask indoors when with students, and his 

inappropriate interactions with students. 

Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of Motives 

29. 

Respondent alone is to blame for his multiple instances of misconduct, 

and respondent knew or should have known his misconduct was in violation of school 

laws and/or District policies. 

Likelihood of Recurrence 

30. 

“Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of [one’s] actions is an essential 

step towards rehabilitation.” (Seide v. Committee of Bar Examiners (1989) 49 Cal.3d 

933, 940.) By failing to fully acknowledge his misconduct, in particular his 

inappropriate conduct with female students, respondent failed to demonstrate he has 

engaged in sufficient rehabilitation to establish he will not engage in similar 

misconduct in the future. 

Potential Adverse Impact on Respondent’s Constitutional 

Rights 

31. 

Respondent did not present evidence or argue that his dismissal will have 

an adverse or chilling effect on his constitutional rights or the constitutional rights of 

any other teachers. The Commission finds such adverse impact unlikely. 

69 

CONCLUSION 

32.  When all the evidence is considered, the District proved it is more likely 

than not that respondent engaged in grooming and/or grooming behaviors due to his 

inappropriate contact with female students; he used his personal YouTube and 

Instagram accounts on his District-issued laptop to display inappropriate video 

recommendations and video/photo content that was sexual in nature, political, and/or 

religious; he inappropriately discussed religion, politics, and the COVID-19 vaccine in 

class; he used DuckDuckGo.com on his District-issued laptop to engage in encrypted 

searches and activity on the internet; he did not wear and/or properly wear a face 

mask; and he did not maintain his gradebooks in a timely manner. When all the 

Morrison factors are considered, the District established that such conduct 

demonstrates respondent’s unfitness to teach children, under Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

33. 

Consequently, the District’s dismissal of respondent under pursuant to 

Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(4), and (a)(6), and section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(8), is upheld. 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

70 

ORDER 

The determination of the governing board of Perris Union High School District 

in the Statement of Charges to dismiss respondent David Baker is upheld. 

Accordingly, respondent David Baker is dismissed as a permanent certificated 

employee of Perris Union High School District. 

DATE: June 5, 2023

CHRISTOPHER BOURKE 

Member 

Commission on Professional 

Competence 

MATTHEW RAINWATER, ED.D. 

Member 

Commission on Professional 

Competence 

JAMI A. TEAGLE-BURGOS 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional 

Competence 

71 

Christopher K. Bourke (Jun 5, 2023 08:16 PDT)Christopher K. BourkeDr. Matthew Rainwater (Jun 5, 2023 11:59 PDT)Dr. Matthew Rainwater 
 
 
 
