BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
FOR THE 
TUSTIN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

MELINDA STEBBINS, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2022020038 

DECISION 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44944, subdivision (c)(1), the parties

submitted a written statement to the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), stating

they waived the right to convene a Commission on Professional Competence to decide 

this matter and stipulated to having the hearing conducted and decided by an 

administrative law judge (ALJ).

ALJ Deena R. Ghaly, OAH, heard this matter on June 21 through June 30, 2022 

(excluding weekends), by videoconference. Attorneys Anthony P. DeMarco and Lauren 

Ruvalcaba, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud, & Romo represented Complainant Maurita 

De La Torre, Ed.D., Chief Personnel Officer of the Tustin Unified School District 

(District). 

Respondent Melinda Stebbins was present throughout the hearing and 

represented herself. 

Documentary evidence and testimony was received, and argument heard. The 

record closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on June 30, 2022.

SUMMARY

The District seeks to dismiss Respondent for: unprofessional conduct within the 

meaning of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2); evident unfitness for 

service within the meaning Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), and 

persistent violation or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 

Education or by the governing board of her employing school district within the 

meaning of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

The charges against Respondent stem from allegations that, while teaching, she 

frequently discussed her religious and political beliefs, surveyed students about their 

religious beliefs, and otherwise used class time to stray from the curriculum and 

proselytize about religion and politics. The District further alleged Respondent 

undermined its efforts to contain the COVID-19 pandemic by failing to abide by and 

enforce the District’s mask mandate and even encouraging students to rebel against it. 

Respondent asserts the charges against her are motivated by religious animus 

and other discriminatory motives. She maintains her class lessons fulfilled curriculum 

requirements, and her mention of religious or political matters were incidental to 

standard or District-sanctioned teaching methods or assignments. Respondent 

admitted to sometimes failing to enforce the mask mandate, but argued it was 

2 

inconsistently enforced throughout the school. Further, the District’s disciplinary action 

against her violated her rights to religious expression and freedom of speech under 

the U.S. Constitution. 

The evidence establishes Respondent repeatedly referenced controversial and 

polarizing issues to the detriment of her students’ education and failed to adhere to 

applicable laws, rules, and regulations of her profession and the District. Moreover, her 

commitment to communicating her views with her students during class time directly 

conflict with the duties of her position as a teacher within a public school system. 

While Respondent’s constitutionally protected rights to freedom of speech and 

religion are not “shed at the schoolhouse gate,” they do not prevent the District from 

enforcing rules and regulations intended to promote a learning environment 

supportive of a diverse student community or to enforce public health measures. 

Consideration of the relevant facts and applicable law establish the District 

proved the grounds for Respondent’s dismissal as set out in the Statement of Charges. 

Consideration of the surrounding circumstances, including factors in mitigation and 

aggravation, establish dismissing Respondent from her position with the District is the 

only appropriate outcome. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

In a Notice of Intention to Suspend and Dismiss Respondent dated 

December 13, 2021, the District adopted a Statement of Charges seeking Respondent’s 

dismissal. The District also served Respondent with a Notice of Immediate Suspension 

Without Pay effective December 14, 2021. 

3 

2. 

Respondent did not challenge her suspension without pay; however, she 

timely filed a Request for Hearing challenging the dismissal action, and this matter 

ensued. 

Background 

3.

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. She 

holds a single subject credential in English and has been employed as an English 

teacher at Foothills High School in Tustin, California since 1999. Respondent has no 

prior record of disciplinary action with the District. 

Incidents Arising During the 2020-2021 School Year 

4. 

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Foothills High School 

transitioned to remote or hybrid learning. More than usual, parents were privy to the 

content of class lessons and discussions because they were broadcast on video to 

students at home. Foothills High School administrators received complaints from 

parents about the amount of time Respondent spent and emphasis she placed on 

communicating her religious and political beliefs to students. Parents and students 

also complained about Respondent’s inquiries into students’ religious beliefs and 

practices and other personal information. 

5. 

Early in the school year, Foothills High School Principal Michelle England 

spoke to Respondent about the complaints and recommended she frame her lessons 

to avoid potentially controversial topics and keep the focus on the District’s standard 

English curriculum.  Principal England, who testified at the hearing, described the 

communications with Respondent as informal in tone and “more along the lines of 

coaching.” At the time, Principal England respected and trusted Respondent as a 

4 

teacher and believed that, with some assistance, her teaching style could be improved 

to avoid controversy and the resulting distractions from the required curriculum. 

6. 

Complaints continued to be lodged with the school administration, 

including one from a parent dated September 2, 2020, stating Respondent had asked 

her child what her religion was, whether the student was in a cult, and whether the 

student was racist. (Exh. 15.) Other complaints alleged Respondent commented 

unfavorably on households headed by single mothers, noting boys need strong male 

role models in their lives. 

7. 

On September 4, 2020, Principal England met with Respondent and a 

union representative for a formal disciplinary meeting. There, Principal England more 

pointedly and specifically instructed Respondent to avoid discussing her personal 

religious views and political convictions and to avoid asking students about their 

religious beliefs or personal subjects. She also again directed Respondent to closely 

follow the standard curriculum of her subject. 

8. 

Later in the month, Respondent directed students to access a website, 

Prager University (PragerU), and write about an article of their choice from that 

website. The website is a self-described conservative data base “focused on changing 

minds through the creative use of digital media.” (Quoted in Exh. 8, p. A278.) 

9. 

On September 28, 2020, Assistant Principal Kristin Hartloff presented 

Respondent with a written Warning of Unprofessional Performance (September 28, 

2020 Warning), informing Respondent of the parents’ complaints, and notifying her 

that her work was unsatisfactory. Assistant Principal Hartloff stressed parents were very 

uncomfortable with Respondent asking about students’ religious affiliations during 

class discussions and as part of assignments. With respect to the PragerU assignment, 

5 

Assistant Principal Hartloff wrote it violated two California Standards for the Teaching 

Profession (CSTP). One standard, CSTP 2: Creating and Maintaining Effective 

Environments for Student Learning, instructs teachers to maintain a fair and safe 

learning environment, including “create[ing] a  . . . learning environment that promotes 

student learning, reflects diversity, and encourages constructive and productive 

interactions among students.” The other standard, CSTP 6: Developing as a 

Professional Educator, instructs teachers in part to “manage professional 

responsibilities to maintain motivation and commitment to all students.” (Exh. 68.)

10. 

The September 28, 2020 Warning included the following directive: 

Effective immediately, you are directed to submit all lesson 

plans to me [for approval] . . . You will not include any 

[discussions of your] personal religious beliefs and/or 

political beliefs with your students. This means you will not 

write about them and share that writing with students, you 

will not talk about them in your meets or in the classroom 

or in a chat, and you will not ask personal questions to 

students such as their religious affiliation. You will not direct 

students to any political or religious websites, including 

PragerU. You will immediately take down all assignments 

that involve PragerU. from your Schoology page and you 

will discard any student work that involved PragerU. That 

work will not be included in student grades. 

(Exh. 9, p A279.) 

6 

11. 

Respondent submitted a rebuttal to the September 28, 2020 Warning, 

denying directly asking students about their religion or using the word ‘cult’ in any 

circumstances in class. Respondent admitted asking a student about racism and 

expressed regret about her choice of words, however, she believed a written warning 

for the infraction was overly harsh. She also acknowledged stating she had said boys 

need male role models, but that this comment was not intended to be critical of 

single-mother households. Rather, she intended boys need male role models of some 

kind, not necessarily fathers; they could be teachers, coaches, or the like. Respondent 

further stated in her rebuttal she limited discussion of her personal beliefs, including 

some involving religion, to a warm-up exercise, known as “Good Things”, adapted 

from a District training, “Capturing Kids’ Hearts,” is a warm-up exercise intended to 

help students engage with the teaching process by sharing personal ideals and 

experiences. Regarding an assignment calling for students to write down religious 

symbols of importance to them and to describe a traumatic event, Respondent 

maintained she told her students answering these questions was optional. (Exh. 10.) 

12. 

Respondent told her students about the District’s disciplinary warning to 

her by reading a letter in her classes. The letter stated she may not see them again and 

asked students who support her to contact District officials on her behalf. Respondent 

ended her classes that day with a discussion of the U.S. Constitution’s Bill of Rights.

Assistant Principal Hartloff logged into the Zoom application to observe her class and 

witnessed Respondent read her letter and lead discussions about the U.S. Constitution. 

At the hearing, Assistant Principal Hartloff stated she found Respondent’s tone to be 

extremely emotional and the discussion of Respondent’s personnel issues 

inappropriate for class. 

7 

13. 

Respondent’s statement to her class on the Zoom conference was video 

recorded and admitted into evidence. In the recording, Respondent can be seen and 

heard and appears calm and professional with the exception of a small break in her 

voice toward the end of her statement. (See, Exh. 20.) 

14. 

After receiving the September 28, 2020 Warning, Respondent went on a 

six-month personal leave. During the leave, school administrators continued to receive 

complaints about her, with parents voicing their preference that their children not be 

returned to her classroom. Others wrote to communicate their support for her. 

15. 

Respondent returned from her leave on March 28, 2021. On April 2, 2021, 

Assistant Principal Hartloff issued a written warning to Respondent (April 2, 2021 

Warning). The April 2, 2021 Warning repeated the deficiencies in the September 28, 

2020 Warning as well as new issues of concern to the administration based on her 

rebuttal to the September 28, 2020 Warning and the classes she taught that day. 

According to the April 2, 2021 Warning, of particular concern to the administration 

were Respondent’s lengthy discussions about civil rights during her September 28, 

2020 class and the farewell letter she wrote, which caused many students and their 

parents to assume she was being fired and to write the administration expressing their 

concern. The April 2, 2021 warning concluded with the following directive:

Effective immediately, you are directed to refrain from any 

and all conversations having to do with your personal 

religious and/or political beliefs. You are also directed to 

refrain from asking students about their personal religious 

and/or political beliefs, whether orally or in writing. Your 

conversations, lessons, assignments, assessments, and all 

student learning taking place in your classroom on our 

8 

campus must only align with the English Language Arts 

Common Core standards and literacy skills. 

(Exh. 3, Attachment B, p. A160.) 

16. 

Respondent submitted a rebuttal to the April 2, 2021 Warning in which 

she disagreed with many of the characterizations about the statements attributed to 

her. Regarding the political speech in her classes, Respondent noted other teachers 

frequently used political issues as fodder for discussion and for writing assignments in 

other English classes, including the substitute teacher who filled in for Respondent 

during her leave: 

During my absence, the sophomore team collaborated with 

the substitute for my classes on the work that was assigned 

to the sophomore classes. I am concerned because you 

found not just one, but several of these assignments to be 

acceptable despite the controversial and political content . . 

. . I was told during the meeting on 4/2/21 that political and 

controversial matter (

) should be avoided, and suitable 

substitutes should be found to teach the same subjects. 

[Principal England] specifically stated in our meeting there 

was no need for politics in the English classroom.

(Exh. 12, p. 317.) 

The topics the students could choose to write during the time Respondent was 

on leave included whether the voting age should be lowered, teen mental health, the 

Black Lives Matter movement, and the COVID-19 pandemic. A last choice was to write 

about “Other: If there’s something else that interests you, just ask!” (Exh 12, p. 318.) 

9 

Incidents Arising During the 2021-2022 School Year

17. 

During the summer before the 2021-2022 school year, the District 

developed a mask mandate to help stem the spread of COVID-19 as the District 

schools prepared to shift back to in-class teaching. The District’s mask mandate was 

widely circulated during assemblies, in written directives, and in posted signs 

throughout campus.

18.

Respondent’s return to the classroom the following school year in August 

2021 was marked almost immediately with controversy. As witnessed by multiple 

administrators and students, Respondent, who was given leave to wear a variation face 

shield and scarf, failed to keep her face covering on and often failed to enforce the 

mask mandate on her students. She also started classes by shaking hands with each 

student as they entered the classroom, though students could opt to bump fists with 

Respondent instead. 

19.  On the first day of class, August 12, 2021, an assistant principal, CK Green 

noted about half the students, numbering between 15 and 18, were unmasked when 

he went to retrieve a student from one of Respondent’s classes. 

20.  On August 25, 2021, a parent reported students in Respondent’s class 

were unmasked. Various school administers made impromptu visits to Respondent’s 

classes over the next several days, including on August 23, 26 and 27, and September 

8, 2021. Each time they found multiple students not wearing masks. School 

administrators repeatedly sent Respondent written directives reminding her of the 

mandate and her duty to enforce it. (See Exh. 3 attachments.) Principal England spoke 

to Respondent, instructing her “in no uncertain terms” to enforce the mask mandate. 

10

21. 

School administrators also specifically directed Respondent to take a 

stricter line with a group of approximately eight students witnessed to habitually 

violate the mask mandate when in her class. On August 19, 2021, Respondent 

provided the students in question with the District’s written COVID-19 directives, but 

she also included political pamphlets referencing theories of legal rights to enter 

businesses without masking. During the hearing, one of the students in the group, J.G., 

stated Respondent also encouraged the students to join the school’s chapter of 

Turning Point USA (TPUSA), a political group for which Respondent served as the 

faculty advisor, and to speak out against the mask policy. Respondent denied 

recommending students join TPUSA or defy the mask mandate. She maintained she 

provided the information about whether businesses can enforce the mask mandate to 

give the students a full picture of the regulatory climate. 

22.  On August 20, 2021, administrators observed Respondent sitting with a 

bible on her knee while speaking to a parent. When they inquired of the parent what 

the discussion had been about, the parent, L.G., stated Respondent was telling her 

about her religion and offered her the bible as a gift. L.G. testified at the hearing and 

stated the conversation made her feel uncomfortable and was not solicited, as she 

follows her own religion. L.G., who is disabled and had experienced a period of 

homelessness with her two daughters, stated she spoke with Respondent because she 

hoped Respondent could help with transportation issues she was having in getting her 

children to and from school. 

23. 

Beginning on September 10, 2021, Z.D., a student in Respondent’s senior 

honors English class, wrote emails to school administrators reporting Respondent’s 

conduct in class, including that Respondent expounded against vaccinations, allowed 

students to remain unmasked, and presided over politicized debates regarding 

11

COVID-19 public health policies. In an email dated September 15, 2021, Z.D. wrote she 

was also experiencing retaliation from Respondent for disagreeing with Respondent’s 

views: “[s]he seemed to target me and tried to correct virtually everything I had to 

say.” (Exh. 47.) Z.D. also wrote Respondent gave very few English assignments. 

24. 

Z.D. testified at the hearing, stating she received no more than five 

assignments during the first month of school compared to the approximately 20 

assignments students received in other sections of the same class taught be different 

teachers. 

25. 

Z.D.’s classmates, A.W. and A.P., who also testified at the hearing, 

corroborated Z.D.’s statements about the few English assignments Respondent gave 

and her routine failure to enforce the mask mandate. A.P. noted Respondent’s practice 

of shaking students’ hands in greeting at the beginning of class “didn’t sit right” after 

the students had endured months of remote learning and many, including A.P., feared 

having to return to the isolation of remote learning if close contact between members 

of the school community caused another outbreak. A.P. also testified about the class 

atmosphere during periods religious and political discussions predominated, noting 

these discussions were “hectic, noisy, and chaotic.” 

26.  On September 16, 2021, Maurita De La Torre, the District’s chief 

personnel officer, issued a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and Unsatisfactory 

Performance (September 16, 2021 Notice) to Respondent. The September 16, 2021 

Notice listed all of the deficiencies identified in prior warnings, along with 

Respondent’s failure to uphold the mask mandate and her persistence in discussing 

religion and politics in class. 

12

27. 

The September 16, 2021 Notice listed several board policies school 

administrators determined Respondent had violated: (i) District Board Policy 4116.1, 

which provides: “It shall be the responsibility of every teacher to deal with potentially 

controversial issues in a comprehensive and scholarly manner taking care that 

students are given an opportunity to explore the full range of opinion. Each teacher is 

expected to exercise good judgment in the manner of instruction;” (ii) District Board 

Policy 6011, which states the Board will establish “the framework for the educational 

system including . . . performance standards [and] curriculum” and further states 

“[s]tandards shall, to the extent possible, reflect the requirements of law, and the 

desires of the local community.” (Exh. 3, p. A143-142.) Also listed among the rules and 

standards with which Respondent was charged with failing to uphold were CSTP 

Standards 2 and 6. 

28. 

The September 16, 2021 Notice ends with directives for Respondent to 

follow: 

1. 

Ensure compliance with all COVID-19 safety 

protocols at all times and refrain from encouraging or 

directing students to violate these safety protocols. 

2. 

Refrain from sharing your personal views about 

COVID-19 safety protocols with students. 

3. 

Submit all lesson plans to Assistant Principal Kristin 

Hartloff each Wednesday by the conclusion of your 

planning period for the subsequent week. Ms. Harloff will 

either approve the lesson plan or return it to you with 

changes by Thursday afternoon. You must make all changes 

13

and resubmit your lesson plans to Ms. Hartloff by Friday at 

the conclusion of your planning period. 

4. 

Follow your approved lesson plans and do not 

deviate from the approved subject matter. 

5. 

Refrain from sharing your personal, religious, and 

political beliefs with students orally or in writing at all times. 

6. 

Refrain from asking students about their religious 

and political beliefs and affiliations orally or in writing at all 

times. 

7. 

Ensure all classroom discussions, instructions, 

lessons, assignments, and assessments and all students 

learning in your classroom and on campus are aligned with 

the District’s English Language Arts Common Core 

standards and literacy skills.

8. 

Refrain from directing your students to political or 

religious websites or organizations including PragerU and 

Turning Point USA, and refrain from incorporating these 

websites in discussions, instruction, lessons, assignments, 

and assessments at all times.

9. 

Utilize sound professional judgment and conduct 

yourself in a professional manner, in speech and action, at 

all times while interacting with students, parents, staff and 

administrators.

14

10. 

Ensure your performance is in alignment with the 

California Standards for the Teaching Profession. 

11. 

Comply with all verbal and written directives from 

District and site administrators and all District rules, Board 

Policies, and Administrative Regulations.

(Exh. 3, p. A146.) 

29.  On September 22, 2021, the school held its “club rush” day, an event 

where student clubs set up booths to encourage membership. School rules prohibit 

club members from handing out paraphernalia but members of TPUSA, handed out 

buttons with the words “I’m Pro Choice. Pick Your Gun” and a picture of three firearms 

under the words. (Exh. 50.) Respondent was the faculty advisor for TPUSA. At the 

hearing, she denied any knowledge of the buttons or even being at the event; no 

evidence was presented controverting her position. 

30.  On September 27, 2021, Chief Personnel Officer De La Torre issued a 

Letter of Reprimand to Respondent. The letter stated in part: “This Letter of Reprimand 

is issued as a result of your failure to conduct yourself in a professional manner and 

refusal to perform regular assignments by spending valuable instructional time 

proselytizing to your students regarding your personal religious beliefs instead of 

providing English Language Arts instruction, in violation of repeated directives.” (Exh. 

4, p. A175.) The letter also admonished Respondent for reading to her classes a 

lengthy personal essay she had written entitled The Importance of Truth, which was 

the subject of many student and parent concerns and complaints. The essay includes a 

long passage about Respondent’s feeling of despondency so great it caused her to 

question her sanity but then feeling relief when her prayers for help were answered. 

15

Respondent ended the essay by noting the help and relief eased by her religious faith 

is available to anyone open to it: 

I am saddened when I see people living in fear, because I 

know they do not have to. I understand what it is like to live 

in fear and it is no way to live. Since this major event in 

2020, God has done so many amazing things to strengthen 

my faith, unbelievable things . . . I know that everything God 

has done for me, He can and will do for every single person 

who believes. 

(Exh. 4, p. A178.) 

The September 27, 2021 Letter of Reprimand quoted the same rules and 

standards referenced in the earlier writings and informed Respondent her failure to 

comply with directives will result in the District initiating dismissal charges. 

31. 

After Respondent received the September 27, 2021 Letter of Reprimand, 

she returned to her classroom. According to multiple students who testified at the 

hearing, Respondent appeared visibly upset. A student recorded a portion of the class 

(Exh. 53) in which Respondent can be heard saying: 

I’ve never told a student to wear a mask or not to wear a mask; I’m not a 

doctor; 

If there was a shooter on campus, I would throw myself on your bodies to 

protect you not because I’m a good person, but because of God; 

I am to be a robot – I am not to share anything personal with you; 

16

 
 
 
 
 
  A mandate is not the same as a law; 

It’s like the Milgram experiment; you have no choice but to press the 

button; 

I have students who have migraines, mental health issues; I have no right, 

school has no right; 

I have the most illegal thing. 

32.  One of the students in the class, H.L., testified at the hearing. H.L. stated 

she had never been frightened in Respondent’s class until that day. As she recalled, the 

atmosphere in the class was very tense as Respondent became increasingly upset, 

cried, and held a black case above her head when she made the statement about 

bringing “the most illegal thing” to class. H.L. feared the case held a gun, until 

Respondent pulled out a bible from it. 

33.

In addition to H.L., several other students testified at the hearing about 

Respondent’s conduct on September 27, 2021. Their testimony was uniform in 

describing Respondent’s distraught state, high level of emotion, and erratic behavior.

Each of them described feeling fearful and concerned for their safety.

34. 

After class, H.L. and at least five of her classmates went to school 

administrators and reported Respondent’s speech. The students prepared written 

statements of what they had witnessed. Consistent with the students’ testimony at the 

hearing, the statements describe Respondent’s tone and demeanor as highly 

emotional and their reactions as fearful and worried about their safety. (See Exhs. 56 & 

58 – 62.) 

17

 
 
 
35. 

After the events of September 27, 2021, the District suspended 

Respondent for two days. She returned to work on September 30, 2021. Assistant 

Principals Hartloff and CK Green witnessed Respondent greeting students at her 

classroom door while unmasked and allowing unmasked students into her class. 

Principal England contacted the District’s personnel office for assistance. District 

Personnel Director Raphael Placentia indicated he would come to campus. Principal 

England went to Respondent’s classroom and sat at the back for the remaining 15 

minutes of class time. She observed students speaking among themselves or playing 

video games while Respondent sat, still unmasked, at her desk, apparently writing. 

Principal England also observed a collection of religious pamphlets in a corner of 

Respondent’s classroom. 

36.  Once the school bell rang and class ended, Principal England informed 

Respondent she would need to leave school. Respondent asked whether she could 

gather her things; Principal England agreed and sent for boxes. Two students offered 

to help her collect her belongings. 

37. 

Director Placentia arrived at Foothills High School campus, delivered a 

Letter of Reprimand, dated September 30, 2021, and read out the first paragraph to 

her. The September 30, 2021 Reprimand Letter informed Respondent she was being 

placed on administrative leave. 

38.  While being escorted out of school on September 30, 2021, Principal 

England photographed the religious pamphlets displayed in Respondent’s class 

“library,” an area of her classroom where reading materials could be accessed by her 

students. During the hearing, Principal England stated the materials clearly violated the 

directives in the preceding writings provided to Respondent. As depicted in Principal 

18

England’s photographs, the pamphlets are not literary or scholarly texts on religion; 

they are brief arguments for adopting a religious life. (See, Exh. 36.) 

39. 

Assistant Principal Hartloff reviewed Respondent’s entries in the school’s 

assignment case system, Schoology. She noted there were very few entries and 

virtually no “major assignments” as of September 30, 2021, Respondent’s last day at 

Foothills High School. Assistant Principal Hartloff also examined Respondent’s entries 

into the Aeries system, a database for keeping track of grades. Consistent with Z.D. 

and other students’ testimony, Assistant Principal Hartloff concluded, given that nearly 

two months had passed since school began, Respondent was not on track to have her 

classes meet all the English curriculum requirements. 

Additional Student Witnesses 

40. 

A.P.(2), an incoming junior at Foothills High School, transferred out of 

Respondent’s honors class during the 2020-2021 school year to avoid the “constant 

talk of religion,” Respondent’s offers of prayers for the students, and her inquiries in 

students’ religious beliefs. 

41.  Not all of Respondent’s students remember her classes as overly 

consumed with religion and politics. B. A., one of the students in Respondent’s 6th 

period honors English class during the 2021-2022 school year, remembered 

Respondent mentioning religion only “every now and then.” She characterized 

Respondent’s presentation at the September 27, 2021 class, however, as a “rant” and 

noted Respondent did not always follow COVID-19 prevention policies, including 

offering her bare hand to shake as students filed into her classroom. 

19

Respondent’s testimony 

42.

Respondent testified at the hearing. As an overriding issue, Respondent 

maintained the District’s actions against her stemmed from religious and political 

animus and that, to the extent she made mistakes, the District’s response was 

excessive and more severe than its actions in similar situations when the alleged 

transgressor more closely adhered to the District’s secular, liberal-leaning outlook. 

Moreover, because of this animus, school administrators’ interventions were essentially 

a sham, and her dismissal a foregone conclusion. 

By way of example, Respondent noted the substitute teacher who had filled in 

for Respondent, identified as Ms. Phillips, had given a lecture on the novel 

  based on the “white savior” theory, which was considered a controversial 

teaching approach. Because, however, the white savior theory is aligned with left-

leaning politics, the substitute teacher, Ms. Phillips received only informal corrective 

instruction from school administrators, very different from the harsh consequences 

Respondent experienced. 

43. 

Regarding allegations Respondent failed to teach in accordance with the 

approved curriculum, Respondent countered that, to the contrary, her teaching style 

and content were consistent with District-sanctioned objectives. She spoke of her faith 

at the beginning of class consistent with the Capturing Kids’ Hearts method. 

Respondent read her personal statement, The Importance of Truth, to mirror skills 

required during a class section on writing effective college essays which require going 

beyond superficial self-descriptions. Political discussions about COVID-19, vaccination 

requirements, and related topics stemmed from the “CNN10” news summaries with 

which many Foothills High School teachers started class. Regarding discussions with 

her classes about the personnel actions she was experiencing, Respondent stated 

20

 
 
these too were in the service of a pedagogical purpose. Anticipating she may not 

return to the school, she wanted to present a cohesive narrative – a beginning, a 

middle, and an end – of her presence in the students’ lives.

44. 

Respondent further denied falling behind in teaching the approved 

curriculum. She stated the relatively few substantive assignments she made at the 

outset of both the 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 school years reflected her standard 

practice of starting the year slowly to build rapport with her students. Because she 

only taught a few weeks at the outset of each year, she had not yet fully ramped up to 

pace; however, this was an approach she had used for the many preceding years of her 

tenure at Foothills High School, and it had never been the source of criticism or 

disciplinary action.

45. 

Respondent asserted some of the specific allegations were false or 

presented out of context. As noted above, Respondent denied having any involvement 

in the buttons depicting guns handed out by the TPUSA club, calling any student a 

racist, using the word ‘cult’ in class, or making disparaging remarks about single-

parent families. 

46. 

Respondent alleged the District’s enforcement of the mask mandate was 

selective, and arbitrary. She also noted some of the very administrators testifying 

against her routinely removed their masks during school, essentially failing to hold 

themselves to the standards they accused her of violating. 

47. 

Respondent further argued her civil rights are being violated by the 

District in violation of the federal civil rights law and the U.S. Constitution. According 

to Respondent, District officials and school administrators wanted to remove 

Respondent from the start because of her religious and political convictions and 

21

engaged in a progressive intervention process without any sincere intent to help her 

correct her ways.

District Evidence Relevant to Respondent’s Defenses 

48. 

During her testimony, Principal England stated her initial discussions with 

Respondent were not about Respondent’s religious views in particular. Rather, they 

were about how references to polarizing subjects such as religion in the context of 

public school teaching can offend and alienate some students, as the student body 

comes from a wide variety of religious and secular backgrounds. Her initial coaching 

focused on avoiding discussion topics likely to be controversial generally; however, 

when Respondent’s teaching methods remained unchanged, Principal England 

decided nuanced directives were not working and therefore specifically directed 

Respondent to avoid whole categories of subjects, including religion and politics. 

49. 

Principal England disagreed that standard teaching conventions such as 

the Capturing Kids’ Hearts exercise or other similar pedagogical methods require 

teachers to expose their most private thoughts. Principal England recalled discussing 

the Capturing Kids’ Hearts exercise with Respondent and expressly noting it is more 

effective when teachers sincerely share some aspects of themselves but nothing too 

private or intimate. According to Principal England, teachers should be accessible yet 

maintain professional distance. Principal England further stated all teachers, regardless 

of religious or political viewpoints, were counseled and corrected when their teachings 

crossed into demagoguery or were exceptionally polarizing. In the case of Ms. Phillips, 

she responded to the administration’s concerns and modified her lessons so no further 

disciplinary action was required.

22

50. 

Regarding Respondent’s argument that the District’s progressive 

intervention process was essentially a sham, Principal England stated she always takes 

into consideration teachers’ vulnerability to disgruntled students and parents and 

seeks to protect them from false allegations. In Respondent’s case, Principal England

became convinced of the veracity of the complaints because of their similarity despite 

coming from various grade levels and class sections. Principal England also observed 

Respondent in the classroom before determining formal discipline against her had to 

be pursued. 

51. 

Assistant Principal Hartloff stated during her testimony she reviewed 

Respondent’s rebuttal and did not find support for her defenses. For instance, 

regarding the allegation Respondent intrusively asked students to disclose their 

religions and traumatic events they experienced as part of an assignment, Respondent 

maintained she made the questions optional. Assistant Principal Hartloff reviewed the 

written instructions for the assignment and did not find they reflected Respondent’s 

representation. The instructions, which were attached to Respondent’s rebuttal, require 

students to complete a “graphic organizer” grid. The grid is a number of questions, 

including one calling for students to list accidents or traumatic event and another 

calling them to list “religious symbols or experiences.” The instructions at the top of 

the assignment page do not make answering any questions optional (see, Exh. 10, p. 

A289), however, during her testimony, Respondent stated she told her students 

answering the questions was optional. 

52.

Assistant Principal Hartloff stated she reviewed Respondent’s entries in 

the Schoology and Aeries databases before determining Respondent was not on pace 

for completing the required curriculum.

23

53. 

Regarding enforcement of the mask mandate, school administrators 

testified it was not perfectly adhered to at all times, particularly during faculty 

meetings when students were not present. Teachers were not always able to keep 

students masked at all times; however, Respondent was observed to be herself in 

violation of the mask mandate while teaching and to be actively supporting some 

students’ failure to adhere to it.

Factual Analysis 

54. 

The factual allegations in the Statement of Charges are a compilation of 

the allegations set out in each of the disciplinary memoranda issued to Respondent 

between September 28, 2020 and September 30, 2021. They are addressed at Factual 

Findings 4 though 37 and are generally uncontroverted.

55. 

As noted at Factual Findings 11 and 29, Respondent denied some 

charges. Specifically, Respondent denied directly surveying students about their 

religious affiliations, ever using the word cult, having any knowledge or involvement in 

the incident when members of the TPUSA club distributed buttons depicting guns, or 

making disparaging remarks about single-parent families. 

56. 

Respondent testified throughout the hearing in a straightforward and 

candid manner, freely admitting to many of the allegations made against her. The 

District’s evidence about the allegations Respondent expressly denied is limited to 

hearsay statements from parents and teachers. Under these circumstances, her denials 

are credited. 

57. 

Less persuasive are Respondent’s arguments that the religious and 

political discussions were incidental to standard English class assignments and that 

they did not interfere with the normal progression called for by the required 

24

curriculum. Respondent’s conduct as described by her students and even herself do 

not have the standard hallmarks of pedagogical discourse, organized debate, and 

consideration of opposing viewpoints consistent with effective classroom teaching, 

particularly for the diverse student body typical of a public school setting. Additionally, 

Assistant Principal Hartloff’s analysis of completed teaching assignments 

demonstrating Respondent assigned and graded very few traditional English 

assignments during the periods she was in the classroom is also credited. It is 

corroborated by the multiple students who testified about Respondent’s classroom 

conditions. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

General Provisions 

1. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.)

2. 

Grounds for dismissal are limited to an enumerated list, including those 

alleged against Respondent in the instant action: unprofessional conduct; evident 

unfitness for service; and persistent refusal to obey school laws. (Ed. Code, § 44932, 

subd. (a).) 

3. 

A particular act or omission may constitute more than one cause for 

removal under the Education Code. (

 (1978) 84 Cal.App.3d 251, 260.)

4. 

In the absence of any statutory authority to the contrary, Complainant 

bears the burden of proof. (Evid. Code, § 500.)  The standard of proof in a teacher 

25

disciplinary proceeding is preponderance of the evidence. (

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) 

Causes for Dismissal 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

5. 

In the context of teacher dismissal proceedings, “unprofessional conduct” 

is conduct that “violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or . . . is unbecoming 

a member of a profession in good standing.” (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 533 (citation omitted], overruled on another 

ground in 

 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn.7.) Continual 

insubordination and refusal to recognize superiors’ authority has been held to 

constitute unprofessional conduct. (

. at p. 552) as has “disruption or impairment of 

discipline or the teaching process." (

 (1962) 206 Cal.App.2d 147, 157.) 

6. 

The preponderance of the evidence established Respondent engaged in 

continual insubordination and refusal to recognize superiors’ authority by failing to 

avoid discussing controversial topics in class and to abide by and enforce the mask 

mandate (Factual Findings 8, 12, 18-21, 23-25, 30, & 35,) and the result, including her 

classes falling behind on curriculum objectives and, in some instances becoming upset 

or frightened, disrupted and impaired the teaching process (Factual Findings 23-25, 

31-34, & 39-41,). 

7. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.) Evident unfitness for service 

26

requires that unfitness be attributable to a defect in temperament which “connotes a 

fixed character trait, presumably not remedial upon receipt of notice that one’s 

conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing school district. (

 at p. 1444.)

8. 

In word and deed, Respondent demonstrated an unwavering 

commitment to sharing her personal religious and political beliefs with students and 

to substitute her convictions about public health measures over the District’s decisions 

and she did so despite the adverse impact it had on instruction and students’ well-

being. (See e.g., Factual Findings 31-34.) This commitment is part of Respondent’s 

character, and she is unlikely change regardless of the expectations of her employing 

school district. As such, this character trait meets or exceeds the “presumably not 

remedial” element of the evident unfitness for service charge. 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF, OR REFUSAL TO, OBEY LAWS OR RULES 

9. 

As a third cause for dismissal, the District charged Respondent with

persistent violation of, or refusal to, obey laws in violation of Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(7). In this context, “persistent” means refusing to relent, 

continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn, persevering . . . constantly 

repeated.” (

Cal.App.3d 77, 82; see also, 

 (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.)

 (1972) 28 

10. 

Respondent’s many transgressions in the face of repeated directives and 

calls for correction regarding both the content of her lessons and her stance toward 

the mask mandate established her persistent violation of, or refusal to, obey laws or 

rules. (Factual Findings 5, 9, 10, 15, 26, 27, 28, & 30.) 

27

Factors 

11.

In

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from the teaching profession 

only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of 

harm to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his 

actions as a teacher.”  The court concluded that a teacher’s conduct cannot abstractly 

be characterized as among others, “unprofessional,” unless the conduct indicated that 

a teacher is unfit to teach." (

 at p. 229.)  The Court then listed factors, since codified 

at California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, to consider in analyzing 

whether cause for teacher dismissal. Thus, evidence of these factors must be 

established as part of determining whether there are sufficient grounds to sustain a 

teacher dismissal. The factors and their application to the instant matter follow: 

(i) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 

fellow teachers: Respondent’s conduct adversely affected students. Multiple students 

testified about the chaotic discussions, alienation, health concerns, and even fear of 

violence they experienced in Respondent’s classroom. The recordings in her classroom, 

particularly the one made on September 27, 2021, reflect Respondent had lost her 

ability to maintain a professional demeanor to a degree likely to have traumatized her 

students. Most concerning, Respondent’s conduct resulted in students losing teaching 

time and opportunity, as well as the benefits of the health-related protections of the 

mask mandate as determined by the District. (Factual Findings 23-25, 31-34, 39-41.)

(ii) The degree of such adversity anticipated. Albeit misguidedly, there is 

indication Respondent believed she was acting in her students’ interest and she did 

not anticipate the adversity they bore. (See, e.g., Factual Finding 11.)

28

(iii) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s conduct 

occurred very recently, within approximately the last two years. (Factual Findings 4-38.)

(iv) The type of teaching certificate held by the party involved. Respondent 

taught English, a subject requiring critical and abstract thinking. Respondent’s 

propensity to preach and proselytize are inconsistent with the subject matter generally 

and with the English curriculum taught at Foothills High School. 

(v) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 

conduct. California Code of Regulation, title 5, section 80300, subdivisions (b) and (m) 

provide definitions for aggravating and mitigating factors, respectively. Their 

application goes to the degree of discipline necessary to adequately protect the 

public, students, or the profession. 

Aggravating factors include: (1) a prior record of adverse action; (2) multiple 

acts of wrongdoing; (3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by bad 

faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws governing educators; (4) that the 

misconduct significantly harmed a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder or 

applicant, significantly harmed the public or the educational system; (5) that the holder 

or applicant demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct, 

which includes failure to comply with known court orders; or (6) that the holder or 

applicant had prior notice, warnings or reprimands for similar conduct from any 

reliable source. 

Here, there are several aggravating factors: Respondent received multiple 

warnings and disciplinary notices as well as periods of suspension and these  

constitute prior adverse action; she engaged in multiple acts of wrongdoing; her 

students were denied normal education experiences and were sometimes frightened 

29

by her conduct; and in class discussions, she speaks of “not returning” and later more 

explicitly that she will be fired but that she must follow her conscience, indicating 

indifference to the consequences of her misconduct. (Factual Findings 8, 12, 18-21, 23-

25, 29, & 30-34, & 39-41.) 

Mitigating factors include: (1) absence of any prior record of adverse action; (2) 

lack of harm to the person who is the object of the misconduct; (3) emotional or 

physical difficulties not caused by illegal conduct and no longer at issue; (4) a 

demonstration of good character of the applicant; (5) objective action taken by the 

applicant or holder, spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the time of the 

misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing; (6) the proximity or remoteness in 

time relative to the seriousness of the misconduct; or (7) the nature and extent of 

subsequent rehabilitation. 

Because Respondent is convinced of the correctness of her acts and the 

importance of her religious beliefs over other duties, none of these factors in 

mitigation apply. Respondent may be of good character; she appears sincere in her 

beliefs and in her concern for the religious development of her students, and in her 

political disagreements over the District’s mask mandate. These attributes are 

misplaced and even detrimental in a public school setting where, to the extent her 

beliefs informed both her teaching and her involvement with the public health 

measures the District chose to keep the student safe, they clashed with District 

objectives to serve the educational needs of a diverse student population and keep 

them safe during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

(vi) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct. Respondent’s beliefs and moral struggles about them may not be 

blameworthy; however, they are not praiseworthy either. As an experienced teacher, 

30

her own education and understanding of the boundaries between private conduct and 

official duty should have guided her to more appropriate and professional conduct. 

(vii) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. Given the 

strength of Respondent’s convictions, the likelihood of recurrence of the conduct in 

question is great. In addition, progressive disciplinary intervention did not halt the 

questioned conduct, which is further evidence it is likely to recur. 

(viii) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. 

At first glance, the District’s emphasis on controlling Respondent’s discussions of 

religion and politics and the resulting consequences when she resisted may cause 

other public school teachers to fear their own speech and beliefs could endanger their 

jobs. As described in greater detail in the section below, however, teachers’ 

constitutional rights are protected. They are subject to some limitations outside the 

classroom and more so, in the classroom. The boundaries are clear and any teacher 

who takes the time to understand the necessary distinctions between protected rights 

to engage in private conduct and public employee obligations will not be negatively 

impacted or “chilled” by the instant case. 

Affirmative Defenses

12. 

Respondent asserted the disciplinary proceeding brought against her is 

motivated by the District’s animus toward her because she is Christian and has 

become associated with conservative-leaning political views, in violation of her right to 

free speech under the U.S. Constitution. Respondent’s proffered evidence in support of 

her claim is what she views as disparate and more lenient treatment of another 

teacher, Ms. Phillips, who used the term “white savior” while presenting a lesson on the 

31

book 

. School administrators took issue with the term, which is 

associated with more left-leaning or progressive political views, and reprimanded Ms. 

Phillips. Unlike Respondent, however, Ms. Phillips was not the subject of further 

disciplinary action. In her rebuttal to the April 2, 2021 Warning, Respondent also 

pointed out other teachers were allowed to give assignments based on political issues. 

13.  Where a district’s motivation in disciplining a teacher “is to silence a 

public employee’s lawful protected speech, that would invalidate a disciplinary action.” 

(

 (2013) 223 Cal.App.4th 169; 

 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575; see also, 

 (1969) 393 U.S. 503, 506 [“First Amendment 

rights, applied in light of the special characteristics of the school environment, are 

available to teachers and students. It can hardly be argued that either students or 

teachers shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the 

schoolhouse gate.”]). 

14. 

In the case of public school teachers and other public officials, however, 

not all otherwise protected speech is lawful. This is especially the case when the 

speech occurs in the course of official duties. (See, 

 (2006) 547 U.S. 

410.)

15. 

For public school teachers, whatever the circumstances of where and how 

the speech occurred, a central issue in determining whether it is considered protected 

speech under the U.S. Constitution is whether it is disruptive to school operations. 

16. 

The seminal case setting out the proper analysis is 

(1968) 391 U.S. 563. In 

, the issue involved speech outside the 

classroom. A teacher sent a local newspaper a letter critical of his employing school’s 

32

governing board. The board determined his actions were detrimental and disruptive to 

the school and dismissed him. In the majority opinion, the Supreme Court held that 

analysis of such cases requires “a balance between the interest of the teacher, as a 

citizen, in commenting on matters of public concern and the interest of the State, as 

an employer, in promoting the efficiency of the public services it performs through its 

employees.” (

, at p. 568.) 

17.  Here, Respondent’s speech and exercise of religious expression were 

occurring in the classroom and in the course of teaching, and therefore are subject to 

heightened control and less protection than private speech. The District’s interests and 

obligations to create curricula appropriate for its diverse student body and to impose 

public health measures consistent with safest practices as they were known at the time 

are given wider latitude. Therefore, Respondent’s belief that she had unfettered right 

to speak out about her views in class is incorrect. 

Limitations on Teachers’ Expressions of Religious Beliefs 

18. 

Similar to free speech considerations in the classroom, courts have 

consistently upheld restrictions on religious expression in elementary and secondary 

schools especially because their attendance is compulsory, therefore they are a captive 

audience. Even the recent United States Supreme Court case, 

(June 27, 2022), __ U.S. ___, 142 S.Ct. 2407, a case Respondent relied 

upon, only extended the Constitution’s free speech and free exercises clauses to “quiet 

personal prayer” at high school football games. “The contested exercises before us 

does not involve leading prayers with the team or before any other captive audience.” 

(

 at p. 2422). This case would not support, for example, Respondent’s 

reading in the classroom of her personal essay, The Importance of Truth, where she 

openly advocates for engaging in religious activity while teaching. 

33

Discrimination Based on Religious Animus 

19.

Respondent further argued that, even to the extent she made mistakes, 

because of Respondent’s religious and political affiliations, the District’s response was 

harsher than other similar cases. This was not, however, supported by the evidence 

presented. Respondent relied primarily on a single instance of teacher speech deemed 

over-politicized by school administrators, namely, Ms. Phillips discussion of the “white 

savior” concept when analyzing 

. As Principal England explained 

during her testimony, Ms. Phillips was corrected because school administrators 

deemed the concept of “white savior” too controversial and politicized for the class. 

Ms. Phillips was not subject to further discipline because she incorporated the 

correction into her ongoing work and there were no further similar incidents. This is 

very different from Respondent’s case where, despite supervisors’ repeat attempts to 

correct Respondent, she defied their directives. 

20. Moreover, even if there was evidence the District’s actions were 

influenced by discriminatory animus, the dismissal may be upheld unless the District 

would not have proceeded with the adverse employment action but for its improper 

motive. (

(1988) 47 Cal.3d 195, 205 [citations omitted].)

Particularly considering Respondent’s repeat violations of the emergency public health 

measures established by the District, the evidence supports a finding that it would 

have proceeded with the disciplinary proceeding against Respondent regardless of 

motives or influence. It is common knowledge that these health measures were 

compulsory on all school districts. There was never a choice except to abide by them. 

34

Disposition 

21.

The Commission (or an administrative law judge acting in its stead) is 

vested with discretion not to dismiss an employee even if grounds for discipline exist. 

(See 

 (1988) 45 Cal.3d 209.) 

22.  Whether school administrators have lost confidence and trust in an 

educator’s capacity and willingness to properly serve in her role are factors that may 

be considered in determining whether to uphold a district’s dismissal decision. (

 (2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.) 

23.

In Respondent’s case, the extent of the misconduct and her struggle 

between her personal convictions and the strictures of public education employment 

leave any resolution of this matter short of dismissal untenable. Respondent can no 

longer fit into the constraints of her job and its requirements. The District, in turn, is 

not required to bend or change its rules to accommodate her. For the good of the 

students, they must part ways. 

ORDER 

Respondent Melinda Stebbins is dismissed as a permanent certificated 

employee of the Tustin Unified School District.

DATE:  

DEENA R. GHALY 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

35

