BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

CHJENE CHHOR, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2022100588 

DECISION 

A Commission on Professional Competence (commission) heard this matter on 

March 6 through 10, May 9 through 12, and May 22, 2023, by videoconference. The 

Commission consisted of the following members Dena Slocum, Shelby Zimmerman, 

and Administrative Law Judge Traci C. Belmore, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, who served as chair. 

Attorney Mark W. Thompson represented complainant, William F. Roberts, IV, 

Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, San Bernardino County Superintendent 

of Schools (SBCSS). 

Attorney Tamra M. Smith represented respondent Chjene Chhor, who was 

present throughout the hearing. 

The record was held open until May 26, 2023, for the submission of written 

closing briefs. The briefs were received, the record was closed, and the matter was 

submitted for decision on May 26, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

Respondent is an Orientation and Mobility (OM) specialist for the Desert 

Mountain Region of SBCSS. SBCSS seeks to dismiss respondent Chjene Chhor from 

employment based on the following: During the 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 school 

years, respondent engaged in conduct including making inappropriate comments to 

parents during distance learning sessions, failing to provide direct services to students, 

failing to write a goal for a student for his Individual Education Plan (IEP), failing to 

attend an IEP meeting for a student without communicating with the administrator or 

the student’s case manager/teacher, failing to provide her OM service schedule to her 

supervisor, failing to complete assessment plans and failing to conduct OM 

assessments in a timely manner, modifying services to students without authority, and 

failed to communicate with parents as directed. 

SBCSS alleged respondent’s conduct constituted cause for dismissal for 

unprofessional conduct, dishonesty, unsatisfactory performance, and persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 

or the governing board of SBCSS. 

2 

SBCSS’s allegations against respondent were established by the consistent, 

credible, and persuasive testimony of multiple parents, and SBCSS administrators and 

staff. Respondent admitted some, but not all, of the allegations, and minimized her 

culpability. Respondent’s explanations and justifications for her conduct were 

inconsistent throughout the hearing, which undermined her credibility, and suggested 

a lack of candor. Overall, respondent’s testimony evidenced a complete failure to 

acknowledge that her behavior was inappropriate. Accordingly, complainant 

established cause to dismiss respondent from her employment. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of SBCSS. She holds a 

clinical or rehabilitative services credential; OM. Respondent has been an OM specialist 

for approximately 20 years. She was employed at the San Diego Center for the Blind 

for two years, then with a school district in Santee for two years. 

2. 

Respondent received a bachelor's degree in biology from University of 

the Pacific. She has a master’s degree in special education with an emphasis in OM. 

Respondent has been employed by SBCSS for almost 17 years. She was hired in 2004, 

then laid off in June 2008. Respondent was rehired on August 26, 2010, and has 

remained as an OM specialist with SBCSS since that date. 

3. 

Respondent has received multiple letters of warning and reprimand, as 

detailed below. She has been placed on a performance improvement plan (PIP) twice. 

Respondent’s most recent performance evaluation, on January 3, 2022, rated her as 

“Unsatisfactory/Needs Improvement” and noted that allowing respondent to continue 

3 

as an OM specialist does a “disservice to all students/families our organization proudly 

serves.” 

4. 

On January 3, 2022, respondent was placed on paid administrative leave, 

pending SBCSS’s investigation of allegations regarding her conduct. 

5. 

On June 6, 2022, William F. Roberts, Assistant Superintendent, Human 

Resources for SBCSS, prepared a Statement of Charges and Causes for Dismissal, 

alleging the following: unprofessional conduct, dishonesty, unsatisfactory 

performance, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 

or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the school district. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. 

(a)(2), (4), (5), & (8).)1 

6. 

On August 4, 2022, respondent was served with the Statement of 

Charges and a notice of her right to an informal conference also known as a Skelly 

hearing. The Skelly hearing was conducted on August 17, 2022, and the 

recommendation for dismissal was upheld. 

7. 

On August 22, 2022, Roberts served respondent with a 30-day notice of 

dismissal. Respondent timely requested a hearing, and this hearing before the 

Commission followed. 

1 All subsequent statutory references are to the Education Code, unless 

otherwise noted. 

4 

 
History of Progressive Discipline 

8. 

On September 23, 2019, respondent was given a letter of warning by her 

supervisor, Terri L. Williams, Principal, Desert Mountain Operations. The letter 

referenced respondent’s failure to follow a directive to create a clearly defined 

schedule on her Outlook calendar. The letter directed respondent to adhere to all 

administrative directives, create a clearly defined schedule on her outlook calendar, 

and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

In a written response to the letter, respondent asserted that the request to add 

information to her calendar was “not only not realistic it is also not practical.” She also 

alleged that she was being targeted by Williams and that the rest of the Visually 

Impaired (VI) department was not required to provide the information on their 

calendar for the 2018-2019 school year. 

9. 

On October 3, 2019, respondent received a letter of warning from 

Williams regarding a parent complaint. The parent complained that respondent’s 

conduct during an IEP meeting was unprofessional, and that respondent made 

offensive comments regarding the child. The letter directed respondent to adhere to 

all administrative directives, prohibited respondent from speaking to parents outside 

of a formal meeting, and required her to read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

10.  On October 22, 2019, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Williams regarding respondent’s failure to document her location during her 

contracted day. Respondent was unable to account for three hours and 55 minutes of 

contracted time on October 7, 2019. When asked to account for the time, respondent 

replied “I plead the fifth.” When told by her union representative that her refusal to 

answer would be insubordination, respondent stated that she would not tell Williams 

5 

her answer because “she will not like the answer.” The letter directed respondent to 

adhere to all administrative directives, provide access to an accurate and detailed 

calendar accounting for her instructional day, keep documentation of instruction 

provided to students, meet district/county reporting deadlines, report her absences, 

keep consistent work hours, document start and end times of each workday, directed 

respondent to complete all paperwork, planning, calendaring and preparation in her 

office, and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

In a written response to the letter addressed to Suzanne Hernandez, Ed.D., 

Human Resources Director, respondent admitted that she attempted to “plead the 

5th.” She stated that she had told Williams that she had the right to “face my accuser 

as those were serious, vicious, and malicious allegations.” Respondent was informed 

that the complaint was made anonymously. Respondent stated that she had 

accounted for all of her time while in the meeting with Williams. Respondent spent a 

large part of the letter explaining why she needed to move offices. Respondent stated 

she was “fearful for my life because I do not know what the anonymous caller is 

capable of doing next.” She requested reassignment to a new supervisor and office. 

11.  On December 6, 2019, respondent was given a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance and was placed on a PIP. The PIP addressed 

respondent’s accounting for her work day using the Outlook calendar, working 

collaboratively with all members of the VI team, the expectation that respondent 

would be in the VI office during designated report writing/office time, and professional 

conduct with regard to students, parents, colleagues, and administrators. 

12.  On April 7, 2020, respondent received a letter of reprimand from Williams 

regarding her interaction with Carlos Soto, a VI instructor. Respondent was 

demeaning, condescending, and raised her voice while speaking with Soto. The letter 

6 

directed respondent to act in a spirit of collaboration with fellow colleagues, treat all 

staff equitably, adhere to all administrative directives, refrain from making false or 

malicious statements about a colleague, and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

Respondent wrote a response to the letter to Dr. Hernandez. Respondent spent 

the majority of her response alleging that she had been told by several teachers that 

Soto was not doing his job. She also stated allegations about one of the teachers who 

allegedly complained about Soto. Respondent closed the letter by asking that HR 

address several questions she posed including whether or not another itinerant VI 

teacher was necessary to help with the caseload. 

13.  On September 21, 2020, respondent received two letters of reprimand. 

The first letter, from Stephanie Hedberg, Principal, Desert Mountain Operations, was 

regarding respondent’s attempt to change the direct services to be provided to a 

student during that student’s IEP meeting, which took place via Zoom. When asked by 

Hedberg to develop a specific goal for the student during the meeting, respondent 

became argumentative. Williams asked respondent to stay on the Zoom session after 

the meeting to discuss respondent’s behavior during the meeting. Williams told 

respondent that her behavior was insubordinate. Respondent argued with Williams 

and then raised her voice. The letter directed respondent to adhere to all 

administrative directives and read and adhere to the SBCSS Code of Ethics. 

Respondent wrote a response to this letter to Dr. Hernandez. Respondent 

denied the allegations. Respondent claimed that Hedberg had undermined her in front 

of the IEP team. Respondent further alleged that prior to the parent showing up for 

the IEP meeting, Hedberg had made disparaging remarks about the parent and had 

tried to conduct the meeting without the parent present. Respondent concluded by 

7 

stating that Hedberg’s letter of reprimand was in retaliation because respondent had 

“called her out on her unprofessionalism.” 

The second letter, from Williams, was regarding respondent’s attempt to 

change her service times for students without an IEP meeting and/or addendum, 

refusal to comply with directives from her PIP, and failure to provide services to several 

students. The letter directed respondent to adhere to all administrative directives; 

meet all service times per students’ IEPs; meet all reporting measures and compliance 

deadlines; provide an accurate detailed calendar for her workday; maintain consistent 

work hours; conduct herself in a professional manner with students, parents, 

colleagues, and administrators; and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. After the letter 

of reprimand was reviewed, respondent asked her union representative if she has to 

follow the directive of an administrator if she did not agree with the directive. Williams 

answered the question affirmatively. 

Respondent’s written response, addressed to Dr. Hernandez, stated that she 

denied the allegations. Respondent then wrote about an incident in Fall of 2018 where 

she alleged that Williams had been “furious” because she had gone to someone else 

for her orientation. Respondent claimed this was the catalyst for the multiple write-ups 

she had received from Williams. She reiterated her desire for reassignment to another 

supervisor. Respondent alleged that there was a high turnover in the VI department 

since Williams became the supervisor. She further alleged that a VI instructor who was 

deceased, had complained about Williams. 

Respondent stated that not all of the students who were coming from the 

closed, dedicated VI class would qualify for or benefit from OM services. She stated 

that none of the transfer students from the closed VI class had OM services on their 

annual IEPs. Respondent stated that OM services cannot be added or deleted without 

8 

an assessment and that assessments had been halted in March 2020 due to the 

COVID-10 pandemic. She stated that giving them OM services was not warranted and 

is “in essence depriving them of the services that are warranted.” Respondent stated 

that OM services should be provided by the teacher of the closed VI class, Katherine 

Polston. 

Respondent claimed that she was “held hostage” on September 11, 2020, by 

Williams. She stated that she was told she could not leave until she had finished her 

individual distance learning plans (IDLP). Respondent accused Williams of being 

unprofessional and inconsistent with her directives. 

14.  On September 28, 2020, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Williams. The letter concerns an attempt to change the service provided to a student 

without an IEP meeting or addendum. This change occurred within three hours of the 

letters of reprimand given to respondent on September 21, 2020. The letter directed 

respondent to adhere to all administrative directives; meet all service times per 

students’ IEPs; refrain from making changes to services or service times during 

distance learning to a student’s IEP; provide all required service minutes to students on 

her caseload; exercise “great care and good professional judgment” to avoid situations 

that might compromise the reputation of SBCSS; conduct herself in a professional 

manner with students, parents, colleagues, and administrators; and read and adhere to 

SBCSS policies. 

Respondent’s written response, addressed to Dr. Hernandez, denied the 

allegations in the letter of reprimand. Respondent reiterated her stance that the 

students from the closed VI class had their OM services on the wrong page of the IEP 

and that the addendums from June 2020, were done without a “proper assessment” 

and “without the presence of an O&M specialist.” Respondent stated she conducted a 

9 

“professional informal assessment” of the student and that is why she recommended 

the change in direct services during his IEP meeting on August 17, 2020. Respondent 

also stated that the student’s mother was in complete agreement with her 

recommendation to change the service times. 

15.  On September 28, 2020, respondent was placed on paid administrative 

leave to allow SBCSS to investigate allegations of unprofessional conduct. 

16.  On October 20, 2020, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Williams. The letter concerned a video that respondent was to provide to a student 

with respondent modeling the correct use of a cane and an email sent by respondent 

after an IEP meeting. The video was to be sent to Hedberg by September 21, 2020, for 

review prior to being sent to the student’s parents. The video was not sent to Hedberg 

for review and therefore was not available when the student was receiving instruction 

from respondent. The email was sent to a student’s case carrier and essentially stated 

that respondent was not required to provide services to the student. The email stated 

the student’s IEP from January 2020 listed the OM services on the wrong page of the 

IEP and the IEP addendum from June 2020, which added OM services on the proper 

page, was not valid because no OM specialist was present and there had been no OM 

assessment. The letter directed respondent to adhere to all administrative directives; 

meet all service times per student’s IEPs; refrain from making changes to services or 

service times during distance learning to a student’s IEP; provide all required service 

minutes to students on her caseload; exercise “great care and good professional 

judgment” to avoid situations that might compromise the reputation of SBCSS; 

conduct herself in a professional manner with students, parents, colleagues, and 

administrators; and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

10 

17.  On October 20, 2020, respondent was given a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance and was placed on a PIP by Dr. Hernandez. 

The PIP contained directives to respondent including, adhering to all rules and 

regulations of SBCSS; adhering to the expectations of the VI department, providing 

services to the students according to their IEPs; responding to email from 

administrators; working collaboratively with parents, students, staff, and colleagues; 

complying with administrative directives; refraining from retaliation on any staff 

member, parent, or student; adhering to the SBCSS Code of Ethics; working with 

Williams to complete IDLPs in a satisfactory manner; and refraining from making any 

change to IEP notes after they have been approved and agreed upon. 

18.  On November 9, 2020, Richard Frederick, the Area Director for SBCSS 

Desert Mountain Operations, wrote a conference summary of the final meeting 

regarding progress with respondent’s 2019 PIP. During the meeting, the goals were 

reviewed with respondent. Respondent stated that she had made progress and met 

her goal of providing an accurate, detailed calendar accounting for her instructional 

day. Frederick pointed out that respondent’s calendar was not detailed or accurate. 

The calendar did not reflect where respondent was at any given time and did not 

accurately reflect the duration and frequency of OM services she was providing. 

Respondent stated she had met her goal of working collaboratively with 

members of the VI department. Frederick noted that respondent had repeatedly 

requested to move her office so that she would share space with physical therapists 

and adaptive physical education specialists and not with the VI department. Frederick 

noted that her unwillingness to even share an office with the members of the VI 

department gave the impression that she did not want to work or collaborate with the 

members of the VI department. 

11 

Respondent had indicated that she was uncomfortable with the placement and 

location of her desk in the VI department and stated that she would not work there. 

Frederick noted this is in direct contradiction of her goal to be present in the VI 

program office during designated office time/report writing on her detailed calendar. 

Respondent stated she believed she had gone “above and beyond” meeting her 

goal of acting and speaking to students and parents in a manner that exemplifies 

personal and professional integrity, dignity, and mutual respect. Frederick noted that 

she had received letters of reprimand on April 7, 2020, and September 21, 2020, 

regarding her interactions with students and parents. 

Overall, Frederick stated respondent had not met the goals of her PIP and that it 

would remain in place. He stated that they would meet in January 2021 to review 

respondent’s progress toward meeting the goals of her PIP. 

On November 17, 2020, respondent sent a written response to Dr. Hernandez. 

In the written response, respondent denied the allegations and claimed that Frederick 

and Williams had fabricated this to divert attention from the closure of the VI class. 

Respondent stated that her calendar contained the date, time, name of the student, 

and site as directed. Respondent blamed her refusal to be housed with the members 

of the VI department on the fact that there was “lots of drama in the VI department.” 

Respondent stated goal three (being present in the VI program office) was “offensive, 

outrageous and far from the truth.” She then went on to list grievances regarding her 

desk and allegations that other specialists complained about VI teachers. Respondent 

claimed she always accommodated her students. She defended her change of service 

times by stating they were made with parent consent. She specifically mentioned a 

student from the closed VI class as an example of her being forced to provide services 

to a student who she believed did not warrant her services. 

12 

19.  On December 7, 2020, respondent received two letters of reprimand 

from Williams. The first letter concerned respondent’s failure to provide services to a 

child, attempt to change/manipulate a child’s service times, the lack of communication 

and resources from respondent to the parent, and respondent’s violation of the 

directives contained in her October 2020 PIP. Respondent stated that the transitional 

IEP was not legally binding. The letter directed respondent to adhere to all 

administrative directives; meet all service times per student’s IEPs; provide access to 

her supervisor to an accurate, detailed calendar for respondent’s instructional day; 

refrain from making changes to services or service times during distance learning to a 

student’s IEP; provide all required service minutes to students on her caseload; 

exercise “great care and good professional judgment” to avoid situations that might 

compromise the reputation of SBCSS; conduct herself in a professional manner with 

students, parents, colleagues, and administrators; attend a virtual training on levels of 

performance, goals and education benefit; and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

The second letter concerned respondent’s interactions with a second student 

and parent. The parent complained that respondent was dismissive, did not provide 

her resources or tools to help staff prepare her child for OM services, had a negative 

attitude toward her child, had a short tone of voice, and was rude during the IEP 

meeting. The parent requested a different OM provider. The student’s case carrier 

stated that respondent had a lack of patience with the parent and student. During the 

meeting, respondent stated that the student did not qualify for her services and that 

she should not have to serve him. Respondent further stated that it was not her job to 

teach foundational skills. The letter directed respondent to adhere to all administrative 

directives; meet all service times per student’s IEPs; provide access to her supervisor to 

an accurate, detailed calendar for respondent’s instructional day; refrain from making 

changes to services or service times during distance learning to a student’s IEP; 

13 

provide all required service minutes to students on her caseload; exercise “great care 

and good professional judgment” to avoid situations that might compromise the 

reputation of SBCSS; conduct herself in a professional manner with students, parents, 

colleagues, and administrators; attend a virtual training on levels of performance, 

goals and education benefit; and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

On December 17, 2020, respondent sent a written response to Dr. Hernandez. 

Respondent claimed that she was not given directions prior to the school year 

beginning and that the OM services were listed on the wrong page of the IEP. She 

stated that N.Y. was one of the students that had come from the closed VI class and 

reiterated that not all of the students from the class would qualify for OM services. 

Respondent sent a second written response to Dr. Hernandez on the same day 

regarding student M.E. He was also a student that had come from the closed VI class. 

Respondent outlined what OM services M.E. had qualified for prior to his inclusion in 

the VI class. Quite conspicuously, respondent failed to mention, in her response, the 

IEP addendum for M.E. from June 2020 that listed direct OM services. 

20.  On December 7, 2020, respondent received her 45-day PIP status report 

from Dr. Hernandez. Dr. Hernandez noted that respondent had failed to send email 

invitations to Zoom sessions to several students per her directive to respondent. As a 

result, the students did not show up and respondent was unable to provide services to 

the students. When Dr. Hernandez asked respondent to forward the email invitations, 

respondent replied that she had texted the parents the day before the scheduled 

session. Williams observed several sessions conducted by respondent. Williams noted 

that respondent failed to connect with the student and/or parent, causing them to 

become visibly frustrated with respondent. Dr. Hernandez observed several of 

respondent’s sessions and her observations were consistent with those of Williams. 

14 

Respondent ignored or dismissed parents’ concerns, failed to connect with students, 

and failed to provide direct services to students. Dr. Hernandez stated that respondent 

had failed to demonstrate that respondent had “overcome your conduct and 

performance deficiencies.” 

21.  On February 9, 2021, respondent received her 90-day PIP status report 

from Dr. Hernandez. Respondent had been provided with teacher support from 

Cynthia Hayes on December 18, 2020. Respondent was observed during Zoom 

sessions by Williams and Dr. Hernandez. Both found respondent deficient in the 

provision of services to students. Dr. Hernandez noted that respondent was still 

deficient in her conduct and performance. 

Respondent’s Actions During 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 School Years 

22. 

The mothers of A.A. and M.E.2, Dr. Hernandez, Tanya Benitez, Carlos Soto, 

Richard Frederick, Stephanie Hedberg, Shannon Hansen, Serena Madril-Acosta, Carlos 

Franco, and Terri Williams provided testimony. There is no evidence that the parents 

harbored underlying ill will toward respondent or had a motive that could be 

perceived to bias their statements or testimony. 

2020-2021 SCHOOL YEAR 

23. 

At the end of the 2019-2020 school year, a dedicated VI class taught by 

Katherine Polston closed. Polston holds both a VI and OM credential. Amended IEPs 

2 The names of students are confidential to protect their privacy and are 

referenced here by their initials. Parental names will also be referenced by initials if 

disclosing their names would breach the confidentiality/privacy rights of the students. 

15 

 
were written for the seven students in that class that included direct OM services. 

Respondent was to provide those services beginning in Fall 2020. 

A.A. 

24. 

A.A. was one of the students transferred from the dedicated VI class. 

Respondent was informed that direct service time was to be provided to all seven 

incoming students. 

25.  On June 12, 2020, an IEP meeting was held. OM services were 

documented on the ensuing addendum as two times per week for 30 minutes. 

26.  On June 29, 2020, Williams sent an email to respondent informing her of 

the incoming students and that they were to be provided direct service time as 

documented on their incoming IEPs. Williams further stated that assessments would 

be done once school physically reopened. 

27.  On August 17, 2020, a staff meeting was held where Williams reiterated 

that the seven students would have services on their IEP that needed to be provided 

and that the assessment process would begin once schools physically opened. 

28.  On August 17, 2020, an IEP meeting was held for A.A. Respondent 

changed the IEP document to reflect that OM services would be provided two times 

per month for 15 minutes. Shannon Hansen, Principal, was present at that IEP meeting. 

Hansen stated that the team had agreed that A.A. was to receive OM services two 

times per week for 30 minutes. Respondent disagreed and refused to sign the IEP until 

the services were changed to her recommendation of two times per month for 15 

minutes. 

16 

29.  On August 31, 2020, Williams sent an email to respondent stating that no 

IEP addendums would be completed that changed OM service times during distance 

learning. 

30.  On September 2, 2020, Williams sent an email to respondent reiterating 

that no changes were to be made to OM services by IEP addendum during distance 

learning and that respondent would complete full assessments once the students were 

physically in school. The email further directed respondent to contact any parents that 

she had advised of a change in their child’s services and let them know that she was 

amiss as no changes were to take place during distance learning. 

31.  On September 18, 2020, Hansen sent an email to respondent stating that 

he had been advised that respondent was given a directive not to change service 

times. As such, services for A.A. would be reverting to the times listed on his June 2020 

addendum of two times per week for 30 minutes. 

32.  On September 21, 2020, respondent called K.A. (A.A.’s mother) and 

suggested that OM services be paused. Respondent then sent an email to Dr. 

Hernandez stating that it was K.A. who wanted to pause services until an assessment 

could be done. 

33. 

K.A. testified regarding her interactions with respondent. She stated that 

her son has a degenerative genetic condition that affects his vision and that it had 

gotten progressively worse since he first exhibited symptoms. K.A. felt respondent was 

questioning her son’s disability and need for OM services. She stated that respondent 

told her that respondent’s services were for completely blind individuals not just 

visually impaired. Because respondent pushed back on providing services to her son, 

K.A. began to question whether her son needed OM services. K.A. recalled becoming 

17 

emotional at one of the IEP meetings because her son’s condition was deteriorating, 

and respondent kept insisting on cutting services to her son at a time when his need 

was increasing. Eventually, K.A. requested a different provider for her son. After that 

request, respondent’s communication with her was intermittent and ineffective. K.A. 

testified that the complaint email she sent to Hansen was an accurate representation 

of her continuing issues with respondent. Her son is currently receiving OM services 

from a different provider, and she is very happy with his progress. 

34.  Hansen testified that he was present at three IEP meetings with 

respondent for A.A. Respondent was not very forthcoming with her services to A.A. 

and tried to convince K.A. to drop services because A.A. was not completely blind. K.A. 

communicated her dissatisfaction with respondent in IEP meetings and via email to 

Hansen directly. Hansen had never had a service provider disagree so vehemently with 

the IEP team. In particular, the IEP meeting for A.A. on September 25, 2020, was the 

most uncomfortable he has ever been in an IEP meeting, and he has participated in 

close to a thousand IEP meetings. Hansen documented his concerns in an email to 

Williams on September 26, 2020. 

35.  On September 25, 2020, after A.A.’s IEP meeting, respondent sent an 

email to his special education teacher stating that since the OM services were not 

listed on his January 2020 IEP, she was not obligated to provide OM services to him. 

She declared that the June 2020 addendum added OM services without an assessment 

and without an OM specialist present. As a result, she asked that the IEP not be sent to 

her for her signature. 

36.  On December 16, 2020, Tanya Benitez, Assistant Superintendent, Pupil 

Services, emailed Williams with a complaint regarding respondent. The email stated 

respondent continued to “harass the family about receiving Zoom services.” 

18 

Respondent also stated that if she could assess A.A., he would not qualify for services. 

The email further stated that the family did not want to work with respondent 

anymore due to the “level of animosity she has toward them” but they did not want to 

lose the service because they were not using it. 

37.  On December 17, 2020, respondent along with her union representative 

met with Williams to discuss the complaint by Benitez. During the meeting, 

respondent stated that she does not have animosity and that she did not say the 

things that were alleged. Respondent clearly stated that A.A. does not need her 

service. Respondent’s union representative informed her that the student is entitled to 

her services whether she thought he needed it or not. 

38.  On January 4, 2021, K.A. sent an email to Hansen detailing her issues with 

respondent. She stated respondent would send last minute texts for the Zoom 

sessions with A.A., would consistently state that A.A. did not qualify for her services, 

and that she was wasting A.A.’s time. K.A. further stated that she believed respondent 

did not want to provide services to A.A. and that she did not want to cooperate with 

her husband or her. Respondent made K.A. feel as if she was “doing as [sic] a favor.” 

Ultimately, K.A. asked to stop services until a different OM provider became available. 

39.  On January 7, 2021, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Williams. The letter concerned the complaints from Benitez and K.A. The letter directed 

respondent to adhere to all administrative directives; meet all service times per 

student’s IEPs; refrain from making changes to services or service times during 

distance learning to a student’s IEP; provide all required service minutes to students on 

her caseload; provide open, detailed, and transparent communication to students, 

parents, administrators, and colleagues; exercise “great care and good professional 

judgment” to avoid situations that might compromise the reputation of SBCSS; 

19 

conduct herself in a professional manner with students, parents, colleagues, and 

administrators; and read and adhere to SBCSS policies. 

40.  On October 18, 2021, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Frederick3 regarding her failure to provide assessments for A.A and N.K. On August 12, 

2021, Frederick directed respondent to review her updated assessment report with him 

prior to presenting it at the IEP meeting. At the IEP meeting on September 1, 2021, 

respondent indicated that an assessment would be completed in the near future. 

41.  On December 20, 2021, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Frederick regarding A.A. Respondent had been directed not to change service times 

without a current assessment. However, at A.A.’s triennial IEP in May 2021, respondent 

had attempted to modify the service from two times per week for 30 minutes to one 

time per month for 20 minutes. After discussion, it was decided not to modify the 

service. At the November 19, 2021, IEP meeting respondent reduced the services to 

one time per month for 20 minutes per her assessment. When other IEP team 

members questioned the reduction in service, respondent was unable to defend the 

assessment. 

42. 

Respondent failed to provide OM services to A.A. consistent with his IEP 

and failed to work collaboratively with the student, his parents, or her supervisors. 

3 Frederick became respondent’s immediate supervisor in February 2021. The 

exact date was not established by the record. 

20 

 
J.F. 

43.  On November 2, 2020, Williams observed respondent in a Zoom session 

with J.F. Williams observed that respondent repeatedly asked the same question about 

the student’s dominant hand. When the parent replied that he was ambidextrous, 

respondent pressed the parent to make a choice. When the parent questioned 

respondent’s choice to provide a video for J.F. to watch, respondent replied that she 

would find a “little boy video” for him to watch. Williams observed that respondent 

was unresponsive to what the parent was saying and was not receptive to her concerns 

or her growing frustration. Respondent attempted to change the service times for J.F., 

which further frustrated his mother. Ultimately, Williams stated that respondent failed 

to deliver adequate OM services to J.F. that “were specially designed to meet the 

unique needs of that student.” 

44.  On December 7, 2020, Williams observed respondent in a Zoom session 

with J.F., again deciding that respondent had failed to meet the unique needs of that 

student. During this session, respondent showed another video to J.F. She then asked 

him repeatedly what he remembered about the video and continued asking after he 

stated that he did not remember. Respondent’s repeated questioning frustrated J.F.’s 

mother. Williams observed that respondent “appeared to brush her comment off,” 

which indicated that she was not receptive to feedback from parents. Her repeated 

questioning of J.F. indicated that she did not understand the “level of the student’s 

ability nor his level of comprehension.” After the session, Williams spoke with 

respondent about the session and respondent stated that Williams should have 

observed that J.F. was not ready for OM services and that she was not suited to teach 

him. 

21 

45.  On January 7, 2021, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Williams regarding a complaint received from J.F.’s mother. The complaint stated that 

both mother and student were frustrated with respondent, that respondent was not 

helping J.F., that respondent was not showing patience with her son, respondent 

repeatedly attempted to change service times, respondent did not provide OM 

services prior to November 2, 2020, and respondent repeatedly stated that he did not 

qualify for OM services. During the meeting for the reprimand letter, respondent 

stated that J.F. was one of the students that came from the VI class and that she could 

not support him during distance learning. Respondent stated the “goal written was not 

correct.” The parties discussed respondent formulating a foundational goal supporting 

identifying objects and their relation to his body, which was agreeable to the parent. 

Respondent stated, “It’s not up to mom what I write as a goal.” Respondent made 

several excuses as to why she could not write that goal and then attempted to change 

his service time. Respondent stated that she did not have a teaching credential but 

instead had an OM rehabilitation certificate. Respondent spent most of the meeting 

with Williams attempting to justify why she should not have to serve the student. 

46. 

Respondent failed to provide OM services to J.F. consistent with his IEP 

and failed to work collaboratively with the student, his parents, or her supervisors. 

M.E. 

47.  M.E. is a student with multiple disabilities who had been in the dedicated 

VI class. His mother, V.P., wrote a letter regarding her concerns with respondent. In the 

letter, V.P. stated that at an IEP meeting respondent had been adamant that M.E. was 

not ready to start services with her. V.P. disagreed with respondent’s evaluation of her 

son. V.P. stated respondent seemed “very rude about it.” After much discussion, it was 

agreed that respondent would provide consult services. 

22 

When distance learning began, V.P. stated she spoke with respondent three 

times and each time she felt rushed and did not feel comfortable asking questions. 

V.P. had issues with respondent’s tone of voice and stated that respondent seemed 

rude. V.P. described a session with respondent that involved someone playing a guitar 

and a video of a girl using a cane. Respondent did not give any direction to M.E. or 

comment on the video. V.P. stated that sometime later respondent called while M.E. 

was in a Zoom class with another teacher. She told respondent that she would call her 

back but when she finished it was late in the day. Respondent did not call her again. 

V.P. testified consistent with the letter she authored and affirmed that it accurately 

depicted her interactions with respondent. 

48.  On December 3, 2021, an IEP team meeting was held for M.E. During the 

meeting, respondent refused to consider team input on cane use and tried to reduce 

services for M.E. Respondent had not completed the assessment and stated that she 

needed the full 60 days to complete her assessment which would then have been due 

on December 26, 2021, during winter break. Another IEP meeting was scheduled for 

December 17, 2021, and respondent was directed to complete and present her 

assessment at that meeting. Respondent continued to state that she would not be 

ready. Frederick directed respondent to share her assessment in advance of the 

meeting. Respondent was uncooperative during the meeting and abruptly left without 

explanation. 

49.  On December 6, 2021, respondent emailed Frederick to request that she 

be removed from assessing students M.E., J.S., and N.Y. Frederick directed respondent 

to complete the assessments. Frederick sent emails to respondent on December 9 and 

14, 2021, asking for status on the assessment for M.E. Respondent failed to reply. On 

23 

December 15, 2021, respondent emailed Frederick to let him know that she checks her 

email daily. She did not share the status of M.E.’s assessment. 

50.  On December 16, 2021, respondent emailed Frederick to confirm that she 

would have the completed assessment. However, respondent stated that she would 

need to miss providing direct services to other students so that she could complete 

the assessment on time. Frederick did not approve respondent missing time to 

complete the assessment. Frederick expressed concern that respondent was again 

attempting to change OM services and requested an opportunity to review the 

assessment prior to her presenting it at the scheduled IEP meeting. Respondent did 

not share her report with Frederick prior to the meeting. 

51.  On December 20, 2021, respondent received four letters of reprimand 

from Frederick, one of which concerned respondent’s failure to adequately 

communicate with her supervisor and follow the directives provided by her supervisor 

regarding the assessment for M.E. 

52. 

Respondent failed to work collaboratively with the IEP team, parent, and 

M.E. She failed to communicate with her supervisor as directed by her PIP and several 

letters of reprimand. 

N.Y. 

53.  N.Y. is a student with multiple disabilities who had been in the dedicated 

VI class. He was eligible for VI and OM services based on previous assessments. 

54.  On November 17, 2021, the triennial IEP meeting was held for N.Y. The 

current ophthalmologist report was not provided and therefore neither respondent 

nor his VI teacher could complete their respective assessments prior to the meeting. 

24 

Despite having been repeatedly told that no changes to OM services could be made 

without an assessment, respondent recommended that N.Y.’s service be modified from 

two times per week for 30 minutes to two times per month for 20 minutes. After 

discussion, no changes were made to OM service times. Respondent proposed a goal 

that was not measurable and did not have a measurable baseline. His mother 

requested that the goal include pre-cane skills. She stated that N.Y. had been learning 

pre-cane skills in the VI class and that she did not want him to fall further behind. She 

appeared visibly frustrated with respondent. Ultimately it was agreed that respondent 

and N.Y.’s mother would communicate at a later time to create a mutually agreed 

upon goal. 

55. 

Frederick directed respondent on November 18, 28, 29, and 30, 2021, to 

communicate with N.Y.’s mother. Respondent contacted N.Y.’s mother on November 

30, 2021. After the conversation with respondent, N.Y.’s mother informed Frederick 

that respondent refused to listen to her or consider her input. Respondent told 

Frederick that N.Y.’s mother was pleased, and that the IEP could be finalized. N.Y.’s 

mother refused to sign the IEP. Her refusal to sign was based solely on her 

disagreement with the OM services and goal. 

56.  On December 20, 2021, respondent received a letter of reprimand for 

failing to adequately provide OM services to students and in particular to N.Y. The 

letter also concerned respondent’s attempt to modify services and her failure to 

communicate with N.Y.’s mother despite being directed to do so. 

TESTIMONY OF TERRI WILLIAMS 

57.  Williams was the Principal for the Desert Mountain region of SBCSS. She 

retired in September 2022. Williams was respondent’s immediate supervisor from 2018 

25 

to 2021. Williams stated that she used the SBCSS Code of Ethics and the collective 

bargaining agreement when imposing discipline upon respondent. She stated 

respondent’s conduct was unprofessional and at times unacceptable. Williams 

observed respondent raise her voice while speaking with Williams and other 

colleagues. Williams stated that respondent was not receptive to input from her or 

respondent’s colleagues. Williams had concerns about respondent's interactions with 

parents, especially those of the seven students from the dedicated VI class. Williams 

observed that respondent seemed reluctant to serve those students and would 

attempt to modify their OM service times without an IEP addendum. Respondent 

would attempt to modify the service times even after being directed by Williams that 

no modifications were to be made during distance learning. Respondent frequently 

stated that the OM services were not listed on the correct page of the IEP and 

therefore they were not required to be provided. Williams stated that if OM services 

are listed anywhere in the IEP, they must be provided. Respondent also repeatedly 

stated that the IEP addendums for those seven students were legally invalid because 

no OM specialist was present at the meeting and no assessment had been done. 

58.  Williams described her observations of respondent during Zoom sessions 

with students and parents. Williams stated that respondent was often dismissive of the 

parent’s input and was argumentative with them. She stated several times that 

respondent was not collaborative with parents, colleagues, or administrators. 

Williams’s testimony was consistent with the multiple letters of warning and reprimand 

and the PIP she provided to respondent. 

TESTIMONY OF DR. SUZANNE HERNANDEZ 

59.  Dr. Hernandez is the director of Human Resources for SBCSS. Her 

testimony is summarized as follows. She outlined the steps of progressive discipline, 

26 

from verbal warning to termination. Those steps were followed in this case. Her 

interactions with respondent were both virtual and face to face. Respondent was 

unwilling to see other sides or perspectives. She asked respondent to reflect on her 

teaching. Respondent was adamant that she did not need to make any changes. 

Fellow teachers, parents, and principals all complained about respondent’s behavior. 

Respondent told her that she was not able to assess respondent's teaching because 

she did not understand respondent’s job and was not trained in OM. She personally 

prepared a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance. 

Respondent was unwilling to accept any kind of feedback or criticism. 

She personally observed respondent in Zoom sessions with students and 

parents. In one session respondent spoke very quickly, and the child was confused. 

Respondent did not notice and/or address the student’s confusion. In another session 

respondent talked over the parent leading to frustration and feelings of disrespect. 

Respondent was assigned to the Teacher Support Network (TSN) in an attempt to help 

her improve her teaching. Respondent was observed to be confrontational, 

argumentative, and unprofessional in communicating with parents, students, 

colleagues, and administrators. 

TESTIMONY OF CARLOS SOTO 

60. 

Carlos Soto is a VI teacher with SBCSS. His testimony is summarized as 

follows. He has approximately 38 students on his caseload. All of the students have 

IEPs. He works with OM providers frequently. He had eight students in common with 

respondent. He recalled respondent yelling at a student’s parent during an IEP 

meeting. Respondent has told him and parents that she is the expert and that they 

should not question her or her goal. He was present at an IEP meeting for M.E. 

Respondent attempted to stop OM services and the parent objected. Respondent 

27 

raised her voice, and it was very uncomfortable. Respondent kept trying to change the 

time and frequency of services. If a service, VI or OM, is listed anywhere on the IEP it 

must be provided. 

TESTIMONY OF SERENNA MADRIL-ACOSTA 

61. 

Serenna Madril-Acosta a VI teacher for SBCSS. Her testimony is 

summarized as follows. She has worked for SBCSS for three years. She currently 

reports to Hedberg but prior to that she reported to Williams. She tries to work closely 

with OM providers. She was present in IEP meetings for J.F., N.Y., and A.A. Respondent 

“bickered” with the parent of J.F. regarding respondent’s recommendation for minutes 

of services. The parents of all three of the students were upset with respondent during 

the IEP meetings. She witnessed an incident involving the removal of a file cabinet. 

Respondent stated in a loud tone that her “stuff was thrown away.” Respondent did 

not behave disrespectfully towards her. 

TESTIMONY OF CARLOS FRANCO-GIRON 

62. 

Carlos Franco-Giron is a teacher who holds both VI and OM credentials. 

His testimony is summarized as follows. He worked for SBCSS as an OM specialist 

between February and June 2022. He succeeded respondent as OM provider for 

SBCSS. He documented issues he had with respondent’s tenure in an email to 

Frederick on April 1, 2022. He was able to locate six assessments of the 22 students on 

his caseload. At the time he sent the email, he had completed nine of the assessments 

and was planning to complete assessments for all 22 students by June 17, 

2022,because the six assessments completed by respondent had “little to no 

information related to O&M.” He had received complaints from parents that 

respondent had denied service to students on the basis that they were not totally 

28 

blind, or their cognitive level was too low. Respondent had not put in a cane order and 

parents were buying them for their children. His testimony was consistent with his 

email. 

TESTIMONY OF TANYA BENITEZ 

63. 

Tanya Benitez, Ed.D. is an Assistant Superintendent, Pupil Services at 

Victor Elementary School District. Her testimony is summarized as follows. She 

oversees all special education students’ IEPs. They contract with SBCSS for VI services. 

She had no direct contact with respondent. She was contacted by Hansen regarding 

respondent’s interactions with A.A. and his parents. She was concerned about the fact 

that respondent was not working collaboratively with A.A.’s parents to the point that 

the parents were claiming respondent was harassing them and A.A.’s father was 

recording their Zoom sessions. She felt the matter warranted elevation and reported it 

to Frederick and Williams. 

TESTIMONY OF STEPHANIE HEDBERG 

64. 

Stephanie Hedberg has been a principal since July 2018. She has been 

involved in special education for over 20 years. Her testimony is summarized as 

follows. Respondent was an OM provider for students on her caseload as a principal. 

She supervised respondent for students on her caseload for approximately two years. 

During that time, she observed respondent providing services directly to students. She 

felt respondent’s provision of services was “questionable.” It was not clear to her that 

respondent wanted to be with the students or whether respondent wanted to provide 

services to the students. Respondent often wanted to change service from direct 

(providing to the student) to consult (collaborate and consult with the student’s 

teachers). She specifically remembers being in an IEP meeting for student J.W. where 

29 

respondent kept stating that J.W. was too low cognitively to receive her services. The 

team disagreed with respondent's statement. She confirmed that she authored a letter 

of reprimand for respondent on September 21, 2020. She verified that respondent was 

argumentative during the IEP meeting and that when she asked respondent to stay 

after the IEP meeting, respondent was still argumentative, and raised her voice 

inappropriately. 

TESTIMONY OF RICHARD FREDERICK 

65. 

Richard Frederick is the Area Director for Desert Mountain Operations, 

SBCSS. He became respondent’s direct supervisor in February 2021. His testimony is 

summarized as follows. He firmly believed that the role of educators was to meet the 

students where they are and “take them as far as we can in building their skills and 

abilities.” He was present at the IEP meeting held for M.E. in December 2021. 

Respondent had not completed her assessment forcing the meeting to be held in two 

parts. Respondent did not recommend direct OM services, saying M.E. lacked 

foundational skills. When questioned about this, respondent refused to answer. 

Respondent would not participate in the reconciliation of services for M.E. The 

meeting was very intense. Respondent left before the meeting was over without saying 

anything. 

He had received complaints about respondent’s delivery of services to N.Y. from 

his parents. He observed a Zoom session with respondent and N.Y. During that 

session, respondent was not receptive to questions from the parents and did not 

provide adequate OM services to N.Y. He issued several letters of reprimand to 

respondent. 

30 

66.  On April 28, 2021, respondent received two letters of reprimand from 

Frederick. One letter of reprimand concerned an incident involving a filing cabinet. The 

decision had been made to remove the filing cabinet. Respondent disagreed with the 

decision because that cabinet housed many of her OM supplies. Nevertheless, the 

cabinet was removed. When respondent came into the VI office and noticed that it was 

gone, she raised her voice and complained loudly about her “stuff” had been moved. A 

coworker reported that she felt respondent’s behavior was directed at her and it 

caused so much anxiety that the coworker left the building for the rest of the day. 

The second letter concerned respondent failing to attend an IEP meeting. 

Respondent failed to attend an IEP meeting on April 15, 2021. She stated that she had 

had technical issues and was unable to log into the Zoom meeting. Respondent stated 

that she had attempted to contact the VI teacher prior to the IEP meeting rather than 

the student’s case carrier or the administrator. Both the case carrier and administrator 

expressed frustration to Frederick with respondent’s lack of communication and failure 

to attend the meeting. Respondent assured Frederick that everyone involved in the 

meeting was pleased with her services. 

67.  On May 19, 2021, respondent received a letter of reprimand from 

Frederick concerning her failure to provide OM services to students. Frederick 

reviewed her attendance logs for February, March, and April 2021. Respondent 

claimed that she had provided all OM services to the students on her caseloads during 

those months. However, respondent’s supplemental class rosters for those months did 

not have all of the OM services for students documented. 

68.  On October 18, 2021, respondent received two letters of reprimand from 

Frederick. One letter concerned her failure to provide OM services during the months 

of August and September 2021, on a defined and regular schedule and her failure to 

31 

provide Frederick with her OM services schedule by September 22, 2021. Frederick 

received complaints from principals that respondent was not appearing for services at 

the designated times and that some case managers were unaware of her service 

delivery times. Respondent emailed Frederick stating that teachers and case managers 

were “flexible” on when OM services were to be provided. She acknowledged that she 

did not have a set schedule for some students. Respondent stated she was “juggling 

with assessments” for the students from the dedicated VI class. As of the date of the 

letter of reprimand, respondent had not provided Frederick with her schedule. 

The second letter of reprimand concerned respondent’s failure to complete 

assessments in a timely and compliant manner. Respondent received a referral to 

complete an assessment for N.K. on May 13, 2021. Because it was close to the end of 

the school year, respondent was informed that the referral would be tolled and that an 

assessment permission (AP) would be generated within the first two weeks of the 

school year. On September 7, 2021, Williams emailed respondent following up on the 

referral. Respondent replied that she had not received a referral for the 2021-2022 

school year. On October 7, 2021, Frederick emailed respondent and directed her to 

immediately generate the PA and to move forward with the assessment process. By 

failing to generate the PA for over two months, respondent delayed the assessment 

process for N.K. 

On August 12, 2021, respondent sent an email to Frederick stating that during 

the May 2021 IEP meeting for student A.A., the team was advised that he would be 

getting a new OM specialist. Respondent went on to state that “until I hear back from 

you I will not be seeing” A.A. Frederick directed respondent to provide a “data-based 

assessment” of A.A. Frederick further directed respondent to send her assessment to 

32 

him prior to it being presented to the IEP team. As of the date of the letter of 

reprimand, respondent had not provided the assessment. 

Respondent’s Additional Evidence 

69. 

Respondent’s testimony was disjointed, and she often rambled. Twice 

when asked a question that required a yes or no response, respondent talked for over 

a full minute without answering the question. When asked if she remembered the 

question, she did not. Respondent’s testimony is summarized as follows. She admits 

that she attempted to “plead the 5th” during the disciplinary meeting with Williams 

but denied refusing to answer questions or provide information about her 

whereabouts. She denied ever raising her voice in any IEP meeting and when the file 

cabinet was removed. She was not offered any training for distance learning. She 

denied telling Hedberg that student J.W. had cognitive issues. She had a good 

relationship with that student’s family. She was unaware that Hedberg had asked her 

to develop a direct services goal for J.W. She admitted that J.W. had a cane goal prior 

to the COVID-19 pandemic and that she attempted to change the goal to a consult 

goal during an IEP meeting during distance learning. She acknowledged that Williams 

told her not to change the goals for students during distance learning but insisted that 

she had gotten permission to change the goal to consult for J.W. from Hedberg. 

70. 

She was informed in the fall of 2020 that she would have students from 

the dedicated VI class. To prepare for these students, she reviewed their IEPs. None of 

the students had OM services on the correct page. Respondent claimed that the IEP 

addendums that were done after the VI class closed were not “legitimate” because 

there was no OM specialist present, and the OM services were not listed on the correct 

page. 

33 

71. 

Regarding student A.A., respondent stated that she asked his mother if 

he uses a cane and claimed that K.A. told her he did not but that he is able to navigate 

without it. As a result, respondent decided to change his service from direct to consult 

and indicated that at the August 17, 2020, IEP meeting. She claimed the team agreed 

to the change. She denied refusing to sign the IEP until the change was made to her 

recommendation. 

A month later at another IEP meeting for A.A., the team wanted to revert to the 

service times listed in his June 2020 IEP addendum. She disagreed based on his vision 

acuity and the fact that she claimed she was told A.A. did not want to use a cane. She 

stated her informal assessment of A.A. was that he did not qualify for her services. She 

denied saying that A.A. was not blind enough for her services and she thought her 

behavior was professional at both IEP meetings. She denied that she had ever tried to 

convince his parents to reduce or cancel OM services. 

72. 

She serviced all her students and denied that she failed to provide 

services during the fall of 2021. She has never been late with an assessment. The 

assessment for N.Y. was late because she did not receive the ophthalmology report. 

73. 

She never received any negative feedback and believed she had good 

relationships with all the parents of her students. 

74. 

Respondent’s testimony has a theme, that she was doing her job, that 

Williams was picking on her, that she did not attempt to convince parents to change 

services, and that although she did not believe the June IEP addendums were 

“legitimate,” she provided the OM services according to those IEPs. Overall, 

respondent’s testimony evidenced an attempt to downplay and minimize her actions, 

and a failure to fully acknowledge or take any responsibility for her behavior. 

34 

RESPONDENT’S WITNESSES 

75. 

Cynthia Hayes has been employed at SBCSS for 24 years. She holds a 

single subject and a severely handicapped credential. Her testimony is summarized as 

follows. She is involved in the TSN. Her primary role in the TSN is to help newer 

teachers clear their credentials. She also supports teachers who need help. She was 

assigned to respondent through the TSN. She provided support to respondent from 

January to May 2021. She observed respondent’s lessons with students twice. She felt 

respondent did not give enough instruction to the parents and sensed some 

frustration on the part of the parents. She provided feedback to respondent and 

respondent was grateful for the feedback and suggestions. 

76.  Michele Wahl is a physical therapist at SBCSS. She has been employed 

there for 11 years. Her testimony is summarized as follows. She shared some students 

with respondent. She observed respondent with students approximately six times. She 

did not observe respondent to behave inappropriately or unprofessionally with 

student or other staff. She attended between 10 and 12 IEP meetings and never 

noticed respondent behaving unprofessionally. She was present at the September 

2020 IEP meeting and agreed that there was a disagreement about respondent’s 

service between respondent, the student’s parent, and Hedberg. Hedberg’s behavior at 

that IEP meeting was typical. 

77. 

Stephen Fiss is retired and works as a consultant. He holds teaching, 

special education, and administrative credentials. He has worked in education for 44 

years. He was employed as an adjunct professor for over 40 years at San Jose State 

University in the Department of Educational Leadership. He was a Superintendent for 

several districts for over 20 years. He served as the Chief School Officer in the Santa 

Clara County Office of Education. He testified as an expert in special education 

35 

administration. His testimony is summarized as follows. He explained the different 

responsibilities of the various members of the IEP team. Once services are established 

in an IEP, those services are binding and must be provided no matter where they are 

listed in the IEP. A specialist is not the sole arbiter of eligibility for services, it is a 

determination made by the whole team. A specialist cannot override the whole team. 

He acknowledged that the June 2020 IEP addendums did not follow best practices and 

that given the circumstances an exception to the IEP team makeup might be 

acceptable in order to keep students properly serviced. He opined that it is 

inappropriate for any member of the IEP team to leave during the meeting. 

78. 

Kathryn Polston holds multiple subject general education, VI, and OM 

credentials. She was teaching a dedicated VI class that was closed in June 2020. She 

provided direct OM services to the students in her classroom. She was not involved in 

the transition IEP meetings. She was providing approximately 105 minutes of OM 

services on a weekly basis for each student in her class. She believed that all seven of 

the students should have received OM services after the closing of her class. 

79. 

All of respondent’s witnesses stated that OM services that are listed 

anywhere in an IEP are legally obligated to be provided. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

SBCSS has the burden of proof in this matter, and the standard of proof 

in a teacher dismissal hearing is a preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 

2. 

A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 

hearing. (§§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) 

36 

Statutory Grounds for Dismissal 

3. 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), provides that a permanent 

employee shall not be dismissed except for one or more of the causes set forth in that 

subdivision. The causes alleged in this matter are unprofessional conduct, dishonesty, 

unsatisfactory performance, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school 

laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the 

public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district. (Ed. 

Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2), (4), (5), & (8).) 

4. 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, a Commission on 

Professional Competence may only vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission 

may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative 

sanction. (§ 44944, subd. (d)(1) & (3).) The Commission’s decision is deemed to be the 

final decision of the school district’s governing board. (Id. at subd. (d)(4).) The 

Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes unfitness to teach, 

and whether dismissal is the appropriate sanction. (California Teachers Ass’n v. State of 

California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344; Fontana Unified School Dist. v. Burman 

(1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220-222.) 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

5. 

SBCSS seeks to dismiss respondent for unprofessional conduct, pursuant 

to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). Unprofessional conduct has been 

defined as “conduct such as to indicate unfitness to teach.” (V.P. v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3rd 1167, 1174.) 

6. 

Respondent repeatedly failed to follow the directives of her supervisors, 

including failing to write a goal for A.A. related to foundational areas of OM, failing to 

37 

provide her contact log to her supervisor upon request, failing to provide her OM 

services schedule to her supervisor, failing to provide completed assessments for her 

supervisor to review prior to presenting them to the IEP team, attempting to change 

OM service times during distance learning, failing to work collaboratively with 

students’ parents, and failing to work collaboratively with the IEP team to set OM goals 

and service times for students. She tried to change OM service times after being 

instructed not to change services during distance learning. She failed to communicate 

with parents of students. Respondent failed to provide OM services to students as 

required by their IEPs. She behaved inappropriately in multiple IEP meetings. She 

made denigrating comments to students and their parents. Respondent failed to 

complete assessments in a timely and compliant manner, and in some cases, she 

completely failed to complete the assessment. Respondent’s overall conduct 

demonstrated a complete indifference to her supervisors’ directives and an 

inconsiderate attitude toward the students and parents, by showing a complete 

unwillingness to provide OM services and assessments. Cause exists to dismiss 

respondent for unprofessional conduct under section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). 

DISHONESTY 

7. 

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), provides that SBCSS may dismiss a 

permanent employee for dishonesty. No evidence related to the charges established 

that respondent was dishonest. Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent for 

dishonesty under section 44932, subdivision (a)(4). 

UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE 

8. 

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), provides that SBCSS may dismiss a 

permanent employee for unsatisfactory performance. Respondent failed to provide 

38 

services to students; was combative in IEP meetings; made denigrating remarks to 

students, colleagues, and supervisors; and repeatedly failed to change her conduct 

after multiple warnings. Respondent received multiple letters of reprimand for her 

conduct towards students A.A., N.K., and their families. Cause exists to dismiss 

respondent for unsatisfactory performance under section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF SCHOOL LAWS OR REGULATIONS 

9. 

Section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), provides that SBCSS may dismiss a 

permanent employee for persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or 

regulations. Dismissal under this subdivision requires that the violation be persistent, 

that is, continuing or constantly repeated. (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union 

School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) A single violation of a school 

board’s rules is not itself cause for dismissal under this subdivision, which pertains to 

unintentional as well as intentional transgressions; “it is the persistent disregard of 

school rules that the subdivision is designed to regulate.” (Id. at 84 [citation omitted].) 

10. 

The evidence established that respondent persistently violated school 

laws and regulations over the course of two school years. Respondent was aware of 

SBCSS policies and regulations, and had completed required training. Respondent 

repeatedly engaged in violating the SBCSS Code of Ethics which required her to: 

•  Adhere to the highest ethical standards and behavior in their relations with 

students, parents, community, and colleagues. 

•  Act and speak at all times in a manner which exemplifies personal and 

professional integrity, dignity, and mutual respect. 

•  Adhere to established professional standards. 

39 

•  Exercise great care and good professional judgment in order to avoid 

situations that may compromise the reputation of SBCSS. 

Respondent was rude and combative with parents of students, colleagues, and 

supervisors. She failed to provide services as required per students’ IEPs. She made a 

derogatory comment to a student. Respondent was repeatedly unprofessional with 

A.A. and his parents. Cause exists to dismiss respondent for persistent violation of 

school laws and regulations under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

Analysis of the Morrison Factors 

11. 

The ultimate question is whether respondent is unfit to teach under the 

factors established by the California Supreme Court in Morrison v. State Board of 

Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230. The Morrison factors are: (1) the likelihood 

that the conduct in question may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; 

(2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of 

the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the extenuating 

or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness 

or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

teacher involved or other teachers. Only the pertinent factors must be addressed. 

(West Valley-Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) The factors may be applied to all of the proven conduct in the aggregate. 

(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist., supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1456-1457.) 

12. 

In this case, application of the pertinent Morrison factors demonstrates 

that respondent is unfit to teach. 

40 

Respondent’s conduct adversely affected students, parents, and administrators. 

Students did not receive all of their mandated OM services. When they did receive 

service, respondent was dismissive of input from parents or combative with parents. 

Multiple parents sought to have respondent replaced as their child’s OM provider. 

Supervisors and administrators were upset by witnessing students’ distress and the 

knowledge that multiple students were experiencing a negative school environment 

due to respondent’s behavior. 

Respondent’s conduct was recent. 

Respondent has received training in providing OM services. She was given 

feedback for two years prior to the conduct described here. This is an aggravating 

circumstance. Part of the conduct occurred during distance learning due to the 

COVID-19 pandemic. This is a mitigating factor. 

Respondent characterizes her motives as praiseworthy, claiming she was 

attempting to protect the students. But her motives for the conduct were 

blameworthy, especially in either refusing to provide services to the seven students 

from the closed VI class, or attempting to reduce the OM service times for those 

students. 

The likelihood of recurrence is high. Respondent continued to engage in a 

pattern of inappropriate behaviors despite being counseled and reprimanded. She 

denied conduct that was credibly established by other witnesses, and consistently 

minimized her misconduct. Respondent has failed to accept any responsibility. She has 

demonstrated over time that she cannot or will not exercise good judgment. 

41 

Disposition 

13. 

Respondent is a veteran teacher who should understand the high societal 

expectations for public school teachers. Respondent engaged in a pattern of 

unprofessional conduct and acts constituting insubordination over an extended period 

of time. She failed to change her behavior despite repeated warnings, and has failed to 

acknowledge her culpability. She has repeatedly shown an inability or unwillingness to 

use good judgment in her interactions with students, parents, supervisors, and 

administrators. 

14. 

The Commission on Professional Competence concludes that cause exists 

to dismiss respondent based on unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, 

and persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or regulations. Each ground 

for dismissal provides a separate and independent basis for respondent’s dismissal. 

42 

 
 
ORDER 

Respondent Chjene Chhor is hereby dismissed from her position as a 

permanent certificated employee of the San Bernadino County Superintendent of 

Schools. 

DATE:  

DATE:  

DATE: 

DENA SLOCUM 

Commission Member 

SHELBY ZIMMERMAN 

Commission Member 

TRACI C. BELMORE 

Commission Chair 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

43 

Dena C Slocum (Sep 5, 2023 15:19 PDT)Dena C SlocumShelby Zimmerman (Sep 5, 2023 15:29 PDT)Shelby Zimmerman09/05/202309/05/202309/05/2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
