BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SHASTA UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

MARTIN REID, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022030751 

DECISION 

On July 11 and 12, 2022, a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) heard this matter by videoconference. The Commission was comprised 

of Julie O Brien, Sara Pasillas, and Administrative Law Judge Jessica Wall. 

Dylan C. Marques and Thomas E. Gauthier, Attorneys at Law at the law firm 

Lozano Smith, represented the Shasta Union High School District (District). 

Matthew Chevedden and Katrina Gould, Attorneys at Law at the law firm 

Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & Chevedden LLP, represented Martin Reid 

(respondent), who was present at hearing. 

Evidence was received, and the Commission began to deliberate on July 12, 

2022. Deliberations concluded on July 13, 2022. The record closed and the matter was 

submitted for decision on July 13, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Parties, Jurisdiction, and Background 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. He 

holds a single-subject English credential from Simpson University. Respondent also 

earned a bachelor s degree in liberal studies from Simpson University in 2011. He has 

worked for the District since August 15, 2012, and taught English at Enterprise High 

School during the relevant period. 

2. 

On February 14, 2022, Jason Rubin, Associate Superintendent for Human 

Resources for the District, signed and authorized the filing with the Governing Board 

(Board), a Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges; Imposition of 

Suspension Without Pay (Initial Statement of Charges) based on allegations that 

respondent repeatedly refused to participate in weekly COVID-19 testing. The Initial 

Statement of Charges informed respondent that he had been placed on unpaid 

suspension for immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments (Ed. 

Code, § 44939). The Initial Statement of Charges also specifies the following grounds 

for dismissal: (1) immoral conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)); (2) dishonesty (Ed. 

Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4)); (3) evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(6)); (4) persistent violations or refusal to obey laws or regulations governing public 

schools or the school district employing him (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8)); and 

(5) willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 

prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (b).). 

2 

3.

Respondent filed a motion for immediate relief of suspension. On April 8, 

2022, Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins issued an order denying 

respondent s motion. 

4. 

On April 11, 2022, Mr. Rubin signed and authorized for filing a First 

Amended Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges; Imposition of 

Suspension Without Pay (Amended Statement of Charges). The Amended Statement of 

Charges added additional facts about the violations while listing the same five charges 

as the Initial Statement of Charges. Respondent signed a Demand for a Hearing and 

this hearing followed. 

The District s Evidence 

5. 

Jim Cloney has been the District s Superintendent for 14 years. Associate 

Superintendents assist him in areas such as instruction and human resources, but he 

has authority over all final decisions. Mr. Rubin has been the District s Associate 

Superintendent for Human Resources for four years. In his role, he deals with 

contracts, hiring, discipline, workers  compensation claims, and salary issues. He is also 

responsible for employee health and safety issues. Mr. Cloney and Mr. Rubin both 

testified at the hearing about the District s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, 

implementation of state mandates, and their interactions with respondent. 

SUMMER 2021 DISTRICT MESSAGE 

6. 

On July 26, 2021, Mr. Cloney sent an email to all staff conveying the 

District s intent to follow state public health guidelines for the 2021 22 school year so 

students could return to in-person instruction five days per week without social 

distancing mandates. However, there would continue to be masking mandates for 

indoor instruction. He explained that the District could not ignore the state s mask 

3 

mandate and allow students and staff to forgo masks without a medical exemption. He 

expressed some agreement with and sympathy for the frustration staff felt about 

masking; however, he reiterated that, after consulting with the Board, legal counsel, 

and staff unions, that  our only option is to comply with the guidelines  so that the 

District could fully open and return to in-person instruction. 

7. 

The following day, on July 27, 2021, respondent emailed a four-page 

letter to Mr. Cloney, Board members, and all staff at Enterprise and Shasta High 

Schools. He urged Mr. Cloney and the Board to reconsider its position on masking, 

which respondent felt was detrimental to students. Respondent accused the District of 

following state guidelines out of fear of litigation and asserted it was unethical to 

follow legal advice if it did not comport with his asse

 (Emphasis in original.1) He said,  [f]ollowing inane advice from state 

authorities is 

inane, even if they are supposed authorities.  Respondent stated, 

superintendent and board members should openly defy the mandate. He wrote,  only 

401 children ages 0-18 

 have died of Covid (many of whom had a high risk 

medical condition or comorbidity) since the beginning of the pandemic.  He stated he 

was  not minimizing this tragedy, but it must be kept in pe

Respondent 

suggested immunocompromised children triple-mask, vaccinate, or homeschool. 

CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH GUIDANCE 

8. 

On August 11, 2021, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) 

Director and State Public Health Officer Tomás J. Aragón, M.D., Dr.P.H., issued an 

1 All emphases in quotes are original, unless otherwise noted. 

4 

 
order, titled  State Public Health Officer Order of August 11, 2021 (Order). The Order 

required all public and private kindergarten through grade 12 schools to verify the 

COVID-19 vaccination status of all workers, maintain records of employee vaccination 

status, and make available records of vaccination verification to the local health 

jurisdiction for purposes of case investigation. The Order states: 

California is currently experiencing the fastest increase in 

COVID-19 cases during the entire pandemic with 22.7 new 

cases per 100,000 per day, with case rates increasing 

tenfold since early June. The Delta variant, which is two 

times more contagious than the original virus, is currently 

the most common variant causing new infections in 

California. 

Vaccination against COVID-19 is the most effective means 

of preventing infection with the COVID-19 virus, and 

subsequent transmission and outbreaks. 

Furthermore, Section II.C. of the Order states: 

Workers who are not fully vaccinated, or for whom vaccine 

status is unknown or documentation is not provided, must 

be considered unvaccinated. 

Section III of the Order addressed testing requirements: 

5 

 
A. Asymptomatic unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated 

workers are required to undergo diagnostic screening 

testing. 

B. Workers may be tested with either antigen or molecular 

tests to satisfy this requirement, but unvaccinated or 

incompletely vaccinated workers must be tested at least 

once weekly 

C. Unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated workers must 

also observe all other infection control requirements, and 

are not exempted from the testing requirement even if they 

have a medical contraindication to vaccination, since they 

are still potentially able to spread the illness. Previous 

history of COVID-19 from which the individual recovered 

more than 90 days earlier, or a previous positive antibody 

test for COVID-19, do not waive this requirement for 

testing. 

9. 

The Order was issued pursuant to various Health and Safety Code 

sections, and took effect on August 12, 2021, at 12:01 a.m. All schools in the District 

were required to comply with the Order by October 15, 2021. The Order became 

District policy requiring all District employees to submit proof of vaccination against 

COVID-19 or undergo weekly diagnostic testing in accordance with the Order. The 

District required full compliance with the proof of vaccination/testing requirement by 

October 15, 2021. 

6 

 
 
10.

In late August, around the second week of school, respondent met with 

Mr. Cloney to discuss his concerns with the District s COVID-19 safety measures. 

Respondent talked with Mr. Cloney about his objections to masking and concerns 

about government overreach. He said he had the community s support, so the District 

should 

violate state mandates. 

OCTOBER 3, 2021 OPEN LETTER 

11.  On October 3, 2021, respondent sent an open letter to an unknown 

number of recipients and requested recipients forward it  far and wide throughout 

Shasta County to parents, educators, and concerned community members. 2 In the 

letter, respondent wrote, in relevant part: 

I am gravely alarmed by the rapidly increasing government 

overreach which has occurred in America over the last few 

years, but I am especially concerned about the most recent 

government overreach: Covid vaccine mandates for K-12 

children and educators. 

Respondent also stated

 Much of responde

opposition to mandating vaccines for children. In the conclusion of his letter, 

respondent discussed the impact of mandates upon school staffing in Shasta County: 

2 Respondent posted a copy of this letter on his blog in December 2021. While 

respondent s blog posts and social media were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 4, 

the contents of Exhibit 4 were not relied upon in the Commission s determination. 

7 

 
What will happen if hundreds of Shasta County educators

get fired 

s new mandate will 

bring education to a standstill in the northstate. According 

to an article by the Associated Press,  All teachers will have 

to be vaccinated when the mandate kicks in for the children 

they teach,  which is expected for high school within the 

next few months. Many educators will 

 comply with this 

mandate, and they will be fired. Schools are already short 

staffed, desperate for teachers and substitutes. Think 

education in 2020 was crazy? Just wait. Education in the 

northstate will utterly collapse once these mandates hit 

unless we all stand together in defiance of government 

Respondent stated,  I, for one, will not stand for this control. I will be fired first.  

In the signature block, respondent listed his name, position, school, and District email. 

DISTRICT COMMUNICATIONS REGARDING TESTING 

12.  On October 7, 2021, Mr. Cloney sent an email titled,  Testing Update,  to 

all District staff. The email informed recipients that testing was mandatory for staff 

who had not verified their vaccination status ( unverified staff 3). Unverified staff who 

3 Unverified staff includes staff who have declined to be vaccinated, as well as 

vaccinated or partially vaccinated staff who have chosen not to share their COVID-19 

vaccination records with the District. 

8 

 
 
contracted COVID-19 could opt out of testing for 90 days after their documented 

positive test (90-day policy). The email also stated: 

If you are in unverified status and have not had a COVID 

test done by the end of the day on Friday, [October 15th,] 

you will be ineligible to report to work on Monday, October 

18th. Staff who are ineligible to report to work on the 18th 

will be provided information on how to test on the 18th in 

order to return to work the next day. Staff who remain 

ineligible to return to work will be contacted individually 

regarding their circumstances. 

13. 

That evening, respondent participated in a Facebook Live video in which 

he echoed the points from his October 3 letter. He stated that,  I just decided that the 

mandates and the government control was overreaching  and predicted that Shasta 

County would  lose a lot of teachers.  He demonstrated an understanding of the 

professional consequences of his choice to refuse testing:  If you don t test, you re 

going to be put on administrative leave on October 18th.  

14.  Mr. Rubin emailed respondent on October 8, 2021, notifying him that he 

was unverified and informing him about the testing schedule at Enterprise High 

School. He wrote,  This week s testing is mandatory and we appreciate your 

understanding through this process.  On following Monday, October 11, 2021, Mr. 

Rubin reminded unverified staff, including respondent, about the dates and times of 

testing for the week of October 11 and provided paperwork for the District s testing 

provider, Lab 24. Respondent failed to submit to testing as required. 

9 

OCTOBER 15, 2021 WARNING LETTER 

15.  On October 15, 2021, Mr. Rubin emailed respondent a warning letter 

stating that he violated a District requirement by failing to participate in testing. It 

stated:  Your failure to participate in District provided COVID-19 surveillance testing 

created an unsafe environment for students and co-workers, as they may have had 

exposure to harm due to your failure to participate in testing.  The letter further 

directed respondent not to enter his work site on October 18, 2021, and placed him on 

paid administrative leave unless he tested by the end of the working day on October 

15, 2021. Respondent was also directed to test either at Lab 24 or at the District office 

on October 18, 2021, then notify Mr. Rubin. The letter added,  Continued 

noncompliance with the above directives will result in further disciplinary action, up to 

and including a recommendation for termination.  

16.  On October 18, 2021, Mr. Rubin sent an email to unverified staff, 

including respondent, regarding the testing locations and times for the week of 

October 18. That afternoon, Mr. Rubin sent another email specifically to respondent 

because respondent had not informed him whether he would be testing that day at 

Lab 24 or at the District office, as required by the warning letter. 

LETTERS OF REPRIMAND 

17.  On October 18, 2021, Mr. Rubin sent respondent a letter of reprimand. 

He noted respondent s failure to participate in testing during the week of October 11, 

2021, and on October 18, 2021. The letter informed respondent that his conduct 

violated the October 15 letter

 and  caused the shifting of duties to other 

employees, causing an increased workload and related staff morale problems.  

Respondent was to test on October 18, 2021, or he would be placed on paid 

10 

administrative leave for the next two days. He was also directed to test on October 19 

or 20, 2021, and notify Mr. Rubin once he tested. Continued noncompliance with the 

testing requirement would result in discipline, up to and including termination. 

18. 

That evening, respondent participated in an interview on Fox News. He 

said:  I am on administrative leave today and I will be going forward, and then I ll be 

m just standing on my principles. I believe in natural immunity.  Respondent 

did not express any stipulation in which he would return to the classroom and 

indicated that he told his students that he would not be returning to the classroom. 

19.  On October 20, 2021, Mr. Rubin sent respondent a second letter of 

reprimand. This letter informed respondent that he violated the directives in the 

October 18 letter to test on October 19 or 20, 2021. This noncompliance  caused the 

District the need to provide for the employment of substitute employees, resulting in 

additional cost to the district, school, or department.  It further added that respondent 

must test by 4:00 p.m. on October 20, 2021, or he would continue to be ineligible for 

his work duties. Mr. Rubin placed respondent on paid administrative leave and 

directed him to report to the District office on October 21, 2021. If respondent 

reconsidered his position, he was directed to test at Lab 24 and notify Mr. Rubin. 

20.  On October 21, 2021, respondent, Mr. Rubin, Mr. Cloney, and 

respondent s union representative met on Zoom to discuss respondent s failure to test. 

The meeting discussed the impending disciplinary action against respondent based on 

his refusal to participate in mandatory weekly COVID testing and a timeline for his 

termination based on that refusal. 

11 

CONTESTATION OF THE OCTOBER 15 WARNING LETTER 

21.  On October 22, 2021, respondent wrote a letter of contestation regarding 

the warning letter. Respondent explained his view that testing unverified staff was 

discriminatory because verified staff were not tested, even though they could spread 

COVID-19. He further argued that testing violated the Fourth Amendment and that the 

District s assertion that he created an unsafe environment  violate[d] the legal 

principle of innocent until proven guilty.  He cited to 

 (1978) 436 U.S. 

478, for the principle that the District was required  to prove, beyond a reasonable 

doubt, that employees are unsafe.  Respondent 

to provid[e] the district with 

an antibody test showing natural immunity and a weekly  spit test  that is non-

invasive. 4 

22.  On October 25, 2021, Mr. Rubin replied that the District was not 

considering antibody tests at that time. Additionally, Mr. Rubin offered respondent the 

opportunity to take a saliva test as a reasonable accommodation with a medical note. 

CONTESTATION OF THE LETTERS OF REPRIMAND 

23.  On October 24, 2021, respondent sent Mr. Rubin two letters of 

contestation regarding the letters of reprimand. He directed Mr. Rubin to his October 

22 letter and wrote, in relevant part: 

the directive to participate in COVID-19 surveillance testing 

was discriminatory and violated my 4th amendment right to 

4 

interchangeably throughout this decision. 

12 

 
be secure in my person from unreasonable searches. It also 

violated basic jurisprudence set forth by the Supreme Court. 

The claim that I caused shifting duties, increased workload, 

and staff morale problems is therefore invalid. It was the 

district who chose to discriminate and violate my rights, and 

it was the district that chose to remove a fully qualified and 

capable employee from campus. If I had a choice in the 

matter, and if my rights were not violated, I would have 

been present on campus, ready to fulfill all my duties as a 

teacher, just as I have been, faithfully, for the past eight (8) 

years now. 

Because the district has violated my right and made ill-

founded claims about my personal health and implied that I 

have been a source of burden on the district, it has put 

undue mental and emotional stress upon myself and my 

family. 

[¶] 

My reasonable offer to provide the district with an antibody 

test and a weekly non-invasive spit test still stands. Thank 

you for considering my position. 

Respondent s second letter asserted the same theories as his first letter. 

13 

NOVEMBER 2021 THROUGH JANUARY 2022 

24. 

Respondent took medical leave from late October through mid-

December. In December 2021, respondent submitted an antibody test to the District. 

On December 19, 2021, Mr. Rubin emailed respondent about the antibody test and 

inquired if respondent had a positive COVID-19 test for the 90-day policy. He offered 

respondent the opportunity to return to work, stating that  [p]reviously you 

mentioned in a letter that you would be open to testing. If that s still accurate, then 

you could participate in the weekly testing that the district is using.  

25. 

Respondent replied later that evening that he did not have a positive 

COVID-19 test, only an antibody test from recent bloodwork. He wrote: 

On principle, I think the Covid swab is invasive and an 

unreasonable search (4th Amendment) for anyone without 

symptoms and especially people with natural immunity. 

Plus, it s discriminatory to test only unvaccinated staff when 

vaccinated people spread Covid too. However, I d be happy 

to return to work if you d accept natural immunity as a 

substitute for weekly testing. Scientifically, I m safe from 

infecting others or being infected myself, so there s no real 

liability for the school. 

26.  On December 20, 2021, Mr. Rubin replied that the District still required 

weekly testing for unverified staff. He repeated that respondent could seek a 

reasonable accommodation 

 for saliva testing, stating,  we 

can definitely make that accommodation for you and get you back in your classroom.  

14 

27.

Two weeks later, on January 4, 2022, respondent emailed Mr. Rubin

declining the offer for a reasonable accommodation. The email stated, in relevant part: 

I currently don t have any medical condition (to my 

knowledge) that would prevent me from taking a nasal 

swab -- I just think it s unconstitutional -- so I don t think I 

could get a doctor s note for that. Also, because I see 

testing only unvaccinated staff as discriminatory, the only 

way I could in good conscience take a weekly test is if the 

district had the whole staff take a weekly non-invasive spit 

test as well. That way it wouldn t discriminate between 

unvaccinated and vaccinated staff and it wouldn t be an 

invasive test. I hope this is an option the district would 

consider. If this is not something the district is willing to do, 

sadly, I think we ve reached an impasse. 

DISTRICT TESTING POLICIES, ACCOMMODATIONS, AND STAFFING 

28. 

After CDPH promulgated the Order in August, Mr. Cloney worked to 

figure out the contours of compliance. He participated in webinars, contacted the 

CDPH to ask questions, and met with on-site administration, nursing staff, human 

resources staff, and three labor groups. His top priority was keeping schools open for 

in-person instruction

. Mr. Cloney also 

cared about being a good steward of District resources and funds. He used COVID-19 

funding to purchase more protective equipment and cleaning materials for students 

and staff, pay extra hours for nursing staff, provide extra sections to reduce class sizes, 

and increase pay for substitutes and staff who agreed to substitute during preparatory 

15 

periods. There was significant funding for COVID-19 measures; however, that funding 

was not unlimited. 

29. 

About one-third (150 of 450) of District staff were unverified. At first, the 

District contracted with Lab 24 to provide weekly nasal swab COVID-19 tests at a 

subsidized rate of $50 per test. Around December 2021, the District switched to Color 

as their testing provider. The state provided Color tests for free, and the District only 

paid shipping. As of summer 2022, staff could choose to take tests at home and 

provide their results to the District, or they could test at school during the workday 

and get coverage for their classes. 

30.  Mr. Rubin received medical notes from seven staff members who 

requested a reasonable accommodation to take a saliva test instead of a nasal swab 

test. He researched which saliva tests would satisfy state requirements and concluded 

that CRL Rapid Response tests met the necessary criteria. He ordered those tests 

online through Walmart at the rate of $99 per test, which the District pays. The District 

did not provide saliva tests for all unverified staff because the saliva tests cost twice as 

much as Lab 24 nasal swab tests and were not free like the Color tests. The cost of 

complying with respondent s January 2022 demand to saliva test all 450 employees 

weekly during the 2021 22 school year would have cost $44,550 per week, which the 

District felt posed an undue financial hardship. Antibody testing was not an option 

permitted by the Order. 

31.  Mr. Rubin admits that the District s testing program was not without 

fault. The District struggled to keep track of which unverified staff were required to 

test, who was quarantining, and who was exempt based on the 90-day policy. 

Nevertheless, the District did not deliberately overlook or ignore any staff who have 

refused to test. Once the District knew an unverified staff member failed to test, the 

16 

administration contacted that person to test or sent the employee home. Unverified 

staff who refused to test were subject to disciplinary action. 

32. 

Approximately six staff members, including respondent, expressly refused 

to take District-provided tests. Two unverified district staff chose to purchase their 

own tests rather than rely on the District s. These employees complied with the Order 

by testing with personal medical providers and submitting time-stamped test results 

to the District. Three other unverified staff refused to test. Each of these three 

employees chose to resign rather than be dismissed. 

33. 

COVID-19 testing created staffing challenges for the District because 

staff who test positive must isolate and those in contact with positive staff members 

must quarantine. Over 250 District employees have tested positive for COVID-19. 

Some have been hospitalized because of the virus, but there are no reported deaths. 

District staff have taken on additional duties to cover staffing shortages. Mr. Rubin has 

served as a substitute teacher during emergencies, as have high school counselors. 

34. 

The District never exceeded the minimum precautions imposed by state 

laws and regulations. Once a safety measure was no longer mandated, like social 

distancing or face masks, the District no longer required compliance. 

35.  Mr. Rubin does not believe that it is immoral to be unverified, refuse a 

nasal swab test, or request an alternative test. He thinks that endangering others and 

making choices that create an unsafe environment for students and coworkers is 

immoral. He also believes that employees should not be punished for free speech. 

Although there were no complaints about respondent s teaching or negative 

performance evaluations, Mr. Rubin believes termination is warranted here. The District 

17 

tried to work with respondent on numerous occasions, but respondent refused to 

comply. The District must follow the law. 

Respondent s Evidence 

36. 

Respondent worked as an English teacher at Enterprise High School since 

2012. He enjoyed his interactions with students and building relationships with 

students and colleagues. He characterized his teaching style as  firm, but fair.  

37. 

Early in the pandemic, respondent had a throat swab test and learned 

that he had antibodies from a prior COVID-19 infection. In his opinion, antibodies 

permanently protect him and offer natural immunity to COVID-19. He recognizes that 

antibody levels fluctuate with time, but believes they offer a broader spectrum of 

protection than vaccination. Similarly, he recognizes that he can get re-infected with 

COVID-19 even if he has antibodies. 

38. 

Respondent finds a nasal test invasive because he does not like the 

feeling of an object entering his nose. He has never undergone a nasal swab test, but 

he stuck Q-tips up his nose in the past and found the sensation unpleasant. 

Respondent also does not like feeling like he is  an other  and being treated 

differently than his colleagues. 

39. 

Respondent does not have a medical condition that causes his aversion 

to nasal swabs. He discussed getting a medical note with his nurse practitioner in 

November 2021, but he did not actively pursue or provide a note for an exemption to 

the nasal swab process. Respondent was familiar with the District s policies on 

reasonable accommodation because he previously 

a mask exemption. On that issue, he found a doctor online to provide him with a 

medical note so he could work unmasked. Additionally, respondent shared that his 

18 

 
medical leave from October to December 2021 was caused by the stress he felt from

COVID-19 testing. Had the District allowed him to do a saliva test in October 2021, he 

would have immediately returned from medical leave. 

40. 

Respondent does not find a blood draw to be invasive because he gets 

bloodwork done every few years at his doctor s office. He believes his antibodies, plus 

a saliva test, would have been sufficient to protect his students. He does not know 

exactly what a saliva test entails and assumes it involves spitting on a piece of paper. 

Respondent testified that he was still willing to take a saliva test in December and 

January but neglected to mention it to Mr. Rubin. He  assumed that [Mr. Rubin] knew  

about his willingness to test based on his October communications. 

41. 

Respondent has no education, training, or work experience in medicine, 

immunology, virology, epidemiology, or science more broadly. He never inquired 

whether his students, their guardians, or fellow staff were immunocompromised. He 

got his information on the pandemic from Dr. Pierre Kory and the Brownstone 

Institute, a nongovernmental organization. Respondent took some courses related to 

constitutional law in college but was unfamiliar with the sole case he cited in support 

of his constitutional objections, 

 (1978) 436 U.S. 478.5 He thinks he 

may have cited the wrong case but stands by his interpretation of Fourth Amendment 

jurisprudence and believes the District needed to obtain a warrant to test him. 

5 In 

 (1978) 436 U.S. 478, the Supreme Court held that failure 

to give a jury instruction on the presumption of innocence violated a defendant s right 

to fair criminal trial for his second-degree robbery charge. 

19 

 
Regarding his discrimination claim, he could not identify a protected class of which he 

was a member. 

42. 

Respondent feels strongly about the issue of government overreach. He 

tries to keep [his] views out of the classroom.  He believes that his discipline could be 

related to his political views because other employees evaded testing. 

43. 

At hearing, respondent s reason for refusing to test departed from the 

position he expressed from October 2021 through January 2022. He now asserts that 

the only reason he did not test was because he wanted the District to pay for his saliva 

test. He never addressed this issue in his communications with the District and did not 

inquire about the cost of saliva tests or whether he could pay the difference between a 

nasal swab and saliva test. His still prefers not to test. 

TESTIMONY FROM COLLEAGUES 

44. 

Three of respondent s colleagues at the Enterprise High School testified 

on his behalf. They all were aware of the allegations against respondent. Matthew 

Garrett and Amy Garrett testified about respondent s teaching fitness. Tonya 

Waterman testified about her experience being an unverified staff member. 

45.  Mr. Garrett has worked at Enterprise High School as an English teacher 

since 2003. He first met respondent about 10 years ago at Simpson University, where 

Mr. Garrett taught respondent in the credential program. Respondent then served as 

Mr. Garrett s student teacher. He believes that respondent is a dedicated teacher 

whose style creates dialogue and facilitates conversation. When respondent assisted in 

developing the curriculum for sophomore English classes, his presence helped offer a 

younger perspective.  Mr. Garrett finds respondent s lesson plans to be engaging and 

believes him to be  probably the best teacher in the Department.  

20 

46. Mrs. Garrett has taught in the English Department at Enterprise High 

School since 2003. She has known respondent for about nine years since he served as 

her student teacher. She also knows respondent socially. Mrs. Garrett praised 

respondent s willingness  to jump right in,  take risks, and be consistent, fair, and 

thorough. She found respondent to be  the best student teacher  out of the six or 

seven with whom she worked. 

47. 

Tonya Waterman has worked at Enterprise High School for 10 years. 

Respondent is her coworker and friend. She is an unverified staff member and did not 

test in January through May. However, once she returned from a vacation, the District 

emailed her about her need to test and she tested twice before the end of the school 

year. She had previously received reminders to test but ignored them. She did not tell 

the District that she was unwilling to test or refuse a directive to test. 

Analysis 

48. 

In 

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (

), 

the California Supreme Court provided a list of factors for 

to teach. The inquiry can be summarized as follows: 

In determining whether the conduct indicates an unfitness 

to practice the profession in question the board  may 

consider  such matters as: (1) the likelihood that the 

conduct may have adversely affected others and the degree 

of such adversity anticipated; (2) the proximity or 

remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of 

certification held by the party involved; (4) the extenuating 

or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the 

21 

conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the 

motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to 

which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person 

involved or other people in the profession. 

(

 (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 285 [citing 

, 

, at p. 229].) 

49. 

The [

] factors are not rules, but broad classes of issues to be 

considered to assist in determining whether to impose discipline.  (

, 

, 31 

Cal.App.5th 262 at p. 285.)  Only the relevant factors need to be analyzed.  (

) The 

factors may be applied in the aggregate, considering the totality of offensive conduct. 

(

 (1992) 2 

Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456 1457 (

) [ When a camel s back is broken we need 

not weigh each straw in its load to see which one could have done the deed. ].) 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE IMPACT 

50. 

Respondent s persistent rule violations and refusal to perform his 

assignments without reasonable cause likely caused an adverse impact on students 

and colleagues. For example, he taught while refusing to take precautions to prevent 

transmission until the District ordered him off-campus. Afterwards, his students were 

taught by substitute teachers, who may not have any experience in teaching English, 

rather than a full-time credentialed English teacher. In sum, he prioritized his personal 

agenda over student health and learning. 

22 

51. Moreover, respondent willfully violated Health and Safety regulations set 

forth in the Order, encouraged others to break the law, and undermined the District s 

authority to enact policies to safeguard in-person instruction. Administrators had to 

devote an inordinate amount of time to addressing respondent s refusal to follow 

policy or provide a medical note justifying his inability to do so. 

caused an increased workload for the staff and substitutes who taught his courses. 

Meanwhile, respondent disparaged the District s motives for following state law. 

52. 

Additionally, respondent s apathy towards immunocompromised 

students and their right to receive a public education shows a profound indifference to 

the rights of protected classes (people with disabilities or medical conditions like 

cancer). While he dismisses the risks faced by those with medical conditions, the 

District may find protecting the health and safety of all students and staff to be a 

compelling interest. Moreover, respon

liability if he infected another staff member or student. Instead, he asserted that he 

would not hold the school liable if he got sick and argued, without citing any scientific 

evidence, that he was immune from infecting others or being infected himself. The 

District rightfully deferred to the guidance of CDPH, legal counsel, and staff unions, 

rather than relying on the unsupported argument of an individual with no legal or 

scientific training. 

DEGREE OF ADVERSITY ANTICIPATED 

53. 

Respondent repeatedly demonstrated that he understood the outcomes 

of his choices. In his open letter, respondent predicted that  [e]ducation in the 

northstate will utterly collapse  under vaccine mandates because educators would not 

comply. He knew that schools were  already short staffed, desperate for teachers and 

substitutes.  He committed that he would  be fired first.  Respondent was aware that 

23 

refusing to test meant he would not be allowed to teach, and he hoped to use the 

District s staffing shortage to force the District to yield to his demands. 

PROXIMITY OF REMOTENESS IN TIME 

54. 

Respondent

took place repeatedly in October 2021, then 

recurred in December 2021 and January 2022. The behavior is recent and was 

promptly charged by the District after a progressive discipline process. 

TYPE OF TEACHING CERTIFICATE 

55. 

Respondent is a high school English teacher. It is one of the core subjects 

that students are required to complete over all four years of high school. This factor 

does not weigh for or against respondent s fitness to teach. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

56. 

There was no evidence of justification for respondent s misconduct. 

Independent acts of deception by 

 colleagues do not alter his culpability. 

Similarly, respondent s misunderstanding of constitutional law does not justify his 

actions. A cursory inquiry into Fourth Amendment jurisprudence would have revealed 

to respondent that the Constitution does not cater to idiosyncratic preferences.6 Had 

6 Decades of established precedent have permitted warrantless searches of 

employees and  special needs  searches within public schools when there is a 

compelling safety interest. (See 

 (1989) 489 

U.S. 602, 627 [an employee s expectation of privacy diminishes when he participates in 

an industry that is regulated pervasively to ensure safety ]; 

 (1995) 515 U.S. 646, 656 [

are different in public 

24 

 
he researched, rather than assuming the correctness of his beliefs, he would have 

found that the Fourth Amendment  does not protect all subjective expectations of 

privacy, but only those that society recognizes as  legitimate.

 (1995) 515 U.S. 646, 654.) Moreover, his reliance on 

(1978) 436 U.S. 478, illustrates a serious lack of critical thought and an inability to 

understand the difference between feeling persecuted and being criminally 

prosecuted. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES 

57. 

Respondent claims he was motivated to respond to unlawful 

discrimination. Yet there is no evidence that respondent was a member of a protected 

class, or that the District retaliated against him because of protected speech, rather 

than his refusal to test. Indeed, respondent spoke frequently about his beliefs and 

received no ill treatment until he chose to disobey multiple directives to comply with 

state law. Additionally, there are well-established methods to protect oneself from 

unlawful discrimination, such as seeking an injunction from a court of law or filing a 

union grievance. Respondent cannot deflect responsibility for his choices by claiming a 

benevolent motive unmoored from reality.7 

schools than elsewhere; the  reasonableness  inquiry cannot disregard the schools  

custodial and tutelary responsibility for children. ].) 

7 See, e.g., 

 (2021) 142 S.Ct. 17 (denying an application for 

mandate); 

 (7th Cir. 2021) 7 F.4th 592, 593, 

25 

 
 
58.

Similarly, respondent cannot 

decisions in scientific evidence rather than opinion. Respondent first sought special 

treatment based on his view of what con

pushed to 

dictate who would be subject to testing and the test they would take. From his own 

rather to alleviate his feelings of persecution. Such a motive falls far short of 

 was not grounded in a desire to protect students, but 

praiseworthiness. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

59. 

Respondent has not acknowledged any wrongdoing. Rather than admit 

his mistakes, respondent has pivoted to a new explanation of his conduct one he 

never articulated during the relevant period. He now argues that the sole issue 

preventing him from testing was desire for the District to pay the cost of saliva testing. 

considering the ample evidence showing that 

his real reason was 

 He was unwilling or unable to concede 

his position, despite the District s numerous attempts to work with him, educate him 

about rules and regulations, and offer him opportunities to correct his behavior. 

Indeed, in his last communications before the initial Statement of Charges, respondent 

expanded his demands and refused to test unless the District required verified and 

unverified staff members to participate in saliva testing. 

60. 

Consistent with respondent s view that he is without fault in this matter, 

he did not demonstrate rehabilitation or provide sufficient evidence to ensure he 

 (

to wear masks and be tested, requirements 

). 

26 

 
would not engage in similar misconduct in the future. Thus, the likelihood that 

respondent s misconduct will recur is substantial. Returning him to employment with 

the District presents the risk that respondent could be on paid administrative leave 

indefinitely because he views himself to be exempt from directives he disfavors. 

CHILLING EFFECT OF DISCIPLINE 

61. 

Respondent asserted that his dismissal could have been based on his 

political speech. To the extent other teachers or District employees perceive 

respondent s dismissal as being the result of those activities, it could dissuade them 

for engaging in protected activity for fear of retribution. However, there is little actual 

constitutional rights or the constitutional rights of other teachers. 

62. 

The facts of this matter show that respondent s discipline arose from his 

willful conduct, rather than protected speech. Respondent received no discipline until 

he directly violated an order from his superiors to test. The warning letter and letters 

of reprimand make clear that respondent s failure to test is the problem, not his 

personal beliefs. Indeed, Mr. Cloney s July 2021 email expressed agreement with and 

sympathy for staff frustration with safety requirements. Even to the extent that 

respondent s letters, media interviews, blog posts, and social media factored into the 

District s decision to terminate, the weight of the 

 factors supports dismissal. 

(See, e.g., 

 (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 343 [finding that the 

 factors supported 

dismissing a teacher solely based on social media comments].) 

27 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Absent a statute to the contrary, the burden of proof in disciplinary 

administrative proceedings rests upon the party making the charges. (

 (1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113; Evid. Code, § 115.) The  burden of 

proof  means the obligation of a party, if he or she is to prevail on a particular fact, to 

establish by evidence a requisite degree of belief or conviction concerning such fact. 

(

 (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 1128.) Here, 

the District bears the burden of proving the charging allegations. 

2. 

The standard of proof in this proceeding is a preponderance of the 

evidence. (

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 

1039 1040; Evid. Code, § 115.)  The phrase  preponderance of evidence  is usually 

defined in terms of probability of truth, e.g.,  such evidence as, when weighed with that 

opposed to it, has more convincing force and the greater probability of truth.

 (1 

Witkin, Evidence, Burden of Proof and Presumptions § 35 (4th ed. 2000) [internal 

citation omitted].) 

Applicable Law 

3. 

A permanent District employee may be dismissed for cause only after a 

dismissal hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) Under Education Code 

section 44944, subdivision (c), the dismissal hearing must be conducted by a three-

member Commission on Professional Competence. Two members of the Commission 

must be non-district teachers, one chosen by the respondent and one by the district, 

28 

and the third member of the Commission must be an administrative law judge from 

the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

4. 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission 

may only vote for or against it. The Commission may not dispose of a charge of 

dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. 

(d)(1)(3).) 

shall not be based on nonsubstantive procedural 

errors committed by the school district or governing board of the school district unless 

the errors are prejudicial errors.

 44944, subd. (d)(2).) 

Cause for Discipline 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

5. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), a school district 

may discipline a permanent certificated employee for immoral conduct. For dismissal 

of a teacher, immoral conduct is defined as conduct that: 

is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary 

to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare. 

(

Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

 (1960) 179 

29 

6.

A teacher is often described as  an exemplar, whose words and actions 

are likely to be followed by the children coming under [the teacher s] care and 

protection.  (

 (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 970.) Here, 

respondent s actions showed indifference to vulnerable members of his community, 

disrespect for his administration, and a lack of consideration towards good order and 

the public welfare. Respondent dismissed the knowledge and expertise of those with 

education and training he lacked, insisting that his perspective was correct in the face 

of overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Moreover, he lacked empathy, a crucial 

value for teachers to instill in their students, when he focused solely on his own health 

and preferences. Accordingly, the District established cause to dismiss respondent 

under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 

DISHONESTY 

7. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), a school district 

may discipline a permanent certificated employee for  dishonesty.  Dishonesty is  lack 

of honesty or integrity,  or a  disposition to defraud or deceive.  (Merriam-

Webster.com Dictionary, 

, Merriam-Webster, <https://www.merriam-

webster.com/dictionary/dishonesty> [as of July 14, 2022].)  Dishonesty necessarily 

includes the element of bad faith.  (

 (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 450, 456.)  [I]t 

means fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness; an absence of integrity; a disposition 

to cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive and betray.  (

) 

8. 

The evidence does not show that respondent was dishonest. Throughout 

the relevant period, respondent openly refused to test rather than engage in 

surreptitious testing avoidance. He did not intend to deceive the District about his 

willingness to participating in COVID-19 testing when he agreed to District 

employment in August 2012, nine years before COVID-19 testing was required. The 

30 

District failed to establish cause to dismiss respondent under Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(4). 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS 

9. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), a school district 

may discipline a permanent certificated employee for  evident unfitness for service.  

The term  evident unfitness for service,  means  clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.  (

, 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, at p. 1444.) The term  connotes 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.  (

) 

10. 

The evidence shows that respondent is committed to his position and 

unwilling to change, even when presented with notice of his misconduct. He places his 

own preferences and aversions above the safety and education of his students and the 

needs of his District. In sum, his willingness to jeopardize student learning to further a 

personal agenda makes him unsuitable for the profession of teaching. The District 

established cause to dismiss respondent under Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6). 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF LAWS AND REGULATIONS 

11. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), a school district 

may discipline a permanent certificated employee for  persistent violation of or refusal 

to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing 

board of the school district employing him or her.  This requires a  showing of 

intentional and continual refusal to cooperate.  (

31 

Persistence requires a showing of  continuing or constant  behavior. (

 (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) 

(1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) 

12. 

The evidence established that respondent refused to provide the District 

with proof of vaccination or participate in weekly testing on multiple weeks in October 

2021 and again in January 2022, in violation of the Order and Board Policies. His 

refusal to test or cooperate with the District was intentional and repetitive. The District 

established cause to dismiss respondent under Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(8). 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS 

13. 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), a school district 

may immediately suspend a teacher for  willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing school district.   Although the term  willful  has no  single, uniformly 

applicable  definition, it refers generally to intentional conduct undertaken with 

knowledge or consciousness of its probable result.  (

 (2001) 91 

Cal.App.4th 826, 829.) 

14. 

The evidence established that respondent knew he would be unable to 

perform his regular teaching assignments when he refused to comply with District 

orders to participate in COVID-19 testing. The District established cause to dismiss 

respondent under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

32 

Conclusion 

15.  When the totality of the evidence is considered in light of the 

factors, the District established cause to dismiss respondent from employment. 

ORDER 

Respondent Martin Reid is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated employee of 

the Shasta Union High School District pursuant to Legal Conclusions 1 through 6 and 9 

through 15, jointly and individually. 

DATED: _________________ 

08/01/2022

DATED: _________________ 

07/28/2022

__________________________________ 
SARA PASILLAS 
Commissioner 
Commission on Professional Competence 

__________________________________ 
JESSICA WALL 
Administrative Law Judge, Chair 
Commission on Professional Competence 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISSENT 

I respectfully dissent. I believe that the District has not met its burden and that 

Martin Reid should not be terminated from his employment with the Shasta Union 

High School District on the grounds of immoral conduct, dishonesty, and evident 

unfitness for service. I base this conclusion on the following factors. I conclude that Mr. 

Reid followed all administrative orders other than those that had to do with his body. 

The District argued that he did not follow the duties of his assignment, but since the 

COVID-19 pandemic was clearly an unusual occurrence, he could not have foreseen 

the extent that he would have to comply and give consent to medical treatment 

beyond the requirements established in his pre-pandemic contract. 

The District did not show that Mr. Reid was unfit for service as he did not have a 

negative evaluation or even a complaint from a parent. In fact, had the pandemic 

never occurred, Mr. Reid would still be held in high esteem by his district. Clearly, Mr. 

Reid was only standing up for his beliefs, something we try to teach our students on a 

daily basis. 

As a parent, I would allow my child in his classroom. As a colleague, I 

understand his conduct and attitude because the State of California presented so 

many conflicting facts and health directives, it was easy to question the veracity of the 

experts. As an administrator, I would trust him because he does not politicize his 

classroom and prides himself on letting students make decisions for themselves. 

// 

34 

Therefore, as a member of this panel, I can in good conscience return Mr. Reid to the 

classroom, in this or any other district. I recommend Martin Reid not be terminated 

from the Shasta Union High School District. 

DATED: _________________ 

08/03/2022

__________________________________ 
JULIE O BRIEN 
Commissioner 
Commission on Professional Competence 

NOTICE 

This is the final administrative decision; both parties are bound by this decision. 

Either party may appeal this decision to a court of competent jurisdiction within 90 

days. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
