BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
SHASTA UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Proceeding to Dismiss: 

DIANA GROFF, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022100381 

DECISION 

A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) of the Shasta Union 

Elementary School District heard this matter by videoconference on December 12, 2022. 

The Commission members were Michelle Kuehl, Misti Livingston, and Administrative Law 

Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, chairperson. 

Dylan Marques of the law firm Lozano Smith represented the Shasta Union 

Elementary School District (District). 

Respondent Diana Groff did not appear, and no one appeared on her behalf. 

Respondent’s default was entered, and this matter proceeded as a default hearing 

pursuant to Government Code section 11520. 

Evidence was received, the Commission met in Executive Session, the record was 

closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on December 12, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

The District is a small school district that serves approximately 114 

students in Shasta, California. It operates one elementary school, Shasta Montessori 

Elementary School, which serves students in kindergarten through eighth grade. 

2. 

Due to its small size, the District contracts with nearby Redding School 

District for certain administrative services. For example, Robert Adams, Redding School 

District’s Superintendent, is the District’s Superintendent. Jennifer Parra, Redding 

School District’s Human Resources Director, is the District’s Human Resources Director. 

3. 

Respondent began working for the District as a resource teacher on 

August 11, 2017. As of the 2021–2022 school year, she was a permanent certificated 

employee. She worked three days a week at Shasta Montessori Elementary School 

providing additional or extra help to small groups of or individual students with 

individualized education program plans.1 

1 An individualized education plan is a written statement describing a special 

education student’s present educational performance, annual goals for development, 

specific services to be used, dates to begin and duration of those services, criteria and 

schedules, and procedures for evaluating whether those objectives are being met. (Ed. 

Code, § 56345, subd. (a).) 

2 

 
The COVID-19 Pandemic 

4. 

The COVID-19 Pandemic forced school districts across California to take 

the unprecedented step of closing classrooms to in-person learning and shifting to 

online/remote learning at the end of the 2019–2020 school year. Although many 

school districts remained closed to in-person learning the following school year, the 

District reopened under a hybrid model with students attending classes on campus 

three days a week and remotely the other two. On October 1, 2020, the District’s 

students returned to campus full-time, and they remained on campus throughout the 

following 2021–2022 school year. 

Public Health Order 

5. 

Shortly before the start of the 2021–2022 school year, Tomas J. Aragon, 

M.D., Dr.PH, Director of the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) and State 

Public Health Officer, issued “State Public Health Officer Order of August 11, 2021” 

(Public Health Order). The Public Health Order provided: 

California is currently experiencing the fastest increase in 

COVID-19 cases during the entire pandemic with 22.7 new 

cases per 100,000 people per day, with case rates increasing 

tenfold since early June. The Delta variant, which is two 

times more contagious than the original virus, is currently 

the most common variant causing new infections in 

California. 

Unvaccinated persons are more likely to get infected and 

spread the virus, which is transmitted through the air. Most 

current hospitalizations and deaths are among 

3 

unvaccinated adults. Almost all K-6th graders are 

unvaccinated and will not be eligible for vaccines at the 

outset of the 2021-2022 school year. Additionally, although 

some 7-12th grade students will be fully vaccinated by the 

start of the school year, many will not. As of August 10, 

2021, less than 41% of Californians 12 to 17 years old were 

fully vaccinated. 

6. 

To prevent the spread of COVID-19, the Public Health Order required all 

“public and private schools serving students in transitional kindergarten through grade 

12, inclusive,” to develop and implement, no later than October 15, 2021, a: (1) plan for 

verifying its employees’ vaccine status; (2) protocol for weekly diagnostic screening 

testing of those who were “unvaccinated;” and (3) system for tracking test results and 

conducting contact tracing. “Workers who [were] not fully vaccinated, or for whom 

vaccine status [was] unknown or documentation [was] not provided, [were] considered 

unvaccinated.” 

The District’s Implementation of the Public Health Order 

7. 

Upon receipt of the Public Health Order, Superintendent Adams 

immediately began developing a process for District employees to verify their vaccine 

status and a weekly diagnostic screening testing protocol. His goal was to bring the 

District into compliance with the Public Health Order as quickly as possible for the 

safety of its staff and students. 

WEEKLY DIAGNOSTIC SCREENING TESTING PROTOCOL 

8. 

On September 15, 2021, Ms. Parra distributed to all District employees 

Superintendent Adams’s letter confirming the District’s commitment “to supporting 

4 

the successful continuance of full in-person instruction for [its] students while 

protecting the safety of students and staff.” Superintendent Adams explained the 

District was “preparing to implement weekly COVID-19 testing protocols” for “all 

certificated and classified employees, substitutes, vendors and volunteers.” 

9. 

Superintendent Adams further explained that “fully vaccinated” 

individuals had the option of not participating in weekly testing. He explained what it 

meant to be “fully vaccinated,” how one could prove his or her vaccination status, and 

the deadline by which he or she needed to provide verification to opt out of testing 

(October 1, 2021). Superintendent Adams also explained what someone should do if 

his or her vaccine status changed after October 1, 2021. 

10. 

The District did not require anyone to get vaccinated or to disclose his or 

her vaccine status. Instead, it required all employees to participate in weekly diagnostic 

screening testing (weekly testing). Those who were fully vaccinated against the COVID-

19 virus and willing to present evidence of their status had the option of not testing. 

VERIFICATION OF VACCINE STATUS 

11. 

Between September 15 and October 1, 2021, employees had the 

opportunity to verify they were fully vaccinated against the COVID-19 virus by showing 

the District’s Human Resources Department a COVID-19 Vaccination Record Card, a 

photo of the Card, documentation from a healthcare provider, a digital record that 

included a QR code, or documentation from other contracted employers. Staff made a 

list of those employees who did not present evidence of their vaccine status, and the 

list was provided to Superintendent Adams. Respondent did not provide proof of her 

vaccine status. 

5 

Superintendent Adams’s Directive to Register for Weekly Testing 

12.  On October 12, 2021, Superintendent Adams sent an email to all District 

employees who did not submit proof they were fully vaccinated by the deadline, 

including respondent. The email notified the employees that they had been “identified 

for weekly testing for the 2021–2022 school year until such a time [that] the [Public 

Health Order] [was] canceled or rescinded.” They were provided the name of the entity 

providing testing and directed to register for testing on the entity’s website by 

October 15, 2021. 

13. 

Respondent sent her school principal the following text message the 

week after receiving Superintendent Adams’s email: 

Well [sic] I’m feeling like Shasta has become a hostile work 

[sic] place. My mom is probably dying from the effects of 

the 3rd booster and when I look the children in the eyes 

and know that [Superintendent Adams] plans to have them 

all vaccinated with or without parents [sic] approval I am 

deeply grieved that I can’t protect them. 

14. 

Respondent confirmed during a subsequent telephone call with Ms. Parra 

that she had no intent to participate in weekly testing. At hearing, Superintendent 

Adams explained he never had any plans to vaccinate students or anyone else. He 

never told respondent or anyone else otherwise. 

Ms. Parra’s Directive to Test 

15. 

Respondent did not register for testing by the specified deadline. Nor did 

she participate in weekly testing when it began on October 18, 2021. Ms. Parra sent 

6 

her a warning letter on October 29, 2021, notifying her that her failure to register for 

testing and participate in weekly testing violated the Public Health Order and 

Superintendent Adams’s written directives and demonstrated insubordination. 

16.  Ms. Parra directed respondent to test by the close of business Tuesday, 

November 2, 2021; informed her of different places she could test, including at home, 

on campus, or at a location of her choice; and provided dates, times, and locations for 

various COVID clinics. Ms. Parra explained, “If you fail to test by the end of the working 

day on Tuesday, November 2, 2021, you will be placed on administrative leave and 

ineligible to work starting Wednesday, November 3, 2021.” 

Ms. Parra’s Second Directive to Test 

17. 

Respondent took personal leave and did not return to work until January 

11, 2022. She did not undergo testing the week she returned, and Ms. Parra issued her 

a written reprimand three days later due to her “recent refusal to attend scheduled 

diagnostic screening for the week of January 10, 2022.” Ms. Parra advised that 

respondent’s failure to abide by the Public Health Order, Superintendent Adams’s 

October 12, 2021 directive, and Ms. Parra’s October 29, 2021 directive was 

unprofessional and demonstrated insubordination. 

18.  Ms. Parra directed respondent to test by 4:00 p.m. on Thursday, January 

20, 2022; explained she could not return to work until she “completed a COVID-19 

test”; informed her of different places she could test, including at home, on campus, or 

at a location of her choice; and provided dates, times, and locations for various COVID 

clinics. Ms. Parra warned that if respondent failed to test by the deadline provided, she 

would be “considered to be on paid administrative leave starting Friday, January 21, 

7 

2022.” Furthermore, noncompliance “will result in further disciplinary action, up to and 

including a recommendation for termination.” 

Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges 

19. 

Respondent continued to ignore the repeated directives to undergo 

weekly testing. On June 15, 2022, the District’s Board of Education (Board) approved 

charges seeking her termination and placing her on immediate unpaid suspension. The 

Board charged her with immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey reasonable regulations prescribed by the 

Board.2 The Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges (Notice of Intent to 

Dismiss) alleged: 

As of the date of this Notice, you have not submitted proof 

of vaccination nor agreed to participate in weekly COVID-19 

testing. In fact, you have communicated to the District that 

you will continue to refuse to be tested, and you have not 

offered any valid reason for your refusal. 

2 The Board alleged her willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause only as a basis for immediate suspension. Her immediate suspension is 

not an issue. (See Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1) [a certificated employee who has been 

immediately suspended may file and serve “a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension”], (2) [such motion must be filed “within 30 days after service . . . of the initial 

pleading in the matter”], & (6) [the motion “shall be the exclusive means of obtaining 

interlocutory review of suspension pending dismissal”].) 

8 

 
20. 

Superintendent Adams caused the Notice of Intent to Dismiss to be 

personally served on respondent on June 16, 2022. An accompanying cover letter 

informed her that she was “suspended without pay pending the outcome of the 

dismissal process.” The letter notified respondent of her right to challenge the Notice 

of Intent to Dismiss. 

Request for Hearing and Notice of Hearing 

21. 

Respondent signed a Request for Hearing on July 15, 2022, and returned 

it to Ms. Parra by email. A Notice of Hearing specifying the date and time of hearing 

was sent to respondent at the email address from which she sent her Request. The 

Notice of Hearing provided: “The hearing will be held via videoconference. Remote 

appearance instruction to follow.” Instructions were sent to respondent on November 

28, 2022, at the same email address as the Notice of Hearing. 

22. 

Respondent did not appear at hearing, and no one appeared on her 

behalf. She submitted no evidence, and none was submitted on her behalf. She never 

provided the District an explanation for not registering for or participating in weekly 

testing. 

Applicable Board Policies and Administrative Regulations 

23. 

The Board enacted Administrative Regulation (AR) 4112 requiring all 

certificated employees to comply with all applicable laws, Board policies (BP), ARs, and 

collective bargaining agreements. AR 4112.3 requires certificated employees to swear 

or affirm that they will “support and defend the Constitution of the United States and 

the Constitution of the State of California” and “will well and faithfully discharge” their 

duties as a certificated employee. 

9 

24. 

The Board adopted a professional standards policy. (BP 4119.21.) This 

policy requires employees to “engage in conduct that . . . contributes to a positive 

school climate” and to “make reasonable effort to protect the students from 

conditions harmful to learning or to health and safety.” Employees are prohibited from 

engaging in inappropriate conduct. “Inappropriate conduct” includes “any conduct 

that endangered students, staff, or others.” 

25. 

The Board also adopted a positive school climate policy reflecting its 

commitment to “providing an orderly, caring, and nurturing educational and social 

environment in which all students can feel safe and take pride in their school and their 

achievements.” (BP 5137.) The policy outlines the expectation that all employees “serve 

as role models for students by demonstrating positive, professional attitudes and 

respect toward each student and other staff members.” 

26. 

To carry out the positive school climate policy, the Board directs that 

“appropriate measures shall be implemented to minimize the risk of harm to students, 

including, but not limited to, protocols for maintaining safe conditions on school 

grounds, promoting safe use of school facilities and equipment, and guiding student 

participation in educational programs and school-sponsored activities.” (BP 5142.) 

Additionally, “school staff shall be responsible for the proper supervision of students at 

all times.” (Ibid.) 

27. 

The Board desires “to promote the health of district students and staff in 

order to reduce absenteeism and enhance employee and student performance.” (BP 

4119.41.) Therefore, “the Superintendent or designee shall develop strategies to 

prevent the outbreak or spread of infectious diseases at district schools.” (Ibid.) 

10 

28. 

The Board also wants to promote “the safety of students, staff, and the 

public” while also protecting District resources.” (BP 3530.) The District is required to 

“keep its liability at a minimum and its insurance premiums as low as possible while 

maintaining adequate protection” against potential losses. (Ibid.) Administrative 

Regulation 3530 provides that “employees may be held responsible for recurring 

damage or losses that occur due to their negligence or lack of supervision.” 

Analysis 

29. 

“[A] statute can constitutionally bar a person from practicing a lawful 

profession only for reasons related to [her] fitness to practice that profession.” (Board 

of Education of Long Beach Unified School District of Los Angeles County v. Jack M. 

(1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, 697 [rejecting board’s argument that teacher’s uncharged 

criminal conduct constituted a per se unfitness to teach].) The California Supreme 

Court previously observed that the terms “immoral conduct,” “unprofessional 

conduct,” and “conduct involving moral turpitude” are too broad and vague to 

constitute a basis for discipline without a showing of unfitness to teach. (Morrison v. 

State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 [outlining eight factors for 

demonstrating an unfitness to teach].) An analysis of the Morrison factors is required 

in proceedings to revoke a teaching credential and to terminate a permanent 

certificated employee. (Board of Education of Long Beach Unified School District of Los 

Angeles County v. Jack M., supra, 19 Cal.3d at p. 697, fn. 2.) “Only the pertinent 

Morrison factors need to be analyzed.” (Broney v. California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.) 

30. 

The Public Health Order was issued shortly before the beginning of the 

2021–2022 school year. To prevent the spread of COVID-19, school districts were 

required to verify their employees’ vaccine status and implement weekly testing of 

11 

those who were unvaccinated. Any employee who did not provide evidence of his or 

her vaccine status was considered “unvaccinated.” 

31. 

The District required all employees to undergo weekly testing. However, 

those who were fully vaccinated had the option of presenting proof of their status and 

opting out of weekly testing. 

32. 

Respondent did not submit evidence of her vaccine status. Therefore, she 

was directed to register for weekly testing. She was subsequently directed to submit to 

testing, twice. Respondent ignored those directives. Indeed, she told Ms. Parra she 

would not participate in weekly testing. She never provided a reason for her refusal. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENTS OR OTHER TEACHERS 

33. 

Respondent created an unsafe environment at Shasta Montessori 

Elementary School by potentially exposing her colleagues, the students, and their 

families to COVID-19 by refusing to provide evidence of her vaccine status or test 

weekly. As a health and safety precaution, she was placed on paid administrative leave 

and prohibited from entering her workplace, effective January 21, 2022. Her leave was 

changed to unpaid leave five months later. 

34. 

Respondent’s absence from the classroom increased her colleagues’ 

workload. It also required the District to pay a substitute to perform services 

respondent was being paid to provide. Her students were required to adapt to a new 

teacher after starting the school year with respondent. 

DEGREE OF ADVERSITY 

35. 

The degree of adversity caused by respondent’s actions was great. As the 

Public Health Order noted, “unvaccinated persons are more likely to get infected and 

12 

spread the [COVID-19] virus.” Additionally, she taught at a school serving 

kindergartners through eighth graders, and none of her students in the sixth grade or 

below were eligible for vaccines at the beginning of the 2021–2022 school year. 

36. 

Furthermore, many students struggled after schools closed to in-person 

instruction, so the District brought them back to campus the following year to 

minimize the effects of the pandemic on them. Respondent’s absence from the 

classroom for most of the 2021–2022 school year interfered with the District’s efforts. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF CONDUCT 

37. 

Respondent’s misconduct was recent in time, occurring last school year. 

TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD 

38. 

Respondent’s teaching credential authorizes her to teach students with 

special needs. Such students often achieve greater success in the classroom when their 

time is structured, they develop a routine, and they develop a rapport with their 

teacher. The pandemic had already created disorganization and uncertainty in 

respondent’s students’ education and interfered with any rapport she had developed 

with them when in-person learning ended. Her absence for much of the 2021–2022 

school year caused even more chaos. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

39. 

An “‘aggravating factor’ is an event or circumstance which demonstrates 

that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is 

needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) Examples of aggravating factors include: (1) multiple 

acts of misconduct or conduct that demonstrates a pattern of misconduct; 

13 

(2) misconduct that demonstrates bad faith; (3) showing an indifference to the 

consequences of misconduct; and (4) prior warnings or reprimands. (Id., subd. (b)(2), 

(3), (5), & (6).) 

40. 

The Public Health Order outlined the dangers of the COVID-19 Pandemic. 

To stop the virus from spreading, the District was required to implement weekly for 

unvaccinated employees testing. Respondent ignored the Public Health Order, the 

District’s attempt to verify her vaccine status, and multiple directives to register for and 

participate in weekly testing. She engaged in a pattern of misconduct and 

demonstrated bad faith and indifference toward the significant risk of harm she posed 

to her colleagues, students, and their families. 

41. 

Superintendent Adams persuasively explained why respondent’s 

misconduct was sufficiently egregious to justify termination of employment. 

Respondent took an oath to “support . . . the laws of the . . . State of California” when 

she was issued her teaching credential and each time she renewed it. (Ed. Code, 

§ 44334.) She ignored that oath and placed herself before the health, safety, and 

welfare of her colleagues and students, the people she chose and was paid to serve. 

42.  Moreover, respondent agreed to abide by all applicable laws, collective 

bargaining agreements, BPs, and ARs when she accepted employment with the 

District, including those BPs and ARs discussed above. For instance, she committed to 

making reasonable efforts to protect students’ health and safety. She was “expected to 

serve as [a] role model[] for students by demonstrating positive, professional attitudes 

and respect toward each student and other staff members.” Respondent fell woefully 

short of meeting those policies. 

14 

43. 

A “‘mitigating factor’ is an event or circumstance which demonstrates 

that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be adequately protected by a 

more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action whatsoever.” (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Examples of mitigating factors include: (1) absence of 

prior discipline; (2) lack of harm; (3) emotional or physical conditions that caused or 

led to the misconduct; (4) evidence of good character; (5) evidence of insight into the 

misconduct and subsequent remedial actions; and (6) evidence of rehabilitation. (Id., 

subd. (m)(1)–(5) & (7).) 

44. 

Respondent did not introduce any evidence, and none was introduced on 

her behalf. Therefore, there was no evidence of any mitigating factors. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES 

45. 

Respondent never provided an explanation for not verifying her vaccine 

status or participating in weekly testing. Though a reasonable inference that she had 

concerns over the safety of the COVID-19 vaccine may be drawn from the text 

message she sent her principal, respondent was never asked or required to get 

vaccinated. The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of respondent’s motives cannot 

be accurately evaluated. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

46. 

Between August and November 2021, respondent ignored the Public 

Health Order and three letters from District administrators directing her to verify her 

vaccine status or participate in weekly testing. She continues to ignore those 

instructions more than one year later. Respondent’s conduct demonstrates a strong 

likelihood of recurrence. 

15 

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINE MAY INFLICT ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING 

EFFECT ON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 

47.  Neither the Public Health Order nor the District’s weekly testing protocol 

required respondent to get vaccinated or disclose her vaccine status. She was required 

to disclose her vaccine status only if she wanted to opt out of testing. She could have 

instead chosen not to disclose her status and to test. In other words, no one could 

accurately determine respondent’s vaccine status simply from her participation in 

weekly testing. Therefore, there was no evidence that terminating respondent may 

adversely impact or have a chilling effect on her constitutional rights. 

Summary 

48. 

Respondent’s actions constitute immoral conduct and demonstrate her 

evident unfitness for service. She agreed to abide by applicable laws, rules, and 

regulations when she accepted employment with the District. Her violation of the 

Public Health Order, the oath she took when issued her credential and each time it was 

renewed, and the BPs and ARs discussed above constitute dishonesty and a persistent 

violation of rules. She provided no explanation for her refusal to verify her vaccine 

status or undergo weekly testing. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 

1. 

The District has the burden of proving the allegations in the Notice of 

Intent to Dismiss by a preponderance of the evidence. (Gardener v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1040 [the preponderance of the 

16 

evidence standard applies in proceedings before a Commission on Professional 

Competence]; Parker v. City of Fountain Valley (1981) 127 Cal.App.3d 99, 113 [”It is 

axiomatic, in disciplinary administrative proceedings, that the burden of proving the 

charges rests upon the party making the charges”].) This evidentiary standard requires 

the District to produce evidence of such weight that, when balanced against evidence 

to the contrary, is more persuasive. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC 

(2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) In other words, the District need only prove it is 

more likely than not that the allegations in the Notice of Intent to Dismiss are true. 

(Lillian F. v. Superior Court (1984) 160 Cal. App.3d 314, 320.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), authorizes termination of 

a permanent certificated employee as follows: “A permanent employee shall not be 

dismissed except for one or more of the following causes: [¶] (1) Immoral 

conduct . . . . [¶] . . . [¶] (4) Dishonesty. [¶] . . . [¶] (6) Evident unfitness for service. 

[¶] . . . [¶] (8) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 

state board or by the governing board of the school district employing him or her.” 

3. 

The court in Board of Education of San Francisco Unified School District 

v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said the following about immoral conduct in the 

context of the Education Code: 

In Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

17 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” 

(Id., at p. 811.) 

4. 

“’[T]he definition of immoral . . . conduct must be considered in 

conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are 

imposed “responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

regard to other callings.’ [Citation.]” (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission 

on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) 

5. 

A charge of “evident unfitness for service” requires proof that the teacher 

is “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies. [It] connotes a fixed character trait, 

presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Woodland Joint Unified 

School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 

1444.) When considering such a charge, the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to 

determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for 

service.” (Id., at p. 1445.) Only if the conduct demonstrates an unfitness for service 

18 

does one proceed to the next step of determining “whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; 

i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.) 

6. 

A charge of persistent violation of or refusal to obey requires a showing 

of insubordination. (Midway School District of Kern County v. Griffeath (1946) 29 

Cal.2d 13, 18–19.) Furthermore, “persistence” requires a showing of “continuing or 

constant” behavior. (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman 

(1972) 27 Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) “Persistence, in the sense intended, is referable to past 

conduct. The Legislature undoubtedly intended that opportunity for correction be 

available and refrained from providing for dismissal for a single violation of 

regulations, or until repeated violations could be considered persistent.” (Midway 

School District of Kern County v. Griffeath, supra, 29 Cal.2d at p. 18.) 

7. 

Courts have said the following about evaluating whether a teacher’s 

conduct warrants discipline: 

Goldsmith v. Board of Education, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in Board of Education v. Swan, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

of a credential, involves many aspects.“. . . [sic] the teacher 

is entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. [Her] habits, [her] speech, [her] 

good name, [her] cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of 

[her] unofficial utterances, [her] associations, all are 

involved. [Her] ability to inspire children and to govern 

them, [her] power as a teacher, and the character for which 

19 

[s]he stands are matters of major concern in a teacher’s 

selection and retention.” 

(Moser v. State Board of Education (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 

Conclusion 

8. 

Respondent’s decision not to abide by the Public Health Order and 

District administrators’ repeated directives to verify her vaccine status or participate in 

weekly testing constituted immoral conduct, dishonesty, and a persistent violation of 

or refusal to obey reasonable regulations prescribed by the Board. Her conduct also 

demonstrated an evident unfitness for service. Therefore, cause exists to terminate her 

employment with the District pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(1), (4), (6), and (8), individually and collectively. Respondent presented no evidence 

why she should be allowed to remain employed with the District. 

ORDER 

Respondent Diana Groff is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated employee of 

the Shasta Union Elementary School District. 

DATE: 

MISTI LIVINGSTON 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence

20 

Misti Livingston (Jan 10, 2023 14:06 PST)01/10/2023 
DATE: 

DATE: 

MICHELLE KUEHL 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence

COREN D. WONG 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional Competence

01/10/2023Coren D. Wong (Jan 10, 2023 14:42 PST)01/10/2023 
 
 
 
