BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
PLACER UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Charges 

Against: 

JEREMY JEFFREYS, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022120422 

DECISION 

A Commission on Professional Competence of the Placer Union High School 

District (Commission) heard this matter May 2 through 5 and August 21 through 23, 

2023, by videoconference from Sacramento, California. The Commission members 

were Scott Collins, John Peterson, and Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, 

Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, chairperson. 

Jacob G. Grillot and Katherine A. Reiche of Currier & Hudson, APC, represented 

the Placer Union High School District (District). Elena DalFavero, Assistant 

Superintendent of Human Resources, also appeared on behalf of the District. 

Matthew Chevedden of Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & Chevedden, 

LLP, represented respondent Jeremy Jeffreys, who was present. 

Evidence was received, the Commission met in Executive Session, the record 

was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on September 11, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

RESPONDENT’S BACKGROUND 

1. 

Respondent began teaching as a noncommissioned officer in the military. 

He was appointed his unit’s instructor. He transitioned from the military into a career 

in law enforcement. As a police officer, respondent had opportunities to teach other 

officers various law enforcement tools and techniques. 

2. 

Respondent transitioned from law enforcement and obtained his 

Emergency Long-Term Single Subject Teaching Permit with Authorizations for 

Industrial and Technology Education and Social Science. He began working as a long-

term substitute for the Vacaville Unified School District in 2000. Respondent obtained 

his Preliminary and then Clear credentials with the same Authorizations in 2005 and 

2006, respectively. The Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District hired him as a full-time 

teacher. In 2015, respondent and his wife, also a teacher, moved to Rocklin, California. 

He obtained employment with the Rocklin Unified School District, and she began 

teaching for the District at Del Oro High School. 

3. 

Nicholas Zerwas taught Video Production Pathway courses at Del Oro 

High School. He was promoted to the school’s Assistant Principal for the 2017/2018 

school year. The District hired respondent as Assistant Principal Zerwas’s replacement 

in the classroom. Respondent continued teaching Video Production Pathway courses 

2 

at Del Oro High School for the following four school years until he was placed on paid 

administrative leave toward the end of the 2021/2022 school year. He returned from 

leave at the beginning of the following school year and taught World Studies at Del 

Oro High School and Video Production Pathway courses at Foresthill High School. 

Respondent has been out of the classroom on special assignment since approximately 

October 19, 2022. 

NOTICE OF UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

4. 

On May 18, 2022, George Sziraki, Jr., Ed.D., Superintendent of the District, 

signed a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct (Notice of Unprofessional Conduct). The 

Notice of Unprofessional Conduct described the following conduct as unprofessional: 

Failure to base student grades on impartial, consistent 

observation and evaluation of student learning consistent 

with District policy; 

Using inappropriate and subjective grading practices; 

Failure to instruct students on course content, instead 

directing students to watch video lectures from the internet 

for content instruction; 

Engaging in grossly dishonest, immoral conduct, including 

by manipulating student test scores by providing students 

the answers and questions to District-wide assessments; 

Failure to appropriately implement student 

accommodations in accordance with federal law and 

3 

discrimination against students based on protected status 

(disability); and 

Exhibiting extremely poor treatment of students and 

insensitivity with respect to boundaries and appropriate 

behavior for students. 

5. 

The Notice of Unprofessional Conduct expressly referenced Enclosure 15, 

which was respondent’s Teacher Summary Evaluation Form (Step 4) dated March 27, 

2022. The evaluation was attached to the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct. 

6. 

Assistant Superintendent DalFavero is the District’s custodian of records. 

She also was involved in preparing the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and 

preparing the enclosures. She placed a copy of the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct 

in respondent’s official personnel file. She identified Exhibit 3 as an accurate copy of 

the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct. 

ACCUSATION AND STATEMENT OF CHARGES 

7. 

On October 18, 2022, Dr. Sziraki signed the Accusation and Statement of 

Charges (Accusation). The Accusation alleged cause to dismiss respondent as a 

permanent certificated employee of the District for immoral conduct, unprofessional 

conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violations of or 

refusal to obey the school laws or regulations of the State of California or the District. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing on the Accusation. 

4 

2020/2021 School Year 

STUDENT LV 

8. 

LV was a senior in respondent’s Introduction to Video Production and 

Broadcasting class during the spring semester. He excelled academically in high 

school. He received straight A’s his freshman year. He generally received A’s and B’s 

his remaining three years. 

9. 

Del Oro High School offered instruction during the spring semester 

through a hybrid format. Some students appeared in the classroom with the teacher 

and others appeared remotely via the Zoom platform. LV chose to attend class 

remotely. He used a computer, web camera, and microphone to transmit his video and 

audio to a computer in respondent’s classroom simultaneously with respondent 

providing instruction in the classroom. Respondent’s image and audio was transmitted 

to LV and other students appearing remotely through a web camera and microphone. 

10. 

LV described the format of respondent’s class as incredibly “rigid” and 

intimidating.” He found the class “not enjoyable at all.” He “had a very poor experience 

in the class.” LV felt as though he was under constant pressure and stress both in and 

out of class. He would not recommend respondent as a teacher to any prospective 

student because he felt his final grade in the course, a B, was based on respondent’s 

subjective standards and in retaliation for questioning his grade rather than LV’s 

objective performance. 

11.  One component of LV’s overall grade was his Workplace Skills grade. His 

Workplace Skills grade was based on following respondent’s rules and policies, e.g., 

arriving for class on time, not using a cell phone without permission, and being 

respectful to respondent, classroom equipment, and classmates. It was also based on 

5 

LV’s work ethic during class, e.g., completing daily warm-up assessments, completing 

summative assessments, staying focused and on task, following instructions, working 

for the entire class period, being actively engaged in learning, and participating and 

collaborating with group members during group projects. For those students 

appearing through Zoom, active engagement in learning included having their 

cameras on for the entire duration of class. 

12. 

In March, LV noticed his Workplace Skills grade had dropped from a 

“middle A” to “a low C.” He scheduled a Zoom meeting with respondent to discuss 

why his grade had dropped. During the meeting, respondent responded defensively. 

He alleged there were several days on which LV either did not turn on his camera, 

turned it off during class, or did not turn in his daily warm-up assignment on time. 

Respondent provided a list of those dates. 

13. 

Respondent video-recorded his classes so students who missed class 

could review the video to catch up. LV reviewed the videos for all the dates 

respondent identified. He confirmed he arrived each day on time with his video 

camera on and his camera remained on for the entire duration of class. He confirmed 

this by seeing himself at the beginning of each video and then “high-speed 

scrubb[ing]” until the end of class to confirm his video camera never turned off. LV 

also verified his timely submission of warm-up assignments on each date respondent 

identified by reviewing the date and time stamp for each assignment. 

14. 

LV sent respondent an email with the above results of his review of class 

videos and history for turning in assignments. Respondent replied that he double-

checked everything, and LV’s grade was correct. This response made LV feel “terrible,” 

“powerless,” and as if he was “stranded in the middle of the ocean.” 

6 

15. 

LV felt he had done all he could do to advocate for himself as a student, 

so he told his parents. His mother, TDV, sent respondent an email scheduling a 

meeting for March 11, 2021. 

16. 

LV described the meeting as having gone “poorly.” He and his parents 

arrived in respondent’s classroom on time, but respondent was helping some students 

and told LV and his parents to wait. The meeting started a few minutes later. 

17. 

Respondent was reluctant to review any of the class videos during the 

meeting. He insisted he double-checked everything and agreed to do “triple-check” by 

reviewing the videos later. He agreed to watch the videos during the meeting only 

after LV’s father insisted they review the videos “now.” 

18. 

Respondent, LV’s parents, and LV reviewed videos for all the dates 

respondent originally provided LV. They confirmed LV was present with his camera on 

the entire time and completed his warm-up assignment on time each day. After, 

respondent identified additional dates on which LV purportedly did not have his 

camera on or turned in a warm-up assignment late. They reviewed the videos for each 

of those dates and confirmed respondent was wrong. 

19.  When initially reviewing the videos, respondent had no expression on his 

face. As they began to confirm his mistakes, his face began to turn red. He explained, 

“I have never made a mistake” in 21 years. He apologized and agreed to give LV the 

missing credit. LV’s Workplace Skills grade increased to 95 percent. Respondent 

explained LV’s grade was not 100 percent due to an unexcused absence. 

20. 

LV did not believe respondent’s apology was “genuine.” Respondent’s 

demeanor and comments were more consistent with an attitude of “I never make a 

mistake,” rather than an expression of regret or sympathy for making a mistake. Based 

7 

on respondent’s reaction to LV questioning his grade, LV feared respondent would 

retaliate during future grading. 

21. 

About one month after the meeting, LV noticed his Workplace Skills 

grade dropped to 70 percent. He emailed respondent but received no response. He 

told his father, and his father emailed respondent. Respondent explained LV’s grade 

dropped due to his score on Project 6. 

22. 

LV’s father responded that his son was under the impression the 

Workplace Skills grade was based on participation and not projects. He also noted LV’s 

grade had dropped long before Project 6 was due. Respondent responded by 

explaining LV’s Workplace Skills grade had dropped only one point since the March 

meeting. LV’s father expressed disbelief that a grade could drop 25 percent from 

losing only one point. 

23.  Dissatisfied with respondent’s responses, LV’s father sent Assistant 

Principal Zerwas an email expressing concerns with respondent’s treatment of LV. LV’s 

parents subsequently met with Assistant Principal Zerwas. They expressed concerns 

that respondent was “targeting” LV by grading him unfairly because he questioned his 

grade. 

24. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas met with respondent, during which they 

reviewed a spreadsheet on which respondent tracked students’ Workplace Skills 

points. The spreadsheet showed LV lost points on 15 days, one of them for having his 

camera turned off. Assistant Principal Zerwas asked if that was a day for which 

respondent reviewed video footage during his meeting with LV and his parents. 

Respondent said it was not, and Assistant Principal Zerwas asked him to pull up the 

video for that day. 

8 

25. 

Respondent looked for the video on his computer and could not find it. 

He acted surprised and searched again. When he still could not find it, he told 

Assistant Principal Zerwas he had stopped recording his classes because most students 

had returned to the classroom. He opined he must have accidentally deleted the 

videos. Assistant Principal Zerwas directed respondent to search the trash folder on his 

computer. Respondent found the deleted videos. Assistant Principal Zerwas instructed 

him to restore the videos and not to delete them again. Assistant Principal Zerwas and 

respondent reviewed the applicable video and confirmed LV was present with his 

camera on. 

26. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas asked respondent to provide a list of the 15 

dates on which LV lost Workplace Skills points and the specific reasons why. 

Respondent’s list indicated LV lost points: (1) three times for having his camera turned 

off, not participating, or not responding; (2) seven times for not completing the warm-

up assignment; (3) three times for not completing the formative assessment; and 

(4) twice for being late to class and missing class discussion. 

27. 

Upon receipt, Assistant Principal Zerwas forwarded respondent’s list to 

LV and asked him to verify the accuracy of the information. LV responded by email and 

disputed “most of” the dates provided. LV explained he reviewed videos of the dates 

on which he purportedly had his camera turned off, did not participate, did not 

respond, or was late to class and missed class discussion. All the videos showed 

otherwise. Additionally, he produced several warm-up assignments with date and time 

stamps indicating they were timely submitted. 

28. 

LV’s email also expressed his belief respondent retaliated against him by 

artificially deflating his grades. Assistant Principal Zerwas compared LV’s scores to the 

class average for the two projects completed before respondent’s March meeting with 

9 

LV and his parents and the two completed after the meeting. LV’s scores for the 

former were higher than the class averages, but his scores for the latter were lower. 

29. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas watched one of the video projects for which LV 

received a score lower than the class average. He also watched other students’ videos 

for the same project. Based on his familiarity with the subject matter from teaching it 

for over five years, he opined that LV’s project was “pretty good” and respondent 

retaliated against him by giving him a lower score. He explained grading in classes like 

Video Production is inherently subjective. Some subjectivity can be eliminated by 

allowing students to resubmit projects with revisions. Respondent did not provide LV 

with that option. 

30. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas forwarded LV’s father’s complaint to Assistant 

Superintendent DalFavero, who initiated a formal investigation. Assistant 

Superintendent DalFavero interviewed respondent. Respondent initially reported LV 

had lost Workplace Skills points for not completing warm-up assignments. He later 

changed his explanation to LV not having completed the assignments before class 

discussion. Assistant Superintendent DalFavero reviewed respondent’s class syllabus, 

which stated warm-up assignments were due “before scoring.” She asked respondent 

how students knew when the assignments were going to be scored, but he did not 

respond. 

31. 

Assistant Superintendent DalFavero asked to review respondent’s class 

videos on two separate occasions. Both times, respondent said the videos had been 

deleted, and she was never able to watch them. This occurred after Assistant Principal 

Zerwas’s explicit instructions for respondent to restore the videos from his trash folder 

and not delete them again. 

10 

32. 

Assistant Superintendent DalFavero summarized her findings and 

conclusions after investigating LV’s father’s complaint in a letter to respondent. She 

concluded respondent failed to follow his and the District’s grading policies and 

provided inconsistent reasons for LV losing Workplace Skills points. She directed him 

to create, publish, and use a grading system based on clearly articulated expectations 

applicable to all students. She further instructed that his grading system must be 

consistent with the course’s Essential Learning Outcomes (ELO’s) and the District’s 

grading policies. Additionally, his grading system had to include clear notice to 

students of his expectations, specific deadlines for assignments, and be free from 

vague standards that deducted points based on performance and work. 

33. 

Assistant Superintendent DalFavero also concluded respondent 

deliberately destroyed evidence by deleting his class videos. She directed him to 

maintain detailed records of students’ grades, including all information relied upon in 

assigning grades. 

34. 

Assistant Superintendent DalFavero offered respondent support and 

assistance for meeting his directives and improving his teaching skills. She directed 

him to contact Assistant Principal Zerwas to discuss additional support and assistance. 

Respondent never did so. 

2021/2022 School Year 

STUDENT KS 

35. 

Student KS was a sophomore in respondent’s World Studies class during 

the fall. She described the class as “different” than her others because respondent did 

not interact with the students very much. She explained he played long videos and 

documentaries “most days of the school week,” unless they were taking a quiz or test. 

11 

36. 

The videos or documentaries generally lasted the entire class. 

Respondent usually sat at his desk. He paused the video or documentary and repeated 

what was just said “every so often.” KS found it “incredibly difficult” to focus because 

of the long videos or documentaries, and she nearly fell asleep a couple of times. 

504 Plan 

37. 

KS was diagnosed as having attention deficit disorder and autism 

spectrum disorder the summer before she started high school. Del Oro High School’s 

504 Planning Team met at the beginning of her freshman year and created a 504 Plan. 

Accommodations included five-minute breaks whenever she felt anxious or frustrated, 

providing hard copies of notes and assignments, and dividing assignments into 

smaller parts when appropriate. 

38. 

KS’s 504 Plan was updated during her sophomore year to clarify her 

accommodation for breaks. Assistant Principal Zerwas explained the update in an 

email to respondent and KS’s other teachers as follows: 

The student will be granted brain breaks of reasonable 

length (no more than five minutes) upon request. These 

breaks may include things like drawing or reading. If more 

than five minutes are needed, the student should check in 

with the instructor and proceed to the front/nurse’s office 

for an extended break. 

(Italics omitted.) 

39. 

Respondent immediately responded by asking how the 504 Plan was 

created, if he missed a meeting, and why he was not included in the meeting to amend 

12 

the 504 Plan. He explained, “This accommodation, as written, is not acceptable.” He 

imagined a scenario in which KS took a break in the middle of an important lecture. He 

described the scenario as “both a classroom management issue and a problem with 

her getting important information.” He also pontificated that allowing KS to go to the 

office for a five-minute break would accomplish little given that it would take her four 

minutes to walk to and from the office. 

40. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas “was blown away” by respondent’s email. He 

responded the following morning by explaining several other students had a similar 

accommodation. He provided examples of how to implement the accommodation. He 

further expressed appreciation for respondent’s concern that KS could miss important 

information during a break. But he also pointed out: 

She may already be missing that important information 

because of her becoming totally overwhelmed. That’s 

exactly why we want to have this accommodation in place 

so that when she realizes she is missing important 

information she can make the necessary adjustment so that 

she can refocus (this way she will only miss a few minutes 

instead of potentially zoning out for much longer). 

41. 

Respondent replied that the District’s policy requires the “504 team,” a 

group of staff familiar with the student, to develop 504 Plans. Had the policy been 

followed and he been contacted, he could have explained how implementing KS’s 

accommodation would create “a classroom management issue.” Respondent 

concluded by stating, “I refuse to allow this type of activity during a test.” He described 

his exclusion from the 504 Planning Team as “yet another example of this 

13 

administration devaluing the professional thought and professional opinions of the 

teachers here.” 

42. 

Two teachers included in the email chain between Assistant Principal 

Zerwas and respondent also responded. One offered to allow KS to come to his 

classroom during her breaks. His classroom was next door to respondent’s, and his 

“preparation period” was during KS’s World Studies class. The other teacher described 

his success with implementing KS’s need for breaks. 

43. 

The following week, Assistant Principal Zerwas sent an email thanking the 

two teachers for their input. He also offered to meet with respondent to “brainstorm” 

ideas on how to implement KS’s accommodation while also addressing his concerns. 

Respondent did not accept the offer. 

Denial of Accommodation 

44. 

Intervention period was a block of time during the school day during 

which students did not have an assigned class and were allowed to seek additional 

support from teachers, take tests they missed, or retake tests on which they did poorly. 

A few weeks after respondent had learned about KS’s updated accommodation, she 

went to his classroom to retake her World Studies Unit 5 test during intervention 

period. 

45.  When KS asked to retake the test, respondent told her she could not until 

she completed the study guide for the test. KS returned to her seat to complete her 

study guide. A friend sitting next to KS said respondent allowed the friend to retake 

the test without completing the entire study guide. This information upset KS, caused 

her to become “shaky,” and she felt a “breakdown” coming. She asked respondent for 

a break, which he denied. KS became more upset and stressed. 

14 

46. 

KS returned to her seat. She felt an “autism meltdown” approaching, so 

she texted her mother and explained what had just happened. Her mother told KS to 

leave class and go to the office to talk to Assistant Principal Zerwas. KS quietly 

gathered her belongings, left the classroom, and walked to the office to talk to 

Assistant Principal Zerwas. Respondent did not attempt to stop her. Instead, he sent 

SRS, KS’s mother, an email explaining KS had walked out of intervention without 

permission, thereby disrupting his class. He further explained he was suspending her 

for two days. 

47. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas described KS as “emotionally heightened” and 

frustrated when she arrived in his office. Her mother arrived shortly thereafter and 

took her home from school early. The following Monday, Assistant Principal Zerwas 

emailed respondent explaining KS would not return to his classroom for the remaining 

three days of the term and would spend those days in the front office. 

SRS’s Complaint 

48. 

SRS filed a formal complaint with the District alleging respondent 

discriminated against her daughter by denying her request for a break. Assistant 

Principal Zerwas interviewed respondent as part of the District’s investigation. 

Respondent explained he did not allow KS to take a break based on previous 

directions at a staff meeting that students were not allowed to leave during 

intervention period. Specifically, respondent explained Del Oro High School Principal 

Kim Barry stated students were abusing intervention period by telling one teacher they 

were going to another’s classroom but then roaming the halls with friends. To prevent 

this, Principal Barry said students should not be allowed to go to other classrooms 

during intervention period. Assistant Principal Zerwas followed up by stating students 

should not be allowed to leave even to use the restroom. 

15 

49. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas also interviewed SRS. She explained 

respondent had emailed her earlier in the semester because he had “growing 

behavioral concerns” with KS during World Studies, including her being off-task, 

talking to classmates when she should not be, and not following instructions. 

Respondent described having to redirect her on multiple occasions, and she was 

starting to become argumentative. He threatened to start suspending KS from class. 

50. 

SRS spoke with respondent after receiving the email. She proposed 

various alternatives when KS needed a break from watching videos in class, such as 

reading a book on the same topic or allowing her to doodle for short periods of time 

while listening to the video. Respondent rejected those options due to concerns that 

other students would get off-topic if they saw what KS was doing. SRS explained why 

KS’s disabilities made staying focused on watching a video for an extended period 

difficult and breaks were critical to her ability to refocus when her mind wandered. 

Respondent was unsympathetic and expressed no desire to accommodate KS’s needs. 

51. 

SRS also complained about respondent’s subjective grading of KS’s 

assignments. She also criticized his use of videos and notetaking as his primary source 

of instruction as discriminatory against those with attention deficit disorder or other 

processing disabilities. 

52. 

After conducting a thorough investigation into SRS’s complaint, the 

District found her concerns were “substantiated.” In particular, the District concluded 

respondent taught his World Studies course with minimal direct instruction, instead 

relying on videos. He did not adjust, differentiate, or scaffold his instruction to meet 

his students’ needs. 

16 

53. 

The District also found respondent graded his students in a subjective 

manner that did not properly assess their understanding of the ELO’s for the course. A 

comparison of KS’s responses on the Unit 5 examination showed she received no 

credit for responses that were substantially similar to others who received credit. 

54. 

The District concluded respondent took a harsh, uncompromising 

approach to implementing KS’s accommodation. It noted respondent knew he was 

obligated to implement her accommodation and found his explanation for not doing 

so “implausible.” Even if he believed his explanation to be true, the District pointed out 

he could have called the office for help in giving KS a break rather than denying her 

one. 

STUDENT AC 

55. 

AC was a sophomore in respondent’s World Studies class in the spring. 

She described his class as “fairly boring” because they did pretty much the same thing 

every day. Class started with a warm-up video that took about 10 to 15 minutes. Each 

student watched the video on his or her own monitor and then answered questions in 

an online threaded discussion. 

56. 

The warm-up video was generally followed by a second video that lasted 

either 40 or 80 minutes. Shorter videos were often followed by a third that lasted the 

remainder of the class. These videos were shown on numerous bigger screens 

throughout the classroom. 

Inappropriate Touching 

57.  One day, the class was watching an hour-long documentary. AC briefly 

closed her eyes due to irritation from staring at the screen for so long. Respondent 

17 

approached from behind without warning, placed four fingers on AC’s shoulder, and 

shook her with enough force to cause her chair to move and her to grab the armrests 

to steady herself. Respondent then walked away without saying anything. 

58. 

AC and a friend sitting next to her immediately looked at each other. Her 

friend asked what just happened, and AC said, “That was weird.” AC noticed 

respondent walked by other classmates who had their eyes closed or heads down as if 

they were asleep, but he did not shake or touch them. She felt “violated” by 

respondent touching her. 

59. 

The following day, AC began feeling anxious while completing her warm-

up assignment. She asked respondent to go to the office, and he told her she could 

leave after completing the assignment. 

60. 

AC completed her warm-up assignment and went to the library. Later, 

she went to the front office and asked if someone could help her. Someone asked why 

AC was not in class, and she became very emotional. 

AC’s Complaint 

61. 

Assistant Principal Matthew Rickabaugh came out to see what was 

wrong. He asked AC what was wrong, and she broke down and had trouble speaking. 

He brought her into his office, and she explained she was uncomfortable returning to 

respondent’s classroom. AC then explained what had happened the day before. 

Assistant Principal Rickabaugh asked her to provide a written statement, which she 

did. 

62. 

Assistant Principal Rickabaugh talked to four or five of AC’s classmates to 

see if they could confirm or refute her description of what had happened. Each 

18 

classmate described respondent touching AC in a manner substantially similar to AC’s 

description. Assistant Principal Rickabaugh found each student credible. 

63. 

Assistant Principal Rickabaugh also interviewed respondent. Respondent 

explained AC was wearing headphones while watching the documentary. He first tried 

getting her attention by calling her name and then tapping her chair. When neither 

worked, he touched her shoulder. Respondent denied shaking AC. 

64. 

The District concluded AC’s complaint that respondent touched her 

shoulder and shook her because he thought she was asleep was substantiated. The 

District also concluded her complaint that respondent did not engage in similar 

conduct toward other students who appeared to be sleeping was substantiated. 

DISTRICT-WIDE MIDTERM AND FINAL 

65.  During the District’s investigation into SRS’s complaint, Assistant Principal 

Zerwas heard from several students that respondent provided a study guide for the 

Fall 2021 District-wide World Studies midterm and allowed them to use it during the 

test. He obtained a copy of the study guide and compared it with the District-wide 

midterm. 

66. 

Respondent’s study guide contained 41 bullet points of information 

students “should know.” The midterm contained 53 questions. The numbering of the 

study guide’s bullet points did not match the numbering of the questions on the 

midterm, and the study guide did not cover all the questions. Nevertheless, the study 

guide contained the answers to 90 percent of the questions in the order in which they 

appeared on the midterm. 

19 

67. 

Assistant Principal Zerwas also learned respondent prepared a study 

guide for the District-wide World Studies final and allowed students to use it during 

the test. He obtained a copy of the study guide and compared it with the final. 

68. 

Respondent’s study guide contained 45 questions. The students were 

told to fill in the answers on the study guide. The final also contained 45 questions. 

Although the questions on the study guide were worded differently, each question on 

the study guide appeared in the same order on the final. 

NOTICE OF UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

69. 

As previously mentioned, the District issued respondent a Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct. The Notice was based on the outcome of the District’s 

investigation of LV’s father’s, SRS’s, and AC’s complaints. It also included allegations 

about respondent’s study guides for the District-wide midterm and final. 

70. 

The Notice of Unprofessional Conduct contained the following directives: 

• 

(1) prepare detailed lesson plans using the five-step format which 

demonstrate appropriate differentiation of instruction to meet students’ 

individual needs; 

• 

• 

(2) submit lesson plans and a weekly assessment schedule to Assistant 

Principals Zerwas and Jackson every Thursday for the following week; 

(3) review his job description and perform all essential functions of his 

position: 

20 

• 

(4) follow the District’s policies, procedures, directives, protocols, and 

guidance and demonstrate appropriate planning, scheduling, and 

professional judgment when performing his job; 

• 

(5) engage in active instruction for the entire duration of class, avoid using 

videos for content instruction, and differentiate teaching methods to meet 

students’ individual needs; 

• 

• 

• 

(6) revise grading policies so they are clear, accurate, and conform with 

District policies and administrative regulations; 

(7) send grading policies and all class syllabi to Assistant Principals Zerwas 

and Jackson a minimum of 48 hours before providing them to students; 

(8) develop clear, objective, written grading rubrics that give credit for 

showing competency and motivate student learning, send copies of rubrics 

to Assistant Principals Zerwas and Jackson at least seven calendar days 

before the concomitant quiz, assessment, or test, and keep copies of all 

student work and corresponding grading rubrics for administration’s review; 

• 

(9) avoid using aggressive, intimidating, demeaning, rude, hostile, or 

unprofessional language when communicating with students or parents, do 

not discourage students or parents from contacting administration or 

counselors, and treat everyone with dignity, professionalism, and respect; 

• 

• 

(10) timely read and respond to all communications from the District, 

parents, or students; 

(11) review Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) and 504 Plans for 

assigned students upon receipt, prepare a written plan outlining how each 

21 

student’s accommodations will be implemented in the classroom, email the 

plan to Assistant Principals Zerwas and Jackson for review, and timely 

contact case carrier and site administrator with any questions about 

implementing an IEP or 504 plan; and  

• 

(12) ask the appropriate department, Professional Learning Community, and 

administrator for additional support if needed. 

2022/2023 School Year 

CHANGE IN TEACHING ASSIGNMENT 

71. 

Jamie Jackson has been an Assistant Principal at Del Oro High School 

since the 2019/2020 school year. Before that, she taught health and culinary for the 

Roseville Joint Union High School District for 17 years. 

72.  One of Ms. Jackson’s duties as an Assistant Principal is to work with a 

team to develop the schedule for the following school year. The schedule lists the 

courses Del Oro High School will offer, the teachers who will teach each course, and 

the times each course will be offered. 

73. 

Video Production Pathways was a series of three courses that helped 

prepare students for joining the workforce upon graduation from high school – 

Introduction to Video Production, Video Production, and Advanced Video Production. 

Students needed to earn a minimum grade of “C-“ to proceed to the next course. Any 

one of the Video Production Pathways courses fulfilled the “elective” or “technology” 

graduation requirement. 

74.  When selecting electives, students indicated their first and second 

choices. Every effort was made to give students their first choice. If there was enough 

22 

interest in a particular course and there was a teacher available, another section would 

be offered. Similarly, if there was not enough interest in a particular course, it would 

not be offered. 

75. 

Respondent has been the only teacher of the Video Production Pathway 

courses since the District hired him. Enrollment in those courses has “declined 

significantly” during respondent’s tenure. His Introduction to Video Production class 

averaged a 44 to 47 percent failure rate. Students who failed were not able to progress 

to the next course in the series. This failure rate was more than four times the typical 

failure rate for electives. It was nearly double the failure rate for math, the most 

difficult core class. Ms. Jackson described the failure rate as “alarming.” 

76.  Ms. Jackson was able to fill only one Introduction to Video Production 

class during the Fall 2022 semester. There were no other courses that did not have an 

assigned teacher for which respondent was qualified to teach. Additionally, Erin 

Davenport, Ed.D., the Principal at Foresthill High School, saw an opportunity to bring 

back a freshman Tech Essentials course and offer Introduction to Video Production for 

the first time. Therefore, respondent was given a “split assignment” teaching at both 

schools. 

77. 

A full-time teacher with the District was assigned six “sections” each day. 

Those sections were broken into “blocks.” The teacher was assigned a class to teach 

during three of those blocks, had a preparation period during another, and an 

intervention period during another on Tuesdays through Fridays. On Mondays, there 

was no intervention period and the students were dismissed early. The last block of 

the day involved training or collaboration with other teachers. 

23 

78. 

Respondent was assigned to Foresthill High School for his first four 

sections of the day and to Del Oro High School for the remaining two. He taught Tech 

Essentials and Introduction to Video Production at the former and World Studies at 

the latter. He traveled from Foresthill High School to Del Oro High School Tuesday 

through Friday during what would have otherwise been his Intervention period. But 

because there was no intervention period on Monday, he taught his World Studies 

class on Mondays live by video camera from Foresthill High School while his students 

were in a classroom at Del Oro High School. Another certificated employee was 

physically in the classroom with students. 

79. 

The District notified respondent of his split teaching assignment at the 

end of the 2021/2022 school year. The assignment was effective at the beginning of 

the following school year. 

REQUEST TO CHANGE TEACHING ASSIGNMENT 

80. 

Respondent emailed Kimberly Barry, Del Oro High School’s Principal, 

shortly before his new assignment began and proposed that he teach Study Skills 

instead of World Studies during the fifth block. He rationalized that World Studies will 

be taught “only Tuesday through Friday (as I am at Foresthill all day on Monday)” and 

“students will be missing 20 days of instruction this term (because I won’t be there on 

Mondays).” Additionally, “students would not have the opportunity to see me for help 

during intervention and also could not be given an opportunity for test retakes.” 

81. 

Principal Barry met with respondent the following day and explained she 

could not make the proposed schedule change because the teacher with whom 

respondent proposed trading schedules was not scheduled to teach Study Skills 

during the fifth block. Additionally, Principal Barry clarified that respondent would 

24 

teach World Studies during the fifth block five days a week, with him teaching by live 

video provided synchronously from Foresthill High School on Mondays. She further 

clarified that a certificated employee in the classroom will supervise the students on 

Mondays. 

EMAIL TO PROSPECTIVE STUDENTS AND PARENTS 

82. 

After meeting with Principal Barry, respondent sent an email to his 

prospective World Studies students and their parents. He explained his class “will be 

significantly different than every other World Studies course at Del Oro.” Instruction on 

Mondays will be “online-based learning” with “students supervised by a non-

credentialed staff member in violation of state law.” Also, students will not be able to 

retake tests or receive extra support from him. 

83. 

Principal Barry learned about respondent’s email after a counselor 

reported receiving an unusual number of requests from parents to transfer their child 

out of respondent’s World Studies course. She sent an email to the same students and 

parents explaining instruction on Mondays will be “live, synchronous instruction to the 

class via videoconference for the entirety of fifth block.” She also clarified that a 

certificated employee will be physically in the classroom with students. Students who 

received respondent’s approval to retake a test “may do so before school, at lunch, or 

during intervention period. Retakes will be proctored by a school staff member.” She 

further detailed that students would have access to additional help from other World 

Studies teachers during intervention period. She copied respondent on the email. 

NOTICE OF CONCERN AND DIRECTIVES 

84. 

Principal Barry sent respondent a Notice of Concern and Directives in 

response to the email he sent prospective students and their parents (Notice of 

25 

Concern). She summarized the sequence of events regarding his proposed schedule 

change, their subsequent meeting, and his email. She explained he knew he would 

teach synchronously on Mondays, yet his email led recipients to incorrectly believe 

students would receive asynchronous assignments with no instruction. He also 

incorrectly represented that students will be supervised in a manner contrary to law. 

85. 

Principal Barry explained several students and parents contacted Del Oro 

High School upset over his misrepresentation that students will not be able to retake 

tests or receive additional support for World Studies. She clarified students can retake 

tests proctored by an appropriate staff member and the other World Studies teachers 

can provide additional help. 

86. 

Principal Barry characterized respondent’s decision to send an email he 

knew contained false or incomplete information as “poor professional judgment.” She 

directed him to ensure all future “communications to parents, students, and staff are 

entirely accurate, complete, carefully prepared, and reflect sound professional 

judgment.” 

DEL ORO HIGH SCHOOL’S BACK TO SCHOOL NIGHT 

87.  Del Oro High School’s Back to School Night was at the beginning of the 

school year. Principal Barry started the program by giving a brief welcome in the 

school’s gymnasium. Afterward, she and Assistant Superintendent DalFavero attended 

respondent’s fifth block World Studies presentation, during which the issue of 

respondent’s prior email to students and their parents was raised. Respondent put 

Principal Barry and Assistant Superintendent DalFavero in an “incredibly 

uncomfortable” position when he told parents, “Your children’s experience is going to 

be significantly different than anyone else here. These ladies right here (gesturing 

26 

towards Principal Barry and Assistant Superintendent DalFavero) are the reason the 

schedule is the way it is.” 

88. 

Respondent’s Notice of Concern explained the legality of the way 

students will be taught and supervised on Mondays. Respondent provided parents 

information contrary to what was in the Notice of Concern. For example, he reiterated 

that the way students will be supervised on Mondays was “illegal.” When Principal 

Barry clarified that it was not illegal, respondent interjected, “No, it is illegal. That’s 

what my attorney says.” 

89. 

Respondent also told parents his split assignment did not allow him to 

be on Del Oro High School’s campus until fifth block, contrary to the schedule outlined 

in the Notice of Concern. He further stated he would not provide study guides because 

he was “written up for that last year.” His explanation ignored the true reason the 

Notice of Unprofessional Conduct was issued. 

90. 

Following Back to School Night, parents contacted Del Oro High School’s 

administration and expressed concerns with respondent’s depiction of how he will 

teach his class. Additionally, several parents noted the tension between respondent, on 

the one hand, and Principal Barry and Assistant Superintendent DalFavero, on the 

other. 

FORESTHILL HIGH SCHOOL’S BACK TO SCHOOL NIGHT 

91. 

Foresthill High School’s Back to School Night was 10 days after Del Oro 

High School’s. Three days prior, the administration sent an email to all teachers 

reminding them of a staff meeting at which Back to School Night would be discussed. 

Approximately 30 minutes before the start of Back to School Night, Assistant Principal 

27 

Jeff Walters sent an email to all teachers telling them what time they should arrive at 

the school’s theater. 

92. 

Principal Davenport started Back to School Night with her staff on stage 

behind her as she provided brief introductory remarks in the school’s theater. She first 

learned respondent was not at Back to School Night when she did not see him on 

stage. Immediately after completing her introductory remarks, Principal Davenport and 

Assistant Principal Walters “scrambled” to find another teacher to attend respondent’s 

Tech Essentials and Introduction to Video Production courses. Respondent never told 

Principal Davenport, Assistant Principal Walters, or anyone else why he did not attend 

Back to School Night. 

NOTICE OF SERIOUS CONCERNS WITH DIRECTIVES AND NOTICE OF POSSIBLE 

DISCIPLINARY ACTION 

93. 

The District issued respondent a Notice of Serious Concerns with 

Directives and Notice of Possible Disciplinary Action (Notice of Serious Concerns). The 

Notice of Serious Concerns was “based on [his] display of continued unprofessional 

conduct that was previously identified and addressed” in the Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct, as well as his violations of directives in the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct 

and Notice of Concern. The District explained respondent provided inaccurate and 

misleading information and acted unprofessionally at Del Oro High School’s Back to 

School night. The Notice of Serious Concerns wrote it was “unacceptable and 

increasingly concerning considering it was in direct contradiction with the written 

communications provided to [him] which set forth the correct information.” 

94. 

The District cited respondent’s failure to appear at Foresthill High 

School’s Back to School Night without advance warning as a violation of his directive 

28 

to timely and accurately communicate with administration. It explained, “had [he] 

discussed or informed Foresthill Principal Erin Davenport or Interim Assistant Principal 

Walters that [he] would be unable to participate in Back to School Night, they would 

have communicated [his] absence to [his] students’ parents, in advance.” 

95. 

The District noted respondent posted his grading practices and syllabus 

on Canvas (a course management system that allowed respondent to post grades, 

information, and assignments online) just before Back to School Night. This violated 

his directive to obtain Assistant Principals Jackson’s and Zerwas’s approval before 

disseminating syllabi or grading procedures to students. 

96. 

Furthermore, respondent’s fifth block World Studies Day 7 lesson plans 

about World Religions fell woefully short of the requisite level of detail, preparation, 

and consideration his directives required. His continued use of videos to teach course 

content violated his directives to provide direct instruction on course content without 

relying on video lectures as a substitute. 

97. 

The District directed respondent to follow all previous directives, 

including those about preparing lesson plans and plans for implementing IEPs and 504 

Plans. Principal Davenport and Assistant Principal Walters were added as people to 

whom respondent was to send documents. It further directed him to acknowledge all 

future emails and communications from administration and parents within seven 

business hours. 

STUDENT MM 

98.  MM was a senior at Foresthill High School. She was assigned to 

respondent’s second block Tech Essentials course in the fall. She found him “very 

aggressive and very intimidating” as a teacher. She described his classroom 

29 

environment as “very unwelcoming.” MM felt respondent provided little instruction 

during class. The lack of structure often caused her mind to “race,” and she would not 

know what to do. MM transferred out of the class after three or four weeks.  

99.  MM had anxiety. An IEP team met and developed an IEP outlining various 

services and supports to accommodate MM’s learning disability and help her access 

her education. Accommodations included taking breaks as needed to decrease 

stressful situations and stepping outside the classroom to eat or drink at any time. 

100.  Nathan Swesey was a Resource/Special Education teacher at Foresthill 

High School. This year was his fourth year at Foresthill High School and as MM’s case 

manager. 

101.  At the beginning of the year, Mr. Swesey sent respondent a list of special 

education students assigned to respondent’s classes and their respective 

accommodations. He included MM and her accommodations. Mr. Swesey ended his 

message by inviting respondent to “please let [him] know if [respondent had] any 

questions.” Respondent never contacted Mr. Swesey, Principal Davenport, Assistant 

Principal Walters, or anyone else with questions about MM’s accommodations. 

102.  One day MM came into Tech Essentials, took her seat, and began the 

daily warm-up assignment. She disregarded respondent’s classroom rule that students 

leave their cell phones at the front of the classroom before taking their seats and kept 

her cell phone in her pants pocket. The warm-up assignment involved watching a 

short video that included audio. Respondent’s classroom rule was to listen to the 

audio using headphones to not disturb others. MM instead muted the audio and read 

the subtitles. 

30 

103.  Respondent noticed MM not wearing headphones and instructed her to 

use her headphones. She responded that she was reading subtitles instead. Shortly 

thereafter, respondent called MM up to his desk and started a discussion about her 

not following instructions and being disrespectful. MM became visibly upset and 

embarrassed because the classroom was silent except for respondent talking. She 

worried other students could hear what he was saying. 

104.  MM became more upset and frustrated as the conversation continued. 

She eventually asked to see Assistant Principal Walters. Respondent asked if she had a 

pass to see Assistant Principal Waters, but she did not. He told her she could see 

Assistant Principal Walters after class. MM again asked to talk to Assistant Principal 

Walters. Respondent explained she would be suspended if she left class. When she 

questioned why she would be suspended if her IEP allowed for breaks, respondent 

explained her leaving would be considered defiance. 

105.  As the discussion continued, MM became more upset and frustrated, her 

voice started cracking, and she began shaking. She felt the beginning of an anxiety 

attack. MM told respondent she was taking a break and left the classroom to find 

Assistant Principal Walters. She found Mr. Swesey instead. 

106.  MM walked into Mr. Swesey’s classroom upset and crying uncontrollably. 

He asked her what was wrong, and she described what had just occurred in 

respondent’s classroom. Mr. Swesey asked what he could do to help, and MM asked 

him to get her personal belongings from respondent’s classroom. She waited in his 

classroom while he retrieved her belongings. 

107.  After MM left respondent’s classroom, he called the front office and told 

Assistant Principal Walters she “just took off” and he did not know where she was. 

31 

Assistant Principal Walters went to respondent’s classroom and spoke to him in the 

hallway. Respondent explained, “I asked [MM] to put her phone away, she got upset, 

and she took off.” He further explained MM left without permission. 

108.  Mr. Swesey arrived to pick up MM’s belongings while Assistant Principal 

Walters and respondent were talking in the hallway. Mr. Swesey told Assistant Principal 

Walters MM was in his classroom and he has “never seen [MM] this upset.” 

109.  Assistant Principal Walters went to Mr. Swesey’s classroom to get MM 

and bring her back to his office. MM had called her mother in the meantime, and her 

mother was waiting in the front office. When Assistant Principal Walters and MM 

arrived in the office, MM’s mother said she had never seen her daughter that upset. It 

took MM two hours to calm herself. She never returned to respondent’s class. 

110.  Later that afternoon, respondent emailed a Guidance/Counselor 

Specialist at Foresthill High School and asked for assistance with finding MM’s IEP 

accommodations in the school’s document management system. The 

Guidance/Counselor Specialist referred respondent to Mr. Swesey for assistance 

because MM was a special education student. She copied Mr. Swesey with her 

response. 

111.  Mr. Swesey sent respondent an email explaining he had sent a previous 

email with MM’s accommodations. He further explained he was “available pretty much 

every morning before school” if respondent had any questions about MM’s 

accommodations. Mr. Swesey also offered to schedule a meeting if that was more 

convenient for respondent. Respondent acknowledged Mr. Swesey’s email by 

explaining he “missed” the prior email but subsequently found it. 

32 

112.  Principal Davenport was unable to speak with respondent in person 

about the incident with MM because he had to leave for Del Oro High School to teach 

his World Studies course. Instead, she emailed him the following morning and asked 

him to email her a description of what had taken place. He responded and described 

MM’s request for a break as follows: 

She then asked if she could go and see Mr. Walters. I asked 

if she had a pass to leave. She did not. I then told her that 

she could absolutely go see Mr. Walters but that she would 

need to wait until after class to do so. She then stated that 

she needed to take a break. Knowing that this student’s IEP 

allowed for this, I allowed her to leave the classroom to take 

a break. 

FAILURE TO FOLLOW DIRECTIVES AND NOTICE OF POSSIBLE DISCIPLINARY 

ACTION 

113.  The District sent respondent a Failure to Follow Directives and Notice of 

Possible Disciplinary Action (First Failure to Follow Directives). The District cited his 

continued failure to follow directives provided in his Notice of Unprofessional Conduct 

and Notice of Serious Concerns. For example, he was directed to provide Assistant 

Principals Zerwas and Jackson detailed daily lesson plans every Thursday for the 

following week. The directives were intended to allow the administration to provide 

feedback and support to maximize respondent’s effectiveness as a teacher. 

Respondent instead provided Assistant Principals Zerwas and Jackson a link to the 

lesson plans he posted on Canvas. The lesson plans did not contain the level of detail 

the directives required. 

33 

114.  The Notice of Unprofessional Conduct also required respondent to 

provide Assistant Principals Zerwas and Jackson copies of grading rubrics for tests and 

quizzes at least seven days before administering the assessments. The purpose of the 

directive was to provide administration the opportunity to help respondent create 

grading rubrics that accurately assessed his students’ understanding of course 

material. Respondent did not provide grading rubrics within the timeframe specified. 

115.  Finally, the District noted that the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and 

Notice of Serious Concerns required respondent to review the IEP’s and 504 Plans for 

all his students, prepare a written plan explaining how he intended to implement each 

student’s accommodations, and send his implementation plan to Assistant Principals 

Zerwas and Jackson. The purpose of the directives was to ensure he was aware of his 

students’ accommodations, require him to think about how best to implement the 

accommodations, and provide the administration an opportunity to confirm 

respondent was complying with the anti-discrimination laws. 

116.  As previously discussed, Mr. Swesey emailed respondent a list of his 

assigned special education students and their respective accommodations at the 

beginning of the school year. The following week, a Guidance/Counselor Specialist 

emailed respondent a list of his assigned students who had 504 Plans and their 

respective accommodations. A week after receiving the second email, respondent 

created a document entitled “2022–2023 IEP & 504 List,” saved it in a Google folder, 

and shared the folder with the administration. He indicated on the document that he 

had no students with accommodations in first or fifth block but had five students with 

accommodations in second block. 

117.  For the students with accommodations, respondent provided the name 

of one and copied and pasted the information the Guidance/Counselor Specialist had 

34 

previously provided about that student’s accommodations. He provided no 

information about how he intended to implement the accommodations. He also 

provided the names of the four other students and wrote “No IEP or 504 documents 

listed in Aeries” after each. Mr. Swesey had previously identified three of those 

students, including MM, as special education students and provided their 

accommodations. 

118.  The First Failure to Follow Directives repeated respondent’s prior 

directives, including those about preparing lesson plans and a plan for implementing 

IEP’s and 504 Plans. It also confirmed his participation in upcoming training on 

preparing lesson plans and the District’s offer of other resources, such as sample 

lesson plans and curriculum. 

FAILURE TO FOLLOW DIRECTIVES REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION OF STUDENT 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

119.  The District sent respondent a Failure to Follow Directives Regarding 

Implementation of Student Accommodations (Second Failure to Follow Directives). The 

District summarized prior directives about student IEP’s and 504 Plans. Although it was 

the beginning of “the seventh week of the 2022–2023 school year,” respondent had 

not provided a written plan for implementing the accommodations for the students 

identified in the First Failure to Follow Directives. 

120.  The Second Failure to Follow Directives instructed respondent to 

“immediately” determine how to implement his students’ accommodations and send a 

written implementation plan to Assistant Principals Zerwas and Jackson for review. 

Additionally, he was told to implement those accommodations “as soon as practicably 

possible with fidelity.” 

35 

STUDENT BM 

121.  BM was a student in respondent’s fifth block World Studies course in the 

fall. He had a 504 Plan that included accommodations for sitting near the front of the 

classroom to limit distractions and receiving hard copies of class notes. 

122.  Respondent prepared an implementation plan explaining how he would 

implement BM’s accommodations during World Studies. He indicated BM’s assigned 

seat was “in the very front row closest to my podium,” and agreed to print class notes 

and allow additional resources for BM. 

123.  Two days after respondent prepared his implementation plan, Assistant 

Principal Jackson observed the entirety of respondent’s fifth block World Studies 

course. She noticed BM was sitting in the last row furthest from respondent’s podium 

for most of the class. He was frequently off task and at times was watching his cell 

phone that he had propped up against his computer while respondent was providing 

instruction. Respondent provided a notetaking template to the entire class, but he did 

not provide a hard copy of the class notes to BM. 

Observations and Impressions of Respondent 

ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL ZERWAS 

124.  Assistant Principal Zerwas estimated he observed respondent teaching 

World Studies about eight times during Fall 2022. He noticed respondent relied on 

videos “a lot” for content instruction, and there was little collaboration between 

respondent and his students. He explained respondent would pause the video 

“awkwardly often” and repeat what was just said. Assistant Principal Zerwas provided a 

written observation report containing constructive feedback and suggestions for 

36 

improvement after at least one observation. He invited respondent to contact him with 

any questions about the observation or feedback. Respondent never did. Nor did he 

ever ask questions about implementing IEP’s or 504 Plans. 

125.  Assistant Principal Zerwas described developing effective lessons and 

differentiating the methods of instruction as the “meat” of what a teacher does 

because not every student learns the same way. A teacher is responsible for helping all 

his students learn. An effective lesson plan contains enough details to demonstrate the 

teacher thought critically and carefully about the covered topic and how best to teach 

it to increase the likelihood of reaching all students. 

126.  The District repeatedly directed respondent to prepare lesson plans using 

the five-step model and submit them for review. That model includes the following 

steps: (1) anticipatory set—engage students by introducing the topic that will be 

covered and explaining how it relates to prior and future learning; (2) introduction of 

new material—provide direct instruction on the topic, model new skills, and assess 

students’ level of understanding; (3) guided practice—facilitate students’ work; 

(4) independent practice—assign work for students to complete independently during 

class or at home; and (5) closure—students briefly summarize what they learned. 

127.  The lesson plans Assistant Principal Zerwas reviewed did not satisfy the 

District’s directives. Respondent had previously posted outlines of different topics on 

Canvas. He simply copied and pasted those outlines into his lesson plans without 

demonstrating any thought about how he would differentiate or scaffold his 

instruction to meet his students’ individual learning needs. His plans were not in the 

five-step model format because they were not broken down into different steps. 

37 

128.  Assistant Principal Zerwas explained study guides, in general, are 

permissible. However, he does not consider what respondent provided to his World 

Studies students to be a study guide. Respondent’s study guide provided the answers 

in the order in which the corresponding questions appeared on the test. He opined, 

“This was cheating.” 

129.  Assistant Principal Zerwas was “totally shocked” over LV’s father’s 

allegations against respondent. However, he was not surprised by the rigidity 

respondent displayed because he has “demonstrated arrogance in the past.” 

130.  Assistant Principal Zerwas’s impression of respondent as a teacher is that 

he is really organized and excels with technology. However, he is “very rigid” and can 

be very difficult for students to work with. He is unwilling to adjust based on his 

students’ individual needs. 

131.  Assistant Principal Zerwas has not seen respondent show any willingness 

to improve. In fact, respondent never acknowledged any wrongdoing or need to 

improve. Additionally, Assistant Principal Zerwas believes respondent deliberately 

deleted the videos of LV’s classes to cover up evidence of his wrongdoing. He opined 

respondent should not remain employed with the District. 

ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL RICKABAUGH 

132.  The District hired Assistant Principal Rickabaugh as a resource teacher at 

Del Oro High School for the 2013/2014 school year. He continued teaching at the 

school until he was promoted to Assistant Principal for the 2021/2022 school year. 

133.  Assistant Principal Rickabaugh observed the entirety of respondent’s 

World Studies course on September 1, 2022. He estimated students spent 90 percent 

38 

of their time looking at a computer screen, either watching a video, following a 

PowerPoint presentation, reviewing slides, or reading documents. He expected less 

reliance on computer screens and more collaboration and interaction between 

respondent and his students because it was a social science class. Student interaction 

is an effective method for a teacher to assess his students’ level of comprehension. 

134.  Assistant Principal Rickabaugh prepared a written report of his 

observation in the form of a timeline of the day’s activities. He provided constructive 

criticism and specific suggestions for improvement after various events. For example, 

he noted the day’s warm-up exercise introduced the Industrial Resolution as a new 

topic. He suggested introducing a new topic with a brief introduction or discussion, 

rather than having students learn about it on their own. Also, respondent discussed 

“substantial farming.” It was clear to Assistant Principal Rickabaugh some students did 

not understand the term, and he suggested that would have been a good time for 

respondent to incorporate new vocabulary into his lecture. 

135.  Assistant Principal Rickabaugh met with respondent the following week 

to discuss his observations, provide support, and answer any questions. Respondent 

requested additional support with preparing lesson plans. 

136.  Assistant Principal Rickabaugh and Principal Barry met with respondent 

and explained the five-step method for preparing lesson plans and how to use it. They 

provided sample lesson plans and recommended colleagues respondent could talk to 

who were well-versed in the five-step method. Assistant Principal Rickabaugh 

referenced his last observation of respondent and explained how some of the sample 

lesson plans would have eliminated some of the problems he observed. 

39 

137.  Respondent became frustrated and defensive when shown how his 

lesson plans were deficient. After the meeting, Assistant Principal Rickabaugh had 

mixed feelings about the meeting. He was confident he and Principal Barry provided 

respondent sufficient support for preparing lesson plans that complied with his 

directives. He was less confident respondent was willing to implement the suggested 

changes. Assistant Principal Rickabaugh left the meeting with the impression 

respondent requested and attended the meeting just so he could say he did, without 

any real motivation to learn or change. 

138.  Respondent subsequently sent his World Studies lesson plans for Day 29 

for review. Assistant Principal Rickabaugh reviewed the lesson plans and provided 

written feedback and suggestions for improvement. Respondent did not ask any 

follow-up questions or request additional support. Nor did he ever ask for help with 

implementing students’ IEP’s or 504 Plans. 

139.  Assistant Principal Rickabaugh’s impression of respondent is that he has 

a set method of teaching from which he is unwilling to deviate. That method is 

challenging for some of students, and respondent is inflexible and unwilling to adapt 

to his students’ needs and learning styles. 

140.  Respondent’s interactions with AC also negatively impacted Assistant 

Principal Rickabaugh’s confidence in respondent as a teacher. He explained teachers 

are held to a high standard of conduct when interacting with students. Any physical 

contact with a student that makes her feel unsafe or uncomfortable is a breach of that 

standard. Also, Assistant Principal Rickabaugh believes respondent was dishonest 

when recounting his interactions with AC. 

40 

141.  Assistant Principal Rickabaugh opined respondent should not continue as 

a teacher in the District. He described teachers as a resource to facilitate student 

learning. Therefore, a teacher should always be willing to put in the work necessary to 

improve his skills and meet his students’ needs. Respondent has consistently 

demonstrated otherwise. 

PRINCIPAL DAVENPORT 

142.  The District hired Principal Davenport as a counselor in 2017. She 

subsequently promoted to Assistant Principal. In Spring 2022, she interviewed to be 

Foresthill High School’s Principal. She was offered the position, and she started her 

principalship at the beginning of the following school year. 

143.  Principal Davenport was aware respondent had “some issues” at Del Oro 

High School when she hired him to teach Tech Essentials and Video Production, but 

she decided to give him a chance. Additionally, Foresthill High School had canceled its 

Freshman Tech Essentials course and never offered a Video Production course in the 

past. She was excited about the opportunity to bring back the former and offer the 

latter. 

144.  Principal Davenport observed respondent teaching only a few times 

informally and once formally before the school was relocated due to a wildfire. She 

found him to be very specific when discussing the day’s activities and his expectations. 

After his introduction, students engaged in a warm-up exercise on their individual 

computers. Respondent did not interact with the students during the warm-up 

exercise. 

145.  Principal Davenport estimated students spent 95 percent of their time 

working by themselves on their computers. During this time, she never saw 

41 

respondent differentiate his methods of instruction, attempt to confirm students 

understood what they were learning, or engage with the students or encourage them 

to engage with each other. Principal Davenport explained all three teaching methods 

are important because there are a variety of learning needs and styles, and a teacher is 

responsible for teaching all of them. Furthermore, a teacher may have a student with 

an IEP or 504 Plan accommodation that needs to be implemented. Finally, student 

engagement is an effective method of assessing what students have learned. 

146.  Principal Davenport was “shocked” when she read respondent’s 

explanation that he allowed MM to leave class for a break because he knew “that this 

student’s IEP allowed for this.” Principal Davenport was aware of respondent’s email 

communications with a Resource/Special Education teacher and a Guidance/Counselor 

Specialist during which he indicated a lack of awareness of MM’s accommodations 

when she left class. 

147.  Principal Davenport believed respondent was dishonest in his description 

of his interactions with MM. “The fact that he lied to cover his butt” removed any trust 

she had in him. Respondent never asked her how to implement IEP’s or 504 Plans. 

Principal Davenport opined respondent is unfit to continue teaching in the District. 

PRINCIPAL BARRY 

148.  The 2022/2023 school year was Principal Barry’s 32nd year with the 

District. She taught English for the first 16 years, served as an Assistant Principal for 

the next 13, and has been Del Oro High School’s principal for the last three. 

149.  Principal Barry observed respondent teaching his World Studies course 

during Fall 2022. “A large portion” of his instruction relied on videos. The warm-up 

42 

involved students watching a video and then answering questions as part of an online 

threaded discussion. 

150.  After the warm-up exercise, respondent played a video about the day’s 

topic. He paused the video every 30 seconds to two minutes, “more often than not” to 

reiterate what the video said. Principal Barry found respondent’s repeated interruption 

of the video distracting. She did not see a lot of student engagement or collaboration 

during the class. 

ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL JACKSON 

151.  At the end of the 2021/2022 school year, Assistant Principal Jackson and 

respondent began working on an Independent Support Plan (ISP) for the following 

school year. The ISP identified six areas of growth. For each area, the ISP outlined 

respondent’s specific goal, a deadline for meeting the goal, evidence that would 

demonstrate he met the goal, and training and support the District would provide to 

help him reach the goal. Some of the training and support mentioned were provided 

before the ISP was implemented the following school year. 

152.  Assistant Principal Jackson’s impression of respondent is he wants to do 

only the bare minimum. She feels he just wants to “check the box.” She does not get 

the sense he wants to make changes, grow as a teacher, and help his students. 

Assistant Principal Jackson “really tried” to help respondent understand the challenges 

students with special needs face accessing their education. She never received 

feedback that he understands those challenges and is willing to make changes to help 

his students overcome them. 

43 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S ADDITIONAL TESTIMONY 

Genesis of Warm-Up Assignment 

153.  Respondent taught Video Production Pathway courses during the 

COVID-19 pandemic. He found teaching during the pandemic particularly difficult 

because the courses required a lot of collaboration, which was nearly impossible 

through remote instruction. Also, Adobe Production software was essential to his 

courses, but students could not access it remotely. Additionally, he used to recruit 

prospective students by inviting seventh and eighth graders to a weekend to show off 

the Video Production Pathway courses. That stopped during the pandemic. 

154.  Respondent found it difficult to engage with students and for students to 

engage with each other during remote instruction. Therefore, he dedicated the 

beginning of each class to an “icebreaker” that involved students watching a short 

video on their individual computers and answering questions by posting their answers 

to an online threaded discussion. He found this exercise “was somewhat effective,” so 

he continued it when students returned to hybrid and then in-person instruction. 

Student LV 

155.  Respondent recalled LV was a student in his Video Production course 

during the Spring of 2021. About one-third of the way through the semester, LV 

became concerned about losing points for Workplace Skills, which constituted about 

20 percent of his overall grade. He contacted respondent about his concern, and 

respondent explained LV often lost Workplace Skills points because he had a bad habit 

of not turning his video camera on at the beginning of class or turning it off during 

44 

class. Del Oro High School’s policy was for students to have their cameras on for the 

entire duration of class. 

156.  Respondent thought he had satisfactorily addressed LV’s concern until 

LV’s parents contacted him and requested a meeting. Respondent started the meeting 

by giving LV and his parents a tour of the classroom because he had never met them. 

They then sat down to discuss LV’s grade. Respondent was concerned about the 

parents’ request to review the videos during the meeting because there were about 12 

hours of video, and he did not want to give them the false impression that they would 

watch all 12 hours during the meeting. 

157.  After reviewing some of the videos showing LV was present in class with 

his camera on, respondent “gave him the benefit of the doubt” and agreed to adjust 

LV’s Workplace Skills grade. “It was sometime after that” that respondent deleted all 

his class videos from his Google Drive because he had stopped recording classes after 

students had returned to in-person learning. Additionally, he thought the concerns 

over LV’s grade had been resolved, he wanted to free up space on his Google Drive, 

and he had backed up the videos to a personal external hard drive. 

158.  Respondent explained he did not do anything wrong in calculating LV’s 

grade or responding to LV’s and his parents’ complaints. However, he conceded that 

he “can always improve” the way he communicates with others. 

World Studies Teaching Assignment 

159.  The 2022/2023 school year was the first time respondent taught World 

Studies for the District. Although he is authorized to teach social sciences, he had not 

taught under that authorization since he taught Government during his first year as a 

long-term substitute. He had never taught World Studies before. 

45 

160.  Respondent admitted to being “out of his comfort zone” at the 

beginning because he was not a subject matter expert in World Studies and lacked 

confidence in his ability to teach it. He described meeting “almost daily” with other 

social science teachers at Del Oro High School, watching instructional videos, and 

exploring educational websites at home. He identified Rebecca Dunkel, Marc Castle, 

and Julie Melbourne-Weaver as some of the teachers from whom he sought support. 

Respondent was given access to an electronic textbook and the History Department’s 

Google Drive folder that contained modules, lesson plans, videos, and other supports. 

161.  Respondent explained he incorporated lectures, Socratic seminars, 

activities, and class projects as teaching strategies to encourage collaboration. He also 

used recorded videos. He asserted his videos, including the daily warm-up, never 

lasted more than one-third of the class. 

162.  Respondent had the opportunity to review the District-wide World 

Studies midterm examination shortly before it was administered. He noticed it 

contained several questions not covered in the curriculum he was teaching. He was 

told the test would not count towards the students’ grades. Additionally, he was 

concerned students would be emotionally impacted by being asked questions not 

covered in class. Therefore, he prepared a study guide as a “valuable learning tool.” 

163.  Respondent was absent on the day of the midterm examination. He had 

not previously told the students they could use the study guide during the test. He did 

not leave instructions for his substitute to allow students to use the study guide during 

the test. 

46 

IEP’s and 504 Plans 

164.  Respondent estimated he has taught 200 students each year he has been 

a full-time teacher. He further estimated approximately 10 percent of his students each 

year have IEP or 504 Plan accommodations. He believes it is important for every 

student to have the “maximum opportunity” to access their education. 

165.  Respondent usually learned a student had an IEP or 504 Plan when the 

administration or a teacher sent him an email. After receiving the email, he looked in 

Aeries and read the actual IEP or 504 Plan. In his experience, it was important to review 

the actual document rather than a summary of the accommodations required because 

he had received summaries that did not match the IEP or 504 Plan. 

Student KS 

166.  KS arrived during respondent’s intervention period to retake a World 

Studies test. She had not completed the study guide prior to her arrival, and she was 

aware of the History Department’s policy requiring students to complete study guides 

before retaking the test. Therefore, respondent told KS she had to complete the study 

guide before she could retake the test. 

167.  While completing the study guide, KS became frustrated and upset. She 

asked for a break, but respondent explained Assistant Principal Zerwas had specifically 

stated during a staff meeting that students could not leave during intervention period, 

even to use the restroom. KS became even more frazzled. 

168.  Respondent eventually noticed KS had left the classroom without 

permission. He immediately sent an email to the administration explaining KS had left 

47 

his classroom without permission. Respondent had previously tried calling the 

administration when KS asked for a break, but no one answered. 

169.  After the incident with KS, respondent requested additional training on 

teaching special education students. He thought such training would be helpful 

because of the apparent conflict between KS’s accommodation for breaks and 

Assistant Principal Zerwas’s instruction that students cannot leave during intervention 

period. Respondent was never provided additional training. 

170.  Respondent did not believe he did anything wrong in denying KS’s 

request for a break. However, he believed he could have handled the situation better. 

He agreed he should have spent more time trying to contact the administration. 

Student AC 

171.  Respondent was walking around his classroom when he noticed AC had 

her headphones on and was leaning back in her chair with her head tilted back and 

her eyes closed. He initially was not alarmed because it was not uncommon for 

students to fall asleep during class. But then he began to wonder if she was in distress 

because students have suffered medical emergencies during class or arrived under the 

influence of drugs or alcohol. However, he had no factual basis for believing AC was 

having a medical emergency or was under the influence. 

172.  Respondent called AC’s name as he walked towards her. She did not 

respond, and he tapped the back of her chair. She still did not respond, so he tapped 

her shoulder. AC opened her eyes, removed her headphones, and looked at 

respondent. Respondent told her that if she was tired, she could stand up and get 

some air, but she could not sleep in class. Respondent denied placing his hands 

around AC’s neck or shaking her. 

48 

Student MM 

173.  Respondent learned about MM’s accommodations before the incident 

because she had discussed them during an icebreaker on one of the first days of class. 

Respondent did not believe he denied MM an accommodation because she did not 

have a pass to see Assistant Principal Walters. Furthermore, Assistant Principal Walters 

had previously stated during a staff meeting students should not be sent to the office 

without a pass. 

174. 

In hindsight, respondent wished he had spent more time establishing 

and building a relationship with MM before the incident. Also, he regretted not having 

immediately contacted the administration for guidance. 

Student BM 

175.  BM’s assigned seat was in the front of the classroom closest to 

respondent’s podium, as required by his 504 Plan. BM sat in his assigned seat 

throughout the day of Assistant Principal Jackson’s classroom observation, except 

when he collaborated with classmates on a class project. Assistant Principal Jackson 

entered the classroom while BM was working on the project. 

Email to Prospective Students and Parents 

176.  Respondent was not assigned an intervention period for the 2022/2023 

school year because that was when he would travel from Foresthill High School to Del 

Oro High School. Additionally, he was not available before school or during lunch. Nor 

was he available after school because he considered that period to be his “family 

time.” Respondent was concerned about the negative consequences his split 

49 

assignment would have on his students, and he felt he had an obligation to advise his 

prospective students and their parents of his concerns. 

177.  Respondent told his prospective students and their parents the way the 

students would be supervised on Mondays was illegal because he was told a classified 

employee would be in the classroom supervising the students. It was his 

understanding that state law required a certificated employee to provide such 

supervision. 

178.  Respondent also told his prospective students and their parents they will 

not be able to retake tests because he would not be on campus when retakes normally 

occur. Also, a student’s grade was based solely on their test scores, so he was not 

comfortable with someone else proctoring his tests. 

Back to School Nights 

179.  Respondent admitted he received a written reprimand for sending his 

prospective students and their parents an email containing false information. 

Nonetheless, he provided the same false information at Del Oro High School’s Back to 

School Night because he “was just answering questions.” He believed he handled 

himself professionally when answering those questions. 

180.  Respondent did not attend Foresthill High School’s Back to School Night 

because he understood from talking to other teachers that attendance was optional. 

Additionally, he had attended Del Oro High School’s Back to School Night 10 days 

prior, and he was not aware of any other teacher who was required to attend two Back 

to School Nights in the same year. Furthermore, his daughter had her eighth-grade ice 

cream social that evening. Respondent agreed he erred by not telling Principal 

Davenport in advance that he would not attend Back to School Night. 

50 

Directive Regarding Lesson Plans 

181.  Respondent was unfamiliar with the five-step format for lesson plans 

when he initially received the District’s directive to submit detailed lesson plans. He 

researched that format online and requested training. He found Principal Barry and 

Assistant Principal Rickabaugh’s training helpful. Respondent believed he complied 

with the District’s directives since he received the training, although he admitted some 

of the lesson plans submitted were criticized for being in the wrong format or not 

being thorough enough. 

Continued Employment 

182.  Respondent “absolutely” wants to remain with the District because 

“teaching is what I do.” Additionally, his wife is a teacher in the District. Their daughter 

is a freshman at Del Oro High School, and respondent has been waiting for the 

opportunity to teach at the school his daughter attends. 

CHARACTER WITNESSES 

Julie Cowan 

183. 

Jennifer Cowan’s daughter graduated from Del Oro High School in 2021 

or 2022. As a freshman, she joined the Film and Broadcasting Club. Respondent was 

the club’s staff advisor. Ms. Cowan credited respondent with helping her daughter 

discover her interest in film. She took every film/video class Del Oro High School 

offered, all of which respondent taught. His teaching, support, and encouragement 

helped turn Ms. Cowan’s daughter’s interest in film into a passion. She became 

president of the Film and Broadcasting Club. She is currently majoring in film with an 

51 

emphasis on directing and screenwriting at Ringling College of Art and Design in 

Sarasota, Florida. 

184.  Ms. Cowan chaperoned two of respondent’s weeklong field trips while 

her daughter attended Del Oro High School. She noticed a strong sense of mutual 

respect between respondent and his students. Based on her experiences as a 

chaperone and a mother of one of respondent’s students, Ms. Cowan formed the 

opinion that he was an effective teacher. She was unaware of the reasons for which the 

District seeks to terminate respondent’s employment. 

Julie Melbourne-Weaver 

185. 

Julie Melbourne-Weaver has taught for the District since January 7, 1997. 

She has taught at Del Oro High School since 2010. She currently teaches Government, 

Economics, and U.S. History. She previously taught World History, most recently during 

the 2020/2021 school year. 

186.  Ms. Melbourne-Weaver is familiar with respondent as a colleague. 

Additionally, she previously served as a union representative at Del Oro High School 

and attended various meetings between District staff and respondent as respondent’s 

representative. 

187.  When Ms. Melbourne-Weaver learned respondent was going to be part 

of the History Department, she began including him in “Department matters.” She 

recalled him requesting support because he was new to teaching World Studies. Ms. 

Melbourne-Weaver provided verbal support, shared her prior World Studies 

curriculum, and provided any other support respondent requested. She found him 

“very, very receptive” to her help. 

52 

188.  Ms. Melbourne-Weaver has never observed respondent interact with LV, 

KS, or AC. Similarly, she has not seen his interactions with others at Foresthill High 

School. 

Rebecca Dunkel 

189.  Rebecca Dunkel is currently in her 25th year teaching Social Sciences at 

Del Oro High School. She is familiar with respondent as a colleague. During Fall 2022, 

respondent occasionally used Ms. Dunkel’s classroom to teach his World Studies 

course because she had her preparation period during fifth block. When he used her 

room, she would sometimes have an opportunity to observe his teaching style. 

190.  Ms. Dunkel described respondent’s teaching style as “formulaic” and 

“routine.” He started each day off by greeting his students. He then lectured and 

finished the day with some type of activity. Respondent showed videos, which Ms. 

Dunkel did not find unusual because she did the same. He stopped the video every 15 

minutes to expand upon or explain what the video had just said. 

191.  Ms. Dunkel watched respondent develop a good relationship with 

students over his years of teaching. She believes he is an honest person. She has never 

seen him interact with LV, KS, AC, or MM. 

Marc Castle 

192.  Marc Castle has taught for the District off and on for 10 years. He 

currently teaches World Studies, U.S. History, Government, and Economics. He teaches 

welding at night. Mr. Castle is familiar with respondent as a colleague. The District 

hired respondent during Mr. Castle’s second or third year with the District. 

53 

193.  Mr. Castle had never seen respondent act in an unprofessional manner. 

Respondent appeared “nervous” and “stressed” when he was first assigned to teach 

World Studies, but Mr. Castle did not find such behavior atypical for a teacher 

assigned a new subject. 

194.  Mr. Castle shared everything he had for teaching World Studies with 

respondent. Respondent was “very willing and open” to receiving all the guidance Mr. 

Castle provided. Mr. Castle believes respondent has the qualities of a good teacher 

because he works hard. Additionally, respondent “spent countless hours” building the 

video studio at Del Oro High School. 

195.  Mr. Castle was uncertain whether he ever saw respondent interact with 

LV, AC, or KS. However, he never saw respondent interact with MM. 

Applicable Board Policies and Administrative Regulations 

196.  The District’s governing board has adopted various policies and 

administrative regulations applicable here. For example, Policy 4119.21 establishes 

professional standards for all District employees by outlining the board’s expectations 

that employees “maintain the highest ethical standards, behave professionally, follow 

district policies and regulations, abide by state and federal laws, and exercise good 

judgment” while performing their duties. Engaging in dangerous behavior, 

discriminating against others, and dishonesty are just three examples the board 

identified as inappropriate conduct. 

197.  The board has adopted a specific policy prohibiting discrimination in the 

District’s programs and activities. Policy 0410 sets forth the board’s commitment “to 

equal opportunity for all individuals in district programs and activities.” It requires all 

such programs and activities to be free from discrimination based on a protected class. 

54 

The board expressly acknowledged individuals with disabilities and the District’s 

obligation to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 

198.  Policy 5121 reflects the board’s belief “that grades serve a valuable 

instructional purpose by helping students and parents/guardians understand 

performance expectations and by identifying students’ areas of strength and those 

areas needing improvement.” The board recognizes that “students have a right to 

receive grades that accurately reflect competency in the course.” 

199.  The board directed the Superintendent or his or her designee to 

“establish a uniform and consistent grading system based on standards with clearly 

articulated expectations that apply to all students in a given course.” Teachers are 

directed to “base students’ grades on impartial, consistent observation and evaluation 

of students’ learning and their proficiency in Essential Learning Outcomes (ELOs).”  

200.  Board Administrative Regulation 5121 requires “the Superintendent or 

designee [to] inform teachers of the district’s policy regarding grading, including 

expectations that grades shall reflect student learning and directly measure student 

knowledge and skills in the content area and shall not include non-academic factors 

(e.g., behavior, attendance, extra credit, late work, etc.).” Grades must be accurate, 

equitable, and motivational. Therefore, a score of zero should be avoided in grading 

rubrics. Additionally, more recent assessments may be given greater weight when 

determining a student’s overall grade. Providing opportunities to retake tests may be 

used to motivate student learning. 

201.  The board “recognizes that student assessments are an important 

instructional and accountability tool.” (Policy 6162.5.) Assessment data is used to 

determine a student’s progress, mastery of academic standards, appropriate 

55 

placement in different programs, and/or eligibility for graduation. It can also be a 

factor when evaluating program effectiveness and staff performance. Tests must be 

administered in a manner that is “fair and equitable for all students.” 

202.  Policy 6162.54 outlines the board’s commitment to maintaining the 

integrity of the student assessment process “in order to obtain an accurate assessment 

of student achievement in the district and maintain accountability to the community 

and state.” Teachers are prohibited from providing “inappropriate test preparation.” 

They may not “provide inappropriate assistance to students during test 

administration.” Nor may they “engage in any other practice to artificially raise student 

scores without actually improving underlying student achievement.” 

Analysis 

EVALUATION OF EVIDENCE 

203.  The persuasive evidence established the truth of the allegations in the 

Accusation. LV, KS, AC, and MM testified about their interactions with respondent. 

Each testified credibly, persuasively, and without any signs of bias against respondent. 

They showed no interest in a particular outcome or motive to testify untruthfully. 

Though BM did not testify, Assistant Principal Jackson saw him sitting in the back of 

respondent’s classroom in violation of his 504 Plan. Her testimony was credible and 

persuasive. 

204.  TDV and SRS testified in a similar manner about their interactions with 

respondent while advocating on behalf of their children. Several administrators 

testified extensively about their interactions with respondent, observations of his 

conduct, investigation into parent and student complaints, and efforts to assist and 

support respondent as a teacher. Principal Davenport credibly testified to her 

56 

willingness to give respondent a chance and hire him despite her awareness of “some 

issues” at Del Oro High School. 

205.  To the extent there was evidence to the contrary, such evidence was not 

credible. Respondent was the sole witness to refute the allegations, and he was not 

credible. His explanation that he allowed MM to take a break because he knew her IEP 

“allowed for this” was belied by the persuasive evidence to the contrary. Such 

dishonesty seriously undermined his credibility. So did his characterization of KS’s 

accommodation as “not acceptable” and explicit refusal to implement it during a test. 

Respondent’s subsequent refusal to implement KS’s accommodation was entirely 

consistent with his prior statements. 

206.  None of respondent’s witnesses was qualified to refute the allegations. 

Ms. Cowan had no idea why the District seeks to terminate respondent’s employment. 

None of his colleagues witnessed his interactions with LV, KS, AC, or MM. Such lack of 

familiarity also made their assessments of respondent’s character and fitness to teach 

less persuasive. (Seide v. Committee of Bar Examiners of the State Bar of California 

(1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [a witness’s assessment of a respondent’s character receives 

less weight when the witness is unaware of the nature and extent of the respondent’s 

misconduct].) 

FITNESS TO TEACH 

207. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court identified the following eight factors to consider in determining 

whether a teacher’s conduct indicates an unfitness to teach: (1) the likelihood the 

conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of 

such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

57 

(4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the 

likelihood of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the 

constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. (Id., at pp. 229–230.) 

“Only the pertinent Morrison factors need to be analyzed.” (Broney v. California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.) 

Adverse Effect 

208.  Respondent’s misconduct adversely affected the students who were the 

subject of the Accusation, their classmates, and the educational community as a whole. 

LV explained respondent’s class was “not enjoyable at all,” and he would not 

recommend respondent as a teacher to any prospective student. KS and MM were so 

distraught over their interactions with respondent they never returned to his class. MM 

suffered an anxiety attack to the extent never seen before by her mother or her case 

manager. AC felt “violated” by respondent. 

209.  There were indirect victims of respondent’s misconduct as well. Assistant 

Principal Jackson testified to a significant decline in interest in the Video Production 

Pathway courses since respondent began teaching them. Additionally, his classes have 

a disproportionately high failure rate, which means several students are unable to 

progress to the next level course. 

Proximity in Time 

210.  Respondent’s misconduct began during the second half of the 

2020/2021 school year and continued over the course of the next two school years. 

58 

However, he was removed from the classroom in the middle of the 2022/2023 school 

year and has not returned. Therefore, all of respondent’s misconduct occurred over the 

span of less than four semesters of teaching. 

Type of Credential 

211.  Respondent holds a Single Subject Teaching Credential with 

Authorizations for Industrial and Technology Education and Social Science. His 

misconduct was inappropriate regardless of the type of credential he holds. 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

212.  Respondent did not introduce evidence of any extenuating circumstances 

to mitigate his misconduct. In fact, he repeatedly testified he did nothing wrong, 

notwithstanding compelling evidence to the contrary. His complete lack of insight into 

his misconduct and refusal to acknowledge any wrongdoing are factors in aggravation. 

Blameworthiness of Respondent’s Motives 

213.  Respondent demonstrated disdain towards students’ IEP and 504 Plan 

accommodations for reasons not articulated. Those reasons are, quite frankly, 

irrelevant. Implementation of all IEP and 504 Plan accommodations is mandated by 

federal and state law and board policy. Respondent’s refusal to implement KS’s and 

MM’s exposed not only him to personal liability, but also the District. 

Likelihood of Recurrence 

214.  Respondent does not think he engaged in any misconduct. Therefore, 

there is no evidence that suggests he will change his behavior, and his misconduct is 

likely to recur. 

59 

Adverse Impact or Chilling Effect of Imposing Discipline 

215.  Respondent produced no evidence that terminating his employment 

would have an adverse impact or chilling effect on his or someone else’s constitutional 

rights. 

Publicity or Notoriety of Respondent’s Misconduct 

216.  Del Oro High School has seen a significant decline in interest in Video 

Production Pathway courses since respondent began teaching them. There was so little 

interest in those courses at Del Oro High School for the 2022/2023 school year that 

they were not offered, and he split his time between that school and Forest Hill High 

School. 

217.  Applying the Morrison factors to the specific facts of this matter, 

respondent’s misconduct impairs his continued fitness to teach. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 

1. 

The District has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 

and Statement of Charges by a preponderance of evidence. (Lopez v. Imperial County 

Sheriff’s Office (2008) 165 Cal.App.4th 1, 4 [“In disciplinary administrative proceedings, 

the burden of proving the charges rests upon the party making the charges”]; 

Gardener v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 

1040 [the standard of proof in an administrative proceeding for the dismissal of a 

teacher is a preponderance of the evidence].) This evidentiary standard requires the 

party with the burden of proof to produce evidence of such weight that, when 

60 

balanced against evidence to the contrary, is more persuasive. (People ex rel. Brown v. 

Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) In other words, the 

District must prove it is more likely than not that respondent engaged in the conduct 

alleged. (Lillian F. v. Superior Court (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 314, 320.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), authorizes dismissal of a 

permanent certificated employee for: “(1) Immoral conduct. . . . (2) Unprofessional 

conduct. [¶] . . . [¶] (4) Dishonesty. [¶] . . . [¶] (6) Evident unfitness for service. [¶] . . . [¶] 

[and] (8) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey . . . reasonable regulations prescribed 

for the government of the public schools . . . by the governing board of the school 

district employing him or her.” 

3. 

The District may not file charges to dismiss respondent for 

unprofessional conduct “unless at least 45 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, 

the board or its authorized representative has given . . . written notice of the 

unprofessional conduct, specifying the nature thereof with such specific instances of 

behavior and with such particularity as to furnish [him] an opportunity to correct his 

. . . faults and overcome the grounds for the charge. (Ed. Code, § 44938, subd. (a).) A 

performance evaluation must accompany the written notice. (Ibid.) 

4. 

It was undisputed that respondent was provided the Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct at least 45 days before the board authorized filing the 

Accusation and Statement of Charges. It was also undisputed that the Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct referenced respondent’s March 27, 2022 performance 

evaluation as Enclosure 15. The Notice of Unprofessional Conduct was admitted as the 

61 

District’s Exhibit 3. However, the District inadvertently omitted Enclosure 15 from 

Exhibit 3. 

5. 

Respondent drew attention to this omission during his closing argument. 

He did not, however, argue he never received Enclosure 15. Nor did he introduce any 

evidence to support such an argument. Therefore, he did not rebut the official duty 

presumption that the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct he received included 

Enclosure 15. (Evid. Code, § 664 [“It is presumed that official duty has been regularly 

performed”]; Petricka v. Department of Motor Vehicles (2001) 89 Cal.App.4th 1341, 

1350 [the party against whom the presumption applies has the burden of proving the 

government official did not properly carry out official duties].) 

6. 

The court in Board of Education of San Francisco Unified School District 

v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said the following about immoral conduct in the 

context of the Education Code: 

In Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

62 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” 

(Id., at p. 811.) 

7. 

“[T]he definition of immoral . . . conduct must be considered in 

conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are 

imposed “responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

regard to other callings.” [Citation.]” (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission 

on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) 

8. 

A charge of “evident unfitness for service” requires proof that the teacher 

is “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies. [It] connotes a fixed character trait, 

presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Woodland Joint Unified 

School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 

1444.) When considering such a charge, the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to 

determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for 

service.” (Id., at p. 1445.) Only if the conduct demonstrates an unfitness for service 

does one proceed to the next step of determining “whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; 

i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.) 

9. 

A charge of persistent violation of or refusal to obey requires a showing 

of insubordination. (Midway School District of Kern County v. Griffeath (1946) 29 

Cal.2d 13, 18-19.) Furthermore, “persistence” requires a showing of “continuing or 

constant” behavior. (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman 

(1972) 27 Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) “Persistence, in the sense intended, is referable to past 

63 

conduct. The Legislature undoubtedly intended that opportunity for correction be 

available and refrained from providing for dismissal for a single violation of 

regulations, or until repeated violations could be considered persistent.” (Midway 

School District of Kern County v. Griffeath, supra, 29 Cal.2d at p. 18.) 

10. 

The following has been said about evaluating a teacher’s conduct when 

deciding whether discipline is warranted: 

Goldsmith v. Board of Education, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in Board of Education v. Swan, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

of a credential, involves many aspects.“. . . [sic] the teacher 

is entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.” 

(Moser v. State Board of Education (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 

Conclusion 

11. 

The preponderance of the evidence established respondent failed to 

implement students’ IEP and 504 Plan accommodations to help them access their 

education. He engaged in inappropriate physical contact that made a student feel 

64 

“violated.” He also engaged in subjective grading practices not designed to determine 

students’ understanding of course content and intended to retaliate for complaining 

about his grading practices. 

12. 

Respondent taught his World Studies course using little direct 

instruction, instead relying largely on videos and self-instruction. He did not 

differentiate or scaffold his instruction to meet his students’ needs. He provided study 

guides containing answers to the District-wide midterm and questions on the District-

wide World Studies final. Students were allowed to use the study guides during both 

tests. 

13. 

Respondent repeatedly ignored directives to prepare detailed lesson 

plans and submit them for review. He also ignored numerous directives to prepare a 

written plan for implementing students’ accommodations, submit the plan for review, 

and implement the accommodations. He disregarded multiple directives to ensure all 

communications with others were accurate, complete, and reflected sound 

professional judgment. 

14. 

Respondent was dishonest with District administrators when they 

investigated complaints about his misconduct. He intentionally destroyed evidence of 

his misconduct. He knowingly provided false and incomplete information in an email 

to prospective students and parents. He later repeated the misinformation despite 

having been provided the correct information in the interim. 

15. 

Respondent’s misconduct constituted immoral conduct, unprofessional 

conduct, dishonesty, and a persistent violation of or refusal to obey reasonable 

regulations prescribed by the District’s governing board. His misconduct also 

demonstrated his evident unfitness for service. Therefore, cause exists to terminate his 

65 

employment with the District pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(1), (2), (4), (6), and (8), individually and collectively. Respondent did not present 

compelling evidence that the District should continue his employment. 

ORDER 

Respondent Jeremy Jeffreys is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated employee 

of the Placer Union High School District. 

DATE: 

DATE: 

SCOTT COLLINS 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence 

COREN D. WONG 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair  

Commission on Professional Competence 

DISSENT 

1. 

I respectfully dissent from the decision made by this panel. I do not 

believe that the evidence presented in this hearing proves an evidence unfitness to 

teach. Additionally, the District engaged in a pattern of behavior towards respondent 

which created a situation whereby it became impossible for him to succeed by any 

reasonable standard. It was clear from the evidence presented that the District was 

66 

Scott Collins (Oct 4, 2023 10:52 PDT)10/04/2023Coren D. Wong (Oct 4, 2023 11:02 PDT)10/04/2023 
 
 
 
trying to force him out with the change of assignment, and subsequent change to an 

itinerant position, which is almost unheard of for a social studies teacher. 

2. 

The first witness brought forth by the District in this case was a former 

student who had complained about receiving a “B” grade from respondent. His 

testimony, and the testimony of the District officials involved indicated that during the 

hybrid model of learning that was created in haste when the pandemic ended, 

students had the choice of remaining virtual or returning for in-person instruction. The 

student in question, LV, chose to remain virtual during this time, which created a great 

deal of difficulty for the classroom teacher in determining the validity of grading 

procedures, supervision of students in the hybrid model, and the standardization of 

instruction. It was alleged that throughout the course of all this confusion that 

respondent engaged in “blatantly dishonest” behavior by erasing videos of class 

cameras from Zoom that would have determined what the facts were. 

3. 

The lack of a District policy that would have directed respondent not to 

store data on a personal hard drive would have made his claim that he needed to clear 

up space when he deleted the files a less mitigating argument. However, most of the 

colleagues I know who taught in the hybrid model claim that they had no confidence 

in the validity of the grades during that period, as it was impossible to measure 

student performance and learning. This was especially true of elective teachers who 

have to measure skill. What we are being asked to do here is to take a student who is 

upset about a grade they received in an elective class during the most confusing time 

in education in the last 50 years and deduct that the grade and the conduct of 

deleting the videos constitutes dishonesty. The only thing the District proved through 

LV’s testimony is that they need to develop consistent policies that employees are well 

trained in. 

67 

4. 

To bolster the argument about dishonesty, the District then proceeded to 

introduce evidence that indicated respondent developed an illegal cheat sheet to 

assist his students in taking a District standardized checkpoint exam. The facts 

established that students were given a study guide with most of the facts that they 

needed for the exam, and that the students did better than anyone else in the District 

in the exam. I can completely understand the logic of an outside observer seeing this 

behavior as a form of cheating or dishonesty, especially someone who came of age 

before the information age. However, there were three components here that made it 

clear to me that respondent should not be punished at all for this study guide. 

5. 

First, the test score was not a component of the grade in the class, which 

indicates that the teacher did not take it seriously, nor was required to by the District. 

How can there be dishonesty around an exam that does not even count? This fact was 

further bolstered by the testimony from the social studies teacher who said that the 

teachers do not give the test a lot of credence, and that it was developed from a bank 

of questions. 

6. 

Second, respondent was in his first semester of teaching social studies 

after having spent his career in CTE. It is common practice in CTE courses to develop 

study guides much like what was presented here for the simple fact that aptitude is 

measured by skill in a performance task in a CTE course, and not by concepts on a 

written test, at least for the most part. It would have made no difference to a CTE 

teacher to hand a study guide out like the one presented here. It should be also noted 

that there was no attempt to hide the actions of the study guide. It was handed out 

without any concern for breaching a protocol. 

7. 

Finally, there was no affidavit for testing procedures. When exams are 

given in schools where there is an expectation of a standardized set of protocols then 

68 

teachers sign affidavits indicating they will follow the protocols listed. This is what we 

do every January in my school. There was no affidavit here. If there were protocols that 

were important then why did not anyone relay them in writing to the teacher who has 

never taught the class before? 

8. 

The third example of dishonesty presented by the District has to do with 

the testimony around whether respondent was dishonest to District personnel about 

IEP accommodations. In that case, I do believe he was not honest when being 

questioned. However, I think that there are mitigating factors present here that 

preclude me from saying he is unfit to teach. By the time he was being questioned in 

this matter, it was clear that the District was doing everything they could to make it 

impossible for him to succeed. He had been assigned to teach social studies for the 

first time in his career in the District, and then subsequently given an itinerant position 

to a school 30 minutes away. It must have been clear to respondent by this point that 

anything he said could and would be used against him. I think that it is unlikely that 

this would happen again, that it was a singular act under the duress created by the 

circumstances of his assignment and location change. 

9. 

The District then presented evidence that respondent was willfully 

ignoring the provisions of individualized education plans for special education 

students. The testimony from the witnesses present centered around provisions in 

certain IEP’s that allowed for students to take a break from the class for a period of 

time to reduce stress. This particular IEP provision has become more common in 

recent times as we try to cope with social and emotional issues. The central problem 

that I have with this particular argument as a basis for being unfit to teach is that there 

was no direction given to any of the teachers with regards to what to do with a 

student who takes one of these breaks. Where does the duty to supervise reside in a 

69 

case where a student leaves class? One of the first things we are taught in a teacher 

credentialing program is the most essential part of our job is the supervision of 

students. The District is trying to argue that respondent is denying students access to 

their education without any indication that there was clarity provided about who is to 

supervise students during these breaks. It is completely reasonable to conclude that 

given two conflicting ideas, one saying that there is a duty to supervise, and the other 

saying to let the kid leave for a break, that teachers would err on the side of 

supervision, especially when given no clear directive from supervision to clarify the 

confusion created. 

10.  With regards to AC, who fell asleep in class and did not respond to verbal 

commands to wake up, it is again a singular act where respondent wakes her up by 

either grabbing her or tapping her shoulder. The District is trying to make the 

argument that this was some type of assault. Respondent indicated he was making 

sure she was not in some type of duress. I was left with the conclusion that this 

conduct would have warranted a written directive not to place hands on students. The 

argument being made by the District in this incident is undermined by the fact that 

they have a duty to report child abuse to the local child protective agency. Since no 

report was ever filed as part of the investigation, then the District officials themselves 

never took the allegation seriously enough to warrant declaring Mr. Jeffreys unfit to 

teach. 

11. 

There is another concern here with this case, and that is the fact that all 

the evidence presented here originated as the pandemic ended and we returned to a 

new normal of instruction, where chronic absenteeism and watered-down standards 

have become the new norm in education. If respondent is truly unfit to teach, then 

where is the evidence of this unfitness before the pandemic? What was established 

70 

here is that the District placed respondent into a subject he had never taught in his 

career and then proceeded to document his struggles to adjust as evidence of 

unfitness for service. When he sought help he was reassigned to an itinerant position 

that gave him no time to prepare for his lessons. These circumstances made it 

impossible for him to succeed. I do not feel he was ever given a chance to flourish in 

social studies. To me, this was a constructed termination orchestrated for reasons 

never presented to the panel. Furthermore, I believe that allowing this decision to 

move forward will have a chilling effect on the profession, as it rewards the aggressive 

targeting of teachers by districts. 

12. 

For the above reasons, I respectfully dissent. 

Date: 

John Petersen 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence 

71 

John Petersen (Oct 4, 2023 10:39 PDT)10/04/2023 
