BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
CARPINTERIA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

JOHN HOTCHNER, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH No. 2022120218 

DECISION 

The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter 

on March 13-17, 20-24, August 21-25, and August 28-September 1, 2023, by 

videoconference. The Commission consists of Michelle Orelup, John Miller, and 

Carmen D. Snuggs-Spraggins, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of 

Administrative Hearings and Commission Chairperson. 

The Carpinteria Unified School District (District) was represented by Milton 

Foster, Jacqueline Litra, and Vanessa Lee, Attorneys at Law, Fagen Friedman & Foster, 

LLP. 

John Hotchner (Respondent) was represented by Estephanie Villalpando and 

Jason Wojciechowski, Attorneys at Law, Bush Gottlieb, A Law Corporation. 

Testimony and documents were received in evidence. The record was held open 

until September 22, 2023, for the parties to file simultaneous closing briefs, which were 

timely filed and marked for identification. The record closed and the matter was 

submitted for decision on September 22, 2023. The Commission thereafter deliberated 

in executive session. 

Protective Order 

On February 27, 2023, pursuant to the stipulation of the parties, the ALJ issued a 

Protective Order to facilitate the exchange information between the parties, protect 

the privacy of students in the case, and to prevent the disclosure of confidential 

information. The ALJ issued an additional Protective Order identifying exhibits that 

have been sealed after their use in preparation of the Decision that contain the names 

and pictures of students and names of students’ parents. These documents shall 

remain under seal and shall not be opened, except as provided by the Protective 

Order. A reviewing court, parties to this matter, their attorneys, and a government 

agency decision maker or designee under Government Code section 11517 may 

review the document subject to the Protective Order provided that such document is 

protected from release to the public. Moreover, the ALJ issued an order directing that 

if transcripts of these proceedings are prepared, the names of minor students and 

their parents should be replaced with the first initial of their first and last names. 

2 

 
Motions in Limine 

Prior to the presentation of evidence, the parties made several motions in 

limine. The ALJ considered and ruled on the motions in limine as reflected on the 

record. 

District’s Motion to Initiate Contempt Proceedings to Enforce 

Subpoenas 

The District moved to initiate contempt proceedings to enforce subpoenas 

against students Z.B., E.H-S. and K.A., and parent S.H-S. The Motions were denied for 

the reasons stated on the record. 

District’s Motion to Conform Pleadings to Proof 

The District’s Motion to Amend the Statement of Charges to Conform to Proof 

was denied for the reasons stated in the order dated October 4, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On September 14, 2022, Diana Zapata, acting in her official capacity of 

Director of Human Resources (DHR) for the District, caused to be served on 

Respondent written notice of the District’s intention to dismiss Respondent and to 

place him on immediate unpaid suspension. The notice included the written Statement 

of Charges against Respondent. 

3 

 
2. 

On October 14, 2022, Respondent timely submitted a Notice of Defense 

and Request for Hearing. 

3. 

On December 2, 2022, the District filed a request to set the matter for 

hearing. The District filed notice of hearing as required by law. 

4. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Background and Employment History 

5. 

Respondent holds a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential with a 

Social Science Authorization and a Clear Cross-Cultural Language and Academic 

Development Certificate (CLAD). He has worked for the District for more than 20 years 

and is a middle school teacher at Carpinteria Middle School (CMS). 

6. 

Respondent is the president of the Carpinteria Association of United 

School Employees (CAUSE). In 2007 or 2008, he was elected to serve as the chair of the 

Social Science Department and, at the request of the District’s superintendent, he 

served as the chair of the safety committee from 2015-2019. 

7. 

Respondent has taught sixth, seventh, and eighth grade students. At all 

times relevant to the Statement of Charges (SOC), he taught history. Specifically, 

during the 2021-2022 school year, Respondent taught History 7/Global Studies to 

seventh grade students. Respondent also had an advisory period, which is a 20-minute 

class similar to homeroom, held prior to any instructional period. The students in 

Respondent’s Advisory class were in the eighth grade. 

8. 

Respondent’s written Class Procedures required students who were tardy 

to his class to stand by the door within his view and wait until he invited them into the 

4 

 
classroom. He required all students to be quiet for the first ten minutes of class while 

they recorded their homework assignments. According to Respondent’s Class 

Procedures, students must obtain his permission before leaving their seats. Specifically, 

they are required to raise their hands and wait for him to acknowledge them. Students 

are directed to watch for Respondent’s thumb; when he raised his thumb above his 

head, students were advised “you will become absolutely silent, look forward, and 

prepare to listen to my instruction. You will also put your thumb up [in front of your 

face and between your eyes] to demonstrate that you are paying attention.” (Ex. 84, p. 

A1051.) 

9. 

In 2021, the Public Employment Relations Board issued a decision in 

Respondent’s favor and against the District regarding a 2019 Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct/Notice of Unsatisfactory Performance. 

10. 

 In June 2022, Respondent obtained an Arbitration Award against the 

District related to the District’s formal observation of Respondent’s teaching in 2021. 

CMS 

11. 

Lisa O’Shea has been the principal at CMS for five years. 

12. 

CMS is a trauma-informed school. On June 30, 2020, Respondent and all 

other certificated employees received training on trauma informed practices to 

implement when interacting with students (SELPA training). (Ex. 30.) The SELPA training 

included the definition of trauma, (“. . . the experience of severe psychological distress 

following any terrible or life-threatening event”), and information on the educational 

impacts of trauma on students and staff. CMS also provided an AHA! Workshop for 

5 

 
Educators training entitled “The Trauma-Sensitive Classroom” in the 2021-2022 and 

2022-2023 school year years. (Ex. 29.) 

13.  On December 13, 2020, Principal O’Shea sent all CMS staff an email that 

suggested ways for staff to address students who were demonstrating trauma 

responses (difficulty self-regulating emotions and therefore engaging in aggressive 

and impulsive behavior or demonstrating fear of new or unfamiliar situations). (Ex. 92). 

On January 24, 2021, Principal O’Shea sent a similar email to staff that contained 

suggestions for trauma informed practices that staff could implement in their 

classrooms. On March 27, 2022, she sent an email to staff that defined trauma, 

described what trauma informed practices should include, and provided links to two 

trauma informed presentations (AHA! Trauma Informed training and SELPA Trauma 

Informed Training). On April 24, 2022, Principal O’Shea sent an email to CMS staff that 

included a link to “CMS Trauma Informed School Presentations.” (Ex. 95, p. 1107.) 

14. 

In the 2020-2021 school year, CMS’s Dress Code policy, as stated in the 

CMS Student Handbook, provided: 

Students are expected to attend school in appropriate 

clothing. Student dress and appearance affect student 

attitudes and conduct. This District's dress code is intended 

to define appropriate student attire and personal grooming. 

Its purpose is to prevent disruption of the educational 

environment, enhance student conduct, eliminate 

distractions, and ensure the health, welfare, and safety of 

the student body and staff. Gang related apparel has been 

6 

 
determined to be hazardous to the health and safety of the 

school environment. Education Code 35183. 

All students in the Carpinteria Unified School District shall 

abide by the following standards while at school or 

attending school activities, unless otherwise stated. 

Individual exceptions to the dress code may be granted by 

school administration upon parent request for medical or 

religious reasons. 

1. Clothing is to be clean, neat, and properly fitted. 

2. Students must be fully clothed at all times. 

3 All clothing shall be within the bounds of decency and 

good taste, as appropriate for school. Garments shall be 

sufficient to conceal undergarments at all times. 

a. Dress and shorts shall be no shorter than mid-thigh. 

b. No "see-through" or "fishnet" types of clothing may be 

worn without an appropriate accompanying top. 

c. No bare midriff clothing, low-cut, backless, off the 

shoulder, tube tops, spaghetti strap tank tops or revealing 

tops may be worn. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

7 

 
5. No clothing, jewelry, or accessories (such as wallet chains) 

which are potentially disruptive, dangerous, or intimidating 

are allowed. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

c. No clothing, jewelry, or accessories which pertain to a 

gang or its territory are allowed. 

6. Hats (worn appropriately) that provide sun protection are 

permitted. Hoods and beanies may be worn in inclement 

weather. Bandanas, and similar headgear may not be worn 

at any time. 

(Ex. 66, p. A966.) 

15. 

CMS’s policy during the 2020-2021 school year regarding valuables and 

electronic devices, including cell phones, suggested students leave those items at 

home, and prohibited their use on campus unless authorized by a staff member. 

Students were admonished that if staff saw students with cell phones or other 

electronic devices, the items “will be confiscated and returned according to [the 

District’s] discipline.” (Ex. 66, p. A961.) 

16. 

According to CMS’s Tardy policy for the 2020-2021 school year, students 

were to be in their assigned seats when the bell rang and, in the case of habitual 

tardiness, teachers were to contact parents and assign consequences. 

17. 

CMS’s Discipline System for the 2020-2021 school year included the 

provision of positive behavioral interventions and supports (PBIS), which focuses on 

8 

 
“educating students about expectations,” and “emphasizes the four ‘BE’s.’ Be 

Respectful, Be Responsible, Be Safe, and Be a Positive Contributor.” (Ex. 66, p. A966.) 

18. 

The Discipline System also provides: 

The goal of student discipline is to teach students to 

behave in ways that contribute to academic achievement, 

positive healthy relationships, school success, and to 

support a school environment where students and staff are 

responsible and respectful. Staff will seek to use other 

interventions including restorative or logical consequence 

when possible to address student misconduct at the school 

site level first and support students in learning the skills 

necessary to enhance a positive school environment and 

avoid inappropriate student behavior. 

(Ex. 66, p. A966.) 

19. 

CMS’s policies regarding tardiness and valuables/electronic devices and 

its system of discipline remained the same for the 2021-2022 school year. However, 

the Dress Code policy was changed as follows: 

The CMS dress code policy is designed to ensure all 

students are dressed appropriately and sensibly. CMS is an 

academic environment and student dress should reflect 

that. The following rules must be followed during the 

school day and at school events: 

1. Students must be fully clothed at all times. 

9 

 
2. All clothing shall be within the bounds of decency, as 

appropriate for school. Garments shall be sufficient to 

conceal undergarments at all times. 

3. No apparel with gang affiliation, or apparel with profane 

or inappropriate images or words will be allowed. 

4. No clothing, jewelry, or accessories which are potentially 

disruptive, dangerous, or intimidating are allowed. 

5. Hats (worn appropriately) that provide sun protection are 

permitted. Hoods and beanies may be worn outdoors in 

inclement weather. Hoods must remain down during all 

classes, including P.E. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(Ex. 67, p. A979.) 

20. 

CMS’s media class created a Friday Video. The video showed students 

performing skits, being interviewed, and engaged in other activities and was shown 

every Friday in Advisory class. 

21. 

From March 2020 to June 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic, CMS 

teachers taught students remotely using the Zoom platform. 

10 

 
Charges Regarding Respondent’s Conduct 

CREDIBILITY 

22. 

The bulk of the charges against Respondent concern Respondent’s 

alleged behavior and comments while in the classroom or otherwise on campus. The 

Commission evaluated the credibility of the witnesses pursuant to the factors set forth 

in Evidence Code section 780: the demeanor and manner of the witness while 

testifying, the character of the testimony the capacity to perceive at the time the 

events occurred, the character of the witness for honesty, the existence of bias or other 

motive, other statements of the witness which are consistent or inconsistent with the 

testimony, the existence or absence of any fact to which the witness testified, and the 

attitude of the witness toward the proceeding in which the testimony has been given. 

The manner and demeanor of a witness while testifying are the two most important 

factors a trier of fact considers when judging credibility. The mannerisms, tone of 

voice, eye contact, facial expressions and body language are all considered, but are 

difficult to describe in such a way that the reader truly understands what causes the 

trier of fact to believe or disbelieve a witness. 

23. 

The testimony of some of the students was found to be credible, as they 

observed and interacted with Respondent over the schoolyears and observed similar 

behavior, and testified in a clear concise, unequivocal manner, and supported their 

perspective with descriptive facts. The testimony of other students, however, was 

difficult to follow and at times did not fully address the allegations set forth in the 

SOC. The credible testimony of students, corroborated by their written statements and 

the testimony of Principal O’Shea established some of the Factual Findings set forth 

below. Where the Commission did not find the students’ testimony credible or no 

11 

 
evidence was presented by the District with respect to some of the charges, the 

Commission found that the charges were not established. 

24. 

Similarly, with respect to some of the charges, Respondent was found to 

be credible and testified in a clear concise, unequivocal manner, and provided context 

for his conduct and statements. As to other charges, however, his testimony was 

difficult to follow and at times did not fully address the allegations set forth in the 

SOC. Several teachers testified on Respondent’s behalf. Their testimony regarding 

student violations of the dress code was credible. However, their testimony that CMS 

was not a trauma informed school and that they did not recall receiving emails from 

Principal O’Shea was unpersuasive. 

2019-2020 School Year 

25.  On or around May 31, 2019, Respondent showed a picture of Nicholaus 

Copernicus (Copernicus) in class and stated student D.N. looked like Copernicus. 

Respondent called student D.N. up to the front of the class and took a picture of him 

next to Copernicus. Student D.N. did not like that, and testified Respondent’s conduct 

was an example of jokes Respondent would make that made student D.N. 

uncomfortable, crossed boundaries and could be considered bullying. 

26. 

According to Respondent, the students said student D.N. looked like 

Copernicus and that they could be related. He asserted he asked student D.N. to come 

up to the front of the class and he seemed to enjoy having his picture taken and was 

not bothered. Neither student D.N., his parents, nor any administrator told Respondent 

student D.N. he was upset, and Respondent contends he had no reason to believe he 

was. Respondent further contends that he did not mock student D.N. and the first he 

learned that there as an issue was a year after the event. Respondent’s conduct on 

12 

 
May 31, 2019, was inappropriate, had the effect of making student D.N. 

uncomfortable, and did not serve any legitimate educational purpose. 

27.  On May 20, 2020, Respondent went to the homes of 16 of his students, 

unsolicited and unannounced, to give them each a gift. A parent contacted Principal 

O'Shea and reported her concerns regarding Respondent’s conduct. Respondent 

explained that he wanted to reward the students who were really engaged by giving 

them a thank you note and a box a cereal. He did not go inside the students’ homes. 

After speaking to the parent who lodged the complaint and reviewing Respondent’s 

email explanation regarding his actions, on May 21, 2020, Principal O’Shea sent 

Respondent an email stating she “loved” Respondent’s attempt to “celebrate and 

connect with our scholars. However, I would ask that you have . . . or me accompany 

you to do home visits. We always try to go in pairs. It helps protect us, and is best 

practice. [¶] Keep up the great work!” (Ex. 69, p. A984.) Accordingly, Respondent had 

good intentions, but demonstrated a lapse in judgment. 

2020-2021 School Year 

28. 

The Zoom video conferencing platform allows participants to send public 

and private chat messages while using it. The public chat message can be seen by 

everyone participating in the videoconference, while private messages can only be 

seen by the sender and the recipient. 

29.  On October 19, 2020, during distance learning, Respondent publicly sent 

messages to the virtual classroom claiming a student was playing video games instead 

of paying attention. Respondent had previously removed the student from the virtual 

classroom in an attempt to get the student to change his behavior. In the public chat 

13 

 
message, Respondent accused the student of demonstrating disrespect and 

disruption. Respondent said that he accidentally sent the message publicly. 

30. 

CMS provides a mandatory support class for students who failed to 

submit assignments or were receiving Ds and Fs. On February 8, 2021, and February 

11, 2021, Respondent sent public messages naming several students who were 

required to attend the support class. In the February 11, 2021, message he additionally 

stated that the support class was mandatory for students who had not submitted a 

project and named the students who had not done so. Respondent’s communications 

on February 8 and 11, 2021, as well as his communication on October 19, 2020, were 

inappropriate in that they had the effect of embarrassing students without any 

legitimate purpose. 

31.  On February 18, 2021, during distance learning, Respondent assigned 

students to write a paragraph regarding the five themes of geography, as applied to a 

civilization of their choice. In response to a private message from female student E.M. 

asking whether she needed to write one paragraph for each of the five themes, 

Respondent privately messaged back that the student was "smart enough" to do more 

work than her classmates and offered her extra credit if she did. (Ex. 42, p. A160.) 

Respondent’s communication with student E.M. was not inappropriate, in that 

implementing differentiated instruction based upon a student’s abilities is within a 

teacher’s discretion. 

32.  On February 19, 2021, a female student privately messaged Respondent 

during class to wish him a happy early birthday and informed him that her birthday 

was three days after his. In response, Respondent suggested “We should have a party. 

A sleepover, with footie pajamas, and all our friends (I need to find some, but I bet you 

14 

 
have a bunch!) We can listen to music, go on a pony ride, and buy a UNICORN!) (Ex. 

43, p. 164.) Respondent asserted that he engaged with the student in an attempt to 

build a relationship with student. Respondent had exchanged private messages earlier 

that morning with the student about Respondent’s concern for her falling behind in 

her work. He asked if the student was okay and whether another student was bullying 

her. (Ex. 43, p. A164.) The student replied that she was okay but had “been a little 

stress [sic] because grades are due today.” (Id. at p. A164.) Respondent’s explanation 

regarding the context of his message is persuasive. However, his comments to the 

student were inappropriate and demonstrated a lapse in judgment. 

33.  On February 23-28, 2021, Respondent sent email messages to Principal 

O’Shea in response to her February 22, 2021 email asking when she could “review 

[Respondent] teaching new material?” (Ex. 1, p. A8.) She explained that when she 

typically observes teachers, they are teaching content. When Principal O’Shea 

observed Respondent on February 22, 2021, it appeared some students had 

completed their project and were working on independently on extra work and others 

were instructed to take notes on a chapter. 

34. 

Respondent provided a lengthy response describing what the students 

were doing, but prefaced it with “[Perhaps] it would have been wise to schedule a pre-

meeting, to ensure you were/are aware of all that preceded that which you observed?” 

(Id. at p. A3.) In response to Principal O’Shea’s question asking if the students were 

teaching themselves by reading the chapter and taking notes, Respondent stated, “No. 

That would be a grossly inaccurate mischaracterization of the expectations, and one 

that could have been easily resolved by a cursory review of the material. Again, 

perhaps a pre-meeting would have been a good idea?” (Id. at p. A6.) While 

Respondent’s email messages are defensive in tone, the Commission does not find 

15 

 
them to be disrespectful and demeaning, nor did Respondent issue multiple directives 

as alleged by the District. 

35. 

At 10:34 a.m. on March 5, 2021, Principal O'Shea emailed Respondent to 

ask him whether he intended to join their post-observation Zoom conference 

scheduled for 10:30 a.m. that day. A calendar invite for the meeting had been sent to 

Respondent on March 1, 2021. Respondent replied: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Your email is a surprise. You made no effort to work with 

me to schedule this meeting, and so I was unaware. I would 

like to believe that you understand that employees, like 

myself, do not constantly review the calendar searching for 

meetings that I/we are unaware of. 

I am in a meeting right now, and not available. 

In the future, please work with me to schedule such 

meetings. It is a routine professional courtesy, it may also 

be a more efficient method of scheduling a meeting. I will 

try to make time later today if you like, to join you. I am 

available between 12:30PM & 2:00 PM. I will check my email 

again around 12:30 PM. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(Ex. 6, p. A21.) 

16 

 
36. 

Principal O’Shea informed Respondent that she rescheduled the meeting 

for the following week after waiting for 30 minutes. In response, Respondent wrote: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

It is unfortunate that you wasted your time today. If I may 

again provide a productive suggestion; working with 

employees to establish and confirm availability may be a 

much more effective and efficient method for such 

purposes. Simply placing a meeting on the calendar, 

without adequate notification, does little to empower 

employees to participate successfully and demonstrate that 

they/I value your time. Although I offered availability up to 

2PM today, you have selected next week to meet. I will 

confirm my availability as soon as possible. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(Ex. 6, p. A20.) 

37. 

Respondent’s emails, as set forth in Factual Findings 35 and 36 were 

unnecessarily disrespectful and not conducive to a productive working relationship. 

38. 

In April 2021, Respondent, when disciplining a student, pulled the 

backpack out of the student’s hand and dropped it next to Respondent’s desk. The 

student’s Chromebook, which was in the backpack at the time, was damaged. 

39.  On May 18, 2021, Respondent confiscated a student's phone when he 

saw him using the phone in the hallway with classmates related to a class assignment 

17 

 
during class time. Respondent did not notify the student's teacher or allow the student 

to explain himself. The student was in media technology class and was using his phone 

to watch and film a video for a class assignment, which was expressly allowed by his 

teacher. Respondent prevented the student from participating in his class assignment. 

40. 

Respondent’s conduct, as alleged in Factual Findings 38 and 39 were 

inappropriate and negatively impacted students. 

41.  On May 21, 2021, the District reminded Respondent that teachers are 

expected to build relationships, facilitate communication, and share control with 

students. The District informed Respondent that his conduct was controlling, conveyed 

disrespect for students and staff, negatively impacted the school environment, and 

prevented students from fully participating in the school curriculum. 

42.  On May 21, 2021, Principal O'Shea directed Respondent to alert her or 

CMS Assistant Principal (AP) Gabriel Covarrubias if he had concerns regarding a 

student dress code violation and to: (a) not confront students on campus regarding 

the dress code; (b) not take/confiscate phones from students who are not in his 

classroom; (c) not remove students from other classes; and (d) if students are 

exhibiting negative behaviors in class, work positively with the parent and student to 

improve their grades and behavior. 

43.  On June 1, 2021, Respondent approached a female student in the main 

hall while she was walking to class with her friends, regarding her alleged 

inappropriate dress and sent her to the office to change. Principal O'Shea was unable 

to determine the reason Respondent considered the student's outfit inappropriate. 

The student was wearing a white shirt with red flowers, a matching short-sleeved 

cardigan, and sweats and was not in violation of CMS’s dress code. (Ex. 32.) 

18 

 
44.  On or about June 7, 2021, Respondent printed out a photocopy of his 

hand for a class assignment involving concrete details and commentary. He compared 

his hand to students' hands in a manner that made students uncomfortable. Students 

removed their hands from their desks to prevent Respondent from engaging in this 

conduct towards them. Student D.E. described how he pulled his hand back when 

Respondent “grabbed” his hand. 

45.  During this exercise, Respondent made statements such as “You have my 

hand, so you can remember me over the summer,” “You can put my hand on the 

dinner table for company,” “You can take my hand on a date,” and “You can put it on 

your face,” “You don’t know where my hand has been.” 

46. 

Respondent contends that students made jokes about having a copy of 

his hand, such as stating that they could leave his fingerprints around town. He made 

the statement about students putting the copy of his hand on their faces in response 

to students saying, “you slapped me.” Respondent asserted that he may have made 

the comment regarding taking the copy of his hand on date if the students needed a 

chaperone while on a date. The District did not establish that Respondent’s comments 

suggested that he had an intimate relationship with the students. 

47.  On June 8, 2021, Respondent taught a lesson on feudalism and 

manorialism. He has taught the same lesson for many years. During the lesson, 

Respondent explains the difference between “good dirt” and “bad dirt,” and leads the 

students through the lesson with drawings and a hand demonstration. He tells the 

students to lace their fingers together. When their fingers are loosely laced it 

represents “good dirt” because air, sunlight and microbes can pass through. 

Respondent tells the students that if a pen or finger cannot fit between their laced 

19 

 
fingers, it is “bad dirt,” and he attempts to poke a marker through students’ laced 

fingers. Several students testified that Respondent stated that a student wanted to put 

his worm in another student’s dirt, and they were uncomfortable with Respondent’s 

comments. The District did not establish that Respondent conducted a demonstration 

that was sexual in nature. 

48.  On June 9, 2021, student K.A.’s mother, A.A., reported to Principal O’Shea 

that her son had concerns about Respondent’s conduct. She testified she overheard 

Respondent teaching her son’s class during the week of March 14 or 15, 2020. Mother 

A.A. reported that Respondent’s tone was very condescending and shaming, and he 

appeared to be personally offended and attacked students if he believed students 

were not interested in the lesson. Mother A.A. also testified that the way Respondent 

said students’ names, he “might as well be calling them stupid.” In her email to 

Principal O’Shea, she expressed concern about the lesson on dirt, but acknowledged 

that she had no personal knowledge of the lesson. 

49.  On June 10, 2021, the last day of school before summer recess, 

Respondent sent a box to Principal O'Shea containing a hat. Attached-to the box was a 

note stating, "See Step 3 [of discipline log]. [Student] will be seeking hat from you 

after school.'' (Ex. 5, p. A18.) In the discipline log Respondent completed for the 

incident he characterized the student’s conduct as "minor." (Ex. 5, p. A17.) The District 

did not establish that Respondent removed the student from the class for this 

infraction or that Respondent removed the student at all, as alleged in the SOC. 

50.  On June 15, 2021, and June 18, 2021, the District held an investigatory 

interview with Respondent and his representative regarding his conduct in the 

20 

 
classroom and his interactions with students. Principal O'Shea and the District's legal 

counsel were also present at the meeting. 

2021-2022 School Year 

51. 

Student J.M. was in Respondent’s History 7 class during the 2021-2022 

school year. He testified that he felt nervous in Respondent’s class because he believed 

Respondent would “do something” to him, and that Respondent did not like him. 

Student J.M. stated that he had to calm himself down three times per week because he 

was nervous. He asserted Respondent was “always” mad at him, typically when he was 

tardy for class. Student J.M. described how Respondent would make him wait outside 

the class for five minutes when he was tardy and then let him in. On one occasion, 

Respondent told student J.M. that he was going write him up. Student J.M. was waiting 

outside the class for Respondent but left when the bell rang so that Respondent would 

not be able to obtain his signature. 

52. 

Respondent had students wait outside of his classroom before entering if 

they were tardy for more than 30 seconds. He also had students who were being 

disruptive step outside while he continued to deliver instruction to the class; 

sometimes the students would be waiting outside for five minutes before Respondent 

came out and had a conversation with the student about their behavior. Respondent’s 

conduct was not unusual, controlling or manipulative. The District did not establish 

that Respondent regularly excluded students from his class for minimal disruption 

during the 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 school years. 

53.  On August 24, 2021, Principal O’Shea observed Respondent’s class. 

Respondent was showing students how to record their assignments. Halfway through 

the lesson, he stopped and stated, "Speaking of recording, you are not recording, are 

21 

 
you, Principal O'Shea?" When Principal O’Shea did not respond, Respondent stared at 

her until she held up her phone to demonstrate she was not recording. As Principal 

O'Shea was leaving the room, Respondent announced that students needed to write 

down their assignments on a piece of paper because the school was no longer buying 

them agenda books. 

54.  On August 30, 2021, Respondent removed a female student from class 

because he wanted to speak to her about her shirt. Once the student was outside, 

Respondent informed her that he "don't get paid enough to see bra straps." 

Respondent’s conduct violated prior directives to not remove students from his class 

for dress code violations and to enforce the dress code. 

55.  On September 1, 2021, Respondent removed a female student from class 

for an alleged dress code violation and asked two other students to join. Once all three 

students were outside, Respondent directed the other two students to tell the student 

what was wrong with her apparel. Respondent had them repeat after him why the 

female student's outfit was inappropriate and tell her to put on a sweater. Respondent 

then informed the female student, “I can't even look at you." His conduct publicly 

shamed the female student, improperly embroiled other students in what should have 

been a private discussion with the student, and violated student privacy, District 

expectations for teachers, and prior directives. 

56.  On September 2, 2021, Respondent removed a female student from class 

for an alleged dress code violation and asked another student to join them. Once 

outside of the classroom, he directed the other student to inform the female student 

to zip up her jacket because her shirt was too short and to ask if the female student 

needed or had a sweater to wear over the shirt. Respondent improperly embroiled 

22 

 
other students in what should have been a private discussion with the student and 

violated student privacy, District expectations for teachers and the prior directive 

issued to him. 

Additional Charges 

57. 

Respondent told students whose stomachs or shoulders were partially 

exposed to “cover it up,” while other students were present. Though inappropriate, it 

was not established Respondent’s comments were objectifying or that they sexualized 

female students. 

58. 

Respondent asked students about their personal lives in a way that made 

students feel uncomfortable. For example, he complimented student L.J. on her outfit 

and hair and asked her details about her personal life, including how long she and her 

family had lived in Carpinteria. Student L.J. believed Respondent was being “flirty” with 

her. She recalled an incident where Respondent “demanded” to come her soccer 

game. In response, student L.J. lied and told Respondent she did not know the date or 

location of the game because she believed Respondent was being flirty with her. Other 

students testified that they believed Respondent was flirting with students. 

59. 

Student O.G. testified that Respondent would move toward students if 

they asked for help and not allow enough personal space. According to student O.G., 

Respondent would sit or lean on the students’ desks. Student O.G. said she felt 

uncomfortable and awkward and would tell Respondent that she understood the work 

just to end the conversation. Student M.A. testified that Respondent would come close 

to her desk sometimes when she needed help and crouch down next to her. She 

asserted Respondent touched her on her shoulder and focused on her so much in 

class that he noticed when she shook her leg and point it out. Student M.A. stated that 

23 

 
she tried not to shake her leg because she did not want Respondent to point it out. 

She further asserted that Respondent came close to her almost every day and that it 

made her uncomfortable. 

60. 

Respondent acknowledged he asked students about their personal lives 

in an effort to build relationships and show a genuine interest in them. He asked 

students what sports teams they played on, where they played, whether they had 

summer plans, and when students told them their older siblings previously had him as 

their teacher, he would ask who their sibling was. Respondent asserted that he had 

similar conversations with students throughout his career. 

61. 

Respondent also acknowledged that he spoke with student L.J. about her 

soccer games and talked about attending her games. His daughter also played soccer 

and he asked whether he would see student L.J. on the field too. 

62. 

Respondent further acknowledged that he complimented students on 

their appearance. He said, “you look really nice today,” if they dressed up and when he 

saw students at graduations. He also told male students they looked “charming” when 

they wore a tie. Respondent touched students’ shoulders to get their attention when 

they were leaving the classroom and had their backs to him, and he was having a 

conversation. Respondent denied ever touching a student on their shoulder in an 

inappropriate way. 

63.  While the students’ testimony regarding feeling uncomfortable was 

persuasive, Respondent’s testimony regarding his personal conversations with 

students and touching students on their shoulder was equally persuasive. 

24 

 
64. 

Respondent made a bet with student M.A.2. regarding a soccer game 

between the students and teachers. The loser of the bet had to paint or color their 

fingernails with a highlighter. The teachers lost and Respondent painted or colored his 

fingernails. Respondent’s conduct was not inappropriate in that teachers are 

encouraged to build relationships with students and the bet furthers that goal. 

65. 

Respondent regularly made comments to the entire class that caused 

students to believe Respondent was insinuating student A.C. is stupid. It was 

established Respondent’s comments were inappropriate, unprofessional, and served 

no legitimate educational purpose. 

66. 

Respondent told students he had access to their files and could look 

through their "records" to see their "baby pictures." He showed some of their photos 

to the class, which embarrassed some students. Respondent asserted he did this as 

part of a lesson on how the government has access to individuals’ information and 

told the students he had access to pictures of the students from years before they 

were in his class. He acknowledged that he told them he occasionally turned to their 

cumulative files to better understand their educational history. Respondent denied 

unilaterally showing students’ pictures from elementary school, and contends that he 

only showed them upon request, and not to threaten or embarrass the students. 

67. 

Respondent used students’ sixth grade pictures on his seating chart, 

using pictures from the attendance roster provided by the District. He explained he 

used the sixth-grade pictures because those are the only photographs available for a 

portion of the students’ seventh grade year. 

68. 

Respondent called certain students by their full names. He denied doing 

so to threaten or embarrass them. 

25 

 
69. 

Respondent intentionally kicked students’ desks when they were not 

paying attention in class or when they were sleeping. One student testified that the 

kicks were “light.” Respondent also woke sleeping students by dropping books loudly 

on desks next to them. The District did not establish that Respondent kicked students’ 

feet when they were sleeping or not paying attention. 

70. 

Respondent discussed diabetes and obesity in relation to teaching a 

lesson on the fall of the Roman Empire due to public health problems and compared 

that to lifestyle choices and health problems that occur in the United States. (Ex. 1315, 

pp. B1728-B1729.) Respondent also discussed healthy food versus unhealthy food and 

the food pyramid. He denied shaming students and no students testified that they felt 

Respondent shamed them during the discussion. The District did not establish that he 

shamed students by discussing weight and junk food and displaying information 

about obesity while teaching History/Global Studies. 

71. 

Respondent asked a student whose jeans were torn, in front of the entire 

class, if she was attacked by dogs or wolves on the way to school. He also said that 

another student in the class must have fallen really hard on top of her to have torn her 

jeans. Though Respondent’s comments were inappropriate. The District did not 

establish that Respondent’s comment implied the students were engaged in sexual 

conduct. 

72. 

Respondent had a practice of drawing a magnifying glass on the 

overhead projector to get students to pay particular attention to an important point. 

During one of these demonstrations, some male students began laughing. Respondent 

told the students to “get your head out of the gutter.” When a student's project fell 

over in class, such that it was protruding at a downward angle, he told students, "Get 

26 

 
your mind out of the gutter." Respondent stated that he used that phrase with the 

students often because of their tendency to interpret things as having a sexual 

connotation. The District did not establish that Respondent made a sexual comment 

related to the shape of the magnifying glass. 

73. 

Respondent removed a drink from the side mesh pocket of a student’s 

backpack without her knowledge. The District did not establish that Respondent 

teased the student after doing so. 

74.  On May 21 and 22, 2019, April 26, 2021, August 25-26, 2021, and 

September 2, 2021, Respondent took photographs of students in his class to be used 

in CMS’s Friday videos, at open house, and in the yearbook. Several of the students did 

not want their pictures taken and would cover their faces with their hands or clothing 

and turn their heads away. (Ex. 39.) Respondent submitted a picture from CMS’s 2019-

2019 yearbook. There are several pictures of students covering their faces with their 

hands and their clothing. (Ex. 1303.) These photographs, however, were not approved 

for inclusion in the yearbook by Principal O’Shea, in that that task was not a part of her 

job duties at that time. Principal O’Shea denied that Respondent submitted 

photographs for the yearbook or the weekly letter. However, the District did not 

establish that Respondent took the photographs of the students to be disrespectful. 

75.  When students made the heart symbol with their hands or when 

Respondent interpreted that they were doing so he would make the heart symbol in 

return. While making the heart symbol, he also stated, “Thanks, I love you too,” and 

“thanks for the love, but I’m married,” and words to that effect. Several students 

testified that Respondent’s statements made them uncomfortable, while others stated 

Respondent was joking when he made the statements. While Respondent made some 

27 

 
students uncomfortable with his statements, the District did not establish that 

Respondent made the comments with any ill intent or that his actions were 

inappropriate. The District also did not establish that Respondent stated, “If l was not 

married, you wouldn't know what I would do,” as alleged in the SOC. 

76. 

Respondent made the following students, “I am a married man, but we 

can still go for a walk after school,” and “I am a married, but we can get ice cream after 

school.” Respondent explained that his students were aware that he is married and 

that his wife is also a teacher at CMS. He made the statements in the context of 

responding to students insinuating that he was doing something inappropriate when 

they saw two teachers talking or walking or if a student gave him a hug because he is 

married. Respondent further explained that he was providing examples of other things 

he could do with people, and it would not be inappropriate just because he is married. 

Respondent credibly denied telling a student that he wanted to hold the student’s 

hand, give the student a hug, or go on a walk with them after school because the 

student was holding a green marker, because it is his favorite color. 

77. 

Respondent dragged a student's chair with the student in it across the 

floor, approximately 10 feet. He explained that the student was making a lot of noise 

and disturbing students in his group. Instead of asking the student to get up, 

Respondent put his hands of either the chair or desk and pulled it. According to 

Respondent the student said, “Whee,” or “Yay. This is fun.” Respondent asserted that 

he has known the student since the student was a toddler and is friends with the 

student and his family. He further asserted neither the student nor his family 

complained about the incident. The District did not establish that Respondent sat on 

top of the student’s desk. 

28 

 
78. 

Respondent refused to allow student A.A. to retrieve her pencil when she 

dropped it on the floor because he did not want her to leave her seat, even though 

she was able to reach it from her seat. 

79. 

Respondent would direct students who were chewing gum to take the 

gum out of their mouth. However, he would not let them throw the gum away and 

would make them hold it in their hand. 

80. 

Respondent told student D.E. that he would have to give him mouth-to-

mouth. Student D.E. did not recall the circumstances underlying the statement. The 

District alleged Respondent made the comment because of the COVID-19 virus. 

However, the District did not establish that Respondent meant anything nefarious 

about the statement, and Respondent denied making a statement. 

81.  When student S.C. removed a fuzzy sweater she was wearing and placed 

it on her backpack, Respondent took it off of her backpack and asked her to put it 

back on because he wanted to "pet” her. Several students who were present found 

Respondent’s comment extremely disturbing. While Respondent’s comment was 

inappropriate the District did not establish that Respondent’s comment constituted 

grooming behavior. 

82.  When student V.P. dropped her paper, Respondent asked her to pick it 

up. She testified that Respondent was behind her when she did so, and she was 

embarrassed. Respondent asserted he asked students to pick up papers but did not 

look at them in sexual way when they did. The District did not establish that he 

instructed student V.P. to pick up her paper in order to look student V.P. in a sexual 

way. 

29 

 
83. 

Respondent drew students in the style of caricatures when creating 

headings on school documents. He drew the caricature in the upper left- or right-hand 

corner of the document with a smiley face and embellishing details related to a 

student such as an L.A. Rams mask, and the letters “ing” after the caricature as a 

reminder for students to create a heading. 

84. 

Respondent told the class that he saw student L.M. the previous 

weekend. He also told her that student L.M. was rude to his daughter when they were 

in preschool. This made student L.M. uncomfortable. 

85. 

Respondent removed a male student’s hoodie, causing the student to say 

“Ouch.” Respondent asserted that the student laughed as he said it. According to 

Respondent, he and other students laughed as well. He believed the student was 

joking when he said “ouch,” and he had no reason to believe he hurt the student. 

86. 

Respondent routinely pushed student M.B.’s computer screen backward 

to see what he was looking at when student M.B. was playing games on his computer, 

without asking student M.B. to show him his screen. 

87. 

Between April 26, 2021, and September 3, 2021, Respondent engaged in 

the following behavior: 

A.  Respondent removed students’ hoods and hats from their heads 

when attempting to take the students’ temperatures before entering 

class and the students would not remove them when asked. 

B.  Respondent tossed papers to students when handing them out, and 

did not pick them up off the floor. He also tossed colored pencils and 

30 

 
markers from approximately 15 feet away to students who forgot 

them. Respondent’s conduct was not demeaning or degrading. 

C.  Respondent had students redo assignments if their work was illegible 

not sloppy. Respondent’s conduct in this regard was appropriate in 

that it is within his discretion as a teacher to refuse to accept illegible 

work. 

D.  Student L.N. testified Respondent crumpled up his work more than 

once when he handed it in. According to student L.N., Respondent did 

not say anything when he did this, student L.N. did not know why he 

had to redo the assignment. Respondent denied that he did so. 

E.  Several students credibly testified that they perceived from 

Respondent’s words and actions that he had favorite students, 

specifically students S.C. and V.P. None of the students testified they 

felt excluded or overlooked because of this. 

F.  Several students credibly testified that they perceived Respondent 

disliked certain students, in particular A.C. and S.A, because he treated 

them more harshly and said negative things about them in front of 

the class. 

88. 

Student C.C. credibly testified during the 2021-2022 school year, 

Respondent touched him on his chest while touching his shirt while talking about the 

dress code. He stated Respondent touched him very quickly and that he did not think 

much of it, but later felt violated and did not understand why Respondent would touch 

him. Respondent’s conduct was inappropriate. 

31 

 
89. 

Student J.S. stated that Respondent would come close to her and look at 

her chest when she wore certain clothes, including v-cut shirts. She described feeling 

uncomfortable when he did this. Respondent denied that this happed. J.S.’s testimony 

did not preponderate over Respondent’s denial. 

90. 

Respondent’s conduct as alleged in Factual Findings 26, 32, 38, 39, 55, 57, 

71, 81, 87, and 88 was inappropriate, unprofessional and served no legitimate 

educational purpose. 

91.  On September 3, 2021, the District placed Respondent on paid 

administrative leave pending its investigation into allegations of misconduct. 

March 18, 2022 Notice of Unprofessional Conduct and Unsatisfactory 

Performance 

92.  On March 18, 2022, the District issued a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance (March 18 NUC/NUP) to Respondent via 

certified and electronic mail. The March 18 NUC/NUP was based upon, among other 

things, Respondent’s conduct alleged in Factual Findings X-X. 

93. 

To cure the deficiencies noted in the March 18 NUC/NUP, the District 

created a Plan of Assistance for Respondent that included 30 directives, including the 

following: 

1. CMS is a trauma informed school and, as a result, 

teachers are expected to build relationships with students, 

determine the underlying causes for behavioral issues, and 

address those causes. Recognize and respond to students 

32 

 
consistent with trauma informed school practices. Create a 

culture of mutual respect and support in your classroom. 

Develop and implement a written pan outlining how you 

intend to implement trauma informed practices and create 

a culture of mutual respect and support in your classroom. 

Submit this written plan to CMS Principal for approval by 

April 5, 2022. 

2. Develop and implement a classroom management plan 

and submit it in writing to the CMS Principal for approval by 

April 8, 2022. Your classroom management plan must 

include strategies for building positive relationships with 

students, assuming positive intent, creating a safe 

environment for learning, giving students a sense of 

control, working with students who act our or withdrawn, 

and utilizing consequences focused on learning instead of 

punishments. 

3. Maintain professional boundaries with students. Refrain 

from engaging in boundary invasions and grooming type 

behaviors. Refrain from sexualizing students. Refrain from 

stating or implying that students are interested in anything 

other than a professional teacher-student relationship with 

you. Refrain from stating or implying that you are interested 

in anything other than a [professional] teacher-student 

relationship. Refrain from making comments about or 

discussing spending time with students outside of school. 

33 

 
Refrain from making comments about students interacting 

with other sexually or romantically or being sexually or 

romantically interested in others. 

4. Treat students, parents, and District employes with 

courtesy, respect and dignity at all times. 

5. Refrain from touching students. Refrain from touching 

student’s belongings (e.g., hats, backpacks, clothing, 

phones, computers, etc.) and or/items in the possession of 

students or being used by students (e.g., computers, desks, 

writing utensils, etc.) 

6. Refrain from making sexual suggestive comments and 

gestures and using sexual innuendo and double entendre. 

Refrain from displaying or creating images that [are] 

potentially sexual in nature. Refrain from engaging in or 

directing students to engage in sexually suggestive 

demonstrations. Refrain from making gestures of a sexual 

nature. 

7. Refrain from administering student dress code, “coding” 

students, or speaking or communicating with students 

about their dress in any manner. If you have a concern 

about any aspect of a student’s dress, you are to notify the 

CMS Principal of the name of the student and nature of 

your concern in a private manner. The CMS Principal or 

designee will review and/or address any dress code 

34 

 
violations you report as they deem appropriate. Students 

you perceive as violating the dress code are to remain 

engaged in school activities and not be sent to the office or 

out of the classroom, unless the CMS Principal or designee 

requests that the student be sent to the office. Refrain from 

speaking to students about their clothing or your 

perception that their dress is inappropriate. Refrain from 

making any comments, statements, drawings, 

demonstrations, or gestures that are or could be 

interpreted as sexual in nature in the classroom. 

8. Refrain from correcting, discipling, or calling-out students 

publicly. Speak to students privately regarding any 

academic or behavioral concerns, or disciplinary issues. 

Refrain from involving peers in [any way] in addressing or 

reprimanding students including, but not limited to, using 

[students] to deliver messages or evaluate other students. 

Praise publicly and correct privately. 

9. Refrain from making statements or gestures that mock, 

belittle, embarrass, disparage, intimidate, or insult students, 

parents, or employees. Refrain from teasing and picking on 

students. 

10. Refrain from engaging in abusive, threatening, and/or 

intimidating conduct towards District employees, students, 

and parents. 

35 

 
11. Refrain from arguing with students and/or engaging in a 

power struggle with them. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

[13]. Refrain from raising your voice when speaking to 

students, parents and employees. Speak to students, 

parents and employees in a claim and respectful manner. 

When speaking to students and/or parents regarding 

academic performance or classroom behavior, give them an 

opportunity to respond, respectfully listen to their feedback 

and concerns with the intention of understanding, and 

make a good faith effort to understand their position. 

[14]. Refrain from removing students form another teacher’s 

class, reprimanding students in another teacher’s class or 

on campus. If you have concerns related to any student in 

another teacher’s class or on campus outside your 

classroom, report your concerns to the CMS Principal. The 

CMS Principal or designee will address any concerns you 

report as they deem appropriate. 

[15]. Refrain from removing students from your own class, 

unless necessary to preserve order in the classroom. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

[19]. Refrain from assigning a Family Tree Project or similar 

project. [The] project provokes trauma responses in some 

36 

 
students. May students are in foster care, come from single 

parent or no parent households, or have suffered traumatic 

familial losses. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(Ex. 65, pp. A548-A551.) 

94. 

The March 18 NUC/NUP also directed Respondent to contact Principal 

O’Shea or DHR Zapata, if he had any questions or concerns regarding compliance with 

the directives or how to conduct himself. 

95. 

The District terminated Respondent’s paid administrative leave, effective 

March 19, 2022. However, because Respondent was dealing with a personal matter, he 

did not return to the classroom until April 11, 2022. 

96. 

Prior to Respondent’s return to the classroom, on April 7, 2022, he sent 

an email to Principal O’Shea and DHR Zapata, thanking them for providing resources 

“critical to a successful return to the classroom,” and asking them about policies and 

procedures, including CMS’s Dress Code policy. (Ex. 77, p. A1013.) Respondent noted 

that there were three dress code policies in place (the District’s dress code policy, a 

“seven-point dress-code policy” provided by Principal O’Shea, and the dress code 

policy published on the CMS website) and asked for clarification of which dress code 

he should rely upon. (Ex. 77, p. A1014.) 

97.  On April 8, 2022, DHR Zapata emailed Respondent and told him that he 

did not need to concern himself with the policy and reiterated the directives from the 

March 18 NUC/NUP concerning dress code. She also directed him to provide Principal 

37 

 
O’Shea with the name of the student and nature of his concern if he had a concern 

about any aspect of a student’s dress. (Ex. 77, p. A1017). 

RESPONDENT’S RETURN TO THE CLASSROOM 

98. 

From April 11, 2022, through April 13, 2022, Respondent reviewed his 

written Classroom Procedures with students and also distributed a Dress Code packet 

to students and reviewed it with them. A parent lodged a complaint with Principal 

O’Shea about the amount of time Respondent spent on reviewing the dress code. 

Respondent explained that when he returned to the classroom on April 11, 2022, he 

was not provided an update of where the class left off and he approached the class as 

if it was the new school year and typically reviews his class procedures and the dress 

code with the class then. He did not discuss the dress code policy with the students, 

and generally reviewed it. 

99.  While Respondent was told not to concern himself with the dress code, 

he did not violate the March 18 NUC/NUP directives about the dress code, nor was he 

insubordinate when he distributed the Dress Code packet and reviewed it with 

students from April 11, 2022, through April 13, 2022, because he did not enforce the 

dress code or speak with students about the clothing they were wearing. 

RESPONDENT’S DRESS CODE VIOLATION REPORTS 

100.  Respondent reported more than 30 dress code violations to Principal 

O’Shea between April 11, 2022, and June 9, 2022. Twenty-six of those reports 

concerned female students, as more specifically set forth below. 

38 

 
101.  On April 11, 2022, Respondent sent Principal O’Shea three email 

messages regarding CMS’s Dress Code policy. First, he notified her three students had 

allegedly violated CMS' Dress Code, then he sent another email telling her to add two 

other students to the list. Principal O’Shea determined all the outfits he reported that 

day, except one, were compliant with CMS' Dress Code. Principal O’Shea took 

photographs of the students’ outfits, which supported her determination. (Ex. 8a.) She 

notified Respondent that administration had "dealt with the dress code concerns." (Ex. 

9, p. A34.) Later that evening, Respondent sent another email stating that he would 

like to “better understand” Principal O’Shea’s response to the violations so that he can 

gain an understanding of how dress code violations are managed. (Ibid.) He further 

stated “I would like to find a way to better support and understand the disparate 

administrative consequences provided to CMS students under your supervision,” and 

“p]lease know, I understand that multiple dress-code policies may make a concise 

response challenging, but that does not alleviate the need to understand the 

experience of our students when I or another faculty member contact you on these 

matters.” (Ibid.) 

102.  On April 13, 2022, Respondent sent two email messages to Principal 

O’Shea regarding Dress Code violations. First, he notified her student M.E. arrived at 

his class “in the exact same condition as she was the last time she was in class and I 

reported the DRESS CODE violation. I hope you will come to the classroom and 

address this issue (with her) this morning, so that may send her clear expectations 

moving forward.” (Ex. 10, p. A37.) (Respondent had reported on April 11, 2022, that 

student M.E. was wearing a “very short crop top.”) (Ex. 8, p. 28.) Principal O'Shea 

subsequently pulled student M.E. out of class to observe her outfit, but was unable to 

identify anything wrong with it because the student’s shirt was tucked into her pants, 

39 

 
and she was wearing a jacket over her shirt. (Ex. 10a.) Respondent sent a second email 

to Principal O’Shea stating that student M.E. returned to class “in the same condition 

she was in when you removed her. Class just ended, and she has left to bring the same 

condition to her next class. [¶] . . . [¶] p.s. In the future, could you clarify the response 

on the pass or by email, as I was unsure how to respond when she returned.” (Ex. 10, p. 

A36.) 

103.  On April 13, 2022, Principal O’Shea sent an email to Respondent stating 

that he has been directed not to concern himself with student dress code violations, 

and that the consequences for students out of dress code is “to get the student 

wearing the appropriate attire so that they can re-enter the learning environment.” (Ex. 

9, pp. A32-A33.) She stated that she did not understand his April 11, 2022 accusation 

about disparate consequences under her supervision since the consequences as 

always remained the same, and that if students continued to violate the dress code, 

their parents are notified. Principal O’Shea told Respondent not to concern himself 

with dress code violation consequences, and to focus on instruction, not how students 

are dressed. 

104.  On April 13, 2022, Respondent responded to Principal O’Shea’s email. He 

asserted he wanted to comply with the directive about the dress code, and noted the 

directive was contradictory. Respondent stated in the email that it was disempowering 

to him, and sent the wrong message to students, when he is told to “ignore and not 

enforce obvious disciplinary violations in the teaching and learning environment.” (Ex. 

9, p. A31.) He stated his belief that in prohibiting him from enforcing the dress code, 

students were allowed to determine what rules they wished to follow, “while receiving 

the consequence of their choice.” (Ibid.) Respondent also expressed concern that the 

directive created an inconsistent approach to the dress code, and that other CMS 

40 

 
faculty reported their concerns to CAUSE and to Principal O’Shea about inconsistent 

enforcement of the dress code and the consequences for violating it. 

105.  On April 15, 2022, Respondent emailed Principal O’Shea to report 

student A.A. being out of dress code for two days, and that her friend, student X.A. was 

“exhibiting the same condition. Both are wearing very short crop tops, which are, at 

the very least, a distraction to themselves, if not also others [sic] that are wondering 

why I have not enforced the rules consistently. Again, my seeming to ignore this is in 

class send the wrong message to students in the room, who seem to perceive that I 

am playing favorites. It also makes me comfortable when these students enter the 

room, clutching their mid-sections in the knowledge that they are violating our CMS 

dress-code policies.” (Ex. 11, pp. A39-A40.) Principal O’Shea responded via email 

acknowledging receipt of Respondent’s concerns and informing Respondent that she 

would address the concerns as she deemed appropriate. 

106.  Respondent emailed Principal O’Shea on April 15, 2022, in response to 

her email of the same date, and stated: 

Thank you, Principal O'Shea, 

Beyond the provisions included in the CUSD/CMS dress-

codes, I would appreciate learning what other criteria you 

use to determine whether a student's violating condition is 

"deemed appropriate." I am only aware of the published 

policies that inform this conversation. 

Please know that I ask the above with productivity in mind; I 

am trying to figure out how I might minimize the negative 

41 

 
impact on my relationship with students who perceive 

(incorrectly) that I am choosing to enforce the dress-code 

inconsistently; based on the directives contained in the 

Districts NUC/NUP. In the past, the students I dress-coded 

may have been frustrated that they were being disciplined 

for their violations, but the rest of the students recognized 

(including the students being dress-coded) that I enforced 

the dress-code consistently and as close to the CUSD/CMS's 

multiple and conflicting policies as possible. 

I can understand how a student would now think I was 

playing favorites, given the posture I have been directed to 

maintain in the classroom and around campus; again, based 

on the directives contained in the Districts NUC/NUP. 

Thank you, in advance for any support and clarity you can 

provide in regard to my concerns. 

(Ex. 11, p. A39.) 

107.  Following receipt of Respondent’s email, Principal O’Shea met with 

student A.A. and determined her outfit was compliant with CMS’s dress code. She 

emailed Respondent and told that he is not to enforce the dress code “at all,” and that 

the students’ perception of him “should be of you consistently not enforcing the dress 

code.” (Ex. 12, p. A43.) 

108.  On April 18, 2022, Respondent sent an email to Principal O’Shea in 

response to her April 15, 2022 email. He stated that her email did not clarify any of the 

42 

 
matters he asked about. Respondent denied that he was enforcing the dress code and 

was merely sharing his concerns with Principal O’Shea. He also stated that he was 

confident that students believed he is not enforcing the dress code and that was a 

“challenge.” Respondent explained his belief that students who complied with the 

dress code were beginning to wonder why he did not consistently apply the rules to 

students who were in clear violation of the dress code. He wrote that the District’s 

directive placed him in a “confusing, if not even negative light with the students, which 

in turn undermines my relationship with them.” (Ex. 12, p. A43.) Respondent also wrote 

that he was sharing his thoughts “with all respect,” because it was important for him to 

clarify the impact of the District’s directive. (Ibid.) 

109.  On April 18, 2022, Respondent notified Principal O'Shea that student 

M.E.’s was again in violation of the dress because she was wearing a “very short crop 

top that seems to distract her and others. I believe that my seeming to ignore this in 

class send the wrong message to her and the students in the room, who seem to 

perceive that I am playing favorites.” (Ex. 13.) He also reported that student I.M. was 

wearing a Raiders jersey, and because Raiders hats were gang-affiliated, he was 

concerned, but unsure, that the jersey was also prohibited under the dress code as 

gang related. On that same date, Respondent sent another email to Principal O’Shea 

reporting that students X.A. and A.A. were wearing very short crop tops to class, and 

that they were a distraction to themselves and others. He also expressed the same 

concerns regarding the messaging the District was providing to the students, and the 

message students were receiving by his failure to enforce the dress code. 

110.  Principal O’Shea met with student M.E. and found her outfit was 

compliant with CMS's Dress Code, in that the top of her shirt went the waistband of 

her slacks. 

43 

 
111.  On April 19, 2022, Respondent emailed Principal O’Shea to report that 

student M.E. was wearing a very short crop to class. He noted that she had visited the 

classroom twice but did not address the issue with student M.E. Respondent asserted 

in the email that student M.E. was reluctant to do her work and although he wanted to 

provide her with additional “direct support, I remain uncomfortable working in close 

proximity with her when she is demonstrating this condition; especially in light of the 

kinds of inaccurate and vindictive allegations contained in the District’s retaliatory 

[March 18] NUC/NUP.” (Ex. 14.) Respondent raised the same concerns regarding the 

impact of the directive on messaging to students and the teaching and learning 

environment. 

112.  Principal O’Shea again met with student M.E. and determined that her 

outfit was compliant with CMS’s dress code policy, in that the top of her shirt met the 

waistband of her slacks. (Ex. 14a). 

113.  During the hearing, Respondent stated that he did not mean to insinuate 

that he did not assist student M.E. although she was not doing her work, and that 

“direct support” meant that student M.E. was willfully refusing to cooperate in class. 

His testimony was unpersuasive in that regard. However, Respondent’s assertion in the 

email that he was trying to protect himself from allegations by M.E. in light of prior 

allegations that he was too close to students and stared at their chests was persuasive. 

114.  On April 25, 2022, Respondent informed Principal O'Shea Student M.E. 

was continuing to wear a crop top without a jacket to cover herself in class and that he 

has seen students wearing hats outside of his class “promoting gang affiliations.” (Ex. 

15.) He again asserted that refraining from enforcing the dress code for all students 

supports the perception he was "playing favorites." (Ibid.) Respondent also expressed 

44 

 
concern that the District/CMS was applying the disciplinary policy inconsistently, and 

stated it was also a concern of several CMS employees that were members of CAUSE 

that he represented. He claimed that his colleagues reported that Principal O’Shea 

appeared to have been ignoring their concerns. 

115.  On that day, student M.E. was wearing a long pink shirt that hung well 

below the waistband of her jeans and a oversized black hoodie. Principal O’Shea 

determined that student M.E.’s outfit complied with CMS’s Dress Code policy. (Ex. 15a). 

116.  On April 27, 2022, Respondent informed Principal O'Shea three students, 

students A.A., O.G., and M.E., were continuing to wear and "flaunt'' their “exposing 

crop-tops” in class. (Ex. 16.) Principal O'Shea had stopped by Respondent’s class prior 

to Respondent’s email and did not remove the students. Only one of the students was 

wearing a shirt that did not meet CMS' Dress Code. (Exhibit 16a.) The other two 

students, who were photographed that day, were both wearing shirts that touched the 

tops of their jeans and did not bear their midriffs. In Respondent’s email to Principal 

O’Shea, he claimed after she left, student A.A. "turned to a friend and laughed about 

not being noticed or caught." (Ex. 16.) At the hearing, student A.A. denied laughing 

because Principal O’Shea did not address the dress code with her. Student A.A. did not 

testify that she was offended by Respondent’s statement that she laughed, nor did she 

testify that she requested to be transferred out of Respondent’s class because of it. 

117.  On May 5, 2022, Respondent informed Principal O'Shea that student S.L. 

was wearing a t-shirt with "inappropriate imagery," that he “was getting lots of props 

for” when student S.L. arrived late to Advisory class and had the attention of other 

students. (Ex. 17.) Respondent asked Principal O’Shea to let him know if she deemed 

S.L.’s shirt was a dress-code violation so that he could be better informed on the topic. 

45 

 
Later that day, Respondent sent her a second email stating student X.A. was "in 

violation of the CMS Dress Code policy'' by failing to cover herself with a jacket and 

choosing, instead, to "expose herself beyond [our] expectations." (Ex. 18.) Principal 

O’Shea observed Student X.A. that same day and photographed her outfit. She was 

wearing a top that was tucked into her waistband and did not expose her midriff. 

118.  Student X.A.’s shirt was not in violation of CMS’s dress code policy. (Ex. 

18a.) 

119.  On May 6, 2022, Respondent reported to Principal O’Shea that students 

X.A., O.G., and M.E. were in violation of CMS’s dress code policy because they were 

wearing crop tops. He further reported that they appeared to be distracted by their 

“open clothing, as do some of the students around them. At what point would 

consistent neglect for the Disciplinary expectations be considered defiance?” (Ex. 19.) 

120.  Principal O’Shea took pictures of the students Respondent reported as 

violating the dress code policy that day. All three girls were wearing tops that touched 

the top of their waistbands and did not expose their midriffs. Principal O’Shea 

therefore determined that their clothing did not violate CMS’s dress code policy. (Ex. 

19a.) 

121.  On May 16, 2022, Respondent reported to Principal O’Shea that student 

M.E. was still arriving to class in violation of the dress code. However, Principal O’Shea 

determined that student M.E.’s clothing complied with the dress code, as her shirt 

touched the top of her pants when standing, as demonstrated in the photograph 

Principal O’Shea took of student M.E. that day. (Ex. 20a.) 

46 

 
122.  On May 17, 2022, Respondent reported to Principal O'Shea that student 

M.E. arrived at his class "in the same condition" in violation of the dress code. (Ex. 21.) 

He stated that he was still “unclear as to what effort and/or messaging you re 

pursuing, but I am concerned that it continues to have little impact on her choices and 

how they impact her productivity in class and on campus” and asked for clarification 

(Ibid.) Again, student M.E.'s clothing complied with the dress code, as her shirt touched 

the top of her pants when standing. (Exhibit 21a.) 

123.  On May 18, 2022, Respondent contacted Principal O'Shea via email to 

share he was concerned students were wearing jerseys that had been distributed to 

students at a school sponsored "CMS Lunch Time Rap Show." (Ex. 22.) He also copied 

CMS staff on the email. Respondent stated, without any basis, that the jerseys may be 

“seen as gang affiliated clothing," which could result in potential violence, and asked 

whether the jerseys were permitted and whether Principal O’Shea had considered how 

the jerseys may ''set up [students] for future conflict." (Ibid.) Respondent stated that 

other staff and faculty had discussed the same concerns and would like clarification 

from administrators. Kelly Vergeer, a teacher at CMS also voiced concern regarding the 

jerseys. (Ex. 1061.) Respondent asked for recommendations on how the jerseys could 

be removed or discouraged in the future, and whether parents should be contacted if 

the jerseys were not permitted. Principal O’Shea explained that her initial research 

indicated that the jerseys were only related to the musician and his music but would 

check with the sheriff resource officer to see if the jerseys were related to “Carpinteria 

gang activity.” (Ibid.) Respondent questioned both the nature of Principal O’Shea’s 

research and her intended inquiry. 

124.  On May 20, 2022, Respondent informed Principal O'Shea via email that 

student M.E. had, once again, came to his class ''wearing overly revealing clothing'' 

47 

 
and asked, "At what point is or will [the student's] willful defiance on the topic of 

dress-code, be addressed effectively?" (Ex. 23.) He included each of the student's 

teachers on the email chain and explained that he did so to assure them that he was 

following the directive by not addressing M.E. directly and so they would know he was 

not ignoring the concerns about M.E.’s clothing. Respondent noted that this was the 

tenth email that he had sent to Principal O’Shea regarding student M.E.’s since he 

returned to the classroom on April 11, 2022. He wrote, “[g]iven the repeated nature of 

the violation, it seems this is an issue larger than simple dress-code violations that M.E. 

presents. What message is your administrative response sending her peers? What 

message is your administrative response sending M.E.?” (Ibid.) 

125.  Principal O’Shea determined that student M.E.’s clothing was in 

compliance with the dress code, as the student's shirt touched the top of her pants 

when standing, and she had her jacket zipped up. Principal O’Shea documented the 

state of student M.E.’s clothing by taking a photograph. (Ex. 23a.) 

126.  On June 1, 2022, Respondent informed Principal O'Shea four students 

were “continu[ing] to openly violate the dress code policy," including student M.E., and 

stated that you would "not clarify the concern, as [Principal O'Shea] [had] already been 

well advised . . . on several occasions” by Respondent, CMS teachers, and CAUSE 

leadership. (Ex. 24.) All but one of the students Respondent reported, including 

student M.E., were dressed in compliance with CMS's Dress Code as demonstrated by 

the photographs taken by Principal O’Shea. (Exhibit 24a.) 

127.  The District did not establish that Respondent violated the March 18 

NUC/NUP directive regarding the Dress Code policy. While DHR Zapata and Principal 

O’Shea told Respondent to not enforce the dress code or concern himself with it, they 

48 

 
also, contradictorily, told him that he could email administrators with any concerns 

that he had. Respondent reasonably and continually asked for clarification about the 

dress code policy since there were three in place, and other faculty and staff members 

had the same concerns. There is no evidence that Respondent discussed his perceived 

dress code violations with students, nor did he discipline students because of dress 

code violations, after receiving the March 18 NUC/NUP. While the District established 

that a vast majority of the students were not in violation of CMS’s Dress Code policy 

when Principal O’Shea observed them, the District failed to establish that Respondent 

targeted or was fixated on female students and/or crop tops. Respondent continuously 

emailed Principal O’Shea about certain students he believed were not complying with 

the CMS Dress Code policy and was never told otherwise. Therefore, Respondent’s 

belief that his concerns were being ignored and the students were continually 

violating the CMS Dress Code policy was not unreasonable. 

RESPONDENT’S WRITTEN PLANS RE: TRAUMA INFORMED PRACTICES AND 

CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT 

128.  The March 18 NUC/NUP directed Respondent to (1) submit a written plan 

outlining how you intend to implement trauma informed practices and create a culture 

of mutual respect and support in your classroom by April 5, 2022; and (2) submit a 

classroom management plan implementing strategies for building positive 

relationships with students, assuming positive intent, creating a safe environment for 

learning, giving students a sense of control, working with students who act out or are 

withdrawn, and utilizing consequences focused on learning instead of punishments by 

April 8, 2022. 

49 

 
129.  Respondent failed to submit either plan by the deadlines. Respondent 

explained that he missed the deadlines because he was on bereavement leave at the 

time. On April 13, 2022, the District informed Respondent of the missed deadline and 

directed him to submit the plans by 5:00 p.m. on April 15, 2022. 

130.  On April 15, 2022, Respondent submitted a one-paged document 

entitled “Plan of Assistance” that failed to comply with the directive. (Ex. 81, p. A1038.) 

In the document, Respondent stated he was confused with the directive and had 

previously requested a meeting to obtain clarification. He also stated that he would 

follow all disciplinary policies and classroom management directives published by the 

District and/or CMS and follow any District trauma informed plan or unique classroom 

plans. 

131.  On April 22, 2022, DHR Zapata emailed a letter to Respondent notifying 

him that his submission failed to comply with the directives contained in the March 18 

NUC/NUP. With respect to the plan outlining how Respondent intended to implement 

trauma informed practices or create a culture of mutual respect and support in his 

classroom (trauma informed plan), DHR Zapata reminded Respondent that he 

previously attended trauma informed school training with his colleagues. She provided 

a link to the book “Helping Traumatized Children Learn 2,” so that he could familiarize 

himself with trauma informed practices. DHR Zapata directed Respondent to read the 

book and submit the written trauma informed plan by 12:00 p.m. on April 29, 2022. 

132.  DHR Zapata also advised Respondent that if he believed his Classroom 

Procedures satisfied some of the directives, he should have incorporated those 

procedures into a plan for review and approval. She directed Respondent to create a 

classroom management plan by April 27, 2022, that included “strategies for building 

50 

 
positive relationships with students; assuming positive intent; creating a safe 

environment for learning; giving students a sense of control; working with students 

who act out or are withdrawn; and utilizing consequences focused on learning instead 

of punishments.” (Ex. 82, pp. A1040-A1041.) DHR Zapata also notified Respondent that 

his failure to submit either the trauma informed plan and the classroom management 

plan on time or to request additional time was in direct defiance of the directive and 

constituted insubordination, and that if he continued to be insubordinate, he may be 

disciplined, up to and including dismissal. 

133.  On April 22, 2022, District representatives and their counsel met with 

Respondent and his counsel to discuss his questions regarding the Plan of Assistance 

and the March 18 NUC/NUP directives. After meeting for 3.5 hours, the parties were 

only able to review 17 of the 30 directives. Respondent’s counsel indicated in an email 

dated April 22, 2022, that Respondent found the meeting helpful to understand the 

District’s directives. Respondent’s counsel asked the District to provide the date of 

Respondent was trained on trauma informed practices and requested a follow-up 

meeting to complete the review of the directives. (Ex. 79.) 

134. 

In an email dated April 22, 2022, the District’s counsel informed 

Respondent’s counsel that the training occurred on June 6, 2020, and referred 

Respondent to the March 27, 2022 email from Principal O’Shea for an example of the 

multiple emails she sent with trauma informed practices resources. The District’s 

counsel also requested that Respondent put his additional questions regarding the 

directives in writing. (Ex. 79.) 

135.  On April 27, 2022, and April 29, 2022, Respondent submitted a classroom 

management plan and written plans. The classroom management plan was not 

51 

 
focused on the classroom environment; did not detail how he would build a positive 

relationship with students, assume positive intent, create a safe environment for 

students, give students a sense of control, work with students who act out or are 

withdrawn, or utilize consequences focused on learning instead of punishments. He 

included his Classroom Procedures into the plan. The District found Respondent’s 

Classroom Procedures unreasonably disempowering and domineering. Respondent’s 

written plan regarding the implementation of trauma informed practices included a list 

of eight statements. For example, he stated: “1) I will continue to look beyond 

behavior, when deemed appropriate. 2) I will continue to build relationships, when 

deemed appropriate.” (Ex. 86, p. A1066-A1067.) The District found Respondent’s 

written plan regarding the implementation of trauma informed practices failed to 

identify and incorporate trauma informed practices into his teaching and did not 

contain any details or concrete plan of plan. 

136.  On May 10, 2022, DHR Zapata sent Respondent a letter via email 

notifying that his classroom management and trauma informed practices plans were 

deficient. She explained how the plans were deficient, provided further information on 

what Respondent should include in the plans so that they comply with the direct, and 

directed him to stop using his Classroom Procedures effective immediately. DHR 

Zapata directed Respondent to submit revised classroom management and trauma 

informed practices plans by 5:00 p.m. on May 13, 2022. 

137.  On May 13, 2022, Respondent submitted a revised classroom 

management plan and written trauma informed practices plan. The plans were very 

similar to the plans Respondent submitted on April 27 and 29, 2022. However, 

Respondent added detail to his classroom management plan by describing how he 

would assume positive intent, he added four items discussing how he would build 

52 

 
upon the students’ sense of safety during their day-to-day experience on campus, 

supplemented two of his previous responses on how he would give students a sense 

of control and added seven additional ways he would do so. Respondent added an 

additional description of how he would work with students who were acting out or 

were withdrawn, and added two ways he would utilize consequences focused on 

learning instead of punishments. He stated that he would not use his Classroom 

Procedures and testified that he did not do so after receiving the May 10, 2022 letter 

prohibiting him from doing so. 

138.  Respondent’s revised trauma informed practices plan did not contain 

much in the way of details or a concrete plan of action. It simply removed the phrase 

"as deemed appropriate,'' and in five out of eight areas included, without any 

explanation, examples of when Respondent would not implement trauma informed 

practices consistently in the classroom. (Ex. 86.) In the area of creating a safe learning 

environment, Respondent stated, among other things, that he would be attentive to 

the physical condition of students, work to support physical challenges, remain 

attention to the emotional condition of students, support challenging emotions, and 

remain attentive to the mental condition of students. He included examples of 

unexpected student responses that he would look for, and examples of supportive 

feedback he would give students to reduce negative thinking. 

139.  Respondent asserted at the hearing that he was not been provided 

adequate support or training to submit the plans as directed and that he was initially 

confused as to what the District wanted. He also asserted that he asked for clarification 

but was not provided it, he was never provided with the book “Helping Traumatized 

Children Learn 2” prior to April 22, 2022, he had not seen trauma informed practices 

implantation plans before and he did not have adequate time to respond by the 

53 

 
deadlines imposed by DHR Zapata since he only given three or four work days to 

revised plans. He explained that deadlines were set during a busy period of the school 

year, as President of CAUSE he was engaged in collective bargaining, and that it was 

difficult to draft the plans from “scratch.” 

140.  Respondent’s contention that he did not have much time to create the 

plans in time to meet the deadlines is well taken in that he was on bereavement leave 

when the March 18 NUC/NUP was issued containing the original deadlines, and he 

was given few working days to revise the plans and meet the subsequent deadlines. 

However, there is no evidence that Respondent requested an extension to submit the 

plans. Moreover, although Respondent stated he did not believe he was adequately 

trained on trauma informed practices to complete the plans, the District provided 

sufficient information to Respondent on how to craft the plans, particularly in its May 

10, 2022 letter, and provided him with resources for assistance. 

141.  Although the plans were insufficient to meet all the directives pertaining 

to the plans, and Respondent’s initial attempts to create the plans were lackluster, 

Respondent substantially complied with the directives on May 13, 2022. 

ALLEGATIONS OF VIOLATION OF THE MARCH 18 NUC/NUP 

142.  On April 12, 2022, student A.S. had her cell phone out during lunch. She 

testified that Respondent came out of his classroom and told her that she could not 

have her phone out. Student A.S. further testified that Respondent took her phone, 

made her write her name on a piece of paper, and told her she could pick it up from 

the office. She asserted that this incident occurred toward the end or middle of her 

eighth-grade year. Exhibit 46 is a photograph taken by Principal O’Shea of the cell 

phone next to a piece of paper with the student’s name on it. Principal O’Shea testified 

54 

 
that Respondent brought the phone to the office after approaching student A.S. on 

the field, and the incident occurred in April or May 2022. Respondent violated the 

directive contained in the March 18 NUC/NUP by confiscating student A.S.’s cell phone 

on April 12, 2022. 

143. 

It was Respondent’s practice to pass out oranges to his students and had 

done so for more than 15 years. At 9:12 a.m. on April 25, 2022, Principal O’Shea sent 

an email to Respondent stating that she noticed Respondent had two boxes of 

oranges in his classroom. She further stated she wanted to make sure he was not 

giving them to students because of complaints that students were throwing the 

oranges and leaving orange peels in front the classrooms. (Ex. 1171, B646.) At 11:35 

a.m. that same day, Principal O’Shea sent Respondent a second message stating that 

oranges were being thrown during nutrition, which occurred after she sent her earlier 

email. Principal O’Shea directed Respondent to not allow students to take oranges 

from his classroom. At 2:02 p.m., Respondent sent an email to Principal O’Shea 

informing her when he saw her earlier email, he did not read it carefully but assumed 

the email concerned how students were handling access to the oranges. He asserted 

he reminded students to act responsibly with the fruit or they might lose access to 

them. Respondent stated that he typically handed out 60 oranges per day. He 

explained he passed out the oranges not only to show appreciation and affection to 

his students, but to ensure that they ate healthy snacks. Respondent agreed to abide 

by the directive, but shared his concerns with the directive claiming it prohibited him 

from building genuine and meaningful relationships with students, and asserted it was 

part of a continued practice to isolate him from the students, adversely affected 

students who did not have consistent access to health snacks, and punished all 

students for the actions of a few. 

55 

 
144.  Respondent’s testimony at the hearing regarding the oranges was 

consistent with his email and persuasive. Accordingly, the District did not establish 

Respondent was insubordinate or defiant concerning Principal O’Shea’s April 25, 2022 

direction to not pass out oranges. 

145.  On May 3, 2022, student A.A. was on the soccer field during nutrition or 

lunch. Respondent was walking from the office to his classroom and saw student A.A., 

who testified she had dropped her cell phone and then put it in her pocket. According 

to student A.A., Respondent saw her phone and yelled at her to go to the office. The 

District did not establish that Respondent confiscated student A.A.’s phone as alleged 

in paragraph d(3) because he did not take it from her. 

146.  On May 16, 2022, student A.A. was sitting on the ground outside of 

Respondent’s classroom and her cell phone was also on the ground. A.A. prepared a 

written statement indicating that Respondent “grabbed [her cell phone],” but then 

gave it back to her when she told him that she would take the phone to Principal 

O’Shea. (Ex. 48.) At the hearing, student A.A. testified that Respondent took the phone 

but did not assert that he gave it back to her. Student A.A. took her phone to the 

office and gave it to Principal O’Shea. Since student A.A. prepared her written 

statement near the time of the incident, it was afforded more weight than her 

testimony. Accordingly, Respondent did not violate the directive contained in the 

March 18 NUC/NUP prohibiting him from confiscating items from students. 

147.  On May 5, 2022, Respondent sent an email to Principal O’Shea notifying 

her student G.G. had been disrespectful to an CMS office manager while walking in the 

hallway and the officer manager asked student G.G. to hand over his earbuds that he 

was using. He also reported that student G.G. pointed at Respondent and yelled at 

56 

 
him, “I’ll catch you after the fade,” or “See you after the fade.” (Ex. 74.) Official notice is 

taken that “catch my fade,” and “catch a fade,” is slang for beating someone up or 

threatening physical harm.” Respondent also stated he did now what student G.G. 

meant by his statements but they did not appear to be respectful, and that he did not 

approach student G.G. Further, he wrote:  

“[G]iven the permissive and inconsistent disciplinary 

response he has experienced under your supervision, I'm 

unclear where and how to productively reintroduce myself 

into that extended conversation. 

Nonetheless, when I witness his treatment of our CMS 

faculty & support staff, I'm compelled to share my 

observations; in hopes of better informing the record and 

providing support to our colleagues and student body 

impacted by [student G.G.'s] behavior. Please let me know if 

you would like me to share any further specifics. 

(Ex. 74.) 

148.  While Respondent criticized Principal O’Shea’s discipline of student G.G., 

the Commission did not find his criticism to be disparaging. 

149.  On May 16, 2022, Respondent instructed his class to take notes, however 

student M.E. did not do so. Respondent prepared a discipline log regarding student 

M.E.’s failure to take notes. According to student M.E.’s written statement prepared 

that day and her testimony at the hearing, while she had “spaced out” and looked out 

the window some of the time, she had been reading the book associated with the 

57 

 
lesson and had not yet had an opportunity to write any notes. She was upset because 

Respondent accused her of not doing any work during the class although she told him 

that she was reading her book. However, student M.E. did not indicate in her 

statement or during her testimony that she felt threatened or intimidated by 

Respondent’s behavior. Accordingly, Respondent’s interaction with student M.E. did 

not violate the March 18 NUC/NUP. 

150.  Also on May 16, 2022, student J.S. was having a rough day and had 

“spaced out” when she was supposed to be reading. Respondent began reading out 

loud from a textbook to student J.S. because, according to Respondent, she was not 

paying attention or doing her work. In her written statement, Student J.S she told 

Respondent, “can you stop bugging me,” and he responded, “I will if you do your 

work,” and she agreed to do so. (Ex. 52, p. A182.) During her testimony, Student J.S. 

said that she told Respondent she could read the book herself, but Respondent 

continued to read to her. Respondent’s reading out loud to her embarrassed student 

J.S. There was no evidence that Respondent sent student J.S. outside. Respondent’s 

actions were inappropriate. 

151.  Respondent had student J.S. stay after class so that he could complete a 

discipline log for her. Her friend B.I., who typically walked with student J.S. to their next 

class, came to Respondent’s classroom and waited outside the door. B.I. asserted in a 

written statement that she prepared the same day, that Respondent told her to get out 

of his classroom although she was outside. She estimated that she waited for at least 

five minutes and that Respondent’s next class was beginning to line up. B.I. told 

Respondent “I don’t think [you’re] supposed to hold someone in for this long.” (Ex. 52, 

p. A181.) In response, Respondent came close to student B.I. and said, “shoo, fly, 

shoo.” (Ibid.) Student B.I. wrote, and testified, that she backed up because of how close 

58 

 
Respondent came to her and Respondent laughed. She further testified that 

Respondent’s actions made her feel “uncomfortable and weird” because Respondent 

was “invading” her space. 

152.  Student J.S. told Respondent, “you look funny writing us up for the littlest 

things,” and, according to student J.S. Respondent told her, “you are the funny one,” 

and laughed. (Ex. 52, p. A182.) B.I. asserted that Respondent stated, “you guys look 

funny.” Student J.S. then said, “you think everything is funny,” and student B.I. said, “if 

it’s so funny then you should just let her go.” (Ex. 52, p. A181, A182.) Both students 

said Respondent laughed even more. Student J.S. then began cussing at Respondent, 

so Respondent called the vice principal. She testified that Respondent “wrote her up” 

for cussing at him once, and that he wrote her up on May 16, 2022, for not doing her 

work. The District did not establish that Respondent regularly escalated minor 

infractions into disciplinary matters for student J.S. 

153.  Respondent acknowledged he told student B.I. to “go, please, shoo,” “fly, 

get going, shoo,” the matter with student J.S. did not have anything to do with her, 

and that she needed to “go now.” He denied leaning in to talk to student B.I., and 

stated he tried to keep a good distance away. Respondent estimated that he was 15 

feet away from Student B.I. when he spoke with her. 

154. 

 Student J.S.’s written statement does not include any reference to 

Respondent leaning in close to student B.I. She testified, however, that Respondent 

told student B.I. to leave, and when she did not, he closed the door. Therefore, student 

B.I.’s written statement and testimony did not preponderate over Respondent’s denial. 

Accordingly, while Respondent’s statements to student B.I. to “shoo” was 

59 

 
inappropriate, the District did not establish that Respondent’s behavior was menacing 

or unbecoming of a teacher of the District. 

155.  On May 16, 2022, student C.G., who was in eighth grade, was walking in 

the hallway with student E.H. According to student C.G., Respondent opened the door 

to his classroom and asked where the students were going. He testified student E.H. 

responded, “mind your own business,” and then Student E.H. and Respondent “got 

close together.” 

156. 

 Respondent prepared an email on May 16, 2022, describing his 

interaction with students E.H. and C.G. He stated that the students were yelling loudly 

in the hallway and the asked student E.H. not to yell. Respondent further stated that 

student E.H. repeatedly told him to go fuck himself, made further comments 

containing profanity, and that he asked student E.H. to go with him to the office. 

According to Respondent, student E.H. repeated that Respondent should go fuck 

himself and then threatened Respondent with violence. Respondent wrote that he 

continued to ask Student E.H. to go to the office with him when he saw Sheri Werner, a 

CMS campus supervisor, and asked her for support. 

157.  Neither student E.H. nor Ms. Warner testified at the hearing. However, 

student E.H. prepared a written statement the following day regarding his interaction 

with Respondent that was admitted as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government 

Code section 11513, division (d). Student E.H. wrote that he yelled in the hallway and 

when Respondent told him to quiet down, he told Respondent, “shut the fuck up.” (Ex. 

53, p. A183.) Student E.H. also denied threatening Respondent. 

158.  Ms. Werner prepared a written statement on May 16, 2022, which was 

admitted as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513, 

60 

 
subdivision (d). In the statement, she stated she saw the students arguing with 

Respondent and that Respondent said student E.H. told him to “fuck off,” or 

something similar and that student E.H. denied it. According to Ms. Werner, student 

E.H. was being “extremely disrespectful” to Respondent and that student C.G. started 

to join in being disrespectful as well. (Ex. 53, p. A185.) She wrote: “[a]lthough 

[Respondent] was understandably upset at being disrespected this way, he did not 

help the situation at all by continuing to engage with them.” (Ibid.) Ms. Werner did not 

indicate in her statement that the students, at any time, threatened Respondent. The 

students eventually went to the office with Ms. Werner. 

159.  AP Cota emailed Respondent on May 16, 2022, and told him that the 

students’ parents had been notified of possible suspensions but that that 

administration was going to obtaining written statements from them the following 

morning. 

160.  While students C.G. and E.H. were not in Respondent’s classroom and he 

had been directed not to discipline students not in his class, it was not unreasonable 

for Respondent to ask the students to speak quietly in the hallway while classes were 

in session. The District established that Ms. Werner de-escalated the situation. 

However, the District did not establish that Respondent misrepresented student E.H.’s 

behavior or disregarded his explanation in violation of the directives contained in the 

March 18 NUC/NUP. 

161.  On May 25, 2022, Principal O'Shea stopped by Respondent’s class to do a 

walkthrough. When she entered Respondent’s class, he began questioning her in front 

of the students about why CMS was not providing Advisory class next year. 

Respondent stated that he was tempting to teach his students to question and stand 

61 

 
up to authority figures. However, it was inappropriate for Respondent to question 

Principal O’Shea in front of the class, and there were other, more class appropriate 

ways in which he could have demonstrated this concept. 

162.  Student H.D. testified that the exchange between Respondent and 

Principal O’Shea made her feel awkward and she wanted to go back to work. Her 

testimony was consistent with the written statement she prepared the day of the 

incident. 

163.  After student H.D. told her father, P.D. about the incident, P.D. sent an 

email to Principal O’Shea on May 27, 2022, stating student H.D. was frustrated by the 

“uncomfortable situation,” Respondent created when he confronted her in the 

classroom and expressed his concern about “the very real threat of disgruntled 

employees in workplaces.” (Ex. 44, p. A166.) P.D. testified that he was concerned that 

Respondent was involving students regarding his workplace issues, but acknowledged 

that he was not present when the exchange between Respondent and Principal O’Shea 

took place. 

164.  David Martinez, Respondent’s teacher’s aide (TA), was present during the 

exchange between Respondent and Principal O’Shea. He did not testify at the hearing, 

but his written statement prepared the day of the incident was admitted as 

administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d). 

TA Martinez wrote that Respondent was teaching about feudalism before Principal 

O’Shea came into the classroom. Respondent asked Principal O’Shea to stay and told 

her he asked the students about Advisory and they advocated to have it. Principal 

O’Shea responded that the following school year, 10 minutes of all first period classes 

would take the place of advisory. Respondent then told her that CAUSE was in favor of 

62 

 
advisory remaining in place, and Principal O’Shea stated the teachers were not in favor 

of that. TA Martinez wrote: 

[Respondent] then reminded Mrs. O'Shea that as the 

advocate for the Union they voted for advisory. Mrs. O'Shea 

said that a small group of teachers have gone to her about 

advisory being too long, it's not in teachers' contract for 

advisory, and 10 minutes will still be in 1st period for 

activities. Once, the discussion ended Mrs. O'Shea left the 

room and [Respondent] went on to teach the class about 

Feudalism. When class was over [Respondent] asked me to 

stay put for a second. [Respondent] asked me if I thought 

that he was being disrespectful towards Mrs. O'Shea. I said, 

"I don't think it was disrespectful but I don’t think it was the 

time for it. [Respondent] said thank you for the input. 

(Ex. 54, p. A189.) 

165.  Student L.M. was included in the Friday video shown on that date. When 

the video was shown, Respondent paused it so that the students could see student 

L.M. According to the Student Witness Form student L.M. completed on May 27, 2022, 

Respondent said, “when ever [sic] I’m bored I’m gonna come back just watch that part 

of you.” (Ex. 55, p. A190.) Student L.M. testified that Respondent said that he was 

going to watch the video in his free time and that she “looked like a little kid 

compared to now.” She further testified that she asked Respondent to stop but he did 

not. Student L.M. was embarrassed by Respondent’s actions. 

63 

 
166.  Student V.P. testified that Respondent would pause the Friday video 

whenever he saw a student that was currently in class or a student from his past global 

studies class. She also testified that Respondent zoomed in on the picture of student 

L.M. but did not do that with other students. Student V.P. completed a Student 

Witness Statement Form on May 29, 2022, and wrote that Respondent paused the 

Friday Video when student L.M. appeared and said, “I’ll watch this in the summer when 

I miss you,” and the room became quiet. (Ex. 55, p. A192.) Student V.P. stated she felt 

“really uncomfortable,” when Respondent made the statement about Student L.M. 

167.  Three other students completed Student Witness Statement Forms about 

the Friday Video incident. They did not testify at the hearing, but their statements were 

admitted as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513, 

subdivision (d). These students also wrote that Respondent said he would watch the 

video to see student L.M. when he felt lonely. 

168.  Respondent denied making the statements. However, the credible 

student testimony and the students’ written statements are persuasive. Accordingly, 

the District established that Respondent said he would watch the Friday Video of 

student L.M. when he was bored or lonely. Respondent’s conduct was both 

inappropriate and unprofessional and served no legitimate educational purpose. 

169.  On May 29, 2022, Respondent had the class write “Happy Birthday” 

messages to student M.A.2. on the board although he did not typically do that for 

other students. Respondent also asked to be invited to her birthday party. The District 

did not establish that once student M.A.2’s birthday had passed, Respondent told 

students he liked the party even though he did not attend. 

64 

 
170.  On May 31, 2022, Respondent saw student M.B. drop trash on the 

ground while the student was not in Respondent’s classroom. As a consequence, he 

assigned student M.B. to pick up trash for five days. He also confiscated student M.B.’s 

fidget spinner, which student M.B. used to focus and relieve anxiety. Respondent 

violated the March 18 NUC/NUP by confiscating the fidget spinner. He also violated 

the directive prohibiting him from disciplining students who were not in his classroom. 

171.  On June 2, 2022, Respondent used time during his Advisory class for 

social emotional learning as suggested by CMS administrators. He discussed “love” 

with the students, and made statements such as “love is a connection we have with 

people,“ “you may have a connection with teachers that is love,” “love back at you” in 

response to students left the room, “you could find love soon,” and that a student was 

showing his love towards him in the context of love is a sense of affection for other 

people. None of the statements constituted sexual innuendo. The District did not 

establish that the comments suggested Respondent had an intimate relationship with 

his students or were inappropriate and unprofessional. 

172.  The District did not establish that on June 2, 2022, Respondent said, “No 

one has touched the inside of you,” [Student] is in love with me because he’s raising 

his hand,” or “If you look at me, we have a love connection” as alleged in paragraphs 

XX of the SOC. Though there were student statements regarding this allegation, none 

of the students who testified at hearing testified to this incident. 

173.  The District alleged Respondent informed student E.D., “I think we are in 

love,” or words to that effect, because they were both wearing red shirts. The student 

testimony did not preponderate over Respondent’s denial that the incident occurred. 

Accordingly, the District did not establish this charge. 

65 

 
174.  On June 6, 2022, Respondent assisted student A.M. with preparing an 

incident report stating that during lunch that day, after a female student who, was 

trying to fight her, told her to kill herself, a group of male students who were nearby 

started laughing and then joined in taunting her and telling her to kill herself as well. 

(Ex. 25.) Ms. Werner prepared a written statement the incident. She wrote that she saw 

student A.M. and the female student were about to get into a fight, so she went over 

to deescalate the situation. There was a group of boys yelling rude comments nearby 

but she could not hear “exactly” what they were saying. (Ex. 26.) She wrote that the 

group of boys often says disrespectful and rude things and it was her practice to 

ignore them, “unless they are saying mean and hurtful things to another person (a 

peer not in their group).” (Ibid.) 

175.  Ms. Werner observed Respondent and “Coach” approach the group of 

boys and tell them that they were being rude and to stop saying rude comments, and 

she thought the boys said rude things back to them but was unsure because she was 

dealing with student A.M. (Ex. 26.) Student A.M. did not tell her that the boys said 

anything disrespectful to her and was more concerned about the female student who 

wanted to fight her. Ms. Werner saw Respondent after lunch helping student A.M. 

write the statement. She was confused about this and wrote “perhaps [Respondent] 

heard the boys say rude things directly to her, but I never heard that and when I spoke 

to [student A.M.] again after lunch, she did not mention being upset about the boys. 

She was more focused on the situation with [the other student] which we resolved.” 

(Ibid.) 

176. 

In light of Ms. Werner's own admission she did not hear what the boys 

had said, the District did not establish that Respondent unnecessarily interposed 

himself in the situation between student A.M. and the group of boys. 

66 

 
177.  On a date not established by the record but after March 18 NUC/NUP 

was issued to Respondent, he took a student’s drink out of his backpack in front of the 

class because the container was open. Respondent placed the drink next to the sink. 

Respondent acknowledged that his action conduct violated the directives but asserted 

that he did so for safety reasons in that the student’s drink could have spilled on the 

floor causing him or students to fall. Respondent’s testimony was persuasive. 

178.  Respondent told the class when he had seen some of the students 

outside of school. Student A.Z. was friends with Respondent’s daughter in elementary 

school. He told the students that he had visited the student at her home and saw her 

do cannon balls in the pool. Respondent began using the term “[Students Name]isms” 

to refer to a cannonball. Respondent’s conduct violated the March 18 NUC/NUP. 

179.  Principal O’Shea testified that Respondent had practice of drawing 

caricatures of two students in the 2021-2022 school year. She asserted the students 

reported he drew a caricature of a person with red hair and asked students to guess 

who it was. However, the record is not clear as to when that occurred. Respondent 

denied continuing this practice after receiving the March 18 NUC/NUP directive to 

stop drawing students. The District’s evidence regarding this charge did not 

preponderate over Respondent’s testimony. Accordingly, the District did not establish 

that Respondent violated the directive in this instance. 

180.  Respondent told students that he knew where they lived and whispered 

students’ addresses to them in class. The context of why Respondent did this was not 

established by the record. Respondent’s conduct was inappropriate. The District did 

not establish that Respondent told students that could see them doing things in their 

homes. 

67 

 
181.  Respondent told students that they looked "cute" and/or like a "good 

kid'' in their elementary school photos. Respondent’ conduct did not violate the March 

18 NUC/NUP because Respondent’s comments would not make students feel picked 

on or unsafe. 

Testimony of Principal O’Shea 

182.  Principal O’Shea provided testimony regarding her concerns that 

Respondent’s conduct had on the students and staff, in that she believed he engaged 

in intimidating and aggressive behavior with them. Principal O’Shea also found 

Respondent’s conduct toward her to be demeaning, insubordinate and 

condescending. Respondent’s testimony that she was concerned about Respondent’s 

statements and her behavior toward her was credible. 

Testimony of Rebecca Norton 

183.  Rebecca Norton retired as CMS’s school psychologist in October 2022. 

She described her interactions with Respondent as mostly collegial. However, she 

observed him interact with Principal O’Shea in staff meetings approximately 10 to 15 

times where, according to Ms. Norton, Respondent was condescending and/or 

disrespectful in his tone and challenging directives. Ms. Norton asserted Respondent 

questioned Principal O’Shea’s leadership ability. Ms. Norton considered Respondent’s 

conduct to be obstructive to the functioning of school business and contributing to 

negative moral among staff and an adverse school climate. 

184.  On May 21, 2021, Respondent sent an email to Principal O’Shea and 

copied all CMS staff regarding technical difficulties with the bell system, stating: 

68 

 
Principal O'Shea: 

In the future, when you are aware that there are IT and 

communication issues that could undermine the safety of 

and our response to safety related events (let alone the 

impact to the routine teaching and learning considerations 

that are impacted) could you please work more proactively 

to notify your staff and faculty? There seems no need to 

increase the challenges that can arise when so many are left 

so unsure of the conditions in place to support our safety 

response. As you were aware of the condition much earlier 

today, I am confused why you chose not to communicate 

on the topic or provide an update to those directly caring 

for our students; that is, until an inquiry was sent school-

wide. Bell tones, phones, and internet service are all tools 

we rely upon to successfully perform our responsibilities. 

On behalf of CMS employees, myself included, I ask that 

you work more aggressively to support our efforts. 

Respectfully, 

~ j. Hotchner 

(Ex. 34., p. A125.) 

185.  Ms. Norton forwarded a response email to Principal O’Shea with the “eye 

roll” emoji. (Ex. 34, p. A124.) She then stated “He cornered Stephanie and me to help 

69 

 
‘discipline’ a student who wasn’t wearing his mask properly yesterday when we were 

out on the field during transition period.” (Ibid.) 

186.  Ms. Norton explained that she had been asked to supervise students on 

the yard during nutrition and lunch. She and Stephanie, a CMS counselor, were 

walking and talking when Respondent came out of his classroom and asked them to 

discipline the student. Ms. Norton stated that the term “cornered” was too strong but 

Respondent stepped in front of them and stopped their conversation. In using the 

word “discipline,” she meant that Respondent wanted her to reinforce the idea of 

proper mask wearing. Ms. Norton did not discipline the student and she did not think 

Respondent needed to involve her. In her opinion, Respondent could have resolved 

the matter with a calm discussion with the student. 

187.  Ms. Norton used the emoji to convey to Principal O’Shea that she 

understood that it must be frustrating for her to have to clarify things and constantly 

be questioned by Respondent because she too was occasionally frustrated with 

Respondent. 

188.  Ms. Norton observed Respondent respond harshly to a student when he 

scolded the student for a minor infraction and asked her to come to the office. The 

student appeared to Ms. Norton to feel scared and shut down. Respondent also asked 

for assistance from Ms. Norton to discipline a student in his class when the student 

refused to remove his hat. 

Testimony of Joseph Fantazia 

189. 

Joseph Fantazia was a special education teacher at CMS from October 

2020 to June 2022. He provided case management for between 16 and 26 students 

70 

 
and academic instruction for students with IEPs. Mr. Fantazia was notified when his 

students were disciplined and was part of the process of moving one of Respondent’s 

students to another teacher’s class. 

190.  Mr. Fantazia was concerned about Respondent’s interactions with 

students because of Respondent’s “black and white” point of view. It appeared to Mr. 

Fantazia that Respondent sought to be more punitive rather than understanding of his 

students. He is aware of Respondent telling a seventh student that he would consider 

the student to be absent and give him a failing grade for the class if he did not turn on 

his camera during remote learning. The student was struggling with anxiety and had 

several personal/familial reasons for not having his camera on. The student’s IEP was 

changed so that he could turn his camera up to the ceiling. When Respondent became 

aware of the change, he instituted additional requirements to ensure that the student 

was participating. Mr. Fantazia believes Respondent should have done more to 

understand how to get more out of his students without leveling threats of failing 

them. 

191.  According to Mr. Fantazia, three students expressed anxiety about going 

to Respondent’s class, and did not like him. However, he did not witness any of the 

events leading to the students’ feelings about Respondent. 

District’s Expert 

192.  Dorit Saberi is the Supervising Psychologist and Co-Founder/Clinical 

Director of the Safe Harbor-Trauma Recovery Center at Harbor UCLA Medical Center. 

She obtained her bachelor’s and master’s degrees from California State University, 

Northridge in clinical psychology and educational counseling psychology. Dr. Saberi 

71 

 
obtained her doctorate degree from Arizona State University and has been licensed by 

the California Board of Psychology since 2002. 

193.  Dr. Saberi is certified to treat individuals who have been the victims of 

traumatic events and has provided trauma services to children ages three and older 

who have been the victims of crime, domestic violence and trafficking. She has also 

treated children ages 16-24 and she has provided trauma focused cognitive behavior 

therapy (CBT). Dr. Saberi is familiar with developmental milestones for school-aged 

children as she received her Ph.D. in that area. She has worked with educators in that 

she has participated in IEP meetings and consulted with educators on recognizing a 

trauma response versus oppositional defiance disorder in students. 

194.  Dr. Saberi explained that children between 10- and 14-years go through 

important developmental stages. They experience an increase in executive function 

and changes in identify formation. Children this age are also developing decision-

making, and reasoning skills, and grapple with self-esteem and body image. They also 

go through puberty, changes in their hormone levels, and become aware of issues of 

justice and develop their moral compass. 

195.  Prior to offering her opinion at the hearing, Dr. Saberi read the hearing 

transcripts, listened to witness testimony during all days of hearing, reviewed the plan 

of action prepared by Respondent and the Statement of Charges and Notice to 

Suspend, watched the videos from Respondent’s depositions, and attended student 

interviews conducted by the District’s counsel. The student interviews ranged from 10 

minutes to an hour. Dr. Saberi acknowledged that interview sessions are not the usual 

method for conducting a psychological evaluation and her attendance during the 

interviews was not meant to be a psychological evaluation. She did not have 

72 

 
opportunity to learn the history of the students who testified at the hearing, and she 

does not know whether they suffered any trauma prior to being in Respondent’s class. 

196.  Dr. Saberi attended the District’s interviews of four or five students who 

did not testify at the hearing. She contends that she was able to separate the student 

testimony at the hearing from the interview statements made by students who did not 

testify when offering opinions on Respondent’s alleged conduct. However, Dr. Saberi 

acknowledged that she inadvertently merged statements (testimony at the hearing 

and allegations made by students who did not testify) on two occasions. Those 

occasions were not made clear by the record. 

197.  Dr. Saberi was concerned about Respondent’s interactions with students. 

It is her understanding that Respondent singled students out by making comments 

about them or engaging in behaviors in reference to the students that made them 

stand out in front of their peers. Dr. Saberi gave examples of drawing caricatures of 

students, commenting on their hair color, stating that he did not get paid enough to 

see bra straps, and reading to student J.X in front of others. She also noted that 

Respondent played the video of L.M., which was embarrassing and humiliating to her. 

Dr. Saberi was concerned that Respondent’s behavior, which she referred to as public 

shaming, resulted in lack of motivation and focus, and caused students to become 

anxious and dread coming to class. At this point in the students’ development, they 

require affirmation as they are forming relationships and Respondent’s behavior could 

have an adverse impact on their development. Dr. Saberi formed the opinion 

Respondent engaged in public shaming of students based on students’ testimony that 

they were embarrassed by Respondent’s actions. 

73 

 
198.  Dr. Saberi described some of Respondent’s actions as over controlling 

behavior. Her opinion was based on student testimony that Respondent would 

demand that they take their hoodies off but then would remove their hoodies himself, 

that he continued to report dress code violations after receiving the March 2022 

NUC/NUP, assigning the family tree project although he was told that it was not 

necessarily fitting or trauma informed, that he made students stand outside if they 

were one minute to class, and that if he raised his hand above his head, the class had 

to be silent. 

199.  Dr. Saberi testified that Respondent’s over controlling behavior could 

limit student creativity, cause students to believe that did not have their own voice and 

prohibit them from expressing themselves. She also testified that Respondent’s’ 

behavior could limit students’ ability to fully engage and focus and create the 

perception Respondent was uncaring. Dr. Saberi offered the opinion that a teacher 

must consider individual students’ abilities, diversity, and life circumstances when 

enforcing classroom rules. 

200.  Dr. Saberi offered the opinion that Respondent’s conduct in the 

classroom lacked transparency. She noted that students reported they were unclear 

about how assignments were graded and what criteria was being used. Dr. Saberi also 

noted that Respondent used subtleties when he said, “I know your address,” and then 

recited it. Dr. Saberi concluded that Respondent’s behavior was incongruent, confusing 

and unpredictable, and such behavior leads to students feeling unsafe in Respondent’s 

classroom. She also concluded that Respondent’s actions caused students to become 

confused about how they are supposed to behave and how they are punished and 

rewarded, which can lead to learned helplessness, inaction, withdrawal, and truancy. 

74 

 
201.  Dr. Saberi noted Respondent, when angry, would engage in conduct that 

was detrimental to students such as slamming a laptop computer, closing it on a 

student’s hand, kicking the leg of student’s desk, throwing papers at students instead 

of handing them out, grabbing the student was speaking to a parent, raising his voice, 

and dragging a student seated in his desk 15 feet. Dr. Saberi opined Respondent’s 

conduct was concerning because students expect safety and respect in the classroom, 

and his behavior can cause students to show down, demonstrate lack of motivation, 

fear, and dread, and wondering if they will become the target of Respondent’s anger. 

202.  Dr. Saberi testified that Respondent’s differential treatment of students 

was concerning. She noted that students testified that student V.X was his favorite 

student, and that he would yell at student J.X. Dr. Saberi also noted that he gave 

oranges to some students but told student B.X. that she could not have one. She 

stated that Respondent’s behavior was concerning because students are forming their 

identities at that time. She noted that students asked student A.C. why Respondent did 

not like him. If students appear to be unfavored, they can internalize the behavior, 

develop the belief are defective or not good enough and do not deserve equal 

treatment. The students will then lose focus and motivation in class. On the other 

hand, if students perceive he or she is the teacher favorite they may become upset and 

experience survivor’s guilt. 

203.  Dr. Saberi expressed concern for Respondent’s unwelcome or intrusive 

touching such as when he grabbed student’s hands to compare with his and students 

pulled their hands away or hid them, or when he touched student C.C.’s chest, and the 

student felt violated. She explained that Respondent’s behavior was concerning 

because of the potential for escalated touching, abuse, and the behavior could be 

considered grooming. In addition, female students reaching puberty can be 

75 

 
uncomfortable with a teacher standing to close, hovering over them, and focusing 

attention on their body parts. 

204.  Dr. Saberi stated that Respondent made inappropriate statements and 

innuendos when saying how students had matured or developed, commenting that a 

student’s eye color was attractive and which color he favored, and commenting that a 

student was wearing his favorite shirt. She noted student J.S. felt Respondent was 

staring at her chest, and student L.J.C. felt Respondent’s comments were flirty. Dr. 

Saberi opined that with this behavior, Respondent violated the students’ boundaries 

by calling attention to their physicality. She further opined that Respondent’s behavior 

was unprofessional and could lead to the students’ confusion and internalization of 

shame or guilt because of their physical characteristics. The negative consequences of 

such behavior is greater in students who have experienced trauma and could lead to 

depression, social anxiety, withdrawal, and self-harm. 

205.  Dr. Saberi offered the opinion that Respondent’s behavior could also be 

considered grooming behavior (building a relationship to lower defenses). She pointed 

to Respondent’s suggestion to student L.JC. that they should have a sleep over as 

possibly part of later stages of grooming. However, Dr. Saberi saw no evidence that 

Respondent met with any students outside of class or school, including student L.JC., 

or took any further action with respect to the suggestion regarding a sleep over. 

206.  The themes addressed by Dr. Saberi (over-controlling behavior, anger, 

public shaming, unwelcome or intrusive touching) point to a potentially traumatic 

classroom environment. She noted that students, in their interviews and testimony, 

spoke about feeling shame, guilt, dread, fear, anxiety, and uncertainty as a result of 

Respondent’s conduct. Dr. Saberi also testified that urban middle school youth also 

76 

 
tend to suffer from adverse childhood events that make them more susceptible to 

experience negative impact to their psychological function due to Respondent’s 

behavior. 

207.  Dr. Saberi explained that long-term psychological effects of a traumatic 

classroom environment include dropping out of middle and high school, low self-

esteem, depression, and lowered self-efficacy. Male students can model and sanction 

the observed behavior. 

208.  Dr. Saberi has treated patients who have had experiences similar to 

Respondent’s students. She noted that they became desensitized to inappropriate 

behavior, gave up on adults, and lowered their expectations such that flirty behavior 

by an inappropriate person was no longer a red flag. She attributes these patients’ 

psychological issues to their early experiences in the classroom. 

209.  Dr. Saberi stated that some middle school students are primed to see a 

sexual meaning in things that were not intended that way, and for some students, 

sexually suggestive things go over their heads. She further stated that it is normal for 

middle school students, because of their stage of development, to find sexual 

meanings in jokes, although they would typically joke with peers not in the classroom 

while lessons are being taught. However, Dr. Saberi acknowledged that she does not 

spend much time in middle school classrooms. 

210.  Dr. Saberi stated that individuals suffer the responses to subversive 

conduct that she described when they are chronically exposed to it. However, 

individuals can suffer aversion and trauma effects with just two contacts, it depends on 

the person. 

77 

 
211.  Dr. Saberi acknowledged that Respondent addressed dress code 

violations by emailing Principal O’Shea after the March 2022 NUC/NUP and did not 

speak with the students he believed to be in violation directly. She is not aware 

whether of Respondent was told not to use his classroom procedures, what other 

teacher’s classroom rules are, or what CMS’s policy was regarding cell phones. Dr. 

Saberi did not recall seeing the exhibits that demonstrated Respondent allowed 

students to create trees that did not relate to family, nor did she recall student A.A.’s 

testimony that Respondent did not search her backpack; rather, she dumped its 

contents on the ground. 

212.  Dr. Saberi’s testimony was given some weight based on her experience 

and training. However, Dr. Saberi’s conclusions were based on allegations in the SOC 

that where not established. Moreover, much of Dr. Saberi’s opinions about the effects 

of Respondent’s conduct, with the exception of student testimony regarding their 

feelings, were speculative and not based upon a psychological assessment of the 

students. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

213.  Prior to working for the District, Respondent was a student teacher in 

Santa Barbar and Goleta. He coached soccer and track during his first few years with 

the District. Respondent has been a member of CAUSE for 20 years. 

214.  Respondent met the District’s expectations when he was evaluated in 

2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2016, and 2018. 

215.  Respondent acknowledged that he has had difficult interactions with 

District and CMS administrators. He attributes those difficult interactions to his 

78 

 
inquiries about subjects that administrators “don’t want to talk about.” Respondent 

asserted that as the CAUSE representative at CMS, he is asked to communicate 

members’ concerns with Principal O’Shea during staff meetings, including members’ 

dissatisfaction with day-to-day operations. 

216.  Respondent denied many of the charges against him concerning his 

interaction with students and admitted others, while providing context. He denied that 

his comments to Principal O’Shea were disrespectful, demeaning or insubordinate. 

217.  Respondent contends that the students Principal O’Shea photographed 

between April 2022 and June 2022, to demonstrate that their outfits did not violate 

CMS’s Dress Code policy were not dressed like that while in his class. He suggested 

that the students changed or adjusted their clothing by the time Principal O’Shea 

interacted with him. However, several students who offered rebuttal testimony denied 

doing so. 

218.  Respondent denied receiving Principal O’Shea’s May 21, 2021 email 

containing the directives prohibiting him from confronting students about the dress 

code, confiscating phones from students not in his class, and removing students from 

other classes, and for students engaging in negative behavior, directing him to work 

positively with parents and students to improve students’ grades and behavior. His 

denial is based upon the fact that the email was sent after hours and although his 

tendency is to respond to Principal O’Shea’s email there is no record that he 

responded to it. 

219.  The District offered rebuttal testimony from Aaron LaPlante, the District’s 

IT manager. He was able to research the status of the May 21, 2021 email, and saw 

that it was opened and then marked unread. Mr. LaPlante explained that an email will 

79 

 
only show “unread” if the user marks it as such. However, Mr. LaPlante cannot tell 

when the email was opened or when it was marked unread. He conducted his search 

regarding the May 21, 2021 email a few days prior to the hearing. Mr. LaPlante stated 

that the email could have been opened and marked unread as recently as the week 

prior to his testimony. 

220.  Respondent contends that he did not learn about the May 21, 2021 email 

until after March 18, 2022. He further contends that it was then that he found the 

email in his inbox, opened it, and marked it unread. Respondent explained that it is his 

practice to mark important emails as unread because it causes the email to be 

highlighted in bold and makes it easier to find if he believes he will need it in the 

future. Respondent’s testimony was credited given his history of responding to 

Principal O’Shea’s many disciplinary emails. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

221.  Cynthia Faust previously worked at CMS for 14 years as a special 

education teacher for sixth, seventh, and eighth grade students. She has known 

Respondent for 14 years, interacted with him on a regular basis, and they typically 

taught some of the same students for at least one-half of a school year. Ms. Faust has 

also socialized with Respondent outside of school at teacher functions. 

222.  Ms. Faust described Respondent as friendly and professional, and 

someone she consulted with at the beginning of the school year regarding ways to 

support and accommodate students’ needs. She asserted that her interactions with 

Respondent were positive, and that he provided her with materials to assist students 

adjust to the curriculum. 

80 

 
223.  Ms. Faust has observed Respondent teaching and is impressed with his 

ability to get students involved. In her opinion, his interactions with students were 

spontaneous and natural, he had a good rapport with them, the students did not 

appear to be afraid to speak and they easily participated in the lessons. Ms. Faust 

stated she has seen students following Respondent around campus and she believes 

he is one of the most popular teachers at CMS. 

224.  Ms. Faust did not observe Respondent act disrespectfully toward staff 

members. She is not aware of any reports that Respondent yelled at or picked on 

students or made inappropriate comments in class. However, one of Ms. Faust’s 

students, J.S., reported to her that she did not like Respondent and that he was mean 

to her, but student J.S. was vague about her complaint. Ms. Faust recalled that student 

J.S. was upset that Respondent was not nice to her friend, but student J.S. was not 

present during her friend’s interaction with Respondent. After that incident, voiced her 

dislike for Respondent. Student J.S. spoke with Principal O’Shea about her concerns 

and did not want to see a counselor. 

225.  Student J.M.’s mother complained to Ms. Faust that on one occasion, 

Respondent made student J.M. wait outside the classroom before admitting him to 

review student J.M.’s behavior form. 

226.  Ms. Faust is aware that trauma informed practices are based on social 

emotional learning. She denied Principal O’Shea, nor any other administrator, 

instructed her to use trauma informed practices in the classroom. Ms. Faust received 

training on AHA and ACES along with general educational training. She recalled seeing 

the AHA Training but did not initially recall receiving the trauma informed practices 

81 

 
emails sent by Principal O’Shea but later acknowledged that she “probably” reviewed 

them. Ms. Faust also did not recall being told that CMS is a trauma informed school. 

227.  Ms. Faust was unaware that the District intends to dismiss Respondent 

and was not aware of the charges against him. When made aware of the some of the 

charges contained in the SOC, she acknowledged that the behaviors, on their face, are 

inappropriate for a teacher. 

228.  Monica Solorzano is a City Council member of the City of Santa Barbara. 

One of her children attends CMS and the other attends an elementary school in the 

District. Her children have not had Respondent as a teacher, and she has not observed 

him in his role as a teacher. 

229.  Ms. Solorzano is the Vice President of Parents for CMS (PFCMS) and 

knows Respondent, whom she met in 2022. Her children also attend the same dance 

studio as Respondent’s daughters. 

230.  Ms. Solorzano has heard Respondent speak at the PFCMS meetings and 

found that he provided thoughtful and considered feedback on agenda items and was 

passionate about public education. 

231.  Principal O’Shea and other administrators have also attended the PFCMS 

meetings. Ms. Solorzano sensed there was tension between Respondent and Principal 

O’Shea and other administrators. She discerned Respondent and Principal O’Shea or 

the administrators did not have a positive relationship because of Principal O’Shea’s or 

the administrators’ tone of voice, facial expressions, and word choice. Ms. Solorzano 

did not experience the same reception when she spoke. 

82 

 
232.  Ms. Solorzano observed Respondent work with parents on event 

planning and interact with them concerning other issues. She described him as kind, 

smart, resourceful, generous with time and energy, and a good faither, friend and 

colleague. Ms. Solorzano never had a negative interaction with Respondent. 

233.  Ms. Solorzano was not aware of the charges against Respondent. When 

notified of some of the charges at the hearing, she states she did not know enough 

about the behaviors alleged to say whether they are inappropriate. 

234.  Crystl Hotchner is Respondent’s wife. She has worked at CMS for 23 years 

and is a math teacher for seventh and eighth grade students. 

235.  For the past five years Mrs. Hotchner and Respondent have taught some 

of the same students since they both teach seventh graders. She believes a majority of 

the students at CMS know she and Respondent are married. 

236.  Mrs. Hotchner described Carpinteria as a small beach town. She has seen 

and interacted with students outside the school environment. Some CMS students live 

on her same street, are friends with her daughter, and are on the same soccer team. 

Mrs. Hotchner will run into students anywhere she goes in town. While in her 

classroom, Mrs. Hotchner has mentioned to students that she has seen them outside 

of school. She has not been reprimanded by CMS administrators for doing so. 

237.  Students talk about Respondent in her class, such as having inside jokes 

with him. She is aware of students talking about Respondent being on leave; the 

students speculated the reason for Respondent’s absence was he was going through a 

divorce, or he had been arrested. 

83 

 
238.  During Mrs. Hotchner’s tenure at CMS, the dress code prohibited 

students from wearing crop tops, flip flops, and clothing with inappropriate slogans 

and clothing had to be certain length. She asserted that at staff meetings, 

administrators and staff discussed that the majority of dress code violations concerned 

female students wearing crop tops and male students wearing their pants too low or 

clothing with inappropriate slogans. 

239.  Students B.I., B.V., and M.E. were students that Mrs. Hotchner and 

Respondent shared that frequently violated the dress code. Mrs. Hotchner has sent 

students to the office for dress code violations or emailed CMS administrators 

regarding those students. The violations were resolved by giving the student a shirt or 

having them zip up their sweatshirt if they were wearing one. 

240.  Mrs. Hotchner sent emails to Principal O’Shea regarding students who 

were out of dress code. On April 26, 2022, she sent an email to AP Cota and copied 

Principal O’Shea and Respondent regarding student A.A.’s dress code violation. Mrs. 

Hotchner copied Respondent on the email because he is the union president. She 

wrote: 

. . . Thank you for your assistance with [A.A.] Just to recap: 

1) Her crop top only reached the top of her jeans if she 

pulled her jeans up really high. 

2) When I asked her to zip up her sweatshirt she rolled her 

eyes and refused to comply[.] 

3) After her refusal I explained that her options were to zip 

up her sweatshirt or go to the office and have [Principal] 

84 

 
O’Shea tell her to zip up her sweatshirt. She rolled her eyes 

and said, “it’s ok” and again refused to zip up her 

sweatshirt. 

4) I asked her to out into the hall so I could talk to her 

privately. 

5) At that point you came into the room (for another 

reason) but were able to talk to [A.A.] together. You 

directed her to zip up her sweatshirt so as not to waste 

class time over clothing issues. She complied. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(Ex. 1076.) 

241.  On May 18, 2022, Mrs. Hotchner sent an email to Principal O’Shea 

regarding students A.A., M.E., B.I., and B.V., who were in her third period class, 

regarding alleged dress code violations. She also copied their first, second and 

advisory period teachers on the email. Mrs. Hotchner stated that these students 

“routinely” came to her class with “short crop tops or very low cut tops,” and she 

“routinely” asked them to put on or zip up their sweatshirts. (Ex. 1085, p. A431.) 

Principal O’Shea responded that: a) Mrs. Hotchner should notify administration of any 

dress code issues; b) students found in violation will be provided a change of clothes 

so that they will not miss instruction; c) “nothing in the dress code policy prohibits 

students from wearing ‘low cut’ clothing; and d) “Attention should be focused on 

supporting students’ academic and emotional progress and less on female students’ 

85 

 
clothing. When female students are removed from class because of their clothing, it 

sends the wrong message about the importance of their education.” (Id. at p. B430.) 

242.  Notably, there was no evidence Mrs. Hotchner sent Principal O’Shea any 

emails regarding student dress code violations prior to Respondent receiving the 

March 18 NUC/NUP. 

243.  Mrs. Hotchner’s classroom management rules include prohibiting drinks 

from the classroom with the exception of water. She provides the rules to her students 

in writing on the first day of class, goes over them in detail on the second day, and 

reviews them with the class on the third day. By the end of the week, the students have 

grasped how her classroom runs. 

244.  Mrs. Hotchner has confiscated drinks from students by placing them on 

her desk and returning them later. When she confiscates a drink, she tells the students 

she does want them to spill it. Mrs. Hotchner has not taken a drink out of a students’ 

backpack and was never told by CMS administrators that she could not have a policy 

prohibiting drinks. 

245.  Mrs. Hotchner confiscated cell phones from students who violated CMS 

policy and was never told not to do so. She asked the student to give the phones to 

her and did not take the phones out of students’ hands. 

246.  To assist with classroom management, Mrs. Hotchner requires her 

students to wait outside her classroom before inviting them to. CMS administrators 

never told her it was inappropriate for the students to wait outside. 

247.  Mrs. Hotchner has observed Principal O’Shea make the heart-shaped 

symbol with her hands. 

86 

 
248.  Mrs. Hotchner has taken photographs of students, with their knowledge, 

using her personal iPhone or an iPad per Principal O’Shea’s request to take 

photographs of students engaged in work for the Friday bulletin and the yearbook. 

Some students did not like to have their pictures taken. Mrs. Hotchner told those 

students she will take a picture of their hands and/or their worksheet. If they insist on 

not having their picture taken, she will not do so. Mrs. Hotchner sends the 

photographs to Principal O’Shea or the librarian. 

249.  Mrs. Hotchner attended the AHA workshop trainings on trauma and 

implements some of the best practices regarding trauma in her classroom. She 

believes she attended the SELPA trauma informed practices training but does not 

recall receiving the emails from Principal O’Shea containing trauma informed practices 

resources. 

250. 

Jennifer Foster has worked at CMS since 1994 and teaches math to sixth 

and seventh grade students. She has worked with Respondent since he started at CMS, 

she is the treasurer of CAUSE, and has socialized with Respondent outside of school. 

Ms. Foster recently attended a “welcome back” gathering at Respondent’s house. 

251.  Fifty percent of Ms. Foster’s seventh grade students were in Respondent’s 

class. No student has reported a concern about Respondent to her. 

252.  Ms. Foster’s classroom rules are: 1) be respectful; 2) be on time and 

prepared for class; 3) do not disturb others; and 4) no unauthorized gum or food. She 

goes over the rules with her class at the beginning of the school years and provides 

examples of what it means to follow or not follow the rules. Students must raise their 

hands if they need to get out of their seat to obtain supplies or use the bathroom. No 

87 

 
one from administration has told her that having the students remain in their seats 

and raise their hand to get up is inappropriate. 

253.  Ms. Foster’s students wait outside the classroom before they enter, and 

she greets each student as they enter the room. No one has ever told her that it was 

inappropriate for students to wait outside. 

254. 

If a student acts inappropriately in Ms. Foster’s case, she will stand by the 

student’s desk. If the student continues to behave inappropriately, she asks the 

student to step outside the classroom while she completes a behavior form/log. Ms. 

Foster will then go outside and talk to the student about their behavior, tell the 

student what she wants to see from them when they return to class, and then invite 

the student to return. She will send a student to the office and text administration if 

they physically harm someone uses profanity with her. No one has ever told Ms. Foster 

that having a student step outside the classroom is inappropriate. 

255.  Ms. Foster testified that CMS’s dress code policy was stricter prior to the 

2022-2023 school year. Principal O’Shea informed Ms. Foster that it is not appropriate 

to dress code students to make them feel bad. During the past five years, Ms. Foster 

has addressed dress code concerns directly with students who were in violation, and 

no one in administration has told her that it was inappropriate do so. 

256.  Ms. Foster has taken photographs of students with a school issued iPad, 

or her personal cell phone if she was already using the iPad for other purposes, to 

document student learning to use at open house. The pictures were also used for 

students to see themselves learning. 

88 

 
257.  Some students do not like having their pictures taken. Ms. Foster tells 

them that their faces would not necessarily be showing and she is taking the pictures 

to show the task or activity. If a student insists that they do not want their picture 

taken, she will delete the photograph. According to Ms. Foster, Principal O’Shea 

thanked her for taking the pictures and included them in the Week in Review. 

258. 

It is Ms. Foster’s understanding that under CMS’s cell phone policy, which 

was effective beginning of the 2022-2023 school year, students are not allowed have 

cell phones out and they should be in their backpacks at all times unless a teacher 

approves otherwise. The previous policy was that so long as cell phones could not be 

seen, students could have them on their person. Under the previous policy, Ms. Foster 

confiscated more than 15 to 25 cell phones during the school year, and no one told 

her that she should not do so. When she confiscated the phones, she did not take 

them out of the students’ hands; she would extend her hand and say, “please give me 

your cell phone” until the student eventually did so. 

259.  Ms. Foster does not allow students to have drinks in her classroom 

except for water. If a student has a drink other than water, she asks the student to put 

it on a table on the side of the classroom. Ms. Foster does not grab drinks out of 

students’ hands, nor does she take them out of students’ backpacks. 

260.  Ms. Foster contended that she did “not really” know what trauma 

informed practices are, and only remembered participating in one 20-minute trauma 

informed practices training in January or February 2022 or 2023. Ms. Foster was told 

by administration that she should use trauma informed practices, but asserted she not 

required to do so, and in any event she is not clear on how to do that. 

89 

 
261.  Ms. Foster has observed Principal O’Shea and Respondent interact during 

monthly meetings over the past five years. She described Respondent’s demeanor as 

polite during the meetings and stated he asked a lot of questions. It appeared to Ms. 

Foster that Principal O’Shea would become frustrated by Respondent’s questions. 

262.  Ms. Foster attend the AHA workshop training during the 2020-2021 

school year. She asserted that events are “foggy” for her after March 2020, therefore 

she does not recall attending the SELPA trauma training. Ms. Foster assumes she 

received the emails sent by Principal O’Shea with trauma informed practices resources 

attached. She tried to open every link in the emails sent by Principal O’Shea but did 

not always have time to do so. 

263.  Ms. Foster is not aware of the charges against Respondent but learned at 

an executive board meeting that the District was seeking to dismiss him. She did not 

know he said that he was not paid enough to see bra straps. Ms. Foster heard rumors 

that Respondent was directed not to address dress code violations. She asserted that 

she may have continued to address dress code violations if given the same directive 

depending on the circumstances. 

264.  Ms. Foster has not thrown a student’s backpack, directed student peers 

to tell another student their clothing violated the dress code, slammed a laptop on a 

student’s fingers, or dragged a student across the room in a chair. She has, however, 

placed a student’s chair down on all four legs when a student was sitting in it with only 

two legs. 

265.  Debra Leiter retired from CMS in June 2022. She and Respondent are 

friends and socialize outside of school two to three times per year. Ms. Leiter has been 

to Respondent’s home, and he has been to hers. 

90 

 
266.  Ms. Leiter taught seventh and eighth grade science, and during the past 

five years, she and Respondent shared some students. She recalled that their shared 

students had positive things to say about Respondent and really enjoyed his class. Ms. 

Leiter has observed Respondent interact with students and described those 

interactions as positive. 

267.  Ms. Leiter had a good relationship with Principal O’Shea. She recalled 

that they had ongoing conversations about Respondent. Ms. Leiter described a 

particular conversation she had with Principal O’Shea in the Fall of 2020, wherein she 

alleged Principal O’Shea asked if Ms. Leiter had any “dirt” on Respondent. However, 

she acknowledged that Respondent was the one who used the term “dirt” when he 

subsequently emailed her and asked if Principal O’Shea was actively seeking “dirt” on 

him. Ms. Leiter informed Respondent that Principal O’Shea had asked for information 

about Respondent but would not put much stock in it because it seemed related to 

Principal O’Shea’s insecurities and not actual vindictiveness. 

268.  Ms. Leiter testified that she had five or six conversations with Principal 

O’Shea where Principal O’Shea said negative things about Respondent. She recalled a 

particular conversation where Principal O’Shea said she did not know how Ms. Leiter 

could be friends with Respondent. 

269.  Ms. Leiter asserted she does know what trauma informed practices are. 

She denied CMS is a trauma informed school or being directed to use trauma 

informed practices in her classroom. Ms. Leiter did not attend the AHA workshop 

because she felt working with colleagues on curriculum was more important. She 

stated, however, that she used trauma-sensitive best practices in her classroom every 

day. Ms. Leiter does not recall receiving emails from Principal O’Shea that included 

91 

 
trauma informed practices resources but received any email sent that was sent school 

wide. 

270.  Ms. Leiter described middle school students as immature and prone, 

every day, to construe innocuous things she said as having a sexual connotation. 

271.  According to Ms. Leiter, CMS’s tardiness policy was overridden by the 

school’s multiple behavior plans and was not consistently enforced. Students were 

tardy to her class, and she became concerned if students were more than 10 to 20 

seconds late. 

272.  Ms. Leiter observed Principal O’Shea make a heart-shaped symbol with 

her hands to students in the hallway and on the field in between classes. 

273.  Ms. Leiter was asked by Principal O’Shea to take photographs of students 

engaged in classroom activities for CMS’s Friday newsletter. In her experience, some 

students did not like to have their picture taken, but she sometimes took their picture 

even if they asked her not to do so. 

274.  Ms. Leiter confiscated phones from students in her class who violated 

CMS’s cell phone policy. She may have confiscated phones from students who were 

not in her class if she told the student to put the phone away and they did not comply. 

No one told her that it was inappropriate for her to confiscate phones. 

275.  Ms. Leiter was not aware of the charges against Respondent. She was not 

told that the hearing concerned Respondent’s potential dismissal from the District and 

understood the purpose of the hearing to be “character assassination.” 

92 

 
276.  Kelly Vergeer is a sixth and seventh grade science teacher at CMS. She 

and Respondent shared the same seventh grade students. During the past five years, 

some of those students told Ms. Vergeer that Respondent is their favorite teacher. 

277. 

It is Ms. Vergeer’s understanding that CMS is a trauma informed school. 

She was provided training on trauma informed practices and can implement them 

although she was not informed that she was required to do so. 

278.  Ms. Vergeer spends the first week reviewing her classroom rules. She has 

her students line up along the wall outside the classroom before they enter. When the 

students stop talking, Ms. Vergeer directs them on what to do when they enter and 

reminds them about her rules. Students must wait to be called on before they can get 

out of their seats. If students are late to class, she will ask why they are late. If a 

student continues to be tardy, Ms. Vergeer will call their parents and thereafter 

provide progressive discipline. If a student is chewing gum, she will ask them to spit it 

out or take the trash can to the student so they can dispose of it. 

279.  Ms. Vergeer has never been told that it was inappropriate for students to 

remain in their seats before she allows them to get up, or for her students to wait 

outside the classroom. 

280.  Ms. Vergeer has observed Respondent’s interactions with Principal 

O’Shea at staff meetings, where Respondent typically asks Principal O'Shea questions. 

Ms. Vergeer described Respondent’s demeanor at the meetings as professional. 

281. 

In Ms. Vergeer’s experience, the maturity level of CMS students varies. 

Some will say things for shock value, draw male reproductive parts on things, and yell 

out the number 69 in reference to a sexual act. She deals with behavioral issues by 

93 

 
conferencing with the student in the doorway or outside during a break in the lesson 

so as not to embarrass the student and so that the class can continue learning. Ms. 

Vergeer does not address a student’s behavioral issues in front of the class. No one 

told her that having the student go outside is inappropriate. 

282. 

In Ms. Vergeer’s experience, more female students than male students 

violated CMS’s dress code. She addressed code violations directly with students, and 

no one from administration told her not do so. 

283.  Principal O’Shea asked Ms. Vergeer to take pictures of students as they 

participated in activities to share with parents at back-to-school night and to submit in 

support of grant proposals. Some students did not like to have their pictures taken. 

284.  Ms. Vergeer has confiscated phones from students who were in her class 

and those who were not. She was never told by administration not to do so. Ms. 

Vergeer would hold out her hand and ask the students to place their phones in it. 

285.  Ms. Vergeer previously taught an advisory class. A manual was provided 

to the teachers with a list of activities to conduct during advisory, along with slides and 

information for some of the lessons; however, teachers were not required to follow 

advisory curriculum. 

286. 

John Fowler has been employed at CMS since 2004 and teaches seventh 

and eighth grade global studies and American history. Mr. Fowler and Respondents 

are close friends, and they have worked collaboratively at CMS. 

287.  Mr. Fowler and Respondent have shared students during the past five 

years. He asserted that the students reported good things about Respondent, 

including playing games with him and having “battles” with him. According to Mr. 

94 

 
Fowler, they described Respondent as engaging, positive, and sincere, and asked 

about Respondent when he was on leave. He has not received any student complaints 

about Respondent. 

288.  Mr. Fantazia approached Mr. Fowler about student C.G. because he 

thought the student would be better served in Mr. Fowler’s class as opposed to 

Respondent’s class. Respondent was very firm in his expectations for the student and 

would not budge. Mr. Fowler understood what Mr. Fantazia meant – student C.G. has 

special needs and needed more flexibility. 

289.  Mr. Fowler recalled that student M.B. came to him about Respondent 

confiscating his fidget spinner. Mr. Fowler was not aware Respondent was directed not 

to discipline students when they were in other teachers’ classes. 

290.  Mr. Fowler has informally observed Respondent teach numerous times 

during the past five years, and he observed Respondent six times during the 2021-

2022 school year for approximately five minutes. He described Respondent as 

exceptional and engaging teacher who motivates his students and provides 

opportunities for them to express themselves. 

291.  Mr. Fowler asserted that CMS’s dress code policy during the 2021-2022 

school year required students to come to school dressed appropriately. However, 

some female students would arrive with their midriffs and cleavage exposed and, 

therefore, it was unclear to Mr. Fowler what the dress code policy was. In his 

experience, it was predominantly the female students who violated the dress code in 

the ways he described. 

95 

 
292.  According to Mr. Fowler, during the spring of 2021, he sent two emails to 

Principal O’Shea. (Ex. 1143.) In the first email, Mr. Fowler reported hearing a female 

student yell “[f]ucking [p]ervert.” (Ibid.) When he looked out his classroom door, he 

saw student B.I. and another female student walking away from Respondent’s 

classroom and across the field, and he saw P.E. students who appeared to be focusing 

on student B.I. and the other student. 

293.  A few minutes later, Mr. Fowler sent a second email, stating, “On a 

related note, I would really appreciate it if we can find [B.I.] a T-shirt today. I believe 

[Respondent] is correct in drawing a correlation between how [B.I] (and [A.A.] as well) 

is dressing and how that might play a role in her approach to school – how she 

interacts with their [sic] classmates, her teachers, and the opportunities we provide for 

her to learn.” (Ex. 1143.) 

294.  Mr. Fowler testified that he sent the emails to Principal O’Shea student 

B.I’s cleavage was exposed and there appeared to be “mixed signals” on what was 

appropriate dress at the school. 

295.  Mr. Fowler asserted that he addressed tardiness with students directly on 

a regular basis. He described student tardiness as “off the charts” after returning from 

remote learning. When a student is up to 30 seconds late for class, Mr. Fowler invites 

them in and gets them caught up on the lesson. If the student is very tardy (over a 

minute or two), he will send them to the office or have them sit in the back of the 

classroom for a moment and fill out a refocus form. It is Mr. Fowler’s intent to bring 

them “into the fold” of learning. If the student is chronically tardy, he will follow-up 

with various interventions. 

96 

 
296.  Mr. Fowler described his students as possessing different maturity levels. 

During the past five years, the students would interpret words he said, such as hard or 

wet as having a sexual connotation and they would giggle, blush, and make jokes. In 

those instances, Mr. Fowler told the students to, “get your heads out of the gutter.” 

297.  Mr. Fowler took pictures of students for a weekly review at the request of 

Principal O’Shea. He used his iPad and sometimes used his personal cell phone 

because it has a better camera. 

298.  Mr. Fowler only allowed students to drink water in his class and allowed 

them to step outside to drink juice or soda. He has confiscated drinks from students in 

the past. Mr. Fowler has worn hats in his classroom and allowed students to do so as 

well, with the exception of hats with NFL logos that may considered gang related, 

when the policy permitted it. 

299.  When Mr. Fowler has confiscated students’ cell phones, he asks them to 

turn them over; he does not take them out of their hands because he tries to avoid 

physical altercations with his students. 

300.  Mr. Fowler “somewhat” knows what trauma informed practices are. He 

recalls attending discretionary trainings and that none of the trauma trainings were 

required. Mr. Fowler denied being told that he was required to implement trauma 

informed best practices in his classroom, but he does implement some of them. 

301.  Charlier Gardner has been friends with Respondent for a decade. His two 

children are in the seventh and ninth grade and attend schools in the District. Mr. 

Gardner’s oldest daughter was in Respondent’s seventh grade global studies class for 

97 

 
a month before he went on leave in 2021. She appeared to Mr. Gardner to be happy to 

have Respondent as her teacher. 

302.  Mr. Gardner described Respondent as an outstanding person who cares a 

lot for the community and children. According to Mr. Gardner, Respondent goes above 

and beyond, is a pillar of the community, and he is happy to have Respondent as a 

friend. He considers Respondent to be an expert in education. However, he has not 

observed Respondent in the classroom. 

303.  Mr. Gardener is not aware of the charges against Respondent nor that 

several students testified against him at the hearing. However, he asserted that even if 

he had heard the testimony, his opinion of Respondent would not change. 

Analysis 

304.  The evidence established that Respondent made comments to students 

and engaged in behavior that made the students uncomfortable and was 

inappropriate. Examples include: confiscating student M.B.’s fidget spinner; telling a 

student that he did not get paid enough to see her bra strap; suggesting that he and 

his student have a sleepover for their birthdays; removing students’ hoodies; touching 

a student’s chest/shirt; directing peers to tell another student why her clothing was 

inappropriate; confiscating the phone of a student who had previously notified 

Respondent that he had an appointment and was speaking with his mother; and 

making statements that suggested that a student was stupid. 

305.  The evidence did not establish that Respondent engaged in grooming 

behavior, sexualized his students, or otherwise made sexual innuendos. Rather, the 

evidence established that because of the age and developmental stage of 

98 

 
Respondent’s students, they imparted a sexual connotation to things Respondent said. 

In addition, the evidence did not establish that Respondent engaged in acts of 

dishonesty. 

306.  The evidence did not establish that Respondent fixated on specific 

female students to enforce the dress code. Instead, there were certain female students 

who routinely appeared in violation of the dress code. In addition, several CMS 

teachers testified that their female students were typically the students that violated 

the dress code. 

307.  While Respondent made repeated reports to Principal O’Shea between 

April 2022 and June 2022 that students were violating the dress code, he did not 

violate the March 18 NUC/NUP, in that he was instructed to notify administration of 

any concerns that he had. The directive was contradictory in that Respondent was told 

not to concern himself with the dress code but allowed him to notify administration if 

he had any concerns. He asked clarifying questions on his own behalf and on behalf of 

CAUSE members about the dress code, but with exception of the initial responses 

notifying Respondent that the issues he raised about specific students had been 

addressed, he was not provided any information. 

308.  Respondent violated the March 18 NUC/NUP in that he discussed seeing 

student A.Z. outside of class and confiscated a student’s phone on April 12, 2022. 

309.  Respondent’s communications to Principal O’Shea were defensive and at 

times, condescending. 

310.  The SOC (Exhibit 65) is incorporated herein by reference. The District 

failed to establish the charges found at the following pages and paragraphs: 

99 

 
page A492, paragraphs 1a(3)-1a(6), 1a(10); 

pages A493-A494, paragraph 13(a), 13(d), 13(g), and 13(i); 

page A494, paragraph (c)(4); 

page A495, paragraph 17; 

page A501, paragraph 15; 

page A502, paragraphs d(b), d(d), d(e), d(j); 

page A503, paragraph k, paragraph 3, and paragraphs (f)(1)-(f)(2); 

page A504, paragraph 3(b), 3(c), and 3(e); 

page A505, paragraphs 3(g) and 3(i); 

page A506, paragraphs 3(j)-3(m); 

pages A507, paragraph (p); 

page A508, paragraphs (u), (v), (w); 

page 509, paragraphs and (z) and (h); 

pages A510-A513, paragraphs i(2)-i(3), i(6), i(10); 

page A518, paragraph 2(c); 

page A519, paragraphs (3)(a), 2(d), and 2(e); 

page A520, paragraphs (d)(2)-(d)(4); 

100 

 
page A521, paragraphs 3(e) and (3)(g); 

page A522, paragraph (h)(4); 

page 524, paragraphs k, j, i; and 

page 525, paragraphs p and n. 

311.  When all of the evidence is considered, Respondent engaged in 

inappropriate and/or unprofessional conduct and demonstrated lapses in judgment. 

His conduct suggests that he would benefit from sensitivity training and other 

educational courses. However, the Commission does not find that Respondent is unfit 

to teach. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The District may dismiss a permanent, certificated employee only for 

those causes identified by state law. The charges in the SOC allege five grounds for 

dismissal authorized by the Education Code: (1) immoral conduct, (2) unprofessional 

conduct, (3) dishonesty, (4) evident unfitness for service, and (5) persistent violation of 

or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for 

the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the 

governing board of the school district. 

2. 

The District must prove the allegations of the SOC. (Gardner v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Preponderance 

of the evidence means evidence with more convincing force than that opposed to it. 

(In re Shelley J. (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 322.) If the evidence is so evenly balanced that 

101 

 
one is unable to say that the evidence on either side of an issue preponderates, the 

finding on that issue must be against the party with the burden of proving it. (People 

v. Mabini (2000) 92 Cal.App.4th 654, 663.) 

Immoral Conduct 

3. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who engages in immoral conduct. 

(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1).) “Immoral conduct” has been defined to mean that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, and dissoluteness. Or, it can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland 

(1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811.) 

4. 

The District did not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

Respondent’s actions were immoral as they were not indicative of corruption, 

indecency, or depravity. Complainant also failed to establish by the preponderance of 

the evidence that Respondent’s conduct was base, vile or depraved. Although the 

District did establish that Respondent acted inappropriately on multiple occasions and 

crossed boundaries with students, these incidents were a result of lapses of judgment 

and there was no improper motive for Respondent’s behavior. 

Unprofessional Conduct 

5. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who demonstrates unprofessional 

conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2).) Unprofessional conduct is defined as “that 

102 

 
which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing." (Board v. Swan (1953) 41 

Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled on other grounds.) 

6. 

Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct on multiple occasions as 

set forth in the Factual Findings above. Accordingly, the District established by a 

preponderance of the evidence that cause exists to terminate Respondent’s 

employment as a permanent employee for unprofessional conduct under Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). 

Dishonesty 

7. 

Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of bad faith. As defined in 

the dictionaries and in judicial decisions, it means fraud, deception, and betrayal. 

Dishonesty denotes the absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or 

defraud; deceive and betray. (Hogg v. Real Estate Commissioner (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 

712, 717.) 

8. 

The District did not establish that Respondent engaged in acts of 

dishonesty under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(4). 

Persistent Violations of School Laws or Regulations 

9. 

A school district may dismiss a teacher who engages in a persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 

or by the governing board of the school district. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Such 

violations must be “stubborn and continuing.” (San Dieguito Union High School 

103 

 
District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) 

The willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and regulations of the 

employing board of education is insubordination. (Board of Educ. of City of Los 

Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, overruled on other grounds by Bekiaris v. 

Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575.) Isolated incidents or incidents involving an 

issue unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered “persistent.” 

(Bourland v. Commission on Professional Competence [Bourland] (1985) 174 

Cal.App.3d 317.) 

10. 

In Bourland, the teacher and her principal disagreed upon a statement of 

objectives by with the teacher would be evaluated. (Bourland, supra, 174 Cal.App.3d at 

p. 319.) Over three months, the principal directed the teacher 14 times to include 

objectives regarding completing tasks on time and improving communications with 

her supervisor, but the teacher refused because she believed if she did so, she would 

be admitting she needed to improve her job performance. (Id. at p. 320.) The court, in 

finding that the teacher did not engage in a persistent refusal violation of rules, found 

that “the parties stubbornly continued to debate the matter over a period of three 

months . . . . [Citations omitted.]” (Id. at p. 321.) The court further found that the 

“private debate” between the parties “does not indicate the type of continual 

insubordination that may seriously affect the discipline in a school.” (Ibid.) 

11.  Here, similar to the teacher in Bourland, Respondent, following the 

directive to notify of administration of any dress code violation concerns, repeatedly 

asked Principal O’Shea for clarification of the dress code. Respondent did not believe 

he was in violation of the directive since he did not address the issue with students 

directly. While the Commission found that Respondent did violate the directives 

contained in the March 18 NUC/NUP, such as when he confiscated a student’s phone 

104 

 
and another student’s fidget spinner, those isolated events do not constitute a 

persistent refusal to follow the rules. 

12. 

The District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that 

cause exists to terminate Respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for 

engaging in a persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws under 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

Evident Unfitness for Service 

13. 

Evident unfitness for service means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) Unlike unprofessional conduct, evident 

unfitness for service connotes “a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 

merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the 

employing school district.” (Ibid.) The Commission must look at the proven conduct in 

the aggregate. The Woodland court found it was unnecessary to determine if every act 

demonstrated unfitness for service. Rather, it was proper to examine the totality of the 

offensive conduct. 

14. 

Respondent’s fitness to teach must be examined under the factors in 

Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. The California Supreme 

Court held that a school district cannot abstractly characterize conduct as immoral or 

unprofessional but must show that retaining a teacher poses a significant danger of 

harm to students, school employees, or others who may be affected by the teacher’s 

conduct. The misconduct must have some rational connection to the teacher’s ability 

to teach as follows: 

105 

 
In determining whether the teacher’s conduct thus indicates 

unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as 

the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity 

anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party 

involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 

any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, 

the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 

and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. 

(Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 

15. 

The first Morrison factor focuses on the “likelihood” the conduct “may 

have” adversely affected students, teachers, or the educational community, and the 

degree of adversity anticipated. The degree of adversity from Respondent’s conduct 

was moderate. Actual adverse impacts of Respondent’s conduct were demonstrated in 

that students were nervous and uncomfortable in his class and at times embarrassed. 

16. 

The second Morrison factor involves the proximity or remoteness in time 

of the conduct. Respondent’s most recent misconduct was committed during the 

2021-2022 school year, which is not remote in time. 

17. 

The third Morrison factor concerns the type of teaching certificate held 

by the party involved. Respondent holds an appropriate credential for the subject 

106 

 
matter he was assigned to teach and has several years of experience where he met 

expectations until his recent discipline. However, Respondent’s credentials allow him 

to teach impressionable middle school students for whom he must serve as an 

appropriate role model. 

18. 

The fourth Morrison factor examines the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct. The evidence established that Respondent 

engaged in multiple acts of wrongdoing and had prior notice, warning or reprimands 

for similar conduct. 

19.  Mitigating factors may include an absence of prior adverse action over 

many years of educational service and present misconduct which is not deemed most 

serious; references of good character by individuals aware of the misconduct; lack of 

harm to the person who is the object of the misconduct; objective action taken by the 

holder, demonstrating remorse and recognition of the wrongdoing and designed to 

timely make amends; the proximity or remoteness in time relative to the seriousness of 

the misconduct; or the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation. Respondent 

worked in the District for many years without any prior adverse action. 

20. 

The next Morrison factor is the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of 

the motives resulting in the conduct. Some of Respondent’s conduct was praiseworthy, 

in that he attempted to build relationships with his students, genuinely believed that 

the same students were consistently violating CMS’s Dress Code policy, and in some 

instances Respondent was representing the interests of CAUSE members. CMS 

teachers attested to Respondent’s character and reputation at CMS; however, they 

were not aware of the extent of Respondent’s misconduct. 

107 

 
21. 

The next Morrison factor is the likelihood of the recurrence of the 

questioned conduct. Respondent’s most serious violations occurred prior to the 

issuance of the March 18 NUC/NUP. Other than a few lapses, Respondent has been 

able to demonstrate his ability to comply with the directives. Respondent’s 

unprofessional lapses following the March 18 NUC/NUP appear to have largely been 

isolated lapses in judgment. Respondent’s continual emailing to administration was 

not a violation of the March 18 NUC/NUP. Respondent’s continual emails appear, in 

large part, based on the administration’s failure to explain to Respondent that the 

clothing of the students at issue conformed to CMS’s Dress Code policy. Absent such 

communications, Respondent was left with the impression that his concerns were not 

being addressed. Based upon the evidence in the record, the District did not prove, by 

a preponderance of the evidence, that Respondent is likely to reoffend. 

22. 

The final Morrison factor is the extent to which disciplinary action may 

inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 

involved or other teachers. There is evidence of some notoriety within the District 

regarding Respondent’s conduct, however, disciplinary action against Respondent 

would not inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect on Respondent or others, because 

there is no constitutionally protected speech or behavior in the conduct at issue. 

23. 

Even where, as here, a school district has established cause for dismissal, 

the Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes unfitness to 

teach . . . , and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction. [Citation.] 

‘[A] disciplinary discharge often involves complex facts and may require a sensitive 

evaluation of the nature and seriousness of the misconduct and whether it warrants 

the grave sanction of dismissal.’ [Citation].” (California Teachers Assn. v. State of 

California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344.) 

108 

 
24.  While Respondent exercised, among other things, poor judgment and a 

lack of professionalism, the District did not establish by a preponderance of the 

evidence that Respondent has a fixed character trait which is not remediable. 

Respondent was issued 30 directives in the March 18 NUC/NUP and demonstrated 

that following receipt of those directions, he was able to change some of his behavior. 

As noted above, Respondent’s misconduct following the March 18, NUC/NUP were 

largely isolated incidents. Respondent’s continual emailing of the administration 

regarding CMS’s Dress Policy was not a violation of the March 18, NUC/NUP in that 

Respondent was instructed to direct any concerns regarding the dress policy directly 

to administration. The District did not present evidence that administration responded 

to Respondent’s numerous emails to notify Respondent that the clothing he 

considered to be in violation was not, in fact, a violation or instructed him to stop 

addressing the dress policy at all after early April 2022. Based on this record, the 

District failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that cause exists to 

terminate Respondent’s employment as a permanent employee for evident unfitness 

for service under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

CONCLUSION 

25. 

A Commission on Professional Competence has broad discretion in 

determining what constitutes unfitness to teach and immoral conduct, and whether 

dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction. (California Teachers Ass’n v. State 

of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) 

26.  While the District established that Respondent demonstrated 

unprofessional conduct in many ways with students and staff, the Commission 

109 

 
concludes that dismissal is not warranted because the Distract failed to establish that 

Respondent is unfit to teach. 

ORDER 

The Statement of Charges against Respondent John Hotchner is hereby 

dismissed, and he shall not be terminated as a permanent certificated employee of 

Carpinteria Unified School District. 

DATE: 

DATE: 

DATE: 

JOHN MILLER 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence 

MICHELLE ORELUP 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence 

CARMEN D. SNUGGS-SPRAGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

110 

John Miller (Dec 22, 2023 11:47 PST)12/22/2023Michelle Orelup (Dec 23, 2023 07:59 PST)12/23/202312/23/2023 
 
