BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
THOMAS JACKSON (EN 684301), 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2023110661 
DECISION 
The Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter 
in person on May 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 24, 2024, in Los Angeles, California, and by 
videoconference on May 31, 2024. Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with 
the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, Charles Mendoza, and 
Ray Alcala constituted the Commission. ALJ Tentser presided. 
Ellen C. Wu and Carlie Stewart, of Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented Francisco 
J. Serrato, Ed.D., Interim Chief Human Resources Officer for the Los Angeles Unified 
School District (District). 2Tamra M. Smith and Ajlal M. Hasan, of Egality Law Office, represented Thomas 
Jackson (Respondent), who was present throughout hearing. 
Prior to the presentation of the evidence, Respondent brought pre-trial 
motions. The ALJ considered and ruled on those motions, as reflected on the record. 
The ALJ ordered that any testimonial reference to the name of minor students be 
replaced in the hearing transcript by the students’ first name and last initial. 
Testimonial and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed 
and the matter was submitted for decision on May 31, 2024. 
The Commission considered the entire record in executive session. 
The Commission redacted personal information contained in the exhibits, such 
as Respondent’s date of birth, while drafting the Decision. 
In preparing the Decision, the Commission determined that there were exhibits 
that contained personal information which necessitated the issuance of a protective 
order to protect the privacy rights of minor witnesses, which was issued concurrently 
with the issuance of this Decision. SUMMARY 
The District seeks to dismiss Respondent on grounds of immoral conduct, 
including, but not limited to, egregious misconduct; unprofessional conduct; evident 
unfitness for service; persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws; immoral 
conduct; and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 
Respondent disputed the factual allegations and argued that grounds for dismissal do 
not exist. The District established Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct3through a preponderance of the evidence but did not establish Respondent’s dismissal 
was warranted based on the application of the factors. The evidence 
presented by the District was insufficient to establish Respondent’s immoral conduct, 
including, but not limited to egregious misconduct; evident unfitness for service; 
persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws; immoral conduct; and willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdiction and Parties 
1. On October 18, 2023, Complainant served on Respondent the District’s 
Notice of Board of Education Intention to Dismiss and Placement On Immediate 
Unpaid Suspension and Statement of Charges. On November 16, 2023, Respondent 
timely requested a hearing.
2. On December 13, 2023, acting in his official capacity, Complainant filed 
and served on Respondent, an Accusation. On November 16, 2023, Respondent timely 
served a Notice of Defense.
3. On May 13, 2024, the District filed and served the Amended Accusation 
(Amended Accusation). The Amended Accusation is the operative pleading in this 
matter. (Ex. 23.)
4. Respondent, 60, is a permanent certificated employee of the District and 
is on paid status. He holds a single subject teaching credential in industrial arts and a 
supplemental teaching credential in introduction to physical education (P.E.). At all 
relevant times, Respondent has been employed as a middle school P.E. teacher at 4Robert Louis Stevenson Middle School (Stevenson). His most recent position at 
Stevenson was P.E. Department Chairperson and Chemical Safety Coordinator. Since 
approximately October 6, 2021, Respondent has been assigned to local District east.
Complainant’s Charges Against Respondent
5. In the Amended Accusation against Respondent, in five charging 
allegations, Complainant alleges that cause exists to dismiss Respondent from his 
employment as a permanent certificated employee of the District for, variously:
a. Immoral Conduct, including but not limited to, egregious misconduct, under 
Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939; (All further 
statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified.)
b. Unprofessional Conduct, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1); 
c. Evident unfitness for service, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(5);
d. Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by 
the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employment him, under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8);
e. Immoral conduct, under section 44939; and
f. Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, 
under section 44939.5Notices and Warnings Issued to Respondent
MAY 20,2013C ONFERENCE MEMORANDUM
6. On May 20, 2013, Respondent received a conference memorandum from 
Leo Gonzalez, then the principal, regarding student discipline, antibullying, respectful 
treatment of all persons, providing the best example as a teacher, engaging in verbal 
confrontations with students, maintaining positive and professional employee-student 
relationships, and failing to report serious incidents that can put students’ safety in 
jeopardy. In the memoranda were certain suggested assistance available to 
Respondent (i.e., optional participation in the District’s Employee Assistance Program 
for assistance with any anger management issues), directives issued to him, and a 
warning that disciplinary action might follow. (Exhibit 1.) 
7. Respondent disputed the allegations against him contained in the May 
20, 2013 Conference Memorandum and asserts he submitted a written responses to 
the memo on May 31 and June 4, 2013. (Exhibit DD.) Respondent admitted he grabbed 
one of the student’s arms, inadvertently causing a bruise, when he broke up a physical 
fight between two students. (Testimony of Respondent.) 
8. The May 20, 2013 conference memo establishes Respondent received 
notice and was aware the following policies: Stevenson Middle School Discipline 
Policy; District Bullying and Hazing Policy; District Abolitions of Corporal Punishment; 
District’s Board of Education Resolution on Respectful Treatment of All Persons; and 
District’s Employee Code of Ethics. (Exhibits 11, 13, 16, 17, 19 and 22.) 6DECEMBER 6,2017C ONFERENCE MEMORANDUM
9. On December 6, 2017, Respondent received a conference memorandum 
from Julio Hernandez, then the assistant principal, regarding student discipline, 
antibullying, respectful treatment of all persons, providing the best example as a 
teacher, engaging in verbal confrontations with students, maintaining positive and 
professional employee-student relationships, and refraining from intimidation and 
retaliation. Aside from reiterating the basis for the conference memorandum and 
providing copies of memorandum-related District policies and procedures, no 
additional assistance or guidance was provided to Respondent. Directives were issued 
to him, including that he always conduct himself in a professional manner, and a 
warning that disciplinary action might follow. (Exhibit 2.) 
10. Respondent disputed the allegations against him contained in the 
December 6, 2017 Conference Memorandum and submitted a written response to the 
memo. (Exhibit FF.)
11. The December 6, 2017 Conference Memorandum establishes Respondent 
received notice and was aware the following policies: District Board’s Resolution 
Reaffirming Respectful Treatment of All Persons; California Standards for the Teaching 
Profession; District Bullying and Hazing Policy; District Employee Code of Ethics; 
District Abolition of Corporal Punishment; and District Nondiscriminatory Statement.
(Exhibits 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, and 19.) 
12. The 2013 and 2017 Conference Memorandum are part of the District’s 
regularly kept records for Respondent and are considered solely in this Decision for 
the purpose of establishing whether Respondent had notice, based on being issued 
the memorandum, of the relevant policies. The memorandums are not considered as a 7basis of establishing discipline in this matter for any of the allegations because the 
allegations pertain to alleged wrongdoing by Respondent which occurred more than 
four years before the filing of the notice of the intention to dismiss in this matter. (Ed. 
Code, § 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A) and (B).) 
NOVEMBER 9,2022C ONFERENCE MEMORANDUM
13. On November 9, 2022, after Respondent was reassigned from Stevenson
in October 2021, a conference was held between Dr. Jose Morales (Dr. Morales), 
principal, Respondent, a (United Teachers Los Angeles) UTLA Area Representative, and 
a District Staff Relations Field Director. The conference described the circumstances 
surrounding a September 30, 2021 verbal and physical altercation between 
Respondent and student J  H.Z. (J ) from involved parties and witnesses and 
included some student witness accounts of Respondent’s behavior towards J  
specifically and other students generally in his 6thperiod P.E. class during the 
2021/2022 school year. The November 2022 conference memo included reference to 
the 2013 and 2017 conference memos as prior warnings to Respondent involving 
similar issues.
14. The November 2022 conference memo’s directives to Respondent were
classified as assistance and guidance. The directives reminded Respondent not to 
touch students for any reason unless it is for their safety or the safety of others, not to 
single out or embarrass students in the presence of other students, discipline and call 
out students, if needed, in a manner that maintains Respondent’s professionalism,
maintain appropriate and professional relationships with students and refrain from 
yelling at them, and conduct himself, as an employee and representative of the 
District, with excellence, integrity and responsibility. Respondent was also provided
8with copies of memorandum-related District policies and procedures; no additional 
assistance or guidance was provided to Respondent. 
15. Respondent was not afforded the opportunity to participate in any 
optional professional development training programs and activities to address the 
issues identified in the November 2022 conference memo. The memo included a 
warning that disciplinary action might follow, and that Dr. Morales would continue to 
investigate the allegations and consider Respondent’s response prior to rendering a 
decision which may result in disciplinary action, including, “but not limited to a Notice 
of Unsatisfactory Act(s)/Service, suspension and/or dismissal from the [District.]”
(Exhibit 7.) 
16. Respondent received copies of the May 30, 2013 and December 6, 2017 
conference memos and the following state and District policies and as part of the 
November 2022 conference: Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Requirements 
Bulletin, Human Resources Division class description for Secondary Teacher, Discipline 
Foundation Policy Bulletin, the following policies: District Board’s Resolution 
Reaffirming Respectful Treatment of All Persons; California Standards for the Teaching 
Profession; District Bullying and Hazing Policy; District Employee Code of Ethics; 
District Abolition of Corporal Punishment; and District Nondiscriminatory Statement. 
(Exhibits 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, and 19.) 
17. Respondent disputed the allegations regarding the September 30, 2021 
incident between him and J  against him contained in the Conference 
Memorandum and submitted a written response to the memo. (Exhibit E.) In his 
written response, Respondent noted that while the November 2022 conference 
memorandum referenced prior accusations against him in the May 30, 2013 and 
9December 6, 2017 conference memos, his previous written responses denying the 
accusations contained in the memos were not mentioned. ( ) 
DECEMBER 7,2022  NOTICE OF UNSATISFACTORY ACT 
18. On December 7, 2022, Respondent was issued a Notice of Unsatisfactory 
Act via email after a zoom meeting between Respondent, a UTLA Area Representative, 
and a District Staff Relations Field Director. The notice informed Respondent that the 
school/section administrator recommended Respondent be dismissed from the District 
and be issued a 15-day suspension based on Respondent’s conduct for the period 
from August 2021 through October 2021. The charges listed the notice were primarily 
based on the September 30, 2021 incident between Respondent and J  and 
included additional allegations of Respondent’s conduct in disciplining students. 
(Exhibit 9.) 
19. The assistance and guidance provided to Respondent in the notice was 
limited to reference to the prior conference memos issued to Respondent on 
November 9, 2022, December 6, 2017, and May 30, 2013, and a Final Evaluation issued 
to Respondent by Kellie R. Pryor, an assistant vice-principal, for 2019-2020, rating 
Respondent as meeting standard performance. (Exhibit 9.) DECEMBER 7,2022  NOTICE OF SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEE 
20. On December 7, 2022, at the same meeting where Respondent was 
issued the December 7, 2022 Notice of Unsatisfactory Act, a Notice of Suspension 
suspending Respondent for 15 days was issued. The suspension was based on 
identical “charges,” all pertaining to student discipline, as contained in the Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Act. (Exhibits 9 and 10.)
10 21. No meaningful assistance and guidance were provided to Respondent in 
the suspension notice. The assistance and guidance were limited to reference to the 
prior conference memos issued to Respondent on November 9, 2022, December 6, 
2017, and May 30, 2013, and a Final Evaluation issued to Respondent by Kellie R. Pryor, 
an assistant vice-principal, for 2019-2020, rating Respondent as meeting standard 
performance. (Exhibit 10.) 
22. Generally, the District afforded Respondent the opportunity to 
participate in various professional development training programs, including the yearly 
required training given to all certificated teachers, during his tenure at Stevenson; 
Respondent participated in those opportunities.
Complainant’s Charging Allegations 1 through 3 
23. These charges pertain to events that are alleged to have occurred on 
September 30, 2021, during the 2021/2022 school year. 
CHARGE 1 
24. Complainant alleges in Charges 1 that, on September 30, 2021: 
[Respondent] exhibited poor judgment when he engaged in 
a verbal and physical altercation with 6th grade student 
[J ] outside of the boys’ P.E. office, which resulted in 
[Respondent] grabbing J ’s arm and leaving him with a 
bruise. 
(Exhibit 23.) 
11 25. The evidence supported Charge 1, in part. It was established Respondent 
exhibited poor judgment when he engaged in a verbal and physical altercation with 6th
grade student J  outside the boys’ P.E. office on September 30, 2021. (First name 
and last name initials are used when referring to student and parent witnesses to 
protect their privacy rights.) It was established Respondent grabbed J ’s left forearm 
during the altercation, leaving redness on J ’s arm where Respondent grasped it. 
The evidence did not establish Respondent bruised J ’s arm when he grasped it, but 
that a bruise of unknown origin was already on J ’s left forearm in the same area 
where Respondent grasped J ’s arm. 
26. In mitigation, Respondent’s action in grabbing J ’s left forearm was an 
impulsive and reflexive result of J  colliding first with Respondent, who was blocking 
J ’s exiting the double doors of the P.E. building. CHARGE 2 
27. Complainant alleges in Charge 2 that, on September 30, 2021: 
[Respondent] did the following to J  in the presence of 
students:
a. Did not let J  run with the rest of the class because 
he was not dressed for P.E.
b. Intentionally isolated J  by telling him, “Now you 
can run,” or words to that effect, after everyone else 
had finished the run.
12 c. Took J ’s backpack away from him and told him 
not to leave at the end of class when J  refused to 
run. 
28. Charges 2a and 2c were partially established by Respondent’s 
admissions. (Exhibits E [Respondent’s November 17, 2022 written response to 
conference summary] and EE [Respondent’s October 6, 2021 police interview video].) 
Respondent first talked to J  about not being dressed for his 6th period P.E. class, 
offered him loaner P.E. clothes that were available (which J  refused), then instructed 
J  to stand by the wall with the intention J  run with the class (because 
Respondent believed J  was hiding by the gate to avoid running with the class), 
asked J why he didn’t run laps with the class after the class completed the laps, to 
which J  responded because Respondent told him to stand by the wall. After the 
students ran, Respondent instructed J  several times to run a lap by himself, which 
J  refused. After J  refused to run a lap by himself, Respondent instructed J  to 
sit down several times, which J  refused. 
29. Based on J ’s multiple refusals to follow instructions and participate, 
Respondent asked J  if he had to call J ’s mother to talk to her about J ’s 
behavior, to which J  responded words to the effect of “go ahead.” It was 
Respondent’s practice to call a student’s parent anytime he had three or more 
“problems” in one day with a student. (Exhibit E, p. B31.) After P.E. class on September 
30, 2021, Respondent “grabbed [J ’s] pack [sic] that was on the ground and away 
from J  in class so [J ] would follow [Respondent] back to the Boys PE Office to 
call [J ’s] mom.” ( at p. B32; See also Exhibit 6, p. A17.)
  
13 30. Charge 2b was not established. Count 2b’s allegations against 
Respondent are based on hearsay statements attributed to J  during an August 8, 
2022 interview by Student Safety Investigation Team (SSIT) investigators, as contained 
in SSIT’s September 27, 2022 Investigative Report (Investigative Report). (Exhibit 6, p. 
A24.) Complainant presented no testimonial evidence from any percipient witness 
(other than Respondent) as to what occurred during Respondent’s 6th period 
September 30, 2021 to establish Charge 2 at hearing. (See Evid. Code, § 412, [“If 
weaker and less satisfactory evidence is offered when it was within the power of the 
party to produce stronger and more satisfactory evidence, the evidence offered should 
be viewed with distrust.”].) Respondent denied Count 2b’s allegations. Consequently, 
the evidence did not support Charge 2b. CHARGE 3 
31. Complainant alleges in Charge 3 that, on September 30, 2021: 
[Respondent] did the following to J : 
a. Argued with J  as they both entered the P.E. office.
b. Threatened to call J ’s mother, which resulted in 
J  becoming emotional and leaving the office.
32. The evidence supported Charge 3, in part. Charge 3a was established. 
Respondent and J  were arguing about J ’s behavior in Respondent’s 6th period 
P.E. class on September 30, 2021 when they entered the P.E. office. (Testimony of J  
V ; Exhibit 6, p. A15.)
33. Charge 3b was partially established. J  was not initially emotional when 
Respondent threatened to call his mother. J  became emotional, however, after 
14 Respondent was successful in reaching his mother by telephone to discuss scheduling 
a parent-teacher conference to discuss J ’s class behavior. (Exhibit 6; Testimony of 
Mr. V ; Testimony of Mr. Ocampo-Savin; and Testimony of Respondent.) 
SEPTEMBER 30,2021A LTERCATION BETWEEN RESPONDENT AND J AND 
CREDIBILITY FINDINGS 
34. There is a conflict in the evidence regarding what occurred on September 
30, 2021 between Respondent and J  during their altercation outside the P.E. office 
at the main double doors of the P.E. building. J ’s claim Respondent grabbed him 
and left a bruise on his arm as a result is the primary basis for Charge 1’s allegations 
against Respondent. J  did not testify at hearing; his October 6, 2021 written 
statement and videos of his October 6, 2021 videos of police interviews were 
submitted into evidence. (Exhibits 4, T, U, and V.) Respondent’s hearing testimony is 
unreliable and inconsistent with prior statements and his deposition testimony; he 
admitted at hearing he did not have an independent recollection of what occurred on 
September 30, 2021, adopting his October 6, 2021 video interview with police on 
October 6, 2021 as the most accurate record of what he claimed occurred during the 
altercation. (Exhibit EE.)
35. The District established through both direct and corroborating 
contemporaneous evidence and hearing testimony that Respondent did grab J ’s 
arm during the altercation, causing redness to J ’s arm. The evidence was 
insufficient, however, to establish that the bruise on J ’s arm was caused by 
Respondent grasping his arm during their altercation.
36. Respondent’s mitigating claim that J  ran into him during their 
September 30, 2021 altercation trying to leave the P.E. building was also established 
15 through credible direct and corroborating contemporaneous evidence and hearing 
testimony. 
37. The reliability of the evidence in this matter is affected by the delay 
between the incident and its investigation by the District, the quality of the District’s 
investigation and documentation of the incident, and the bias and self-interest of the 
parties and witnesses.
38. To the extent the evidence is proximate to the incident, substantially 
consistent, and there is a lack of demonstrated bias by that witness, the evidence is 
credited and provided evidentiary weight in this matter. To the extent the evidence is 
shown to be biased, self-interested, contradictory, and based on incomplete or faulty 
data, it is not relied upon in this Decision to make factual findings. 
39. The hearing testimony of the witnesses was evaluated pursuant to the 
factors set forth in Evidence Code section 780: the demeanor and manner of the 
witness while testifying, the character of the testimony, the capacity to perceive at the 
time the events occurred, the character of the witness for honesty, the existence of 
bias or other motive, other statements of the witness which are consistent or 
inconsistent with the testimony, the existence or absence of any fact to which the 
witness testified, and the attitude of the witness toward the proceeding in which the 
testimony has been given. 
40. There is no dispute between the parties that Respondent instructed J , 
then a student enrolled in his 6th period P.E. to go with him to the boys P.E. office on 
September 30, 2021 after the period concluded. (On September 30, 2021, the boys P.E. 
office was comprised of the four desks of the four male Stevenson P.E. teachers, 
Respondent, Mr. Vara, Mr. Gregory Mijares, and Mr. Ocampo-Savin.) Respondent 
16 intended to contact J ’s mother to discuss issues he was having with J  in his P.E. 
class on September 30, 2021, which Respondent alleged included J  not dressing in 
P.E. clothes, not running laps with the class and then refusing to run a lap after the 
class completed the lap, and refusing to comply with Respondent’s instruction to J  
that he sit by Respondent during the class after refusing to run the lap. J  disputed 
Respondent’s allegation that he did not participate in class and told Respondent he 
did not care if Respondent called his mother. (Exhibit 4.) 
41. When Respondent and J  arrived at the P.E. Office on September 30, 
2021, there were two other P.E. teachers present in the office, Mr. Vara and Mr. 
Ocampo-Savin. Mr. Mijares was not initially in the office when Respondent and J  
arrived but entered the office after the altercation between J  and Respondent at 
the P.E. main double doors. Mr. Vara heard but did not see what occurred throughout 
the altercation because he was working at his desk and his view was blocked by the 
computer monitors at his desk. Mr. Ocampo-Savin was a witness to parts of the 
altercation. 
42. J  was not upset when he first entered the P.E. office with Respondent. 
Respondent initially tried calling J ’s mother on the P.E. office landline phone and 
was unable to reach her, leaving a voicemail in Spanish about needing to schedule a 
parent conference because J  was not following class rules. (J ’s mother is 
primarily Spanish speaking.) Respondent then contacted J ’s uncle and did reach the 
uncle. Respondent told the uncle he was trying to reach J ’s mother to talk to her 
about J ’s behavior in his P.E. class. 
43. After his conversation with uncle, Respondent was able to speak with 
J ’s mother with the aid of Mr. Ocampo-Savin, who acted as Respondent’s translator 
during the conversation. During their telephone conversation, Respondent complained 
17 about J ’s class behavior and told mother to come to school for a parent-teacher 
conference. J  became upset after Respondent was able to reach his mother. 
44. While waiting for J ’s mother to arrive, Respondent left the P.E. office 
and went into the hallway of the P.E. building. J  also went to the hallway of the P.E. 
building and tried to leave through the P.E. building’s main exit double doors. 
Respondent and J  argued in the hallway. Respondent blocked his exit and J  ran 
into Respondent, trying to get past Respondent and leave the building. Respondent 
lost his balance because of J  running into him, grabbed the double doors with one 
arm and J ’s left forearm with the other arm. (Testimony of Y  R.T.; Exhibits 4, 5, 
6, 24, 25, S, T, U, V, Z, YY.) 
45. While their testimony varied as to how loudly Respondent was speaking 
during the argument, Mr. Vara and Ocampo-Savin both testified at hearing and 
prepared written statements that they heard Respondent and J  arguing in the 
hallway outside the boys P.E. office during the altercation. (Exhibits 24 and O.) Mr. Vara 
heard the P.E. double doors opening and closing during the altercation. (Testimony of 
Mr. Vara; Exhibits 24 and O.) Respondent pulled J  back into the P.E. building during 
the altercation. 
46. Student Y  R.T., who was walking by the P.E. building at the time, saw 
Respondent grasping J ’s arm as he pulled J  back into the P.E. building. 
(Testimony of Y  R.T.; Exhibits 6, p. A18; Exhibits Z and YY.) Y  R.T. told her 
mother about seeing Respondent grabbing and pulling J  into the P.E. building 
when her mother picked her up from school on the day of the incident. (Testimony of 
E  T.) 
18 47. After their altercation, J  went to the P.E. office and was upset and 
crying. J  called his mother on his cell phone and told his mother Respondent had 
grabbed and bruised him; he took a picture of his left forearm with his cellphone and 
sending it to his mother. (Testimony of Mr. Ocampo-Savin; Exhibits 4 [J ’s October 6, 
2021 witness statement], 5 and 25 [the photo J  took of his arm where Respondent 
grasped him immediately after their September 30, 2021 altercation provided to 
Principal Morales and to police], the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) police cam 
videos of J ’s October 6, 2021 interviews with officers.] 
48. None of the teachers admitted at hearing to looking at J ’s arm when 
he returned to the Boys P.E. Office after his altercation with Respondent in the hallway. 
Mr. Vara and Mr. O’Campo-Savin’s accounts of what they saw vary in some respects, 
but both teachers were present when J  took the picture of his arm [Mr. O’Campo-
Savin’s right leg, sitting at his P.E. office desk, is visible in the background of the 
picture] and heard J  tell his mother words to the effect of “look what he did to me” 
or that he had been hit on the arm by Respondent when speaking with his mother. Mr. 
Mijares, who translated for Respondent during the parent-teacher conference after the 
altercation on September 30, 2021, also testified at hearing he heard J  tell his 
mother on the phone that Respondent had grabbed him and was going to send his 
mother pictures. 
49. Respondent’s claims that J ’s cellphone photo of his arm is not 
authentic and was doctored is unpersuasive and not supported by convincing 
evidence. 
50. Regarding the bruise on J ’s arm, Respondent acknowledged seeing 
bruising on J ’s arm. Mr. Ocampo-Savin also told SSIT investigators he saw marks on 
J ’s arm, but later recanted that portion of his statement at hearing. The evidence 
19 was insufficient to establish that Respondent caused the existing bruising on J ’s 
arm on September 30, 2021. Rather, it was established, based on the typical 
progression and coloration of bruising, as testified to by Respondent’s expert, Dr. 
Stewart Silverstein, that the bruising on J ’s arm where Respondent grabbed him 
was most likely already present at the time Respondent grasped J ’s arm during 
their altercation. 
51. Once Respondent and J  returned to the Boys P.E. office after their 
altercation in the hallway, J  was upset and accused Respondent of grabbing and 
bruising him during the altercation. Respondent denied J ’s claims he grabbed and 
bruised him and stated it was J  who had hit him. (Testimony of Mr. Vara, Mr. 
Ocampo-Savin, and Mr. Mijares.) Mr. Mijares testified at hearing Respondent told him 
he was standing in front of the double doors in the hallway when J  tried to push his 
way out and that Respondent’s forearm was a little sore because J  was trying to 
push his way out. After the incident, Mr. Mijares told Respondent, whom he 
characterized as an “old school” disciplinarian, that next time Respondent should let 
the student go home if they don’t want to stay for detention. Mr. Mijares expressed his 
belief to Jackson that a better way to handle the situation and avoid an altercation 
between student and teacher, like Respondent being pushed, was to let the student 
go. According to Mr. Mijares, Respondent agreed and told Mr. Mijares he was right 
and the next time he would let “him” go. (Testimony of Mr. Mijares.) 
52. J ’s mother subsequently arrived for the parent-teacher conference on 
September 30, 2021. Mr. Mijares acted as interpreter for the meeting. J ’s mother, 
Respondent, J , and Mr. Mijares participated in the meeting. (Mr. Ocampo-Savin did 
not participate in the meeting, having left for the day.) There is some dispute about 
what occurred during the meeting. The credible evidence established Mr. Mijares, who 
20 was acting as translator for J ’s mother, introduced himself to her as the “team 
lead.” J ’s mother spoke about J  being grabbed by Respondent, which 
Respondent denied, stating J  ran into him pushing his way out because he didn’t 
want to stay for detention. J ’s consecutive dates of not dressing for P.E. and not 
wanting to run laps were discussed. J ’s mother reported being unable to find P.E. 
clothes in J ’s size; Respondent provided J  with P.E. clothes. J ’s mother stated 
she did not want to cause trouble for J , but she did not want Respondent to 
“retaliate” against J  because of the altercation. J ’s mother was offered the 
opportunity to switch J  to another class, which she refused. Respondent agreed to 
respect the decision to keep J  in his class, and J ’s mother stated she was not 
going to complain about the altercation between Respondent and J . (Testimony of 
Mr. Mijares.) 
53. By all accounts, J , his mother, Mr. Mijares, and Respondent believed 
the matter was resolved after their September 30, 2021 meeting. Nevertheless, the 
next day, Respondent, concerned with J ’s accusations against him, without 
notifying J ’s mother, transferred J  out of his 6th period P.E. class and into Mr. 
Vara’s P.E. class. Mr. Mijares and Mr. Ocampo-Savin both had a negative opinion of 
J  and did not believe J ’s assertions he had been grabbed by Respondent on 
September 30, 2021, but believed Respondent’s account, as their mentor, of the 
altercation. As a result, they concluded that they did not have a reasonable suspicion 
of child abuse such as to trigger their mandated reporter obligations and did not 
report the September 30, 2021 altercation to Stevenson administration or authorities. 
54. Approximately a couple days after the September 30, 2021 altercation, 
Mr. Vara, after first speaking with Mr. Mijares about whether he intended to report the 
altercation to administration, and being told that the matter was not going to be 
21 reported, reported the altercation Assistant Vice Principal Joe Ojeda, who reported it 
to Principal Morales. Mr. Vara, who was not on good terms with Respondent and Mr. 
Mijares and was not speaking to Respondent or Mr. Mijares at the time of the 
September 30, 2021, incident, provided an account of the incident that contained both 
accurate and false information. For example, while Mr. Vara’s October 5, 2021 written 
statement was established by credible evidence, Mr. Vara’s statements to SSIT 
investigators on August 12, 2022 and September 7, 2022, stating Respondent asked 
Mr. Mijares to back him up about what happened between Respondent and J  and 
that Mr. Mijares agreed, implying the two conspired to cover up wrongdoing by 
Respondent, was not established by the evidence. (Exhibits 6, pp. 15-16, and 24.) 
55. On October 6, 2021, Principal Morales reported the matter to police, who 
ultimately did not prosecute Respondent due to the September 30, 2021 altercation 
with J . While Respondent discussed filing a claim of battery against J  during the 
subsequent investigation of both the District and police, he did not file a battery claim 
against J . Respondent maintains he is the victim of the September 30, 2021 
altercation. Mr. Vara, Mr. Mijares, and Mr. Ocampo-Savin were all investigated by the 
District to determine if they failed to timely report suspected child abuse after the 
September 30, 2021 altercation. As recently as January 2023 and the hearing in this 
matter, Mr. Mijares and Mr. Ocampo-Savin were providing written statements 
regarding their actions on September 30, 2021 in response to conference memos 
issued to them by Stevenson administrators. 
56. Both Respondent and J  did not provide a full and accurate account of 
their altercation on September 30, 2021. Respondent has consistently denied he 
grabbed J ’s arm during their September 30, 2021 altercation, claiming it was J  
who ran into him during their altercation at the double doors of the P.E. building main 
22 entrance. (Exhibit EE; Testimony of Respondent.) It is settled that the trier of fact may 
“accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject another part even though the 
latter contradicts the part accepted.” ( . (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 
67.) Respondent’s claim J  ran into him first during their altercation was established 
by the evidence. Respondent’s denial he grabbed J ’s arm in response is not 
credited and is contradicted by the weight of the credible evidence to the contrary.
57. Similarly, J  was partially truthful in his account of his altercation with 
Respondent on September 30, 2021 in his written statement, with police, and with 
investigators. He willfully omitted the fact that he first collided with Respondent when 
he tried to get past Respondent to leave the building before Respondent grasped his 
arm and pulled him back into the P.E. building. When J  did admit, during his 
second interview with officers on October 6, 2021, he collided with Respondent trying 
to leave the building, he minimized his body’s impact on Respondent when he ran into 
him, claiming he merely walked into Respondent trying to get out of the P.E. building. 
(Exhibits U and V.) 
58. In his statement to SSIT investigators and hearing testimony, Principal 
Morales claimed Respondent admitted to grabbing J ’s sweatshirt during his 
October 6, 2021 interview regarding the incident. (Testimony of Principal Morales; 
Exhibit 6, pp. A14-A15.) It was not established, however, Respondent admitted to 
grabbing J ’s sweatshirt during the altercation. Principal Morales’ claim is unreliable, 
affected by his bias against Respondent, whom he believed to be a teacher with a 
history of aggression against students, and his perception that Respondent, Mr. 
Mijares, and Mr. Ocampo-Savin conspired to cover-up the September 30, 2021 
altercation and J ’s transfer to Mr. Vara’s P.E. class. (Exhibits 6, pp. A14-A15; P, p. 
B75; T.) He did not contemporaneously document the interview or the alleged 
24 August 8, 2022 interview. (Exhibit 6, p. A17.) There was an almost yearlong delay 
before Y  R.T. was identified as a potential witness to the September 30, 2021 
altercation. Her statements to SSIT investigators, video deposition testimony excerpts, 
and hearing testimony therefore are judiciously reviewed. (Exhibits 6, p. A18, Z, and 
YY.) “Testimony which you believe given by one witness is sufficient for the proof of 
any fact. However, before finding any fact to be proved solely by the testimony of such 
a single witness, you should carefully review all of the testimony upon which proof of 
such fact depends.” (, (1975) 14 Cal.3d 864, 885.)
62. Respondent’s assertions Y  R.T. fabricated her testimony because she 
and J  are friends or because she had or has romantic feelings for J  is speculative 
and unsupported by convincing objective evidence. Y  R.T. always acknowledged 
that during the early fall of 2021 she and J  were students in most of the same 
classes. However, she credibly and consistently denied she was J ’s friend. Aside 
from suggesting that Y  R.T. had conspired to lie for J  because she was 
motivated by friendship or romantic feelings, Respondent provided no credible 
evidence to support claimant Y  R.T.’s was a biased witness. In fact, Y  R.T. did 
not personally know Respondent and was never a student in Respondent’s P.E. class.
63. Further, Y  R.T. credibly addressed why she did not promptly come 
forward and report witnessing Respondent grabbing J ’s arm and pulling him into 
the P.E. building on September 30, 2021 during her April 23, 2024 deposition 
testimony, stating she was reluctant to come forward because she did not feel she had 
sufficient English language skills and was reluctant to subject herself to the rigors the 
investigative process would entail, including being subjected to the deposition 
process. (Exhibit YY.)
25 64. Y  R.T. was provided the aid of a simultaneous translator during the 
deposition, which caused Y  R.T. to ask Respondent’s counsel to repeat certain 
questions during the deposition. Respondent’s argument that Y  R.T. was not 
truthful during her deposition is baseless. 
65. Similarly, the claim Y  R.T.’s testimony should be wholly discredited 
because Y  R.T. made some inconsistent statements is unconvincing. There were 
minor inconsistencies in Y  R.T.’s statements. For example, which direction she was 
walking from or to on the day of the incident after school, which students she walked 
and spoke with after school, whether there were others in the P.E. building area when 
she witnessed Respondent grabbing and pulling J , and which of J ’s arms (right 
or left) Respondent was holding during the grabbing and pulling. Y  R.T. also 
reported seeing a bruise on J ’s arm when he came back to school days after the 
incident, but the origin of the bruise is unclear. 
66. Nevertheless, Y  R.T. is unequivocally consistent that she saw 
Respondent grab and pull Respondent into the P.E. building. She also testified in a 
forthright and credible manner at hearing. Accordingly, her testimony, alone, is direct 
credible evidence establishing the fact Respondent did grasp and pull J ’s arm 
during their September 30, 2021 altercation. 
67. It was established J  spoke both in a serious way and in a boasting way 
about having Respondent arrested after Respondent was arrested and removed from 
Stevenson in October 2021. (Testimony of Renzo Miranda and Y  R.T.) 
Respondent’s argument that J ’s boasting about the September 30, 2021 altercation 
is evidence J  fabricated his allegations because he did not like Respondent is 
speculative and unconvincing. J  was surprised when Principal Morales and the 
27 71. The testimony of Mark J. Eskridge, a digital forensic examiner, who 
testified as an expert on the authenticity of the photograph of J ’s arm provided to 
police, is also not credited and given little evidentiary weight. (Exhibit 25.) Mr. Eskridge 
concluded that the string of characters in the header indicated the photo may have 
been photoshopped. However, he acknowledged the photo he examined came from 
police records and was not the original photograph taken by J  and was not taken 
directly from J ’s phone. Mr. Eskridge could not answer whether the police 
uploading the photograph to their police database and downloading the photo could 
have affected the photograph’s header information. In fact, Mr. Eskridge admitted, he 
had never analyzed a photograph uploaded through police records and was unfamiliar 
with the program AXON Capture utilized by law enforcement to the photo in question. Complainant’s Charging Allegation 4 
72. This charge pertains to events that are alleged to have occurred between
August 2021 and October 2021. 
73. Complainant alleges in Count 4 that, between August 2021 and October 
2021:
[Respondent] did the following to students in his sixth 
period class:
Yelled at them to:
“Stop slacking.”
“Pay attention.”
“Listen.”
28 Said, “I am going to yell at you again,” or words to that 
effect.
Lashed out at student who made mistakes. 
Made students stand and face the wall. 
“Humiliate[d]” students in front of the class.
(Exhibit 23, p. A181.) 
74. Count 4’s allegations against Respondent are based on hearsay 
statements attributed to J.P., a randomly selected student witness, at Stevenson, 
during an August 18, 2022 interview by SSIT investigators, as contained in the 
Investigative Report. (Exhibit 6, p. A24.) The allegations were not established by direct 
evidence at hearing. Consequently, the evidence did not support Charge 4. 
Complainant Charging Allegation 5 
75. This charge pertains to allegations of misconduct alleged to have 
occurred between August 2021 and October 2021, as described in Charges 1-4, 
individually and/or collectively.
76. Complainant alleges in Charge 5 that, between August 2021 and October 
2021, as to Charges 1-4, individually and/or collectively:
[Respondent] failed to follow multiple administrative 
directives previously given to him, including but not limited 
to, to the following:29 i. Immediately refrain from embarrassing students in 
the presence of others. 
ii. Conduct himself in a professional manner at all 
times. 
iii. Do not use demeaning or derogatory language with 
students. 
v. Utilize appropriate discipline techniques and follow 
the [Stevenson] discipline policy. 
vi. Adhere to all District policies and procedures, 
including but not limited to, the following: 
[District] Employee Code of Ethics 
[District] Code of Conduct with Students 
[District] Board of Resolution on the Respectful Treatment 
of all Persons 
California Standards for the Teaching Profession 
[District] Abolition of Corporal Punishment Bulletin 
(Exhibit 23, pp. A181-A182.) 
  30 77. Count 5 further alleges that the directives referenced therein, as set forth 
in Factual Finding 76, were issued to Respondent on the following occasions: 
a. Orally on December 6, 2017, and subsequently 
memorialized in the conference memorandum dated 
on December 6, 2017, issued by Julio Hernandez, 
Assistant Principal at [Stevenson].
b. Orally on May 30, 2013, and subsequently 
memorialized in the conference memorandum dated 
on May 30, 2024, issued by Leo Gonzalez, Principal at 
[Stevenson].
c. Yearly in the required training given to all certificated 
teachers.
(Exhibit 23, pp. A181-A182.)
78. The evidence did not support Charge 5 as it relates to Charges 2 through 
4. 
79. The evidence did not support Charge 5’s allegations Respondent failed to 
follow multiple previously issued administrative directives as to Charge 1 that he 
immediately refrain from embarrassing students in the presence of others and not use 
demeaning or derogatory language with students.
80. The evidence partially supported Charge 5 as to Charge 1, which was 
established in part at hearing. It was established Respondent violated the previously 
issued administrative directives that he conduct himself in a professional manner at all 
times, utilize appropriate discipline techniques and follow the Stevenson discipline 31 policy, and adhere to all District policies and procedures by exhibiting poor judgment 
on September 30, 2021, when he engaged in a verbal and physical altercation with 6th 
grade student J  outside of the boys’ P.E. office, which resulted in Respondent 
grabbing J ’s arm, leaving redness on the arm. 
Respondent’s Additional Evidence
81. Respondent takes no responsibility for his actions in the altercation 
between himself and J  on September 30, 2021. Respondent believes he is the 
“victim” of the altercation and should not be subject to dismissal because J  ran into 
him during the altercation. Despite Respondent’s failure to be forthright about his role 
in the altercation with J , J ’s actions in instigating the physical altercation by 
running into Respondent somewhat mitigates Respondent’s reflexive poor judgment 
in grasping J ’s arm. Respondent credibly testified that he is a committed and 
capable educator who should continue to be retained as a teacher by the District. 
82. Stevenson teachers and a former administrator testified in support of 
Respondent’s claims that he possesses the requisite skills, integrity, and character to 
continue to be a teacher at Stevenson. The evidence was considered in rendering this 
Decision.
83. Respondent’s fellow Stevenson P.E. teachers Mr. Mijares, Mr. Ocampo-
Savin, and Ms. Mercedes Steiner praised Respondent’s mentorship, consistent 
professionalism, and good classroom organization and management, during their 
hearing testimony. None of his P.E. teacher co-workers witnessed Respondent acting 
in an inappropriate manner with students, including yelling at students.
84. Ms. Steiner testified that, based on her observations, Respondent had 
“good rapport” with students. Mr. Ocampo-Savin described Respondent as “respectful” 
33 Statutory Grounds for Dismissal
3. The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent 
certificated employee if one or more of the causes described in sections 44932, 
subdivision (a), or 44939, are established. Here, the District seeks Respondent’s 
dismissal based on immoral conduct, including but not limited to, egregious 
misconduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1)); unprofessional conduct (§ 44932, subd. (a)(2)); 
evident unfitness for service (§ 44932, subd. (a)(6)); persistent violation of or refusal to 
obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the 
school district employing him or her (§ 44932, subd. (a)(8)); immoral conduct (§ 44939); 
and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district (§ 44939.) 
(Factual Finding 5.) 
4. The District’s Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges charged 
Respondent with various acts to support the six statutory grounds for dismissal. 
(Factual Finding 1-5.) The Commission considered whether the District established 
each of the charged acts by a preponderance of the evidence. The Commission then 
considered whether the charged acts violated one or more of the alleged statutory 
bases for dismissal. 
5. The Commission found that the District established charge 3a and 
partially established charges 1, 2a, 2c, 3b, and 4. The District did not establish Charges 
2b and 4. (Factual Findings 23-80.) 
6. Cause for dismissal of Respondent does not exist under section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1), based on immoral conduct, including but not limited to egregious 34 misconduct, as set forth in Factual Findings 23 through 80 and Legal Conclusions 3 
through 5. 
7. Cause for dismissal of Respondent exists under section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(2), based on unprofessional conduct, as set forth in Factual Findings 23-
26, 31-32, 34-71, 75-77, and 80. 
8. Cause for dismissal of Respondent does not exist under section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(6), based on evident unfitness for service, as set forth in Factual 
Findings 23 through 80 and Legal Conclusions 3 through 5. 
9. Cause for dismissal of Respondent does not exist under section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), based on persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by 
the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the school district 
employment him, as set forth in Factual Findings 23 through 80 and Legal Conclusions 
3 through 5. 
10. Cause for dismissal of Respondent does not exist under section 44939, 
based on willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing district, as set forth in 
Factual Findings 23 through 80 and Legal Conclusions 3 through 5. Analysis of Morrison Factors 
11. In deciding whether cause for dismissal exists based on Respondent’s 
unprofessional conduct, it also must be established that a teacher’s misconduct relates 
to his fitness to teach pursuant to the meaning of (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227-230 ( )Not all “  factors” need be present for 35 the test to be satisfied. (
(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Further, the analysis need not be conducted on 
each individual fact established but is applicable to the collectively established facts. 
( 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.)
12. The factors were considered and compared to the facts 
established above. “Unprofessional conduct,” as used in section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(2), is conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or that is 
unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing. ( (1953) 41 
Cal.2d 546, 553.) The Morrison factors analysis applies to causes for dismissal for 
unprofessional conduct. However, the court held that “an individual can be 
removed from the teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the 
profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or 
others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher. ( at p. 235.)
13. The applicable factors demonstrate Respondent’s unprofessional conduct 
had a direct relationship to teaching but did not establish Respondent’s unfitness to 
teach. (Factual Findings 23-80.)
1. THE LIKELIHOOD THE CONDUCT MAY ADVERSELY AFFECT STUDENTS 
OR FELLOW TEACHERS . Respondent’s unprofessional conduct, verbally 
and physically arguing with J  on September 30, 2021, was an instance 
of unprofessional conduct. Under the totality of the circumstances, it is 
reasonable to infer this behavior is unlikely to recur. Respondent has 
been issued disciplinary notices and direction because of the incident. In 
addition, Respondent’s agreed with Mr. Mijares at the time of the 
incident that he would allow students to leave if they did not want to 
stay for detention. (Factual Finding 51.) It is therefore unlikely his conduct 
36 will recur as to adversely affect students. Further, based on the evidence, 
it is a reasonable conclusion that the teachers who were aware of the 
incident would handle a similar situation differently in the future. 
2. THE DEGREE OF SUCH ADVERSITY .The degree of adversity was low; it 
was established that both Respondent and J  believed the September 
30, 2021 incident was resolved and were surprised when it became the 
subject of police and District investigation. 
3. THE PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT .The 
unprofessional conduct is remote in time. The incident occurred on 
September 30, 2021, over two-and-three-quarters years ago. 
4.  THE TYPE OF TEACHING CERTIFICATE HELD BY THE PARTY INVOLVED . 
The type of teaching certificates held by Respondent require Respondent 
to be able to handle the day-to-day stressors of teaching, including 
dealing with a defiant student in a temperate manner, even when 
provoked by that student. 
Respondent’s physical actions with J on September 30 were a serious 
lapse in professional judgment. However, it was an isolated incident that 
has had severe consequences on his life and teaching career. 
Respondent’s subsequent failure to take responsibility for his part in the 
situation with J  is concerning. Despite Respondent’s lack of 
accountability, it is reasonable to infer he is unlikely to repeat his actions 
toward another student. Notably, Respondent contemporaneously 
agreed with Mr. Mijares that Respondent will allow students to leave in 
the future if they don’t want to stay for detention. Accordingly, under the 
37 totality of the circumstances, including the fact J  instigated the 
physical altercation, the incident does not conclusively prevent 
Respondent’s ability to function as a teacher in an effective and safe 
manner in a school environment with students. 
5. THE EXISTENCE OF EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING 
CIRCUMSTANCES ,IF ANY,SURROUNDING THE CONDUCT .Extenuating 
circumstances were proven. The student, J , initiated the contact with 
Respondent in trying to leave the P.E. building, which contributed to 
Respondent’s reflexive action in response, i.e., grasping J ’s forearm to 
prevent him from leaving. 
6.  THE PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES 
RESULTING IN THE CONDUCT .Respondent’s conduct is blameworthy. He 
is a veteran teacher with decades of experience and was the P.E. 
department head. He knew or should have known based on his training 
and experience that grasping a student was inappropriate under the 
circumstances and should have been documented.
7.  THE LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE OF THE QUESTIONED CONDUCT . It 
is unlikely based on Respondent’s contemporaneous agreement with Mr. 
Mijares’ he will physically prevent a student from voluntarily leaving 
detention if he returns to a District classroom. (Factual Finding 51.) As 
discussed, Respondent took no responsibility for his conduct and 
demonstrated no remorse for his actions. Nevertheless, it is a reasonable 
inference, that the negative personal consequences he has suffered due 
to his momentary lapse in judgement makes it unlikely he would grasp a 
39ORDER
The Amended Accusation and Statement of Charges against respondent 
Thomas Jackson are dismissed.
DATE:
DATE:
DATE:RAY ALCALA
Commissioner
CHARLES MENDOZA
Commissioner
IRINA TENTSER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
