BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
WEST CONTRA COSTA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
CONTRA COSTA COUNTY 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
KENDRICKS ANDERSON, Respondent. 
OAH No. 2023080512 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by 
videoconference on January 22 through 25, 2024
Erin C. Moran, San Bernardino City Unified School District; Marina Mae Amador, Rim of 
the World Unified School District; and Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, 
State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings, who presided. 
Attorneys Alex A. Lozada and Dustin Stroeve represented the West Contra Costa 
Unified School District (District). 
Attorney Clarissa Romero represented respondent Kendricks Anderson, who 
was present. 
The record was left open for briefing. The District submitted closing and reply 
briefs which were marked for identification as Exhibits 29 and 30, respectively. 2 Respondent submitted an opposition brief which was marked for identification as 
Exhibit R. The record closed and the matter was submitted on May 22, 2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. The District is a large school district serving northwestern Contra Costa 
County. 
2. At all relevant times, respondent was a permanent certificated employee 
of the District. 
3. -Skelly [Draft]  statement of 
charges upon respondent. (See  (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194.) 
Respondent chose to submit a written response to the draft statement of charges in 
lieu of a formal hearing. 
4. On June 20, 2023, the District served a final statement of charges upon 
respondent. The statement of charges is the operative pleading in this matter. 
5. . 
6. In the statement of charges, the District alleges five causes to dismiss 
respondent from his employment for the District: (1) immoral conduct; 
(2) unprofessional conduct; (3) unsatisfactory performance; (4) evident unfitness for 
service; and (5) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
the reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of public schools or by the 
governing board of the District. 3 7. Specifically, the District alleges that respondent had inappropriate 
interactions with students and staff while he was a teacher at De Anza High School (De 
Anza) in the fall of 2021, including: stroking the hair of student JJF (student s 
withheld for privacy); removing and raising his shoe above his head as if to hit student 
KN; throwing his glasses at student KD; referring to student DY
 staff, intended 
to mimic applause; confronting office manager Jan Bridges using an angry and 
aggressive tone; hugging student JB from the side and patting his side about five or 
six times while JB asked him to stop; while escorting students past campus security 
officer 
; later telling 
respondent stated to Jackson 
; grabbing a tablet 
hands after they asked if they could charge 
it; after student HS asked to use the restroom, initially ignoring the request, then 
throwing a pack of sticky notes at her and allowing her to go, then after she returned 
; and attending 
a faculty meeting wearing a De Anza sweatshirt 
by the application of an image to (image of knife 
as advocating for violence. 
8. The District also alleges that respondent had inappropriate interactions 
with students while he was a teacher at Pinole Valley High School (Pinole) in the winter 
of 2023, specifically that: student GPC reported that respondent used racial slur such 
as wetbag,  b**ner, rice maker,  and the n-word he also grabbed a phone from 
her lap, making her and others feel uncomfortable; respondent grabbed a phone 
which was placed on student DA asked for permission 4 to go to a meeting in the library and respondent said he did not believe him and that 
he did not think DA had a GPA above 2.0, and when he was shown documentation of 
the meeting, respondent stated Wow, so they just give these to anybody student 
JNS reported that respondent frequently commented on her acne and called her 
beautiful black princess "ghetto and beautiful black sister even though JNS had 
asked him multiple times to stop calling her sisterand to stop talking about her 
acne; student TG reported that respondent frequently made inappropriate comments 
about appearances, including, laughing at your eyebrows, did you draw 
them on yourself and also he left inappropriate text conversations for students to 
see and made other inappropriate comments, such as, You're a sharp young woman. I 
like that and he violently grabbed computers and phones from students without 
warning; student ELW reported that respondent made fun of the size of her forehead 
and made comments about ELW dating 
someone of her own race, causing her to feel extremely uncomfortable. 
9. Respondent timely requested a hearing and this proceeding followed. 
Relevant District Policies 
10. Board Policy 4119.21 (Professional Standards) states: Employee conduct 
should enhance the integrity of the district and advance the goals of the educational 
programs  
11. Board Policy 5137 (Positive School Climate) provides that all staff are 
expected to serve as role models for students by demonstrating positive, professional 
attitudes and respect toward each student and other staff members. 
12. Board Policy 4119.22 (Dress and Grooming) provides that employees 
shall maintain professional standards of dress and grooming that demonstrate their 5 high regard for education, present an image consistent with their job responsibilities
and assignment, and not endanger the health or safety of employees or students.  
Background 
13. Respondent holds a clear single subject teaching credential authorizing 
him to teach English and social sciences. 
14. Respondent began teaching in 2007. He began teaching for the District 
in August 2017. He taught English at Pinole through the 2020/21 school year. He was 
the chair of the theater department and the co-chair of the English department. He 
was also an assistant coach for a junior varsity basketball team. He was then invited to 
transfer to De Anza by its principal, Christopher Pierce, who knew respondent from a 
summer program and one or more African-American men s events. 
15. De Anza is organized into multiple academies, each with an academic or 
vocational emphasis (law, health, information technology, and Junior Reserve Officer 
Training Corps). 
16. Canvas is a web-based learning management system that allows teachers 
to post learning materials, assignments, and grades, and for students to access these 
materials and submit completed assignments and participate in discussions. Canvas 
was not generally used at De Anza, but respondent used it as the primary interface for 
each of his classes. 
202122 School Year at De Anza High School 
17. During the 2021/22 school year, respondent taught English to students in 
the law academy at De Anza. At the beginning of this school year, students returned to 
in-person learning after more than a year of distance learning due to the COVID-19 6 pandemic. During the 2021/22 school year, the District had a policy requiring each 
person to wear a mask when indoors. 
18. Many of  students experienced difficulties accessing and 
using Canvas in the fall of 2021. 
19. On September 24, 2021, Pierce and Assistant Principal White issued a 
conference summary document stating that they had met with respondent and 
discussed the following issues:  
 There have been several written and verbal complaints 
about you from students, parents, and staff. 
 There is a pattern to the complaints that focus on how 
you: use demeaning/insulting language when addressing 
students, mock students, stare down students in an 
 unpredictable 
mood swings. 
 You have not implemented IEP accommodations such as: 
providing extended time. 
 You have not provided Canvas access to SPED case 
managers so they can adequately support their students 
with your assignments. 
 The concerns of the interactions between you and the 
SPED Instructional Aide. 7 because 
he became very defensive and argumentative and accused Pierce and White of not 
doing their jobs correctly and coddling  students. Pierce regards this response as 
unprofessional and did not perceive that respondent had any desire to work on 
solutions to the complaints of students, parents, staff, and other teachers. 
FIRST ALLEGED INCIDENT (TOUCHED THE HEAD AND STROKED THE HAIR OF 
STUDENT JJF) 
20. Student JJF did not testify at hearing. The District did not submit 
evidence to support this allegation. 
SECOND ALLEGED INCIDENT (THREATENED STUDENT KN WITH A SHOE) 
21. Former student DYR testified at hearing. DYR attended De Anza during 
the 2021/22 school year and respondent was her English teacher. DYR graduated in 
2023. She reports that she had numerous problems with respondent, but not other 
teachers. 
incident) in her backpack because she had so many conflicts with respondent. DYR 
asked to transfer to another class, but was told that she would have to also transfer to 
a different academy, which she did not want to do. As a result of her conflicts with 
respondent, DYR left De Anza but returned for her senior year. DYR is currently in 
college and her goal is to become a teacher. 
22.  DYR reports that she saw respondent threaten student KN with his 
sandal. DYR reports that KN asked for help using Canvas and respondent became 
frustrated. DYR reports that respondent removed one of his brown Birkenstock sandals 
and raised it above his head as if to throw it at KN. DYR does not remember 
respondent saying anything while he raised the sandal. DYR reports that there was not 8 DYR reports that KN raised her hands in a defensive 
posture and looked afraid. KN then quickly left the classroom and reported the 
incident to the De Anza administration. DYR reports that the incident made her view 
respondent differently and made her feel unsafe in his classroom. DYR reports that KN 
mentioned the incident to her last year
 DYR reports that she has known KN since middle school and KN had never 
been invol . 
23. The District alleges this incident occurred on August 31, 2021, and that 
date is listed on a November 15, 2021, written reprimand issued to respondent. 
24. DYR also reports that on another occasion she saw respondent throw a 
pack of sticky notes at student TM and the pack hit TM on her back. DYR reports that 
TM stormed out of the classroom and she and TM reported the incident to Pierce and 
completed a written statement. 
25. Pierce testified at hearing. Pierce is in his third year as principal at De 
Anza. The 2021/22 school year was his first. Prior to that, he was an assistant principal 
at De Anza for five years. Prior to that, Pierce worked as a teacher for a decade or 
more.  
26. Pierce reports that KN came directly to him and reported that respondent 
had raised his sandal above his head after she told respondent that she did not 
understand the lesson. Pierce reports that KN told him that she was afraid. Pierce 
reports that she appeared afraid and he found her credible. 
27. White testified at hearing. During the 2021-22 school year, he was an 
assistant principal at De Anza. Prior to that he was a teacher at De Anza. White is 
currently an administrator elsewhere in the District. White observed KN when she 9 made the complaint about respondent threatening her with his shoe and reports that 
she seemed  
28. Marlene Trempy testified at hearing. She has been a resource specialist at 
De Anza for the last six years. She facilitates the Individualized Education Programs 
. Trempy describes KN as a smart student who 
wants to do well. Trempy reports that KN has autism. Trempy did not witness the 
incident, but reports that KN visited her shortly afterwards and reported that 
respondent took off his shoe and threatened to throw it at her. KN reported that in her 
 Trempy reports that KN did not know what she 
did to upset respondent but suspected it was because she did not understand 
asked for more information.  
mother was also very upset about the incident. 
29. KN did not testify at hearing. Marlene Trempy reports that she recently 
spoke with KN, but KN was too scared to testify. 
30. Respondent testified at hearing. His attitude was generally combative 
and his testimony was often evasive and sometimes contradictory. 
31. Respondent testified that he never threatened any student with a shoe, 
but he did use his shoe to kill roaches and ants while teaching. Respondent submitted 
an email to corroborate his testimony that he complained of roaches and ants in his 
classroom in fall 2021. Respondent also submitted two photographs that show ants in 
his classroom. On cross examination respondent testified that the only time he ever 
took off his shoe in class was the same day he took the pictures of the ants. He 
testified that he never saw KN in apparent distress and never saw her run out of his 10 classroom. Respondent reports that he is not concerned that two witnesses testified 
that he threatened KN with a sandal. 
THIRD ALLEGED INCIDENT (INAPPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR TOWARDS STUDENT 
KD, INCLUDING THROWING EYEGLASSES ) 
32. KD testified at hearing. Her testimony was credible in all respects. KD 
graduated from De Anza in 2023 and was a 16-year-old 
English class during the 2021/22 school year. 
33. KD reports that her initial impression of respondent was positive, but that 
her view changed within the first month. She explained that she became increasingly 
uncomfortable with respondent, because he: began sitting and standing very close to 
her; said  in a talk tone of voice; put his hand on her 
back; and said that he admired her. She reports that she did not hear him speaking 
this way to other students. KD reports that she once loudly told respondent to stay out 
of he but he just laughed and stood up. 
34. KD reports that at some point in the semester she was late for class, sat 
down, and discovered that she was locked out of the current assignment in Canvas. 
She asked respondent for help. She reports that he became very irritated, walked over 
to her, stomped his foot, loudly really, . She 
dodged but the eyeglasses hit her on the arm. She does not believe that respondent 
was joking, rather she reports that he was very angry and frustrated. She reports that, 
although she normally stands up for herself, on this occasion she was embarrassed 
f in a state of shock She later grew mad at herself for not fighting back 
after the class saw her get hit with the eyeglasses. 11 35. KD reports that she 
class, and because she felt uncomfortable, she stopped asking respondent for help 
first semester. 
36. KD reports that respondent also made fun of her acne and made fun of 
the acne of another student and the size of . 
37. Respondent submitted an email showing that KD missed most of a class 
period to look for a necklace that she had misplaced. 
38. Respondent denies throwing his glasses at any student. He testified: 
No. never thrown anything in a classroom. I teach 
sports, so there anything I would throw. Tactile 
activities involving students generally involve me 
unless modeling how to put your nametag on the door 
or where in the classroom would you want to post that as 
far as do we have to put them on with our period or with 
our grade, because teaching multiple grades, which I 
usually am. So, I like to have my freshmen do it so when we 
do take a class picture for a fundraiser or whatever 
sectioned off. 
FOURTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (REFERRING TO STUDENT DYR AS IRTY AND 
FROM NORTH RICHMOND ) 
39. DYR reports that on the second or third day of class, respondent made a 
comment implying that her Burberry brand sweater was a fake. She felt confused and 12 humiliated. She reports that on another occasion, in front of other students,
respondent showed her a picture of a black water bug  on his phone and said that 
she looked like the insect. DYR reports that this comment was significant because she 
is African American and other students 
were goading her to respond, but she did not respond because she had problems in 
the past with anger and talking back to teachers and was trying very hard to work on 
that trait in fall 2021. 
40. DYR reports that respondent repeatedly called her Miss Cooper,  the 
name of an African American student one grade above her. She believes this was 
because she is African American, even though respondent is too. 
41. DYR reports that respondent screamed in the middle of class that she 
must be from North Richmond, with the dirty kids  and again referred to her as Miss 
Cooper. DYR reports that North Richmond is a 
 This 
incident was stated to have occurred on September 23, 2021, in a November 15, 2021, 
written reprimand of respondent. 
42. DYR also reports hearing respondent call a Mexican student a wetback  
DYR reports that the student was crying after class and this prompted DYR to start a 
petition 
students. DYR reported all these incidents to her mother and her mother complained 
to the school and ultimately met with respondent, Pierce, and assistant principal 
White. 13 43. Marlene Trempy reports that DYR showed up in her classroom crying and 
reported that respondent had told her 
 engaging in sex work. 
44. Respondent reports that DYR had been expelled from school the year 
prior and he was not notified of this, even though such notification was required. 
45. Respondent denies calling DYR the wrong name, unless by accident 
during the first three weeks of school. 
46. Respondent denies 
He testified 
where students are coming from. The only thing I know is that there is a denser 
 
47. Respondent denies saying that DYR or any other student would only 
. He testified that this statement is not 
academic language and he never uses classes. 
48. Respondent denies comparing DYR to a bug, testifying that the only 
mention of bugs in his classroom related to pest control spraying. 
49. Respondent denies ever calling a student a racial slur. 
FIFTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (CONFLICT WITH PARAPROFESSIONAL MORATO) 
50. Complainant alleged that in September 2021, a paraprofessional, Luisa 
Fuentes Morato,  
with assignments14 Complainant offered no evidence to support 
this allegation. 
SIXTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (THREATENING GESTURE TOWARDS GEORGE 
JACKSON) 
51. George Jackson, Jr., is a campus safety specialist at De Anza. He has 
worked for the District for approximately 16 years. Jackson and respondent both 
started working at De Anza at the beginning of the 2021/22 school year and both were 
assigned to a building known as Seven Hall. Jackson reports that he first heard of 
respondent when students complained about things respondent said to them. Jackson 
referred these students to the administration. 
52. Jackson credibly testified that on one occasion (listed as October 25, 
2021, in a November 15, 2021, written reprimand), outside the gate to De Anza, 
to shoot Jackson. Jackson reports that his coworkers (including Jerome Fletcher) 
advised Jackson not to respond and to write a report of the incident, and Jackson 
followed this advice. 
53. Fletcher has been the De Anza Site Safety Supervisor for six years. He is 
familiar with respondent and George Jackson. Fletcher reports that respondent would 
multiple times in the De Anza hallways during the 2021-22 
school year. Fletcher reports that on the occasion just outside the school gate, 
respondent walked by and  while smirking. 
Fletcher reports that there is no question respondent was mimicking guns and Fletcher 15 felt uncomfortable for Jackson, who took the gesture as threatening. Fletcher advised 
Jackson to report the incident. 
54. Respondent testified that he never threatened Jackson and never 
gestured at Jackson with his hands: 
Q. Have you ever gestured at him [Jackson] with your 
hands? 
A. No. walking with my students. When I walk with 
my students, because I have my two laptops, one of them is 
laptop in my hand. My other hand does what it does when 
you are walking. I point at people unless trying to 
identify them to a staff member. That is about it. If I point at 
you, I know your name, trying to identify you, who 
is this. Other than that, I point. I take names. 
I address them by their professional title if they have 
professional titles or whatever is appropriate for the level of 
interaction which having. 
Q. Have you ever gestured at him [Jackson] making 
finger guns? 
A. No. 
Q. Have you ever gestured at anyone making finger 
guns with your hands? 16 A. Peace. Holding my peace. Holding my peace, Peace. I
wave good-bye peace. The only time I use peace in my life 
ismy son's name is Peace. My name is Peace 
Anderson. Peace. 
SEVENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (CONFRONTING OFFICE MANAGER JAN 
BRIDGES USING AN ANGRY AND AGGRESSIVE TONE) 
55. Pierce testified that 
But Pierce did not indicate if he witnessed this behavior or 
provide further details. The District did not provide sufficient evidence to prove this 
allegation. 
EIGHTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (HUGGING AND PATTING THE SIDE OF STUDENT 
JB) 
56. The District did not provide significant evidence to prove this allegation. 
NINTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (UNPROFESSIONAL STATEMENTS TO STUDENTS 
AND JACKSON) 
57. Jackson reports that in a hallway outside classrooms, he overheard 
respondent tell students something to the effect that they needed to leave roaches at 
their homes and not bring them to school. Jackson understood respondent to be 
implying that the students were dirty. Jackson reports that he told respondent 
 ooks like you got your dream 
job. Jackson was offended by this comment, which he took to mean that he could not 
find a higher status job, even though he had left a more lucrative job at a large 17 refinery to work with students. Jackson reports that a couple of the students thanked 
him for standing up for the  
58. reports that she observed respondent 
arguing with other staff, including a coach and Jackson. She reports he aggressively 
and loudly told Jackson that Jackson was a security guard and needs to stay in his 
place. 
59. Respondent denies having any direct interaction with Jackson, including 
 Respondent testified: 
No. The only thing I have to think about is my dream job, 
holding my peace, leaving my dream job. Because m in a 
more the same technology wise, but a higher 
density of students that I feel like I can help make a bigger 
change and impact lives. So, I feel like living my dream 
already, and even by being at De Anza where there is a 
greater demographic of students that I can reach. 
I recall even speaking to him about it. 
working with my students. I have anything to talk 
about except for to my students. So, pretty sure I didn t 
say anything to him because there is no reason for me to 
converse with him. talking to my students about going 
to the library and keeping their masks on, so no direct 
interactions with him or I, just broad statements to my 
students about not wearing their masks or fraternizing with 
people that are not wearing their mask. 18 TENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (GRABBING A TABLET AND CHARGER OUT OF 
STUDENT S HANDS) 
60. The District alleged that respondent grabbed a tablet and charger out of 
did not present any significant evidence to support this 
allegation. 
ELEVENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (THROWING A PACK OF STICKY NOTES AT 
STUDENT HS AND ASKING S MOTHER AN INAPPROPRIATE QUESTION) 
61. The District alleged that after student HS asked to use the restroom, 
respondent initially ignored the request; then threw a pack of sticky notes at her and 
allowed her to go; then after she returned, called her mother and asked how to say 
The District did not present any significant evidence to 
support this allegation. DYR reported that she saw respondent throw a pack of sticky 
notes at student TM, but there was no evidence that DYR meant to refer to student HS. 
TWELFTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (WEARING DE ANZA SWEATSHIRT ALTERED 
WITH A VIOLENT IMAGE) 
62. Students in the De Anza printing club made approximately 200 De Anza 
sweatshirts ! ot). 
Each teacher received one of these sweatshirts as a gift. 
63. Respondent altered the sweatshirt by  a 
patch that depicted a violent image a hand stabbing a knife through two other hands 
clasped together. In very small letters, the words are written on the 
image of the knife. There is blood on the wrist being stabbed and blood on both sides 19 of the knife. The most obvious interpretation of the statement on the altered 
sweatshirt (Altered Sweatshirt) is [or harm]  
64. Respondent wore the Altered Sweatshirt at De Anza on November 1, 
2021. Pierce reports that 
see Altered Sweatshirt. 
65. Pierce reports that  modification 
of the sweatshirt and Marlene Trempy 
observed many staff members sitting behind respondent when he was wearing the 
Altered Sweatshirt in the horrified a De Anza student 
had recently been shot, suffering permanent injury. Fatham Riordan Ng, a teacher at 
De Anza, saw respondent wearing the Altered Sweatshirt 
and was  
66. Jackson was not at the staff meeting but saw respondent wearing the 
Altered Sweatshirt on the De Anza campus and was shocked. He discussed it with his 
coworkers and reports that they all wondered what kind of statement respondent was 
trying to make. Jackson viewed the Altered Sweatshirt as a threat. 
67. Fletcher also viewed the Altered Sweatshirt as a threat. He is not sure if 
respondent was advocating for violence, but De Anza had issues with violence and 
Fletcher is sure that the Altered Sweatshirt was not appropriate for De Anza. 
68. Kathleen Trempy testified at hearing. She has been the law academy 
at De Anza for the last three and one-half years. Prior to that she worked for 30 
 Kathleen Trempy 
saw respondent wearing the Altered Sweatshirt, and her interpretation of the 20 alteration was that respondent hated De Anza and its students and was encouraging 
violence towards the students. 
69. Respondent admits that he altered the sweatshirt. He testified: 
After about the fourth week or so, I had ordered a whole 
bunch of different patches. And it was starting to fray and 
roll up around the edges, and a few letters had fallen off. 
And I patched there were some, you know, a whole bunch 
of patches, and I put one on there where the lettering had 
fallen off to complete the phrase and make it more 
personalized. 
70. Respondent testified that the meaning of the Altered Sweatshirt was 
 . 
Respondent denies trying to convey distrust of his coworkers or unhappiness. Despite 
the image of a hand stabbing a bloody knife through two other hands, respondent 
repeatedly testified that the patch does not show a violent act. Rather, he testified that 
it is an allusion to a biblical scripture meaning 
God versus putting your trust in man  Respondent testified that he does not know the 
religion of his coworkers, does not know what they understand, and does not consider 
their understanding important. 
OTHER EVENTS DURING THE 2021-22  SCHOOL YEAR 
71. On September 24, 2021, respondent met with his supervisors at De Anza, 
Pierce and White, to discuss numerous complaints that they had received about 
respondent. Pierce reports that during the meeting r
 21 respondent to act professional not to present 
as intimidating, demeaning, or disrespectful in his either language, verbally, or his 
respondent 
received a Conference Summary that detailed the reasons for the meeting and the 
standards of conduct he was expected to uphold moving forward including, but not 
limited to, ensuring that all verbal and nonverbal communication with students is 
consistent, respectful, and professional  collaborate with [his] 
colleagues in a professional manner to meet the educational and social/emotional 
 
72. Despite giving respondent these directives, Pierce continued to receive 
numerous complaints about respondent. 
73. While on bereavement leave in early November 2021, respondent set his 
District email account to automatically reply to any sender with a message that 
included the following: 
Hello. If you are receiving this message it is because Mr. 
Anderson is out of the office. I will be out until November 
15, 2021 . Please do not email me, as I generally do not 
respond to my work email and please be so 
narcissistic and self-absorbed to think that an 
auto-responder is specific to you. Yes, you. Have a 
wonderful week and I am looking forward to seeing the 
DeAnza community next week. 
(Emphasis in original.) At hearing, respondent testified that if someone were offended 
by this message, he would 22 comprehension. Respondent admits that he set his email account to send this message 
after Pierce counseled him to communicate professionally. Surprisingly, respondent 
contends this message was professional, despite the phrase 
narcissistic and self-absorbed to think that an auto-responder is specific to you.  
Pierce opined that this is what any 
student or parent would have received if they emailed respondent during that period. 
Pierce opined that it was very unprofessional and reports that this conduct 
 
74. On November 15, 2021, Pierce and White issued a written reprimand to 
respondent, which included summaries of the allegations discussed above, as well as 
numerous other detailed allegations of unprofessional and disrespectful 
communications and behaviors towards students, teachers, staff, parents, guardians, 
and community members. 
75. Effective November 18, 2021, respondent was placed on paid 
administrative leave based upon the allegations described above. Following the 
conclusion of a third-party investigation, respondent was issued a 45-day Notice of 
Unprofessional Conduct and returned to work. 
ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE REGARDING THE 2021-22  SCHOOL YEAR. 
76. Respondent contends that the  termination of his employment 
 him. 
77. Pierce reports that he does not believe that the complaints against 
respondent were coordinated. In support of this opinion, Pierce points to the large 
number of complaints and the fact that they came from students, teachers, staff, and 23 parents. Pierce also denies that his efforts to discipline respondent were motivated by 
, explaining: 
I did, as I stated also, [met and offered] support with Mr. 
Anderson when he brought up the bug infestation and the 
markings on the door and offered him a separate space to 
teach his class, but the purpose of our original informal 
meetings had nothing to do with any of this. It was specific 
around student and parent complaints. 
began 
approximately two months before respondent complained about insects or graffiti and 
included many complaints from students and parents. 
78. 
the whole De Anza community if respondent returned to teach there. He reports that 
 
79. White reports that in his 10 years in education, he never saw so many 
complaints about a teacher as there were against respondent in fall of 2021. 
80. Marlene Trempy reports that she received numerous complaints from 
parents that respondent made demeaning and disrespectful comments towards 
Special Education students. Marlene Trempy reports that she ultimately asked for all of 
negative feedback about respondent. 
81. would be very concerned with 
the safety and the mental health of our students if respondent returned to De Anza 24 because he refuses to collaborate, 
 
2022/23 School Year at Pinole Valley High School 
82. After the 2021/22 school year, respondent was involuntarily transferred 
from De Anza back to Pinole and he taught there through the 2022/23 school year. 
83. Ryan Kolb testified at hearing. Kolb has been the assistant vice principal 
of Pinole for 14 years. He is familiar with respondent as a teacher at Pinole since 2017 
(with the exception of the 2021/22 school year). Kolb reports that there were more 
than five complaints about respondent from students and employees prior to the 
2022/23 school year, but several complaints during the 2022/23 school year, including 
the five complaints alleged in the statement of charges relating to that year. Kolb 
reports that many students refused to provide written statements, but would tell him 
classroom. 
84. Kolb authenticated 11 written statements submitted by Pinole students 
during the 2022/23 school year, each alleging unprofessional conduct by respondent. 
THIRTEENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (USED RACIAL SLURS AND GRABBED A 
PHONE FROM STUDENT S LAP) 
85.  In a written statement dated February 6, 2023, student GPC reported 
that approximately one week earlier respondent used racial slurs 
bag, rice maker, [and] the n word.
was texting a friend, saw respondent walking towards her, put her phone between her 
thighs, and respondent walked up behind her and grabbed the phone, which made her 25 feel uncomfortable. Student GPC also reported that respondent had done the same to 
student S. 
FOURTEENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (GRABBED A PHONE FROM STUDENT S 
LAP) 
86. In a written statement dated February 6, 2023, student S reported that 
grabbed the phone from her. S also reported that a week or two earlier respondent 
student GPC, which made that 
student uncomfortable. 
FIFTEENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (INAPPROPRIATE COMMENTS TO STUDENT 
DA) 
87. In a written statement dated February 6, 2007,1 student DA reported that: 
he asked respondent to release him from class to go to a meeting in the library for a 
special project; respondent  or kid 
like you  could get into such a special project 
and after DA showed respondent a letter documenting the meeting, respondent 
 
 
1 This date is certainly incorrect and the actual year was very likely 2023. 26 SIXTEENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (INAPPROPRIATE COMMENTS TO STUDENT JS 
AND OTHER ACTS) 
88. In a written statement dated February 6, 2023, student JS reported that: 
because of the students and 
 ; 
, and black beautiful sister ; respondent frequently commented on her acne, 
and the acne of other students; and she told him multiple times not to make these 
comments. JS also reported that respondent - slurs in 
class. JS also reported that respondent told her that she was ungrateful because she 
did not care about her shoes. 
SEVENTEENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (INAPPROPRIATE COMMENTS TO STUDENT 
TG AND OTHER ACTS) 
89. In a written statement dated February 6, 2023, student TG reported that 
respondent: frequently made inappropriate comments about 
draw them on 
yourself inappropriate 
computers and cell phones from students with no warning  
EIGHTEENTH ALLEGED INCIDENT (INAPPROPRIATE COMMENTS TO STUDENT 
ELW) 
90. In a written statement dated February 3, 2023, student ELW reported that 
respondent made inappropriate comments about her appearance, including the size of 
her forehead and the color/texture of her skin. ELW reported that respondent stopped 27 her on her way to class, covered his face and acted as if her forehead was blinding 
him, and then said it was ELW also reported that 
,asked a classmate if that student had Vaseline 
(petroleum jelly) for ELW, and stated that ELW needed the Vaseline. ELW also reports 
that on one 
you and Alex [another student -boyfriend] eyeballing each other you guys 
should sit next to each other
finally dating someone you [SIC] own 
feel uncomfortable 
classroom.  
RESPONDENT S EVIDENCE REGARDING THE STUDENT COMPLAINTS AT PINOLE 
91. Respondent reports that he was never interviewed regarding student 
complaints at Pinole. 
92. Respondent is familiar with each of the students who submitted the 
written statements described in Factual Findings 85 through 90. 
93. Respondent denies ever using a racial slur to describe any student. He 
reports teaching lessons about the use of language, including racial slurs. He 
submitted -
addressing her experiences with the 
- and how that experience varied depending on the context of its use. He also 
. Respondent 
explained that a student had complained that he felt pressured to use the n-word 
during class (this complaint is not an allegation in this matter). In the email chain, 
respondent denied pressuring any student to use this term and also provided a 28 lengthy explanation of his teaching on this subject, which appears appropriately 
academic (there is no allegation in this matter that were 
inappropriate). 
94. Respondent admits that he routinely confiscated phones from students 
using them in class, but denies ever talking a phone from  Respondent 
 Respondent opined 
that GPC, S, and TG made these allegations because they were disappointed their 
phones were taken away. 
95. Surprisingly, respondent repeatedly testified that he never has 
conversations with students; he only delivers instructions and responds to inquiries, 
and that he gets to know students through their writing. However, when asked about 
espondent admitted her. Then 
he testified that he did not make with her, but he 
in reference to her doing her own makeup, which he describes as 
skill that she was de and not a joke: 
No, wed talk about observations. I ll make an observation. 
Either she d laugh or she wouldn t, orit wasnt meant as a 
joke. It was an observation of a skill or talent being 
developed by a student, on their own. 
Respondent testified that [y]
he does not know if TG was offended by that statement. 
Later respondent whether she 
 that this is 29 mother would have 
complained to him if TG had been offended. 
96. 
 
97. Respondent denies complimenting students  appearances. Respondent 
, but admits calling her 
.He testified that he does not remember 
her asking him to stop using those terms. Respondent reports that he used these 
terms when a student was in a bad or desperate position, to let the student know the 
 Respondent testified that he remembers this day 
and JS was in tears before he made the comments. 
She was crying. Tears were literally coming out of her eyes. 
She had an incident while walking into my classroom. I 
in tears. I know when students are in emotional turmoil, 
because I know my students. 
And with this student, with whom I share a community of 
practice, this is an inspirational thing been told to me 
and other sisters and brothers that I have spoken with, 
working with, lived with my entire life, within my 
community, which you are not a member, and I shared this 
because she was in a moment of turmoil and crying and in 30 desperation, and it was a source of inspiration. She cleaned 
it up that day. She walked off feeling a whole lot better. 
Respondent testified that this incident occurred in December 2022, and that he was 
not at school on February 6, 2023, the date of most of the written statements at issue. 
98.  
99. Respondent denies any recollection of DA asking to go to a meeting in 
the library, but testified that DA was not on the list of students excused to leave class. 
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS 
100. In  written response, he described Pierce as 
he described 
being as faulty as his commitment to his nuptials.  At hearing, when 
asked if he thought these statements were appropriate, respondent denied that these 
statements were unprofessional and testified they were appropriate because they 
showed that Pierce  lie  
101. At hearing, respondent testified that there is no truth to any of the 
 to anyone. 
Additional Evidence 
102. Owen G. DeVance testified in support of respondent. DeVance has been 
a teacher for approximately 15 years, 10 in the District. Prior to that he was a human 
resources consultant for a large public utility for 30 years. He is a social studies teacher 
and familiar with respondent from their work together at Pinole and De Anza, 
including judging speech contests together. 31 103. DeVance reports that he considers respondent both a colleague and a 
friend. He regards respondent as a dedicated educator who loves his family. DeVance 
did not observe respondent in the classroom, but reports that he observed respondent 
interact with students one night 
that night were all positive. DeVance is not aware of any complaints about respondent, 
but reports that he does not hear students complain about any teachers because his 
students know that gossip about other teachers or students is . 
Ultimate Findings 
104. it was sometimes 
contradictory and implausible.  witnesses appeared sincere and testified 
in a straightforward manner, consistent with other evidence. In each instance where 
 
testimony was less credible.  
202122 SCHOOL YEAR AT DE ANZA HIGH SCHOOL 
105. The evidence shows that it is more likely than not that respondent: 
 threatened student KN with his shoe or sandal (second alleged incident); 
 threw his glasses at student KD (third alleged incident); 
 referred to student DYR as  (fourth 
alleged incident), compared her to a picture of a black water bug, told her 
and also called 
another student (who was of Mexican heritage) ; 32 made a threatening gesture towards George Jackson (finger guns) (sixth 
alleged incident); 
 made unprofessional statements to students (implying that they were dirty) 
ninth alleged incident);  
 wore a De Anza sweatshirt at school, that he had altered with a violent 
image that faculty and staff reasonably interpreted as a threat of violence or 
a statement of hatred for the school, students, or faculty. 
106. The evidence was insufficient to show that respondent: 
 inappropriately touched the head and stroked the hair of student JJF (first 
alleged incident); 
 
Morato from the [class]room for performing her job duties  (fifth alleged 
incident); 
 ngr
related to a payroll issue (seventh alleged incident); 
 hugged and patted the side of student JB about five or six times, causing AB 
to ask him to stop (eighth alleged incident); 
 grabbed a tablet and charger out of student 
incident); or 
 threw a pack of post-it notes at student HS and asked her mother how to 
. 33 2022/23  SCHOOL YEAR AT PINOLE VALLEY HIGH SCHOOL 
107. The evidence shows that it is more likely than not that respondent in 
early 2023: 
 made an inappropriate joke about the cosmetic makeup of student TG 
(seventeenth alleged incident); and 
 called  
(sixteenth alleged incident). 
and in her written 
statement TG characterized 
was not making a joke, but merely 
observation of a skill that she was developing Respondent also 
 testimony that he used those terms with the intention of being 
supportive was credible, even though JS apparently did not welcome these statements. 
108. The evidence was insufficient to show that respondent: 
 used racial slurs in the classroom outside an appropriate educational context 
(thirteenth and sixteenth alleged incidents); 
 g
(thirteenth and fourteenth alleged incidents); 
 made inappropriate comments to student DA, implying DA was not smart 
enough to be part of a Pinole special project (fifteenth alleged incident); or 
 made inappropriate comments to student ELW (eighteenth alleged incident). 34 present any 
students were not available for cross-examination. It is also possible that one or more 
students may have viewed an educationally appropriate discussion of racial slurs in the 
classroom as inappropriate. 
109. The District did not provide evidence of performance evaluations of 
respondent. 
110. by 
credible and supported by the large number of students, parents, staff, and other 
year at Pinole. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. The District bears the burden to prove cause to dismiss respondent. The 
standard of proof is a preponderance of the evidence. (
 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) The Commission 
credibility, in making the factual findings above. These findings reflect a 
preponderance of the evidence. 35 Respondent Received Sufficient Due Process Prior to 
Move to Dismiss Him 
2. Respondent asserts that he should not be terminated because the 
District failed to provide him due process prior to moving for dismissal, based on his 
own testimony that no one from human resources sat down with [him] prior to the 
issuance of the Statement of Charges to discuss their concerns and allegations.  
However, the evidence established that the District secured a third-party investigation 
into the De Anza allegations prior to suspending respondent for 45 days in November 
2021 and provided respondent the right to a hearing in spring 2023. 
Respondent received sufficient due process prior  
First Cause for Dismissal (Immoral Conduct) 
3. Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), a school 
district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for immoral conduct. Courts 
tude 
 
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) (All further statutory citations are to the Education 
Code.) 
4. In 
 ( ) (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337, the Court of Appeal 
held that negative comments about groups of students on social media may be 
sufficient support for a finding of a charge for immoral conduct. There, a school 
 illustrate the 36 economic impact of immigrants in the United States and stated that the cafeteria was
., p. 332.) The Court held that the 
 conduct was immoral because her negative comments about students 
 ., p. 345.) In 
reaching its decision, the Court upheld 
counselor for immoral conduct and evident unfitness for service. ( .) 
5. Respondent threatened to and did throw objects at students; made 
numerous demeaning, or racially or sexually harassing statements to students; 
threatened a staff member; and wore a sweatshirt at school altered with a violent 
image which faculty and staff reasonably interpreted as a threat of violence or a 
statement of hatred for the school, students, or faculty. (Factual Findings 105 & 107.) 
R misconduct continued after Pierce and White met with him and gave 
him a written warning. (Factual Finding 64, 71, 72, & 107.)  actions were 
the 
guidance counselor in . These actions constitute immoral conduct under 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 
Second Cause for Dismissal (Unprofessional Conduct) 
6. Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), a school district may 
dismiss a permanent certificated employee for unprofessional conduct. The term 
, but the California 
Supreme Court has held the term may be construed consistent with common usage as 
conduct that 
is unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.  (  (1953) 41 
Cal.2d 546, 553 [overruled on other grounds].) 37 unprofessional under section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). (Factual Findings 105 & 107, 
see Legal Conclusion 5.) 
Third Alleged Cause for Dismissal (Unsatisfactory Performance) 
7. Pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), a school district may 
dismiss a permanent certificated employee for unsatisfactory performance. 
8. Sections 44660 through 44665 set forth the requirements for evaluating 
certificated employees. Section 44662, in relevant part, provides: 
(b) The governing board of each school district shall 
evaluate and assess certificated employee performance as it 
reasonably relates to: 
(1) The progress of pupils toward the standards established 
pursuant to subdivision (a) and, if applicable, the state 
adopted academic content standards as measured by state 
adopted criterion referenced assessments. 
(2) The instructional techniques and strategies used by the 
employee. 
(3)  
(4) The establishment and maintenance of a suitable 
responsibilities. 38 9. Section 44664, in relevant part, provides:
(b) The evaluation shall include recommendations, if 
necessary, as to areas of improvement in the performance 
of the employee. If an employee is not performing his or 
her duties in a satisfactory manner according to the 
standards prescribed by the governing board, the 
employing authority shall notify the employee in writing of 
that fact and describe the unsatisfactory performance. The 
employing authority shall thereafter confer with the 
employee making specific recommendations as to areas of 
to assist the employee in his or her performance. If any 
permanent certificated employee has received an 
unsatisfactory evaluation, the employing authority shall 
annually evaluate the employee until the employee achieves 
a positive evaluation or is separated from the district. 
10. Before a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee 
for unsatisfactory performance, it must comply with section 44938, subdivision (b), 
which, in relevant part, provides: 
(1) At least 90 calendar days prior to the date of the filing, 
the board or its authorized representative has given the 
employee against whom the charge is filed, written notice 
of the unsatisfactory performance, specifying the nature 
thereof with such specific instances of behavior and with 
such particularity as to furnish the employee an opportunity 39 to correct his or her faults and overcome the grounds for 
the charge. The written notice shall include the evaluation 
made pursuant to Article 11 (commencing with Section 
44660) of Chapter 3, if applicable to the employee. 
11. The District did not provide evidence of unsatisfactory performance 
evaluations (Factual Finding 109) and does not argue or point to any evidence to show 
that it proved cause to dismiss respondent on this basis. Cause does not exist to 
dismiss respondent from employment for unsatisfactory performance under section 
44932, subdivision (a)(5). 
Fourth Cause for Dismissal (Evident Unfitness for Service) 
12. A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 
Evident unfitness for service 
 ( ) (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
presumably not 
at p. 1444 ) Such evident unfitness 
may exist, for example, when a teacher is repeatedly and incurably insubordinate, or is 
incapable of maintaining cordial, cooperative, and professional relationships with 
colleagues. ( ., at pp. 1436-1440.)  
Unprofessional conduct  is, as it were, often a lesser 
included form of proscribed behavior within evident 
unfitness for service.  Thus, conduct constituting evident 40 unfitness for service will often constitute unprofessional 
conduct.  But the converse is not true. Evident unfitness for 
service requires that unfitness for service be attributable to 
a defect in temperament a requirement not necessary for 
a finding of unprofessional conduct.  
( at p. 1445.) 
13. As discussed in Legal Conclusions 5, respondent committed numerous 
acts of unprofessional conduct, even after formal counseling to cease. At hearing, 
even a single instance 
of wrongdoing. He appears to be incapable of maintaining cordial, cooperative, and 
professional relationships with colleagues or many of his students. Respondent is 
evidently unfit for service as a teacher under section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). (See 
2 Cal.App.4th at 1429, 1444.) 
Fifth Cause for Termination (Persistent Violation of or Refusal to 
Obey Applicable Laws or Regulations) 
14. A school district may dismiss a teacher who engages in a persistent 
violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 
or by the governing board of the school district. ( 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Such violations 
by 
 (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) 
The willful refusal of a teacher to obey the reasonable rules and regulations of the 
employing board of education is insubordination. (
 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, overruled on other grounds by 41 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575.) However, a contentious debate between a 
teacher and principal about teaching objectives, even where the teacher repeatedly 
process, is not cause to dismiss a teacher for persistent violation. (
 (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317, 321.) Nor is a 
single violation of a school board s rules, by itself, cause for dismissal under this 
section. (  (1972) 104 Cal.Rptr. 64.) 
15. Without further specificity or explanation, respondent cites  
() (2009) 177 
Cal.App.4th 1379, and argues that show willful refusal the District must show direct 
insubordination. No such rule is apparent in the statute, , or any of the cases 
cited in Legal Conclusion 14. 
16. misconduct was a detriment to the integrity and goals of 
the District, demonstrated disrespect to students and staff members, and the Altered 
Sweatshirt , and 
professional standards, positive 
school climate, and dress and grooming policies set forth in Factual Findings 10 
through 12. Respondent engaged in a persistent violation of or refusal to obey District 
policies under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 
Analysis of the  Factors 
17. The ultimate question is whether respondent is unfit to teach under the 
factors established by the California Supreme Court in 
 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230. The  factors are: (1) the likelihood 
that the conduct in question may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, 42 and the degree of such adversity anticipated; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time 
of the conduct; (3) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the 
likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to which 
disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. Only the pertinent 
factors must be addressed. (
 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) The factors may be applied to all of the 
proven conduct in the aggregate. ( , 2 
Cal.App.4th at pp. 1456-1457.) 
18. In this case, application of the pertinent Morrison factors demonstrates 
that respondent is unfit to teach. 
 severe adverse effect on several students, 
teachers, and staff members, as reported under oath by students DYR and KD, 
administrators Pierce and White, staff members Jackson and Fletcher, and teachers 
Marlene and Kathleen Trempy. 
 . 
 Aggravating factors include the large number of acts of wrongdoing, the 
continued misconduct after receiving oral and written counseling to cease, and 
respondent  refusal to admit he committed almost all of these acts or acknowledge 
any wrongfulness of the acts. A mitigating factor is 
years of teaching without adverse action. 43 is nothing 
plausibly praiseworthy about his motives for the various wrongful acts, each of which 
involved hurtful words or behavior to a student, teacher, or staff member. 
 Because respondent refuses to acknowledge any wrongdoing, he 
demonstrated no remorse or rehabilitation and the likelihood that he would repeat the 
same or similar misconduct is very high. 
 No constitutional rights are implicated by this disciplinary action. 
Disposition 
19. The Commission on Professional Competence concludes that cause exists 
to dismiss respondent based on immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, evident 
unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey school policies 
under section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (2), (6), and (8). Cause was not established to 
dismiss respondent for unsatisfactory performance under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(5). The Commission reached this decision on a unanimous vote. Each ground for 
dismissal provides a . 
  44ORDER
Respondent Kendricks Anderson is dismissed from his position as a permanent 
certificated employee of the West Contra Costa Unified School District.
DATE:
MICHAEL C. STARKEY
Commission Member
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
DATE:
DATE:ERIN C. MORAN
Commission Member
MARINA MAE AMADOR
Commission Member
