BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE  
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
ONTARIO-MONTCLAIR SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

MARIO JAUREGUI, Respondent 

OAH No. 2023010420 

DECISION 

This matter was heard before the Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) by videoconference on May 15, 2023. The Commission is comprised of 

the following members: Michael Curtis, Jeremy Perez, and Abraham M. Levy, 

Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California, who 

presided over the matter. 

Beverly A. Ozowara, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

represented the Ontario-Montclair School District (District). 

Mario Jauregui, respondent, appeared on his own behalf. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The hearing record was closed, 

and after the Commission completed its deliberations, the matter was submitted for 

decision on June 2, 2023. 

SUMMARY  

The District seeks to dismiss respondent for specific instances of unprofessional 

conduct between January 2022 and October 2022. After reviewing the evidence of 

record and applicable sections of the Education Code and District policy, the 

Commission finds that the District proved that respondent engaged in unprofessional 

conduct under the Education Code and District policy, respondent persistently violated 

District Board policy, failed to adequately perform his duties as a teacher, and is 

evidently unfit for service as a teacher. After applying the “Morrison” factors,1 the 

District’s decision to dismiss respondent is affirmed. 

FINDINGS OF FACT  

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Hector Macias, Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources, signed the 

Statement of Charges on November 30, 2022, in his official capacity.  

2. 

The District alleges that respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct 

pursuant to Education Code section 44932,2 subdivision (a)(2); unsatisfactorily 

performed his duties as a teacher pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(5); is 

evidently unfit for service as a teacher pursuant to 44932, subdivision (a)(6); and 

engaged in persistent violations or refusal to obey regulations and district polices 

1 Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. 

2 Subsequent references are to Education Code unless otherwise stated. 

2 

 
pursuant to section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). The District additionally alleges that 

respondent’s conduct violated Board Policy 4119.21. This policy directs district 

employees to “maintain the highest ethical standards, behave professionally, follow 

district policies and regulations, abide by state and federal laws and exercise good 

judgment when interacting with students and other members of the school 

community . . . “ and “engage in conduct that enhances the integrity of the district, 

advances the goals of the district's educational programs, and contributes to a positive 

school climate.” (Ontario-Montclair School District Board Policy, § 4119.21.)  

3. 

The factual assertions in the statement of charges are detailed below.  

4. 

On January 12, 2023, respondent timely filed a request for hearing and 

notice of defense, and this hearing followed. At the hearing respondent did not 

dispute the assertions in the statement of charges, and did not present evidence on 

his behalf.  

The District’s In Limine Motion to Preclude Respondent from 

Presenting Evidence on his Behalf 

5. 

The District filed a motion in limine to preclude respondent from 

presenting evidence on his behalf, including his testimony, because he did not comply 

with the disclosure requirements under section 44944.05. The District’s motion was 

heard at the start of the hearing and granted in part. Respondent was precluded from 

presenting evidence on his behalf because he did not comply with section 44944.05. 

Respondent, however, was permitted to testify. As noted immediately above, 

respondent elected to not testify.  

3 

Respondent’s Teaching History with the District  

6. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District and is 

employed as a Special Education - Special Day Class Teacher. His job duties require 

him to provide instruction through sound instructional planning, programming, and 

teaching methods and strategies for students with learning disabilities. (See Exhibit 5, 

Job Description for Teacher Special Education: Special Day Class.) Since 2020 he has 

also worked in different locations at the District, including work as a substitute teacher.  

7. 

Since 2020, respondent has been repeatedly counseled regarding 

problems with his teaching and instructional performance, and his professionalism. He 

has been provided with assistance plans to improve his scheduling and interaction 

with staff. On November 19, 2020, the District issued respondent a letter of reprimand 

due to his failure to attend coaching sessions, failure to follow scheduled instruction 

during parent conference week, missing a scheduled data meeting with the site 

administrator, and being disrespectful and unprofessional towards another teacher. 

Respondent was issued a second letter of reprimand on January 8, 2021, for missing a 

coaching session, failing to have lesson plans to ensure students meet their 

Individualized Education Plan goals, lacking professionalism in his communications 

with staff, and failing to submit lesson plans. 

8. 

On April 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, 2021, respondent failed to report to work. His 

absences were marked as “unexcused,” and he was placed on “unpaid status.” On April 

12, 2021, the District sent respondent a “Second Notice” indicating the District has 

begun the job abandonment process against him due to his unexcused absences. The 

District previously sent respondent a letter on April 7, 2021, regarding his absences on 

April 2, 5 and 6, 2021. The letter noted that he did not respond to calls from the school 

or email sent to him.  

4 

9. 

On April 15, 2021, the District issued respondent a Notice of 

Unprofessional Performance and Unprofessional Conduct for his behavior. Respondent 

was placed on a 90-day review period and directed to improve his performance and 

overall professionalism. Among these directives, he was expected to work the 

minimum number of hours required per the Ontario-Montclair Teachers Association 

Contract.  

10.  On December 15, 2021, the District issued to respondent a second Notice 

of Unprofessional Performance and Unprofessional Conduct because he did not make 

substantial improvements in his performance and professionalism during the 90-day 

review period from the first notice. The Notice further identified specific instances of 

unprofessional conduct: respondent was found asleep at his desk on August 31, 2021, 

and November 9, 2021, two of his students went to another classroom unsupervised, 

and he failed to follow lesson plans. He was directed to improve his performance, 

prepare lesson plans in advance, and work the minimum number of hours required per 

the Ontario-Montclair Teachers Association Contract.  

Factual Bases of the District’s Action as Detailed in the Suspension 

Charges 

11. 

The reasons to dismiss respondent based on his conduct are detailed in 

the statement of charges. This conduct occurred between January 2022 and October 

28, 2022. Respondent, it is again noted, does not dispute that he engaged in this 

conduct. He did not offer a response, or argument, to the charges, though he was 

given the opportunity to testify at the hearing but declined the opportunity.  

12. 

The District established the factual bases of respondent’s conduct as 

detailed in the statement of charges from the following evidence of record: the 

5 

testimony of Mr. Macias, Jessica Perry, Principal at Lincoln Elementary School (Lincoln), 

Robert Gallagher, Executive Director of Human Resources, and the following 

documents which were received as evidence: The affidavits of James Cameron, a 

kindergarten teacher at Hawthorne Elementary (Hawthorne) where respondent worked 

as a substitute teacher; Celeste Saldana, an attendance technician at De Anza Middle 

School (De Anza); Anthony Fernandez, a teacher at Lincoln; Veronica Chavez, a special 

needs program assistant at Lincoln; Fabiola Agustin, a special needs program assistant 

at Lincoln; Jennifer Chavez, a teacher on assignment at De Anza; Willie Johnson, a 

coordinator for Think Together, an organization that partners with school districts to 

provide extended learning opportunities for underprivileged children; and Kathryn 

Bartosh, a principal at Berlyn Elementary School, where respondent worked in 2020 

and 2021 as a Special Education - Special Day Class Teacher. In addition, the following 

documentary evidence was admitted: statements from Veronica Chavez, Fabiola 

Agustin, Anthony Fernandez, Maria Luisa Silverstre, Special Needs Program Assistant; 

an email from Jessica Perry, Principal at Lincoln; a conference summary dated January 

23, 2020, from Ms. Perry and signed by her and respondent; an assistance plan dated 

January 23, 2020, from Ms. Perry signed and dated January 23, 2020; a handwritten 

note from a Ms. Rodriguez dated January 21, 2020; a statement from Ms. Silverstre 

dated January 21, 2020; an unsigned statement regarding the January 21, 2020, 

incident; another unsigned statement regarding the January 21, 2020, incident; and an 

email statement from Lauren Goodman, a special education teacher, regarding a 

March 9, 2022, incident. In addition, letters of reprimand dated November 19, 2020, 

and January 8, 2021, and Notices of Unprofessional Conduct issued to respondent on 

April 15, 2021, and December 1, 2021, were received as evidence.  

In summary, this evidence showed the following:  

6 

Specific Instances of Respondent’s Conduct 

RESPONDENT’S ABSENCE WITHOUT APPROVED LEAVE 

13. 

From January 13 to January 28, 2022, respondent was absent without 

approved leave as a teacher at the District. To obtain approved leave, respondent was 

required to follow the Ontario-Montclair Teachers Association Collective Bargaining 

Agreement, Article XIII, Leaves of Absence, B(2). This section states as follows:  

Unit member shall submit notice of the need for personal 

necessity leave to the immediate supervisor at least two (2) 

days prior to the beginning date of the leave, except where 

extenuating circumstances make this impossible. . . all unit 

members taking personal necessity leave must sign a 

Petition for Leave . . .  

14. 

Respondent failed to follow these steps to obtain approved leave. His 

failure to inform administrators in advance of his unapproved leave impeded their 

ability to request and acquire a substitute teacher to fulfill his daily duties with 

students.  

15. 

Respondent, further, failed to submit appropriate leave forms, and he 

violated District rules and procedures and directives the District issued to respondent 

in the April 15, 2021, and December 1, 2021, notices of unprofessional conduct. He 

was specifically directed in the notices to work the minimum hours and days per the 

Collective Bargaining Agreement.  

7 

FAILURE TO TIMELY RETRIEVE STUDENTS FROM BREAKFAST TABLES  

16. 

As part of his duties, respondent was required to timely retrieve students 

at the breakfast tables. On February 23, 2022, respondent failed to go to the breakfast 

tables to retrieve another teacher’s class at the 8:30 a.m. expected time for him to 

retrieve the students. Instead of retrieving the students at 8:30 a.m., he retrieved them 

around 8:40 or 8:45 a.m. Further, when he retrieved them, he did not engage with the 

students or support the other teacher.  

FAILURE TO ADEQUATELY SUPERVISE STUDENTS ON MARCH 1, 2022 

17.  On March 1, 2022, respondent accompanied a group of students and was 

walking a few steps in front of them. He failed to notice that one student, who needed 

supervision, tripped and fell when walking in the grass. A teacher from another class 

had to come to help and support the student while respondent continued walking 

without noticing that the student fell.  

FAILURE TO BRING STUDENTS INTO CLASSROOM FOR INSTRUCTION  

18.  On March 9, 2022, at 8:55 a.m., at the breakfast tables, after the students 

had finished their breakfast, with instructional aides waiting for his direction, 

respondent failed to bring his class inside for classroom instruction. Principal Perry saw 

the students sitting idly at the tables and went outside. She asked respondent why his 

class was not inside for instruction. He told Principal Perry he was waiting for 

directions, even though he had access to lesson plans inside the classroom.  

FAILURE TO ADEQUATELY SUPERVISE STUDENTS ON MARCH 9, 2022 

19. 

Also on March 9, 2022, respondent left the classroom with a student who 

needed to use the restroom and walked the student only partially to the restroom. This 

8 

student in his class needed help to go to the restroom and could not go to the 

restroom on their own. Classroom aides reminded respondent of this. Nonetheless, 

respondent only pointed the student to the restroom and walked back to class. A 

teacher later that day found another one of respondent’s students from his class in the 

hallway alone.  

FAILURE TO ADEQUATELY SUPERVISE STUDENTS ON APRIL 27, 2022 

20.  On April 27, 2022, respondent was serving as a substitute teacher at 

Hawthorne kindergarten class. During instructional time, multiple students pulled 

down their pants and took pictures with their iPad of their buttocks while respondent 

was supposedly supervising them. He then failed to notify site administrators of the 

incident. Respondent, further, did not attend multiple meetings with Human Resources 

to discuss the incident. As a result of the incident, administrators spent significant time 

reacting to parent concerns about the lack of supervision of their children.  

ABSENCES WITHOUT APPROVED LEAVE AT START OF THE 2022/2023 

SCHOOL YEAR 

21.  On three consecutive days, August 5, 8, and 9, 2022, at the start of the 

2022-2023 school year, and without prior notification, authorization, or appropriate 

leave requests filed with the District, respondent failed to report to work. He was 

listed as a “no-call no show.” His absences were marked as unexcused, and he was 

placed on unpaid leave. In a letter dated August 9, 2022, the District advised 

respondent that he had abandoned his job without approved leave. When asked about 

the absences, respondent stated, “Can we go onto the next topic?” Respondent said 

this in a meeting with Mr. Gallagher on August 15, 2022.  

9 

RESPONDENT’S INTERACTION WITH HEAD OF HUMAN RESOURCES ON 

AUGUST 12, 2022 

22.  On August 12, 2022, Mr. Gallagher approached respondent in the 

parking lot and asked him multiple times to sign an absence slip. Instead of signing, 

respondent refused to speak to or acknowledge Mr. Gallagher, and walked away from 

him. When Mr. Gallagher approached respondent, while respondent was in his car, 

respondent did not roll down his window and moved his car in an aggressive manner 

to keep Mr. Gallagher from approaching. When asked about the incident three days 

later, respondent said he didn’t remember the incident.  

RESPONDENT ALLOWED STUDENTS TO PLAY VIDEO GAMES ON OCTOBER 13, 

2022 

23.  On October 13, 2022, respondent allowed students to play video games 

on the computer instead of utilizing lesson plans to instruct students.  

RESPONDENT ENGAGED IN DISRESPECTFUL BEHAVIOR WITH STAFF AT DE 

ANZA MIDDLE SCHOOL  

24.  On multiple occasions, when he worked at De Anza Middle School on 

assignment, respondent engaged in the following disrespectful, inappropriate and 

unprofessional behavior:  

•  He “flipped off,” or raised his middle finger, to Mr. Johnson, the Think 

Together Site Coordinator, and the School Custodian;  

•  He spoke loudly and threw paperwork at the school’s attendance 

technician while she was on the phone with a parent;  

10 

•  He did not properly return keys to school staff, but gave the keys to 

another teacher after he refused to open a classroom for a student who 

needed to get his or her personal items;  

•  He refused to follow teachers' lesson plans, even when students asked 

what work had been assigned;  

•  He sent a student to the office twice after the front office told him that 

no one was at the school to pick up the student;  

•  He walked off the campus after office staff members and ancillary staff 

called for him to return to complete his shift and finish the daily 

substitute exit process. 

25. 

Respondent did not provide evidence on his own behalf. At the hearing 

he was given the chance to testify and chose not to do so.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Education Code Sections  

1. 

Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for imposing 

discipline against a permanent employee. Pursuant to Subdivision (a)(2), a permanent 

employee may be disciplined for unprofessional conduct; under Subdivision (a)(5), for 

unsatisfactory performance; under Subdivision (a)(6) for evident unfitness for service; 

and under Subdivision (a)(8), a permanent employee may be disciplined for persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the 

governing board of the school district employing him or District polices. 

11 

2. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means, “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Comm’n on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term “connotes a fixed character 

trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) The court held that the 

Morrison factors “must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the 

cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.” (Id. p. 1445.) As the court in Woodland 

explained, “[i]f the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether 

the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in 

temperament.” (Ibid.) 

3. 

Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the 

process for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and 

sets forth the Commissions’ authority regarding its decision. 

4. 

Education Code sections 44934 and 44938 outline the procedures the 

District must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent 

employee. (Education Code, §§ 44934 and 44938.) 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

5. 

The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, to convince the 

trier of fact that the existence of a fact sought to be proved is more probable than its 

nonexistence. (Redevelopment Agency v. Norm’s Slauson (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 

1128.) The District has the burden of proof to establish cause to dismiss its employee. 

6. 

The standard of proof in a teacher disciplinary proceeding is a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence 

12 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) A preponderance of the evidence means that 

the evidence on one side of an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than, 

the evidence on the other side of the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or 

quantity, but in the convincing effect the evidence has on those to whom it is 

addressed. In other words, the term refers to evidence that has more convincing force 

than that opposed to it. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 

Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

Relevant Judicial Authority 

7. 

The seminal case for teacher dismissals is Morrison v. State Board of 

Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. There the Supreme Court held that where persistent 

refusal to obey regulations or polices is raised in teacher dismissal cases, the 

applicable standard is whether the person is fit to teach. The factors outlined in 

Morrison must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited 

conduct indicates unfitness for service. (Id. at p.229.) 

8. 

A violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(2), (a)(5), 

and (a)(8), must be established by reference to the Morrison factors. If unfitness to 

teach is shown, then the District must further establish that the employee’s refusal to 

follow the laws or regulations was “persistent,” i.e., “stubborn and continuing.” (San 

Dieguito Union High School District v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 

174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) Isolated incidents or incidents involving an issue 

unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered “persistent.” (Bourland 

v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) 

9. 

The word “persistent” is defined by lexicographers as “refusing to relent; 

continuing, especially in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; persevering . . . constantly 

13 

repeated.” (Governing Board of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 

Cal.App.3d 77, 82.) Education Code section 44932, subdivision (8), pertains to 

unintentional as well as intentional transgressions, and hence the Legislature has 

decreed that a single violation is not sufficient to warrant dismissal, apparently to 

allow for correction; “it is the persistent disregard” of school rules that the subdivision 

is designed to regulate. (Id. at p.84.) 

Morrison Factors 

10. 

In Morrison, supra, the Supreme Court suggested seven factors to 

consider when evaluating whether the school employee should be dismissed: (1) the 

likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the 

degree of such adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) 

the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the existence of extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the 

likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent that the 

discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 

the teacher. 

11. 

The Morrison factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate. 

When a camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load 

to see which one could have done the deed. A trier of fact is entitled to consider the 

totality of the offensive conduct. (Woodland, supra, pps.1456-1457.) Only the pertinent 

Morrison factors need to be analyzed. (Broney v. California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.) 

14 

Other Disciplinary Considerations 

12. 

An administrator’s loss of confidence in the educator and doubt 

regarding the educator’s ability to serve as a role model for students are factors that 

may be considered. (San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.) 

Evaluation of the Charges and Disposition 

13. 

The Commission finds that the preponderance of the evidence has 

established that respondent repeatedly and persistently violated District policy and/or 

refused to obey this policy, his performance as a teacher was unsatisfactory, and he 

engaged in unprofessional conduct. As found above, respondent was absent without 

leave for 12 days, from January 13 to 28, 2022, and at the start of the 2022/2023 

school year on August 5, 8, and 9, 2022, despite being directed in notices of 

unprofessional conduct issued to him on April 15, 2021, and December 1, 2021, to 

work the hours required under the teachers’ association contract with the District. 

Respondent further failed to adequately supervise students on multiple occasions 

leaving students unsupervised, which threatened their well-being and safety, with one 

student falling on the campus without respondent noticing, and another student 

found wandering the halls of the school. As an indication of the degree of his failure to 

supervise students adequately, while he was responsible for the supervision of 

kindergarten students, students took photos of their buttocks in class. He then 

compounded his failure by not informing site administrators of their behavior. In 

addition, respondent did not timely pick up students from the breakfast tables, did not 

timely bring students inside the classroom for instruction until reminded to do so, and 

did not engage students. Respondent, also, was unprofessional with colleagues and 

staff at De Anza Elementary School, and he acted unprofessionally towards Mr. 

15 

Gallagher, Director of Human Resources, when Mr. Gallagher tried to communicate 

with him regarding an absence slip he wanted respondent to complete. Respondent, 

overall, did not satisfactorily perform his duties as a teacher.  

14. 

After giving due consideration to the appliable “Morrison” factors, the 

Commission finds that respondent’s dismissal is warranted. Respondent is evidently 

unfit for service as a teacher due to his lack of basic organizational and effective 

communication skills, and his temperament; and his conduct adversely affected 

students and teachers and the District’s educational mission due to his unexcused 

absences, his inability to adequately supervise students, and his ineffective and 

unprofessional communication with colleagues, administrators, and supervisors. 

Additionally, it is likely respondent would engage in the same conduct if he were to 

remain employed at the District.  

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

16 

ORDER 

The determination of the Board of the Ontario-Montclair School District in the 

Statement of Charges to dismiss respondent Mario Jauregui is upheld. Respondent 

Mario Jauregui is dismissed as a permanent certificated employee of the Ontario-

Montclair School District. 

DATE:  

DATE: 

DATE: 

MICHAEL CURTIS 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

JEREMY PEREZ 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

ABRAHAM M. LEVY 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional Competence 

17 

Michael Curtis (Jun 6, 2023 13:55 PDT)06/06/2023Jeremy Perez (Jun 6, 2023 13:59 PDT)Jeremy Perez06/06/2023Abraham M. Levy (Jun 6, 2023 14:02 PDT)06/06/2023 
