BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
MARYSVILLE JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

KAREN MCNAY, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent 

OAH No. 2023010490 

DECISION 

This matter was heard before a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) for the Marysville Joint Unified School District (District) on June 6 

through 9, 13, and 15, 2023. The Commission included Christine Alberg, Luciano Ortiz, 

and Matthew S. Block, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

presiding from Sacramento. 

Ethan T. Retan, attorney at Kingsley Bogard, LLP, represented the District. 

Matthew Chevedden, attorney at Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 

Chevedden LLP, represented Karen McNay (respondent), who was present throughout 

the hearing. 

Evidence was received and the record closed on June 15, 2023. The matter was 

submitted for decision when the Commission concluded its deliberations on June 23, 

2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. She 

teaches third grade at Johnson Park Elementary (JPE) School in Olivehurst, California. 

2. 

On September 1, 2022, respondent was placed on unpaid leave following 

an incident between respondent and one of her students that occurred on August 29, 

2022. On October 24, 2022, District Superintendent Gabe Simon signed the Statement 

of Charges recommending termination of respondent’s employment with the District 

on the basis of: (1) immoral conduct; (2) unprofessional conduct; (3) dishonesty; (4) 

unsatisfactory performance; (5) evident unfitness for service; and (6) persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or the reasonable 

regulations of the State Board of Education or the District. 

3. 

On December 13, 2022, respondent was served with a Notice of 

Immediate Suspension and Intent to Dismiss. Respondent timely filed a request for 

hearing and this hearing followed. 

District’s Evidence 

4. 

Respondent has worked for the District for 17 years, the last three of 

which have been at JPE. She is one of two third grade teachers. Her direct supervisor is 

Principal Tracy Pomeroy, who testified at hearing. 

2 

5. 

Emily McKinnon teaches sixth grade at JPE. She and respondent have 

been friends for several years, and it was Ms. McKinnon who encouraged respondent 

to apply for a teaching position at JPE. However, in early 2021, their relationship 

temporarily soured over differences in opinion regarding the job performance of Ms. 

Pomeroy and other JPE administrative staff members. Eventually, Ms. McKinnon 

“unfriended” respondent on Facebook. 

6. 

On the morning of March 9, 2021, Ms. McKinnon was working in her 

classroom. Respondent entered the room, and in a loud and threatening tone, said, 

“Hey, it’s on!” She then turned and quickly walked away. Ms. Pomeroy observed the 

incident from afar and spoke with Ms. McKinnon about what occurred. Ms. McKinnon 

did not know what respondent was talking about and was unable to ask before 

respondent walked out of the room. She subsequently filed a formal complaint and 

requested a meeting with respondent and Ms. Pomeroy to discuss the situation. 

7. 

Ms. Pomeroy also spoke with respondent about what she observed. 

Respondent admitted making the comment. She told Ms. Pomeroy that if Ms. 

McKinnon tried to get her in trouble, she would lie and say that she was showing 

support for the Marysville Unified Teacher’s Association (MUTA) and pointed to the 

MUTA shirt that she was wearing at the time she made the comment. When she met 

with Ms. McKinnon and Ms. Pomeroy, respondent did say she intended to show 

support for the union and apologized to Ms. McKinnon for the misunderstanding. 

8. 

At approximately 10:40 a.m. on August 25, 2021, Ms. Pomeroy went to 

respondent’s classroom after respondent asked for someone to relieve her. When Ms. 

Pomeroy got to the classroom, respondent met her at the door crying and said she 

was going to have to take a leave of absence due to stress. She expressed frustration 

3 

at the fact that she had 28 students in her class. Ms. Pomeroy stayed in the class with 

respondent’s students for several minutes to allow respondent to compose herself. 

9. 

Later that day, Ms. Pomeroy met with the first, second, and third grade 

teachers to discuss class sizes for the 2021/2022 school year. JPE enrollment was 

higher than in previous years, and each first and third grade class had 28 students. The 

purpose of the meeting was to discuss which grade would receive an additional 

assigned teacher. 

10. 

At the beginning of the meeting, respondent said that she was going to 

file a grievance if her class size was not reduced to 24 students by the following day. 

Ms. Pomeroy explained that pursuant to the District’s Collective Bargaining 

Agreement, each class could have up to 32 students. Respondent told Ms. Pomeroy 

the meeting was only a “show,” and that she knew Ms. Pomeroy had no intention of 

reducing third-grade class sizes. She then angrily walked out of the meeting. 

11. 

C.L. is a JPE student who was in respondent’s class during the 2021/2022 

school year. C.L. read well below the third-grade level. She had an individualized 

education plan (IEP) and received special education services through the JPE resource 

specialist program (RSP) in addition to her primary classroom education. Lunden 

Duenas was employed as a special education teacher in the RSP from 2020 through 

2022 and testified at hearing. As part of C.L.’s IEP, she received individualized 

instruction in Ms. Duenas’s classroom at various times during the school week. 

12. 

To reward her students for staying on task, Ms. Duenas initiated an 

incentive program known as “Fun Fridays,” where the students were allowed to 

participate in art projects and other fun activities if they completed their schoolwork as 

instructed during the week. Respondent refused to let C.L. participate in “Fun Fridays” 

4 

on multiple occasions because she did not approve of the students doing art projects 

as opposed to working to improve their reading abilities. Respondent was the only JPE 

teacher who did not allow her RSP students to participate in “Fun Fridays.” 

13. 

Respondent frequently yelled at C.L. during the 2021/2022 school year 

and complained that she did not feel supported by C.L.’s parents. On several occasions 

when Ms. Duenas went to pick up C.L. from respondent’s classroom, she found C.L. 

sitting in the back of the class facing the rear wall. Shelby Miller worked in 

respondent’s classroom as a paraeducator from October 2021 through January 2022. 

Ms. Miller testified at hearing. She spent approximately three hours every morning in 

respondent’s classroom and observed multiple interactions between respondent and 

C.L. Respondent was always very stern with C.L., and she frequently isolated C.L. from 

other students by making her turn her desk around and face the rear wall as a form of 

discipline. 

14.  During an afternoon recess in late October 2021, Ms. Pomeroy and JPE 

Outreach Consultant (ORC) Yesenia Cachu Rio observed respondent screaming at C.L. 

because she tried to get a drink of water from a drinking fountain. It was a warm day, 

and Ms. Pomeroy told respondent that she could not refuse water to a student. 

Respondent began to cry and accused Ms. Pomeroy of undermining her authority as a 

teacher. Ms. Cachu Rios encouraged respondent to take a “breather,” and Ms. 

Pomeroy took the students back to the classroom. 

15.  M.C. was a JPE student who started the 2021/2022 school year in 

respondent’s class. On November 1, 2021, respondent administered an exam to the 

class. When M.C. performed poorly on the exam, respondent told him that he needs to 

read more at home in front of the entire class. M.C. went home crying, which 

prompted his mother to contact the school. 

5 

16. 

Carol Wood worked as an attendance clerk and office secretary at JPE 

from 2014 through 2022 and testified at hearing. She answered the call from M.C.’s 

mother and transferred it to Ms. Pomeroy at the mother’s request. When respondent 

heard about the phone call, she became angry that M.C.’s mother was allowed to 

speak to Ms. Pomeroy without first speaking to respondent. After learning that M.C. 

was transferring to a different school because of the incident, respondent wrote an 

email to Ms. Pomeroy and Ms. Wood, which stated, in pertinent part: 

It is unfortunate that mom was not directed to speak to me 

first. When mom and I were messaging back and forth last 

night, I thought we had worked things out. Apparently, I 

underestimated the damage that was done when she 

bypassed speaking with me first. I fear that [M.C.] will now 

have to wait that much longer to get the help he needs. 

This situation breaks my heart on many levels. 

17.  On November 30, 2021, respondent contacted the office and spoke to 

Ms. Wood about an absent student. During the conversation, respondent told Ms. 

Wood that she was too nice to parents and directed her not to allow the parents of 

her students to speak with Ms. Pomeroy unless they have spoken with her first. She 

told Ms. Wood that M.C.’s life was ruined because his mother spoke with Ms. Pomeroy 

before speaking with respondent. She also complained that nobody at JPE did their 

job and said that “wrath” is going to come down on the school. 

18.  On December 3, 2021, Ms. Wood called respondent and asked her to 

send a student to the office with his backpack because his sister needed to speak with 

him. Respondent became frustrated because the phone call interrupted her teaching 

and refused to send the student to the office until Ms. Wood gave her a reason for the 

6 

request. When Ms. Wood told respondent the student’s sister had locked herself out 

of their home and needed to use his key, respondent sent the student to the office but 

without his backpack. The student was sent back to respondent’s classroom to retrieve 

the backpack, which interrupted the class a second time. 

19.  During the 2021/2022 school year, K.D. was a student in the other JPE 

third grade class. K.D. struggled with behavioral issues and was physically aggressive 

toward other students. It was not uncommon for his teacher, Jeff Ahlberg, to send K.D. 

to respondent’s classroom as a disciplinary measure. 

20. 

Respondent was not at school on December 6, 2021. When she returned 

on December 7, 2021, she was told that K.D. choked C.L. on the playground the day 

before. Despite having no personal knowledge of what had occurred, she approached 

K.D. in the school office, pointed her finger in his face, and threateningly said, “don’t 

you ever lay a finger on one of my students.” This occurred in front of school secretary 

Angie Buckland, who testified at hearing. According to Ms. Buckland, respondent’s 

face was very close to K.D.’s face when she made the comment and K.D. appeared 

scared. It was later determined that K.D. had not choked C.L. the day before, that the 

students were playing a game, and that C.L. was the one who initiated the game. 

21.  On certain Friday mornings, JPE students gather outside as a student 

body to say the Pledge of Allegiance and sing the school fight song. One such 

occasion was December 10, 2021. On that day, the parent of A.C., one of respondent’s 

students, came to school to retrieve A.C.’s math book because he was home sick. Ms. 

Wood approached respondent to get the book because the parent was waiting in the 

office. When she did, respondent held her hand up in Ms. Wood’s face and refused to 

speak to her. Consequently, Ms. Wood was unable to provide the parent with A.C.’s 

math book. 

7 

22.  On the afternoon of December 15, 2021, respondent attended C.L.’s IEP 

meeting with Ms. Duenas and C.L.’s parent. On that day, Ms. Duenas was responsible 

for dismissing students in the parking lot and making sure they safely boarded the 

school bus to be taken home. As a result, she was several minutes late to the IEP 

meeting. As she walked to the meeting, respondent called her cell phone and angrily 

asked if she was going to show up for the meeting. She then behaved in a dismissive 

and disrespectful manner throughout the meeting in front of C.L. and her parent. 

23.  On the morning of December 16, 2021, Ms. Pomeroy encountered 

respondent in the JPE parking lot before the school day began. She mentioned that 

she had received several complaints from staff about their interactions with 

respondent. After learning of the complaints, respondent said, “[l]et’s have a meeting 

and I will tell them they need to do their fucking job.” She also said Ms. Pomeroy was 

being a “John,” referring to the prior JPE principal. She encouraged Ms. Pomeroy to 

have the employees draft formal complaints about her and said that she would “call 

them on their shit.” When Ms. Pomeroy reminded respondent of her obligation to 

behave professionally at school, respondent said, “[t]his is who I am. I was told when I 

taught kindergarten that I needed to talk to them cutesy. I talked to them like people.” 

24. 

After school started that morning, respondent took her students to the 

JPE library. Abigail Smith was the school librarian at the time and testified at hearing. 

As the children were silently reading, respondent began to loudly complain about how 

she got in trouble again and about how JPE administrative staff members were 

incompetent. When it was time to return to the classroom, respondent told her 

students to line up. However, she then stated that she was told she needs to be nicer 

and asked them to line up in a sarcastically polite tone. She then asked the students, 

“I’ve been told I’m mean and scary, are you guys scared of me?” According to Ms. 

8 

Smith, the students appeared visibly uncomfortable after hearing respondent’s 

comments. 

25. 

Later that day, Ms. Pomeroy went to respondent’s class to read a story to 

the students and lead them in an art project. When they were ready to begin the art 

project, C.L. raised her hand and asked Ms. Pomeroy for a pencil. Respondent loudly 

said that C.L. “does not get a pencil because she draws in class.” According to Ms. 

Pomeroy, C.L. appeared embarrassed by respondent’s comment, which was made in 

front of the entire class. 

26.  On the morning of January 24, 2022, K.D. was involved in a physical 

altercation with another JPE student. As a result, respondent made K.D. spend the day 

with her as a disciplinary measure. Respondent took K.D. to lunch in the school 

cafeteria with her own class at approximately 11:30 a.m. Kayla Holmes worked in the 

JPE cafeteria during the 2021/2022 school year and testified at hearing. When she 

noticed K.D. enter the cafeteria with respondent, Ms. Holmes asked respondent if she 

would be supervising both third grade classes during the lunch break. Respondent told 

Ms. Holmes that K.D. was spending the day with her because he could not keep his 

hands to himself. She also said that if she were the parent of the child K.D. hit, she 

would call the police and press charges against him. 

27. 

K.D. was scheduled to participate in behavioral counseling with Ms. 

Cachu Rios during the lunch break on January 24, 2022. Ms. Cachu Rios went to pick 

him up at the cafeteria and found respondent aggressively leading him in the direction 

of the office. She asked respondent what was going on, and respondent told her that 

K.D. was staying with her because he punched another student and should not be 

allowed to be around other students. She also told Ms. Cachu Rios that the behavioral 

counseling she was providing to K.D. was clearly not working. 

9 

28.  On February 1, 2022, respondent was served with a Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct and Suspension (Notice) based on the incidents discussed 

above. The Notice included the following language: 

This is an extremely serious and job-threatening situation. 

Unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance are 

cause for discipline up to and including dismissal, as 

authorized by [Education Code] Section 44932. 

29. 

JPE employees frequently use a radio device to communicate with each 

other and members of the school administration. When an employee uses the radio, 

the transmission can be heard by any employee who has their radio turned on at the 

time. On April 1, 2022, respondent used the radio to contact the office because A.C. 

was not doing his work or following instructions. There was no ORC or counselor 

available, so Ms. Buckland walked down to respondent’s room to assist. She found A.C. 

sitting by himself in the hallway and decided to take him for a walk around campus. 

After approximately 10 minutes, respondent broadcast over the radio that A.C. was 

missing. Ms. Buckland responded that she was with A.C., and respondent said that A.C. 

was not allowed back in her class. 

30.  Ms. Buckland took A.C. to the office and called respondent for a further 

explanation of why A.C. needed to be sent home. Respondent told her that he doesn’t 

follow directions and that he needed to be “picked up.” Ms. Buckland contacted A.C.’s 

father, who agreed to pick him up. 

31.  District policy limits the circumstances under which a student can be 

formally suspended and sent home. After Ms. Buckland contacted A.C.’s father, Ms. 

Pomeroy determined that A.C. had not committed an offense for which he could be 

10 

sent home. However, he could be placed on an “in-house” suspension. When a student 

is suspended “in-house,” they are not sent home, but they are not allowed to attend 

their normal class. 

32. 

At Ms. Pomeroy’s request, Ms. Buckland contacted respondent again to 

retrieve schoolwork for A.C. to work on in the school office. She told respondent that 

A.C. could not be sent home and that his father was in the office and wanted to speak 

with her. Respondent then told her that she never asked to have him sent home but 

wanted him to go to the office to call home. 

33. 

Respondent’s contentious relationships with JPE staff members 

continued throughout the duration of the 2021/2022 school year. Ms. Wood and Ms. 

Buckland were both fearful of contacting respondent because she frequently treated 

them rudely. Nonetheless, Ms. Wood approached respondent in June 2022 and 

suggested that they start the upcoming school year “fresh.” Respondent put her hand 

up in Ms. Wood’s face and said, “I just can’t. Just go.” 

34. 

J.G. is a JPE student who started the 2022/2023 school year in 

respondent’s class. J.G.’s struggles with reading and writing are so significant that 

respondent recommended his participation in a Student Study Team (SST), which is a 

precursor to a student receiving special education instruction. 

35.  On August 29, 2022, respondent administered a spelling test to her class. 

During the test, J.G. became frustrated because he could not read or write the words 

and flipped his paper over. Respondent told J.G. to turn the test back over, and he told 

her he could not read the words. He turned the paper over when instructed to do so 

by respondent but flipped it back over a short time later. After J.G. flipped his paper 

over several more times, respondent aggressively turned the paper over and shouted 

11 

at J.G. to do his work. She then directed him to the front of the classroom, where she 

called J.G.’s mother in front of the entire class. 

36. 

J.G.’s mother testified at hearing. When respondent called her, she said 

J.G. was misbehaving in class and was unable to write or pronounce his letters. She 

also said that most of the help he needed would have to come from home because 

respondent was unable to devote all her time to him. Respondent then told J.G.’s 

mother that if his behavior did not improve, she or her husband would need to sit next 

to J.G. during class. J.G.’s mother asked to speak with him, and after a brief 

conversation, J.G. handed the phone back to respondent and said that his mother was 

coming to pick him up. 

37. 

Respondent did not allow to J.G. to participate in the morning recess, 

which began several minutes after her phone call to his mother. After recess, she 

began a grammar lesson, and asked the students to write their names on a piece of 

paper. When J.G. did not follow respondent’s instructions, she used her radio to 

contact the office, and said “I already called mom. Get the student out.” 

38.  Neither Ms. Pomeroy nor JPE Vice Principal Melissa White were available 

to respond to respondent’s request. Ms. Buckland asked ORC Beatriz Jaquez to bring 

J.G. to the office and warned her that respondent may be overwhelmed. As Ms. Jaquez 

approached respondent’s classroom, she could hear respondent yelling through the 

closed door. When Ms. Jaquez entered the classroom, respondent aggressively 

pointed at J.G. and said, “he’s right here!” She then told Ms. Jaquez that J.G. never 

completes his work. 

39. 

As J.G. gathered his belongings several items fell to the floor. When Ms. 

Jaquez went to assist J.G., respondent yelled, “he’s a third grader and can do it by 

12 

himself.” Ms. Jaquez told J.G. “it’s ok,” at which time respondent loudly said, “it’s not 

ok!” Once Ms. Jaquez and J.G. were outside the classroom, he told her that he does 

not do well when grownups scream at him. J.G.’s mother held him out of school for the 

next two days, after which he was transferred to the other third grade class. 

40. 

Respondent was interviewed about the incident with J.G. by District legal 

counsel Paul Gant on September 27, 2022. She told him she was not concerned 

whether her treatment of J.G. was embarrassing to him. In fact, she admitted that she 

wanted him to feel “uncomfortable.” Respondent also denied asking for J.G. to be 

removed from her class and insisted that she was only asking for “assistance.” 

Respondent’s Evidence 

41. 

Respondent testified at hearing. She has worked at JPE for the last three 

years. She holds a multiple-subject teaching credential which she earned at California 

State University, Sonoma. She also holds a master’s degree in special education. She 

described her teaching style as structured and firm, but fair. She denies ever yelling at 

a student and said that she uses her “teacher voice” to get the attention of students 

who are misbehaving. 

42. 

The 2021/2022 school year was the first time students returned to in-

person learning at JPE since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. Many students 

demonstrated significant behavioral problems upon their return and respondent 

believes the District initially failed to provide guidance regarding how to handle the 

situation. However, as the year progressed, the two third grade classes were assigned 

a paraeducator to assist with instructional and behavioral issues. 

43. 

Respondent admits that the incident in Emily McKinnon’s classroom 

occurred because Ms. McKinnon had recently “unfriended” respondent on Facebook. 

13 

She also admits she told Ms. Pomeroy she was going to lie, and in fact did lie, to avoid 

being disciplined over the incident. She eventually apologized to Ms. McKinnon, and 

they remain friends. 

44. 

Respondent admits that she behaved inappropriately at the class size 

meeting with Ms. Pomeroy and the other teachers on August 25, 2021. Respondent 

went to the meeting believing that Ms. Pomeroy had no intention of assigning an 

additional teacher to third grade to reduce her class size. When Ms. Pomeroy 

commented that she could not imagine having 30 children in a first-grade class, 

respondent said, “there’s your answer,” and walked out of the meeting. Respondent 

believed that as principal, Ms. Pomeroy should have made the decision herself without 

involving anyone else. However, she acknowledges it is not her place to tell the 

principal how to do her job. 

45. 

Respondent describes C.L. as smart, caring, and “a ray of sunshine.” 

However, C.L. has trouble focusing, and her behavior can be challenging. Respondent 

has never denied water to any of her students, including C.L. On the day of the 

October 2021 incident, all the students, including C.L., were given the opportunity to 

get a drink of water after they finished Physical Education (PE), and were then 

instructed to line up to return to class. C.L. refused to stand in the line and kept going 

back to the drinking fountain. 

46. 

C.L. had a habit of drawing in class instead of paying attention to 

instruction and completing her work. The understanding between respondent, C.L., 

and her parents is that she would only be provided with writing instruments when the 

need to write arose during a lesson. Respondent did not intend to embarrass C.L. on 

December 16, 2021, and she does not believe that C.L. was embarrassed. Respondent 

was merely explaining to Ms. Pomeroy why C.L. did not have a pencil at her desk. 

14 

47. 

Respondent admits that she refused to allow C.L. to participate in “Fun 

Fridays” because she does not consider them part of RSP services. She denies ever 

refusing to send a student for RSP services other than Fun Fridays. Ms. Duenas never 

raised any concerns about respondent failing to send students for RSP services. 

Respondent does not believe that she was rude during the December 2021 IEP 

meeting with Ms. Duenas, C.L., and her parent. Ms. Duenas never complained about 

respondent’s behavior and their relationship has always been a positive one. 

48. 

Respondent had a friendly relationship with Ms. Wood at the beginning 

of the 2021/2022 school year. However, Ms. Wood tended to call respondent or enter 

her classroom and interrupt respondent while she was teaching. She would also try to 

have personal conversations with respondent that took respondent’s attention away 

from her students. This frustrated respondent, and her relationship with Ms. Wood 

began to deteriorate. 

49. 

Respondent admits being frustrated that M.C.’s mother was allowed to 

speak with Ms. Pomeroy before speaking with respondent on November 1, 2021. She 

also admits telling Ms. Wood that she was too nice to parents. 

50. 

Respondent admits that she was dismissive of Ms. Wood on December 

10, 2021. She did not want to walk to her classroom and retrieve A.C.’s math book 

because she wanted to supervise her students while they were gathered outside. She 

believes that A.C.’s father either picked the book up at the end of the day, or that 

respondent dropped the book off at A.C.’s home. Respondent admits that Ms. Wood 

approached her in June 2022 and asked to start the new school year on more friendly 

terms. She replied that she would maintain a professional relationship with Ms. Wood. 

She denies holding her hand up in Ms. Wood’s face. 

15 

51. 

Respondent admits she referred to Ms. Pomeroy as “John” on the 

morning of December 16, 2021, and that she knew the comment would upset her. 

Respondent denies complaining about JPE staff in the library on December 16, 2021. 

However, she admits speaking in a sarcastically polite tone and acknowledges it was 

unprofessional to do so in front of the students. 

52. 

Respondent admits she told K.D. not to touch any of her students on 

December 7, 2021. She denies yelling at him or pointing her finger in his face. 

Following the physical altercation between K.D. and another student on January 24, 

2022, respondent told Ms. Holmes in the cafeteria that K.D. was shadowing 

respondent for the day because he could not “keep his hands to himself.” She admits 

telling Ms. Holmes that she would call the police and press charges against K.D. if she 

were the parent of the other child, and she now regrets doing so because she can 

understand how the comment may have made K.D. feel. 

53.  On April 1, 2022, respondent contacted the office and said that A.C. 

needed to call home because he was not following directions and distracting other 

students. A.C.’s parents are in the Air Force and their phone numbers are not from the 

same area code as JPE, which is why respondent did not have A.C. call home from her 

classroom. She told A.C. to go to the office but did not supervise him once he left. 

Respondent denies ever saying that she wanted A.C. to go home. 

54. 

Respondent denies aggressively turning J.G.’s paper on his desk on 

August 29, 2022. Rather, she gently turned the paper over and said words to the effect 

of “leave it there, honey.” She admits that she called J.G.’s mother in front of the class 

to make him feel uncomfortable. She elected to place the call during class time as 

opposed to during the upcoming recess because she believes she had recess duty. She 

16 

admits telling J.G.’s mother that she needed help from home, and that she or J.G.’s 

father would need to sit with him in class if his behavior did not improve. 

55. 

J.G. continued to ignore respondent’s directions after recess, which is 

why she contacted the office for assistance. However, she admits that J.G. was not 

disrupting the class at the time. She denies that she ever said, “I already called mom, 

get the student out.” She admits telling Ms. Jaquez “it’s not ok!” as she tried to 

reassure J.G. Respondent denies ever yelling at J.G. However, in retrospect, she 

believes she could have handled the situation more professionally. 

56. 

Respondent called two witnesses to testify at hearing. The first was Toni 

Vernier. Ms. Vernier is the Director of Curriculum for the Plumas Lake Elementary 

School District. She previously worked for the District for 12 years as the Executive 

Director of Student Services. Ms. Vernier has never seen respondent behave 

inappropriately with students or colleagues, and she believes that she is an excellent 

teacher. 

57. 

Respondent also called Mr. Ahlberg as a witness. Mr. Ahlberg has worked 

collaboratively with respondent for the past three years and referred to her as the best 

teaching partner he has ever had. Mr. Ahlberg has never seen respondent behave 

inappropriately with students or colleagues. 

58. 

K.D. was a student in Mr. Ahlberg’s class. He frequently engaged in 

disruptive and physically aggressive behavior toward other students, and it was not 

uncommon for Mr. Ahlberg to send him to respondent’s class to calm down. J.G. was 

transferred to Mr. Ahlberg’s class after the incident in respondent’s class on August 29, 

2022. Mr. Ahlberg described J.G. academically as the lowest student he’s ever had to 

teach. 

17 

Analysis 

59. 

The Commission must resolve two issues in this case. First, it must 

determine whether respondent engaged in the conduct alleged in the Statement of 

Charges. If so, it must then determine whether that conduct indicates that respondent 

is unfit to teach. The Statement of Charges alleges five categories of behavior that 

constitute cause for dismissal. Each will be addressed in turn below. 

UNPROFESSIONAL AND INAPPROPRIATE INTERACTIONS WITH STUDENTS AND 

STAFF 

60. 

It is alleged that on March 9, 2021, respondent behaved unprofessionally 

when she entered Ms. McKinnon’s classroom, and in a threatening tone, said, “[h]ey, 

it’s on!” The District has proven the incident by a preponderance of the evidence. 

Respondent admitted making the comment in a subsequent conversation with Ms. 

Pomeroy and in her testimony at hearing. She also admitted she was prepared to lie 

and in fact did lie to avoid being disciplined. 

61. 

It is alleged that respondent unprofessionally screamed at C.L. for 

attempting to get a drink of water on a warm afternoon in October 2021. The District 

has proven the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Pomeroy and Ms. 

Cachu Rios both witnessed the incident firsthand. Respondent’s behavior was so 

agitated that Ms. Cachu Rios encouraged her to take a “breather” and Ms. Pomeroy 

had to take respondent’s students back to the classroom for her. 

62. 

It is alleged that respondent unprofessionally demeaned M.C. on 

November 1, 2021. The District has proven the allegation by a preponderance of the 

evidence. When M.C. performed poorly on an exam, respondent rudely told him that 

18 

he needed to read more at home. Respondent’s behavior caused M.C. to feel 

unintelligent and prompted his mother to remove him from JPE. 

63. 

It is alleged that respondent unprofessionally complained about her 

colleagues and members of the JPE administration on November 30, 2021. The District 

has proven the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Wood testified that 

during a telephone call, respondent told her that no one at JPE did their jobs and that 

“wrath” was going to come down upon the school. She criticized Ms. Wood for being 

too nice and told her not to allow parents to speak with Ms. Pomeroy unless they have 

spoken to her first. Finally, she told Ms. Wood that M.C.’s life had been ruined by his 

transfer out of JPE, which she attributed to Ms. Wood transferring his mother’s 

telephone call to Ms. Pomeroy. 

64. 

It is alleged that respondent behaved unprofessionally in her interaction 

with Ms. Wood on December 10, 2021. The District has proven the allegation by a 

preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Wood testified that she approached respondent 

to retrieve A.C.’s math book because his father was waiting in the office. When she did, 

respondent put her hand up in Ms. Wood’s face and refused to speak with her. This 

behavior was not only rude to Ms. Wood, but it prevented her from providing A.C.’s 

father with the math book. Respondent’s testimony that she could not assist Ms. 

Wood because she had to supervise her class was unpersuasive. The entire faculty was 

outside at the time for the Friday event. Respondent could have requested that 

another teacher or a member of the JPE administration supervise her students for a 

brief period of time. 

65. 

It is alleged that respondent unprofessionally complained about Ms. 

Pomeroy to JPE Counselor Luvpreet Sahota on December 14 and 15, 2021. The District 

19 

did not present sufficient evidence in support of the allegation, and therefore failed to 

prove it by a preponderance of the evidence. 

66. 

It is alleged that respondent behaved unprofessionally in C.L.’s IEP 

meeting on December 15, 2023. The District has proven the allegation by a 

preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Duenas testified that respondent was incredibly 

rude to her and a therapist who were in attendance, which undermined the 

collaborative nature of the meeting. 

67. 

It is that alleged respondent behaved inappropriately in response to 

complaints about her behavior from JPE staff on December 16, 2021. The District has 

proven the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Pomeroy testified that 

when she attempted to discuss the complaints with respondent, respondent replied, 

“Let’s have a meeting and I will tell them they need to do their fucking job.” She then 

referred to Ms. Pomeroy in a derogatory manner as “John,” in reference to the former 

JPE principal, and told Ms. Pomeroy to have the staff members file formal complaints 

so she could “call them on their shit.” Respondent admitted referring to Ms. Pomeroy 

as “John,” and that she did so because she knew it would upset Ms. Pomeroy. 

68. 

It is alleged that on December 16, 2021, respondent unprofessionally 

embarrassed C.L. in front of the entire class by announcing that she was not allowed to 

have a pencil because she draws in class. The District has proven the allegation by a 

preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Pomeroy witnessed the incident and respondent 

admitted that it occurred. 

69. 

It is alleged that on December 16, 2021, respondent unprofessionally 

complained about members of the JPE administration in front of her students. The 

District has proven the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Smith 

20 

witnessed the behavior and testified at hearing that it appeared to make the students 

feel uncomfortable. While respondent denies openly criticizing other JPE staff, she 

admits using an overly sarcastic tone about being nice and acknowledges that it was 

unprofessional to do so in front of the students. 

70. 

It is alleged that respondent treated K.D. unprofessionally on January 24, 

2022, and that she potentially interfered with services to which he was entitled under 

his IEP. The District has proven the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. Ms. 

Holmes testified that respondent told her K.D. had been involved in a physical 

altercation with another student earlier in the day, and that if she were the parent of 

the other student, she would call the police and press charges against K.D. Ms. Cachu 

Rios testified that on the same day, respondent told her that K.D. didn’t need to be 

around other children, and that she was going to encourage the parents of other 

students to complain to the school board about K.D.’s behavior. Respondent’s 

comments suggested to K.D. that he should be treated as a criminal, and respondent 

now admits her behavior was unprofessional. Finally, by forcing K.D. to remain with her 

throughout the day, respondent interfered with his counseling session with Ms. Cachu 

Rios. 

AGGRESSIVE AND UNWARRANTED TREATMENT OF STUDENT 

71. 

It is alleged that respondent mistreated K.D. in an aggressive and 

unwarranted manner on December 7, 2021. The District has proven the allegation by a 

preponderance of the evidence. Ms. Buckland witnessed the incident and testified to 

what occurred at hearing. Respondent pointed her finger in K.D.’s face and told him 

never to lay a finger on one of her students based on an unfounded incident the day 

before. According to Ms. Buckland, respondent’s behavior appeared to scare K.D., who 

had done nothing wrong. Respondent denies pointing her finger and getting close to 

21 

K.D.’s face. Whether she did so or not is of minimal significance. Her statement was 

clearly intended to be interpreted as a threat to K.D. 

INTERFERENCE WITH OR FAILURE TO PROVIDE RSP SERVICES 

72. 

It is alleged that respondent interfered with the provision of RSP services 

during the 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 school years. The District has proven the 

allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. Respondent refused to allow C.L. to 

participate in “Fun Fridays” with Ms. Duenas because she disagreed with the 

curriculum, despite knowing that Ms. Duenas initiated “Fun Fridays” to reward students 

for completing their RSP work the rest of the week. Additionally, respondent interfered 

with K.D.’s behavioral counseling session on January 24, 2022. 

INAPPROPRIATE TREATMENT OF STUDENT AND VIOLATION OF DISCIPLINARY 

POLICY 

73. 

It is alleged that respondent treated A.C. inappropriately and violated the 

disciplinary policies of the District on April 1, 2022. The District has proven the 

allegations by a preponderance of the evidence. On that day, respondent ordered A.C. 

out of her classroom because he was refusing to follow directions. Ms. Buckland found 

him sitting unsupervised in the hallway a short time later and decided to take him for a 

walk. When respondent realized Ms. Buckland was with A.C., she told her that A.C. was 

not allowed back in her classroom and needed to be “picked up.” However, A.C. had 

not committed an offense for which he could be sent home and formally suspended. 

When respondent learned of this, she dishonestly said that she intended for A.C. to call 

home, not to go home. Respondent’s testimony that Ms. Buckland misheard her is 

unpersuasive. While the word “call” could conceivably be mistaken for the word “go” 

22 

over a radio transmission, respondent’s explanation is belied by Ms. Buckland’s specific 

recollection that respondent said A.C. needed to be “picked up.” 

SHAMING A STUDENT AND DISCLOSING CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

74. 

It is alleged that respondent shamed J.G. and revealed his confidential 

student information on August 29, 2022. The District did not present sufficient 

evidence in support of the allegation that respondent revealed K.G.’s confidential 

student information, and therefore failed to prove it by a preponderance of the 

evidence. 

75.  However, the District has proven the allegation that respondent shamed 

J.G. in front of the entire class by a preponderance of the evidence. Respondent was 

aware of the difficulties J.G. experienced reading and writing, and she was aware he 

was turning his spelling test over because he was frustrated. However, even though 

the morning recess was only several minutes away, respondent called J.G.’s mother on 

the telephone in front of the entire class and complained about how he was unable to 

write or pronounce letters. She then told J.G.’s mother that she or her husband would 

need to sit next to J.G. in class if his behavior did not improve. 

76. 

After the morning recess, which respondent did not allow J.G. to 

participate in, she began teaching a grammar lesson. When J.G. failed to follow her 

instructions, respondent used her radio to contact the office and said, “I already called 

mom, get the student out.” 

77.  Ms. Jaquez could hear respondent yelling as she approached her 

classroom. When she entered, respondent demanded to know whether J.G. was going 

to be sent home. She then pointed at J.G. and angrily said, “[t]his is the kind of 

behavior I have to deal with. He never completes work. This is disrupting my class.” Ms. 

23 

Jaquez told J.G. to gather his belongings and offered to help him. When she did, 

respondent said “he’s a third grader and can do it by himself.” Ms. Jaquez then told 

J.G. that everything is ok, at which point respondent said, “it’s not ok.” 

78. 

Respondent responded to a child with established learning difficulties by 

publicly shaming him in front of his classmates. She even admitted she was trying to 

make him feel uncomfortable and that she was not concerned about his feelings. 

Fitness to Teach – Morrison Factors 

79. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 

(Morrison), the California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from 

the teaching profession only upon a showing that [her] retention in the profession 

poses significant danger of harm to students, school employees, or others who might 

be affected by [her] actions as a teacher.” The court listed the following factors as 

relevant when determining whether a teacher’s conduct indicates that she is unfit to 

teach: 

[1] the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, [2] the degree of such 

adversity anticipated, [3] the proximity or remoteness in 

time of the conduct, [4] the type of teaching certificate held 

by the party involved, [5] the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, [6] the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct, [7] the likelihood of the recurrence 

of the questioned conduct, and [8] the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse or chilling effect 

24 

upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or 

other teachers.  

(Id. at pp. 229-230.) 

80. 

As set forth below, when respondent’s conduct is considered in light of 

the Morrison factors, the District established that she is unfit to teach. 

ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS 

81. 

Respondent repeatedly demeaned students who struggled with learning 

difficulties and behavioral problems. She used ridicule and embarrassment as a form 

of discipline. In the case of K.D., she suggested that he should be treated as a criminal. 

Additionally, respondent was routinely rude and dismissive to other JPE employees. 

DEGREE OF ADVERSITY ANTICIPATED 

82. 

Respondent’s behavior clearly had a negative impact not only on the 

children subject to her ridicule, but on her entire class. Her behavior was so extreme 

that two students were removed from her class in successive years. Her attitude 

toward the JPE administration resulted in employees being unwilling to contact her, 

which interfered with their ability to do their job. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

83. 

Respondent was placed on administrative leave two days after the 

incident involving J.G. That incident occurred less than one year ago. Moreover, 

respondent displayed a continuous pattern of inappropriate and unprofessional 

behavior for much of the prior two years. When the evidence is considered in its 

25 

entirety, the most recent event is not remote in time, and the previous events are not 

so remote that they should be excluded from consideration. 

TYPE OF TEACHING CERTIFICATE HELD 

84. 

Respondent holds a multi-subject teaching credential. She teaches 

impressionable third grade students. As an educator, she must be able to display an 

appropriate demeanor and exercise sound judgment. She has repeatedly failed to do 

both. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

85. 

There is no justification for respondent’s treatment of A.C., C.L., J.G., and 

K.D. All four students were known to struggle academically or behaviorally. 

Respondent used public humiliation and ridicule to discipline children with well-

established learning difficulties. There is also no justification for respondent’s 

unprofessional behavior toward other JPE staff members. Even if respondent did not 

particularly care for the other JPE staff members, she has an obligation as an educator 

to behave professionally toward students, parents, and colleagues. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES 

86. 

Respondent is solely to blame for her multiple instances of misconduct. 

Her disciplinary tactics were clearly intended to punish behavior rather than correct it. 

Similarly, she ridiculed students with learning difficulties rather than foster a positive 

learning environment within which her students could thrive. 

26 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

87. 

“Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of [one’s] actions is an essential 

step toward rehabilitation.” (Seide v. Committee of Bar Examiners (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 

940.) By failing to fully acknowledge her misconduct, respondent failed to demonstrate 

that she has engaged in sufficient rehabilitation to establish that she will not continue 

to engage in similar conduct in the future. Instead, respondent continues to minimize 

the wrongfulness of her misconduct and cast blame for her inappropriate reactions on 

the students themselves. 

POTENTIAL ADVERSE IMPACT ON RESPONDENT’S CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 

88. 

Respondent did not present evidence or argue that her dismissal will 

have an adverse or chilling effect on her constitutional rights or the constitutional 

rights of other teachers. The Commission finds such an adverse impact unlikely. 

Conclusion 

89.  When all the evidence is considered, the District proved it is more likely 

than not that respondent engaged in the multiple instances of misconduct alleged in 

the Statement of Charges. When all the Morrison factors are considered, the District 

established that such conduct demonstrates respondent’s unfitness to teach children. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

A school district seeking to dismiss a permanent certificated employee 

from employment bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 

27 

(Gardner v. Comm’n on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035; Bevli v. 

Brisco (1989) 211 Cal.App.3d 986.) The term preponderance of the evidence means 

“more likely than not.” (Sandoval v. Bank of Am. (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1).) In describing what constitutes 

immoral conduct within the context of the Education Code, the court in Board of 

Education of San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 

808 said: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  

(Id. at 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734,740.) 

3. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, §44932, subd. (a)(2).) Unprofessional conduct may 

be defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is 

such conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing. 

28 

(Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; see Perez v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

4. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

dishonesty. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(4).) 

5. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

“unsatisfactory performance.” (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(5).) 

6. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

evident unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6). That term means “clearly 

not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. V. 

Comm’n on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term 

“connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 

notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the school district.” (Ibid.) 

The court held that the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to determine, as a 

threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.” (Id. at p. 

1445.) As Woodland court explained, “[i]f the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next 

step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident,’ i.e., whether the offensive 

conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.) 

7. 

A school district my dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or 

by the governing board of the school district employing her. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(8). 

29 

Causes for Dismissal 

8. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, and 

Factual Findings 60 through 78 in particular, the District proved by a preponderance of 

the evidence that respondent engaged in immoral conduct on multiple occasions. As 

such, cause exists to dismiss respondent pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(1). 

9. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, and 

Factual Findings 60 through 78 in particular, the District proved by a preponderance of 

the evidence that respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct on multiple 

occasions. As such, cause exists to dismiss respondent pursuant to Education Code 

section 44923, subdivision (a)(2). 

10. 

Based on Factual Findings 7, 32, 40, 43, 60, and 73, the District proved by 

a preponderance of the evidence that respondent behaved dishonestly on multiple 

occasions. As such, cause exists to dismiss respondent pursuant to Education Code 

section 44932, subdivision (a)(4). 

11. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, the 

District proved by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent’s performance as 

a JPE teacher was unsatisfactory. As such, cause exists to dismiss respondent pursuant 

to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(5). 

12. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, the 

District established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent is unfit for 

service because of a defect in temperament. As such, cause exists to dismiss 

respondent pursuant to Education Code 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

30 

13. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, the 

District established by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent engaged in a 

pattern of misconduct from March 2021 through August 2022, despite receiving 

several warnings from her supervisor and the District. As such, cause exists to dismiss 

respondent pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

ORDER 

Respondent Karen McNay is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated employee 

of the Marysville Joint Union School District. 

DATE: July 20, 2023

CHRISTINA ALBERG 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

LUCIANO ORTIZ 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

MATTHEW S. BLOCK 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional Competence 

31 

Christine Alberg (Jul 20, 2023 09:40 PDT)Luciano Ortiz (Jul 20, 2023 14:33 PDT) 
 
 
 
