BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
ROCKLIN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Proceeding to Dismiss: 

JENNIFER KAISER, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH Case No. 2023050871 

DECISION 

On October 30 through November 3, 2023, a Commission on Professional 

Competence (Commission) heard this matter from Sacramento, California. The 

Commission was comprised of Susan Carol Evans, Julie Murdaugh, and Administrative 

Law Judge Wim van Rooyen. 

Courtney de Groof, Attorney at Law, Lozano Smith, represented the Rocklin 

Unified School District (District). 

Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 

Chevedden LLP, represented Jennifer Kaiser (respondent), who was present at hearing. 

Evidence was received, and the Commission concluded its deliberations on 

November 3, 2023. The record was left open until November 8, 2023, to allow the 

parties to submit a revised joint confidential names list. On November 8, 2023, the 

 
parties filed their revised joint confidential names list, which was marked and admitted 

as Exhibit 27 and sealed by protective order. That same day, the record was closed and 

the matter submitted for decision. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction and Background 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. She 

serves as a special education teacher at Rocklin High School. 

2. 

On April 20, 2023, Tony Limoges, Ph.D., Associate Superintendent of 

Human Resources for the District, signed and filed with the Rocklin Unified School 

District Board (Board) a Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Placement on Immediate Unpaid 

Suspension Pending Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings; and Statement of Charges 

(Statement of Charges) against respondent. The Statement of Charges specified the 

following grounds for dismissal: (1) immoral conduct (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a)(1), 

and 44939); (2) unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2)); (3) evident 

unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)); and (4) persistent violation of 

Board rules and regulations (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8)). 

3. 

On May 17, 2023, respondent submitted a Request for Hearing and 

Notice of Defense to the Statement of Charges. This hearing followed. 

The District’s Evidence 

4. 

The Statement of Charges outlines five incidents of misconduct 

respondent allegedly engaged in with District students, staff, and parents on January 9, 

2020; on February 18, 2022; in July 2022; on August 20, 2022; and on December 14, 

2 

2022. The District’s evidence regarding each incident is discussed separately below. Dr. 

Limoges also testified regarding the District’s ultimate decision to pursue respondent’s 

dismissal following the five incidents. 

JANUARY 9, 2020 INCIDENT 

5. 

On January 9, 2020, at the end of the school day, respondent and her 

husband, Scott Wilcher, came to the office of Parker Whitney Elementary School, a 

District elementary school their son D.W. attended at the time. Sheryl Murphy, the 

school clerk, and Nicole Blackwell, the school health aide, were present in the office 

when they arrived. Ms. Murphy and Ms. Blackwell both submitted written statements 

regarding their interactions with respondent and Mr. Wilcher that day. Ms. Murphy 

also testified at hearing consistent with the written statements. 

6. 

Upon entering the school office, respondent and Mr. Wilcher asked to 

speak to the principal, Kari Auwae. However, Ms. Auwae was in a meeting and 

unavailable. Respondent and Mr. Wilcher expressed dissatisfaction that D.W.’s teacher 

sent him to the office that day. They asked Ms. Murphy how much time D.W. spent in 

the office, but Ms. Murphy did not know. Respondent then told Ms. Murphy that 

respondent was “done” with D.W.’s teacher and that D.W.’s teacher “just needs to shut 

the fuck up.” 

7. 

Ms. Murphy knew respondent because respondent previously taught 

special education at Parker Whitney Elementary School. Ms. Murphy was shocked by 

respondent’s statement because she did not expect respondent to be so vocal about 

another teacher. She had never heard another District employee refer to a colleague 

using profanity and derogatory statements. Ms. Murphy observed, even though 

3 

respondent was visiting the school office as a parent, “all eyes are always on you when 

you are a teacher.” 

8. 

On February 26, 2020, Dr. Limoges issued respondent a Conference 

Summary Memorandum, which stated, in part: 

During our conversation I reminded you that as an 

employee of the District you are expected to exhibit 

professional behavior at all school sites. This includes all 

District schools and property, including the school where 

your child attends. The fact that you may be at a school site 

as a “parent” versus a teacher does not exclude the 

expectation of professional behavior as an employee. I 

explained to you that this applies to all employees and gave 

you the example of an employee engaging in misconduct at 

a football game. 

[ . . . ] 

Though I was unable to confirm the allegations, you are 

reminded to conduct yourself in a professional and 

courteous manner and refrain from making offensive and 

inappropriate remarks. Failure to adhere to this expectation 

of professionalism will result in discipline, up to and 

including dismissal . . . At this time, this letter will not be 

placed in your personnel file. 

4 

FEBRUARY 18, 2022 INCIDENT 

9. 

On February 18, 2022, around 2:00 p.m., parents S.B. and C.H. stood 

across the street from Rocklin High School holding signs to protest the school mask 

mandate and support students who participated in a “walk out” to protest that 

mandate. At the time, respondent drove out of the Rocklin High School staff parking 

lot and pulled up to the stop sign closest to the parents. S.B. and C.H. both submitted 

written complaints to the District regarding their interaction with respondent that day. 

S.B. testified at hearing consistent with those written complaints. 

10. 

Respondent rolled down her car window and told S.B. and C.H. to go 

protest at the District’s office instead. The parents agreed that it was a “great idea” but 

stated they were presently at the school to support the student “walk out.” In 

response, respondent yelled: “You’re wasting your time here. We don’t have any 

control here. We don’t make the rules here, the District has all the power.” The parents 

responded: “Actually, you do have a say. Every teacher and student have [sic] power 

here to stand up and make a difference. All we want is a choice.” Respondent then 

screamed: “Your kids can’t do anything about it and you look like two fucking idiots 

standing here with your stupid signs.” Thereafter, respondent sped off, holding up her 

hand. The parents could not tell whether she gave them “the middle finger or the 

peace sign.” 

11. 

S.B. and C.H. were “blown away” by respondent’s unprofessional 

behavior. S.B. had never seen a teacher behave this way. She was concerned about 

respondent’s temperament and ability to work with students. At the time, S.B. and C.H. 

did not know respondent’s name. They only later discovered her name through 

inquiries with other parents. S.B. and C.H. ultimately filed their written complaints and 

raised the issue of respondent’s February 18, 2022 conduct at a Board meeting. 

5 

12.  On May 2, 2022, Dr. Limoges issued respondent another Conference 

Summary Memorandum, which found the parents’ allegations were established by a 

preponderance of the evidence. It further stated: 

You are reminded once again to conduct yourself in a 

professional and courteous manner and refrain from 

making offensive and inappropriate remarks. Failure to 

adhere to this expectation of professionalism will result in 

discipline, up to and including dismissal . . . A copy of this 

letter will be placed in your personnel file after 10 days. 

JULY 2022 INCIDENT 

13.  On an unknown day in July 2022, Kimberly Ann Martin, a District special 

education aide, was working in a summer school class when respondent suddenly 

entered her classroom. Ms. Martin submitted a written statement about her interaction 

with respondent that day. She testified at hearing consistent with her written 

statement. 

14. 

Respondent supervised Ms. Martin during the regular school year, but 

was not working that summer. The previous day, Ms. Martin had submitted a request 

to transfer to Whitney High School for the 2022–2023 school year because of bullying 

Ms. Martin experienced from other aides at Rocklin High School. At the time, Ms. 

Martin believed respondent may have heard about the transfer request and come to 

the summer classroom to discuss it. Thus, Ms. Martin asked respondent if she could 

speak with respondent in private outside the classroom. 

15.  Once outside, Ms. Martin mentioned her transfer request to respondent. 

Respondent asked Ms. Martin why she had not first given respondent an opportunity 

6 

to “fix the problem.” Ms. Martin responded that respondent had previously ignored 

Ms. Martin’s requests to address the bullying due to respondent’s friendship with one 

of the bullying aides. Respondent then became angry and said: “You are so 

unprofessional! You fucked me and when someone fucks me, they are done! You will 

never work at Rocklin High again!” Ms. Martin was “stunned” at respondent’s outburst. 

She felt threatened by respondent’s words and tone. 

16. 

Judy Kevin, another summer special education aide and a retired teacher, 

observed a portion of the discussion between respondent and Ms. Martin. Ms. Kevin 

testified at hearing. She recalls respondent making hand gestures, saying the “f-word,” 

and moving forward towards Ms. Martin, with Ms. Martin moving backward. Ms. 

Martin looked frightened, and Ms. Kevin feared the altercation would become physical. 

At the time, Ms. Kevin did not know who respondent was. She thought respondent was 

a disgruntled parent confronting Ms. Martin. Ms. Kevin only later learned respondent 

was a special education teacher in the District. Ms. Kevin had never seen a teacher 

behave in such an aggressive manner. It made Ms. Kevin sad. She was glad no student 

had observed the interaction. 

17.  On October 14, 2022, Dr. Limoges issued respondent a 45-Day Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct (45-Day Notice) based on the July 2022 incident. He found 

the conduct was established by a preponderance of the evidence. The 45-Day Notice 

directed respondent to treat all students, staff, and community members with respect 

and dignity; review and follow the District’s Professional Standards Policy; follow 

reasonable directives given by any District administrator; refrain from unprofessional 

conduct; refrain from using profanity on school grounds; refrain from threatening a 

staff member’s employment; refrain from yelling and cursing at staff; and refrain from 

retaliating against staff. The 45-Day Notice cautioned respondent that failure to 

7 

implement the directives may result in termination. The 45-Day Notice was placed in 

respondent’s personnel file. 

AUGUST 20, 2022 INCIDENT 

18.  On September 15, 2022, C.S., the mother of K.R., filed a complaint against 

respondent with the District. K.R. was a special education student in respondent’s class, 

but respondent was not K.R.’s case manager. The complaint alleged respondent 

overstepped her role as a teacher and circumvented K.R.’s case manager when 

respondent: (i) sent an e-mail to K.R.’s parents about K.R. missing school after a family 

member passed; (ii) sent an e-mail to K.R.’s parents about K.R. potentially being moved 

to a different school; (iii) sent an e-mail to K.R.’s parents justifying K.R.’s placement in a 

child development class; and (iv) talked to K.R. about missing school to go to the 

dentist and attend basketball camp. Additionally, the complaint referenced an August 

20, 2022 meeting between respondent and K.R.’s parents to discuss their concerns. At 

that meeting, respondent allegedly got up, raised her voice, and pointed her finger at 

C.S. before leaving the room. 

19. 

Two attendees at the August 20, 2022 meeting testified at hearing: 

Maureen Duffy and Michael Pappas. Ms. Duffy is a Program Specialist II with the 

District. She has a total of 23 years of experience in education, holds a special 

education credential, and oversees the special education program at all three District 

high schools. She attended the August 20, 2022 meeting because K.R.’s parents 

requested District representation. 

At the start of the meeting, K.R.’s parents were “already a little hot.” At one 

point, C.S. started yelling and making lots of accusations against respondent. In 

response, respondent stood up, yelled back at C.S., and then left the room. Ms. Duffy 

8 

was shocked by respondent’s behavior because it was unprofessional and displayed a 

lack of decorum and self-control. Ms. Duffy had never witnessed similar behavior by a 

teacher meeting with parents. Based on Ms. Duffy’s attendance at hundreds of 

meetings with parents of special education students, she acknowledged parents 

frequently get upset. However, a teacher must still act professionally and end the 

meeting if the conflict becomes unmanageable. It is never appropriate for a teacher to 

yell at parents. 

20.  Mr. Pappas is an Assistant Principal at Rocklin High School. As an 

Assistant Principal, Mr. Pappas attends approximately 50 meetings with parents of 

special education students each year. He recalled the August 20, 2022 meeting was 

contentious. K.R.’s parents “escalated the situation” by directing numerous accusations 

at respondent and other meeting participants. At one point, respondent stood up, 

raised her voice, and pointed her finger at K.R.’s parents. Respondent then left the 

room. Mr. Pappas believes respondent acted unprofessionally. Notwithstanding the 

parents’ behavior, respondent should have remained calm and respectful. 

21.  On December 19, 2022, Matt Murphy, the District’s Director of Personnel, 

issued respondent a Letter of Reprimand based on the August 20, 2022 incident, which 

he found was established by a preponderance of the evidence. The Letter of 

Reprimand directed respondent to refrain from unprofessional conduct in all District 

environments; to treat students, staff, and community members with respect and 

dignity; and not to interact with K.R. and her parents. The Letter of Reprimand was 

placed in respondent’s personnel file.  

9 

DECEMBER 14, 2022 INCIDENT 

22.  On December 14, 2022, J.P., a Rocklin High School parent, filed a 

complaint against respondent with the District. In her complaint and subsequent 

interview, J.P. alleged respondent: (a) bullied Rocklin High School wrestlers (including 

her son T.P.) during a wrestling match at Granite Bay High School on December 14, 

2022; (b) had a verbal altercation with J.P. and her husband after the conclusion of that 

wrestling match and used profanity; and (c) consumed alcohol before, and was 

intoxicated at, the match. 

23.  Numerous witnesses provided conflicting testimony concerning the 

events at the wrestling match. To the extent a particular witness’s testimony or portion 

of their testimony is not discussed, the Commission found it not credible, 

unpersuasive, and/or immaterial to resolution of this matter. 

24. 

Tiffany Baker has worked as a resource specialist program aide for the 

District for five years. She knows respondent as a special education teacher at Rocklin 

High School. Ms. Baker’s child is also on the wrestling team. She enjoys attending 

wrestling matches. She submitted a written statement regarding her observations at 

the December 14, 2022 wrestling match and testified at hearing consistent with that 

statement. 

Ms. Baker and her husband were sitting at the top of the bleachers watching the 

match. A few Rocklin High School students entered the gym, sat down approximately 

six rows in front of Ms. Baker, and started watching the match while eating Chick-Fil-A. 

Respondent sat in the same bleachers as Ms. Baker and the aforementioned students. 

Ms. Baker saw respondent get up from her seat, walk toward the students, and point 

her finger at them while saying: “You are a fucking disgrace and you do not deserve to 

10 

wear those colors.” Respondent returned to her seat before approaching the same 

group of students for a second time. Respondent again admonished them in an 

elevated voice, pointing with her finger. After returning to her seat, respondent got up 

and approached the students for a third time, and said to one particular unidentified 

student: “You are a fucking loser.” Thereafter, respondent returned to her seat for the 

final time. 

At the end of the match, J.P. and her husband entered the gym and approached 

respondent and her husband. There appeared to be a heated conversation between 

the two couples. However, Ms. Baker did not hear any specifics before she left. 

Ms. Baker was shocked and confused by respondent’s behavior. At the time, she 

had no idea what prompted it. She had never heard a teacher speak to students using 

profanity and found it highly inappropriate, even for a sports match. She explained 

that, as a teacher, “students look up to you even when you are not on campus” and 

“we always represent where we work.” Additionally, respondent’s behavior raised 

serious concerns regarding her temperament and self-control. 

25.  Dale Eckenburg teaches social studies and is a tennis coach at Rocklin 

High School. He has known respondent as a colleague for approximately 15 to 20 

years. Mr. Eckenburg enjoys attending high school sporting events, including wrestling 

matches. He submitted a written statement regarding his observations at the 

December 14, 2022 wrestling match. He testified at hearing consistent with that 

statement. 

Upon his arrival to the wrestling match, Mr. Eckenburg noticed “something was 

going on with our wrestling program.” Several members of the wrestling team were 

not wrestling and instead sitting in the bleachers eating Chick-Fil-A. Mr. Eckenburg 

11 

then observed respondent approach the group of students and berate them. 

Respondent’s statements to the students included: “You are a fucking disgrace to 

Rocklin High School,” “You should never be wearing Rocklin gear,” and “You quit on 

your team.” After returning to her seat, respondent twice stared excessively at the 

students. At the end of the match, respondent stood up and emphatically asked the 

crowd to thank the coach and competing wrestlers. Curious about what transpired, Mr. 

Eckenburg later talked to one of the student wrestlers. That student informed him 

there had been a “student walkout” against the wrestling coach. 

Mr. Eckenburg was “stunned” by respondent’s “highly inappropriate” behavior 

at the match. He had never heard a teacher speak to students like that. He believes 

“anytime a teacher is in public you are part of the District and must act in a certain 

way.” 

26. 

J.P. testified at hearing. She did not attend the wrestling match because 

her son (T.P.) was not wrestling that night. However, she and her husband went to pick 

up T.P. after he called her upset. T.P. told her about respondent’s interactions with him 

and other wrestling team members sitting in the bleachers. J.P. arrived towards the 

end of the match. J.P. and her husband confronted respondent and Mr. Wilcher about 

respondent’s behavior towards T.P. The conversation escalated in volume until both 

J.P. and respondent were yelling. However, J.P. testified respondent did not use any 

profanity. J.P. reported respondent’s behavior that evening to the District because she 

was concerned for the welfare of Rocklin High School students. 

27.  On February 7, 2023, Dr. Limoges issued investigation findings regarding 

J.P.’s complaint. Based on his investigation, Dr. Limoges found the majority of J.P.’s 

allegations were substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence. The allegation 

respondent had been intoxicated at the wrestling match was not substantiated. 

12 

DISTRICT’S DECISION TO PURSUE RESPONDENT’S DISMISSAL 

28.  Dr. Limoges filed the Statement of Charges recommending respondent’s 

dismissal due to the number of incidents of unprofessional conduct and their serious 

nature. Additionally, because such conduct persisted despite the imposition of 

progressive discipline, Dr. Limoges believes respondent is unable to conform her 

conduct to professional expectations and is thus unfit to teach. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

29. 

Respondent offered documentary evidence and testified at hearing. She 

also presented the testimony of her husband, two colleagues, and two parents of 

former students.  

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

30. 

Early events in respondent’s life led her to the world of special education. 

She was in a near-fatal car accident in college and seriously injured. She spent three 

years in a wheelchair and six years walking with a cane. The experience taught her the 

world was not always an accessible place. This inspired her to work with those less 

able. Through her college studies, she discovered the field of special education and 

decided to pursue a career in it. After completing her bachelor’s degree, she worked as 

a substitute teacher in the San Juan and Sacramento City Unified School Districts. 

Respondent then obtained her special education credential and a master’s degree in 

special education from National University. 

31. 

In August 1999, respondent started working for the District as a special 

education teacher. She first taught at Rocklin High School. Subsequently, she also 

taught at Rocklin Elementary School and Parker Whitney Elementary School. After 

13 

spending two years in administration as a District office program specialist, she 

returned to working as a special education teacher at Rocklin High School in 2015. 

32. 

Throughout respondent’s career in the District, principals and 

administrators frequently consulted respondent due to her special education expertise. 

Parents often expressed gratitude for the difference she made in their children’s lives, 

as demonstrated in several e-mails offered at hearing. Respondent also received 

several accolades, including a “Teacher Who Made a Difference” award. Outside of the 

classroom, respondent is proud to have brought the Unified Sports program to Rocklin 

High School. This program pairs general education and special education students for 

participation in sports. She provided a declaration from former colleague Scott Shier, 

who attested to their meaningful work together on the Unified Sports program as well 

as respondent’s general competence and professionalism. 

33. 

Respondent testified about each incident alleged in the Statement of 

Charges. Respondent admitted she and her husband went to the Parker Whitney 

Elementary School office to speak to the principal on January 9, 2020. Respondent 

previously filed a complaint against her son D.W.’s teacher for sending him to the 

office excessively in violation of his individualized education program (IEP). 

Respondent was frustrated and upset this pattern was continuing, depriving D.W. of 

instruction time. When respondent and her husband were informed the principal was 

unavailable to speak to them, they initially waited but ultimately left. 

Respondent went to the school office in her capacity as a parent, not as a 

District teacher. She denies using any profanity during the visit. Respondent did not 

know why Ms. Murphy or Ms. Blackwell would state respondent used profanity 

because respondent has never had issues with them before. 

14 

34.  On February 18, 2022, respondent left work early because it was the 

Friday before the February break. There had been mask mandate protests at the 

school all day, and she wanted to leave before the protestors returned. Respondent 

admitted speaking to S.B. and C.H. at the stop sign outside the staff parking lot. 

Respondent suggested they protest at the District office instead of the school because 

that is where policy is made. However, respondent testified she never told the parents 

they were stupid, never used profanity, and never made any hand gesture towards 

them. When respondent was asked why she previously testified at her deposition that 

she waved at the parents while she drove away, she stated she did not recall whether 

she waved. Respondent never taught S.B. or C.H.’s children and never interacted with 

them before. She had “no idea” what motivated S.B. or C.H. to make their allegations. 

35. 

In July 2022, respondent went to the school campus to pick up reading 

materials from a student. As respondent left the student’s classroom, Ms. Martin 

“chased [respondent] down” and asked to speak to respondent. Ms. Martin then 

informed respondent Ms. Martin had requested a transfer to Whitney High School for 

the 2022–2023 school year due to bullying by other aides. That was the first time 

respondent heard anything about such bullying. 

Respondent was shocked and upset because Ms. Martin was a good aide. 

Additionally, respondent thought it unprofessional to give so little notice right before 

the new school year when aides are difficult to find. Respondent acknowledged telling 

Ms. Martin “I cannot believe you are doing this to me.” However, she denied 

threatening Ms. Martin’s employment prospects. If respondent “cussed,” it was to 

herself and not towards Ms. Martin. Respondent believed Ms. Martin may have lied 

about the alleged employment threat because Ms. Martin was angry about having to 

leave Rocklin High School because of her issues with the other aides. Nevertheless, 

15 

respondent admitted she could have handled the situation better. Instead of arguing 

with Ms. Martin, respondent should have just walked away when respondent became 

upset. 

36.  With regard to the August 20, 2022 incident, respondent admitted she 

previously communicated with K.R. and/or her parents about K.R.’s absences, K.R. 

potentially being moved to a different school, and K.R.’s placement in a child 

development class. Respondent addressed those types of issues with all her students 

and their families because she truly cared about their progress and welfare. Moreover, 

C.S., K.R.’s mother, was initially appreciative and even sent respondent an e-mail in 

June 2022 thanking respondent for her efforts. 

For unknown reasons, C.S. later became dissatisfied with respondent’s 

involvement and started posting negative information about respondent online. C.S. 

also sent e-mails to Rocklin High School’s principal, Davis Stewart, to complain about 

respondent. Respondent found C.S.’s behavior “very offensive and unnecessary.” Mr. 

Stewart requested respondent attend a meeting with K.R.’s parents to “clear the air.” 

Respondent was initially uncomfortable, but agreed to attend when Mr. Stewart 

assured her he would stop the meeting if it became abusive. 

At the August 20, 2022 meeting, C.S. sat directly opposite respondent. C.S. was 

combative, aggressive, and loud. Eventually, C.S. started yelling at respondent. She told 

respondent she would sue respondent. At that point, respondent got up, pointed at 

C.S., told C.S. “go ahead,” and then left the room. Respondent did so because she did 

not feel safe and felt “it was time to go.” 

37.  On December 14, 2022, respondent completed her workday at Rocklin 

High School. She then visited a student on home hospital from approximately 4:00 

16 

p.m. to 5:00 p.m. After, she met her husband at a local taphouse where she had one 

and a half beers before going to watch the wrestling match at Granite Bay High 

School. Respondent’s son D.W. attended Rocklin High School that school year. She 

wanted to attend the wrestling match because D.W. was on the wrestling team and 

scheduled to compete that night. She also served as a parent volunteer for the 

wrestling team. 

Upon her arrival to the wrestling match around 6:20 p.m., respondent noticed 

most of the wrestling team was not participating in the match. The previous day, D.W. 

had told her some students had refused to attend wrestling practice and wanted the 

coach fired because they believed he was gay. A group of about five students, 

including T.P., were sitting in the bleachers right behind the coach, eating Chick-Fil-A. 

Although they were not heckling or engaging in any overt actions, it seemed obvious 

to respondent they were continuing their protest against the wrestling coach. She 

found their behavior very offensive, embarrassing to Rocklin High School, and 

intimidating to the wrestlers who participated in the match. 

Respondent admitted she approached the group of students twice during the 

match. The first time, she told them they were disgraceful and should not be there. 

The students did not respond and just continued eating. The second time, she told 

them they should not be wearing the “Rocklin blue.” Again, the students did not 

respond. Respondent acknowledged using a “louder voice” when she addressed the 

students. She did not tell the students why she was troubled by their presence because 

she believed it was obvious given the circumstances. 

Respondent denied using any profanity towards the students. She explained, “I 

was fully aware of who I was and where I was.” Additionally, respondent abhorred 

bigotry or hate speech. She feared “if [she] had used profanity, [her] point would be 

17 

lost.” Respondent did not know why Ms. Baker or Mr. Eckenburg claimed she used 

profanity. She never had any issues with them. Respondent offered the declaration of 

D.A., another District parent who observed respondent’s interaction with the students. 

D.A. did not hear respondent use profanity. 

At the end of the match, respondent stood up, thanked the coach and the 

participating wrestlers, and clapped. As respondent and Mr. Wilcher were preparing to 

leave the gym, J.P. and her husband aggressively confronted them about respondent’s 

statements to the group of students, including their son T.P. A loud conversation 

ensued between the couples. When J.P.’s husband threatened violence, respondent 

and Mr. Wilcher ended the conversation and left. Respondent denied having been 

intoxicated at any point that evening. 

In hindsight, respondent believed she could have handled the situation with the 

protesting students better. She should have explicitly identified her concern about 

bigotry and explained why she believed their behavior and presence at the match were 

inappropriate. 

38. 

Following the December 14, 2022 incident, the District placed respondent 

on leave and instructed her not to attend any school events or activities. Nevertheless, 

the District requested she continue serving two students on home hospital while on 

leave. Both students were enrolled at Whitney High School and not part of 

respondent’s regular caseload. Respondent presently teaches at a private school (St. 

Rose’s School), works as an adult program instructor at Pathways to Employment, and 

tutors students for Grade Point Tutoring. 

39. 

Respondent strongly desires to return to Rocklin High School as a special 

education teacher. She considers it her “home” and feels she has made commitments 

18 

to students, parents, and colleagues. She still receives lots of questions about when 

she is returning. 

40. 

Although respondent acknowledged she could have handled some of the 

above-mentioned incidents better, she vehemently disagreed she is unfit to teach. She 

has years of experience as a special education teacher, and the District has raised no 

issues with her substantive knowledge or skills. 

41. 

Respondent only used profanity “situationally.” She agreed it is generally 

inappropriate to direct profanity specifically at a student, parent, or colleague. 

However, in her view, using profanity at a student is not necessarily intimidating, 

harassing, or embarrassing. It “depends on the situation.” If the District were to cease 

employing persons who use profanity at students, “we would not have any football 

coaches.” 

TESTIMONY OF RESPONDENT’S HUSBAND 

42. 

Scott Wilcher is respondent’s husband. He was present during the 

January 9, 2020 incident at Parker Whitney Elementary School and the December 14, 

2022 incident at the wrestling match. He testified consistently with respondent’s 

account concerning both incidents. 

TESTIMONY BY RESPONDENT’S COLLEAGUES 

43. 

Timothy Scott Hamilton was the Rocklin High School wrestling coach at 

the time of the December 14, 2022 incident. Mr. Hamilton confirmed some wrestling 

team members had refused to attend a prior wrestling practice and did not participate 

in the December 14, 2022 match. He had heard the students and their families were 

unhappy about his perceived sexual orientation. At the time, he was distraught by 

19 

those events. He even brought his wife to the December 14, 2022 match for support 

and protection. He later resigned as the coach for the sake of his own mental health 

and wellbeing. 

Mr. Hamilton found respondent helpful and supportive as a wrestling team 

parent volunteer. He did not observe respondent’s interactions with the group of 

students in the bleachers because he was focused on the wrestling match. However, he 

conceded that if the allegations regarding respondent’s statements to the students 

were true, they were highly inappropriate and grounds for dismissal. 

44. 

Tosha Chauvin has been a District special education aide for 

approximately 11 years. She worked with respondent daily. They are also friends 

outside of work. Ms. Chauvin described respondent as passionate about her job and 

highly knowledgeable about special education. Other District employees frequently 

asked for respondent’s help with complex issues. When respondent was placed on 

leave in Spring 2023, Rocklin High School special education students were negatively 

impacted. The students “felt like their safety net had been removed.” Ms. Chauvin 

strongly believed respondent should be reinstated. 

At the time of hearing, Ms. Chauvin had not reviewed the Statement of Charges. 

She has heard respondent use profanity in the classroom, but never directed towards a 

student. She explained, “sometimes a word just slips out, we all do that.” Ms. Chauvin 

agreed calling a student a “fucking disgrace” or “fucking loser” would be highly 

inappropriate. 

TESTIMONY BY PARENTS 

45. 

J.D. and T.H. each parent a special education student previously taught 

by respondent. Both described respondent as an excellent teacher who is professional, 

20 

passionate, caring, attentive, and an advocate for her students’ needs. Neither believed 

respondent should be dismissed. At the time of their testimony, J.D. and T.H. were 

unaware of the specific allegations against respondent. They never heard respondent 

use profanity. They agreed that if respondent called a student a “fucking loser” or 

“fucking disgrace,” it would be highly inappropriate. 

Credibility Evaluation Concerning Alleged Incidents 

46. 

Respondent’s account concerning the five alleged incidents materially 

differed from the accounts provided by the District’s witnesses. Thus, it is necessary to 

evaluate witness credibility to determine whether the District established each alleged 

incident by a preponderance of the evidence. 

47. 

“Except as otherwise provided by statute, the court or jury may consider 

in determining the credibility of a witness any matter that has any tendency in reason 

to prove or disprove the truthfulness of his testimony at the hearing, including but not 

limited to any of the following: (a) [h]is demeanor while testifying and the manner in 

which he testifies[;] (b) [t]he character of his testimony[;] (c) [t]he extent of his capacity 

to perceive, to recollect, or to communicate any matter about which he testifies[;] 

(d) [t]he extent of his opportunity to perceive any matter about which he testifies[;] 

(e) [h]is character for honesty or veracity or their opposites[;] (f) [t]he existence or 

nonexistence of a bias, interest, or other motive[;] (g) [a] statement previously made by 

him that is consistent with his testimony at the hearing[;] (h) [a] statement made by 

him that is inconsistent with any part of his testimony at the hearing[;] (i) [t]he 

existence or nonexistence of any fact testified to by him[;] (j) [h]is attitude toward the 

action in which he testifies or toward the giving of testimony[;] [and] (k) [h]is 

admission of untruthfulness.” (Evid. Code, § 780.) 

21 

48. 

It is well-settled that the trier of fact may accept part of the testimony of 

a witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted. 

(Stevens v. Parke, Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67 [citations omitted].) The trier of 

fact may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly 

contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences 

from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected 

material.” (Id., at 67–68, quoting Nevarov v. Caldwell (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 777.) 

Moreover, the trier of fact may reject the testimony of a witness, even an expert, 

although not contradicted. (Foreman & Clark Corp. v. Fallon (1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.) 

The testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence.” (Kearl v. 

Bd. of Medical Quality Assurance (1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) 

49. 

As to the January 9, 2020 incident, Ms. Murphy credibly testified 

respondent used profanity in the Parker Whitney Elementary School office when 

referring to her son’s teacher. Ms. Murphy’s testimony is supplemented by Ms. 

Blackwell’s consistent written statement. Neither Ms. Murphy nor Ms. Blackwell had 

any motive to fabricate such an allegation against respondent. Indeed, respondent 

testified she never had issues with either individual. Respondent admitted she was 

frustrated and upset with D.W.’s teacher on January 9, 2020. Although respondent and 

her husband denied her use of profanity, both have a personal and financial interest in 

her continued employment by the District. Thus, their testimony is less credible. In 

sum, the preponderance of the evidence demonstrates respondent engaged in the 

alleged conduct on January 9, 2020. 

That Dr. Limoges previously reached a contrary conclusion does not change the 

outcome. The Commission gives no deference to Dr. Limoges’s investigative findings, 

22 

whether favorable or unfavorable to respondent. Instead, the Commission 

independently decides the matter on the evidence in the record as a whole. 

Additionally, respondent’s contention she visited the school office only in her 

capacity as a parent lacks merit. As numerous witnesses testified, a District teacher is 

expected to behave professionally on District property at all times. 

50. 

As to the February 18, 2022 incident, S.B. credibly testified respondent 

called S.B. and C.H. stupid, used profanity towards them, and made a hand gesture at 

them before driving away. S.B.’s testimony is supplemented by C.H.’s consistent written 

complaint. Both parents felt strongly enough about respondent’s conduct to raise it at 

a subsequent Board meeting. Neither S.B. nor C.H. had any motive to fabricate the 

allegations against respondent. Respondent admitted she never taught S.B. or C.H.’s 

children, had no prior interactions with S.B. or C.H., and had “no idea” what motivated 

S.B. or C.H. to make their allegations. By contrast, respondent has an interest in 

minimizing her conduct that day to avoid discipline. At hearing, respondent also 

denied making any hand gesture towards the parents. This is inconsistent with her 

prior deposition testimony that she waved at them. Thus, her testimony is generally 

less credible. In sum, the preponderance of the evidence demonstrates respondent 

engaged in the alleged conduct on February 18, 2022. 

51. 

As to the July 2022 incident, Ms. Martin and Ms. Kevin credibly testified 

respondent used profanity towards Ms. Martin, and Ms. Martin credibly testified that 

respondent threatened her future employment. Ms. Martin and Ms. Kevin had no 

motive to fabricate the allegations against respondent. Indeed, respondent conceded 

Ms. Martin was a good aide and she was upset by Ms. Martin’s transfer request. 

Moreover, Ms. Kevin did not know who respondent was when she observed the 

encounter. At hearing, respondent also conceded she may have used profanity during 

23 

the encounter but testified it was not directed at Ms. Martin. That testimony lacks 

credibility given respondent’s interest in minimizing her conduct to avoid discipline. 

Additionally, that respondent lacked direct authority to hire and fire Ms. Martin is 

inconsequential. As a teacher, respondent supervises aides and has significant indirect 

influence over their hiring and firing. Thus, her statements to Ms. Martin could 

reasonably be perceived as threatening. In sum, the preponderance of the evidence 

demonstrates respondent engaged in the alleged July 2022 conduct. 

52. 

As to the August 20, 2022 incident, respondent admitted her 

communications with K.R. and/or her parents that led to the August 20, 2022 meeting. 

Respondent credibly testified she had K.R.’s best interests at heart. However, the 

preponderance of the evidence also established she overstepped her role as a teacher, 

especially after the family became dissatisfied with her involvement. Additionally, Ms. 

Duffy and Mr. Pappas credibly testified as to respondent’s behavior at the August 20, 

2022 meeting. Specifically, they recalled respondent got up, raised her voice, and 

pointed her finger at C.S. before leaving the room. Respondent herself did not dispute 

that allegation. In sum, the preponderance of the evidence demonstrates respondent 

engaged in the alleged conduct on August 20, 2022. 

53. 

As to the December 14, 2022 incident, Ms. Baker and Mr. Eckenburg 

credibly testified respondent approached a group of Rocklin High School students 

sitting in the bleachers at the wrestling match, berated them, and used profanity 

towards them. Neither Ms. Baker nor Mr. Eckenburg had any motive to fabricate the 

allegations against respondent. Respondent admitted she never had any issues with 

them. Although respondent and her husband denied her use of profanity, both have a 

personal and financial interest in her continued employment by the District. Thus, their 

testimony is less credible. The declaration by D.A. is also entitled to less weight. D.A. 

24 

stated he did not hear respondent use profanity, but he did not testify at hearing and 

was not subject to cross-examination. In sum, the preponderance of the evidence 

demonstrates respondent engaged in the alleged conduct towards the students in the 

bleachers on December 14, 2022. 

However, the preponderance of the evidence did not establish respondent 

engaged in an unprofessional verbal altercation with J.P. and her husband following 

the wrestling match. Respondent and her husband Mr. Wilcher credibly testified J.P. 

and her husband initiated the confrontation. Their testimony is supported by J.P.’s own 

testimony and the observation by Ms. Baker. Moreover, J.P. herself testified 

respondent did not use profanity. 

The preponderance of the evidence also did not establish respondent was 

intoxicated at the wrestling match. Respondent admitted she had consumed one and a 

half beers after work hours and before going to watch the wrestling match. However, 

there was no credible evidence respondent was intoxicated at the match. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

The District bears the burden of proving cause to dismiss respondent by 

a preponderance of the evidence. (Parker v. City of Fountain Valley (1981) 127 

Cal.App.3d 99, 113; Gardner v. Com. on Professional Competence (1985) 164 

Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039–1040.) The term “preponderance of the evidence” means “more 

likely than not.” (Sandoval v. Bank of Am. (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1387–1388.) 

25 

Applicable Law 

2. 

A permanent District employee may be dismissed for cause only after a 

dismissal hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, and 44944.) Under Education Code 

section 44944, subdivision (c), the dismissal hearing must be conducted by a three-

member Commission on Professional Competence. Two members of the Commission 

must be non-District teachers, one chosen by the respondent and one by the district, 

and the third member of the Commission must be an administrative law judge from 

the Office of Administrative Hearings. 

3. 

When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, the Commission 

may only vote for or against it. The Commission may not dispose of a charge of 

dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. 

(d)(1) & (3).) The Commission’s decision “shall not be based on nonsubstantive 

procedural errors committed by the school district or governing board of the school 

district unless the errors are prejudicial errors.” (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (d)(2).) 

Cause for Dismissal 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

4. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), a school district 

may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for immoral conduct. Immoral conduct 

is defined as conduct that: 

is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary 

to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

26 

or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare. 

(Bd. of Ed. of San Francisco Unified Sch. Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 

811; see also San Diego Unified Sch. Dist. v. Com. on Professional Competence (2011) 

194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) 

5. 

Moreover, the definition of immoral conduct “must be considered in 

conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are 

imposed responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

regard to other callings.” (San Diego Unified Sch. Dist., supra, 194 Cal.App.4th at 

p. 1466.) A teacher is often described as “an exemplar, whose words and actions are 

likely to be followed by the children coming under [the teacher’s] care and protection.” 

(Palo Verde Unified Sch. Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 970.)  

6. 

Here, respondent used profanity on multiple occasions towards District 

staff, parents, and students. She also threatened the future employment of a District 

aide. Such conduct was verbally abusive, aggressive, and indecent. It shows moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community and an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. As such, it is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Accordingly, the 

District established cause to dismiss respondent under Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(1). 

27 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

7. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), a school district 

may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for unprofessional conduct. The term 

“unprofessional conduct” is not defined by the Education Code. Nevertheless, the 

California Supreme Court has held the term may be construed consistent with 

common usage as conduct that “violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or 

such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.” (Bd. 

of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) 

8. 

Here, respondent used profanity on multiple occasions towards District 

staff, parents, and students. She also threatened the future employment of a District 

aide. Additionally, respondent got up, raised her voice, and pointed her finger at a 

parent before leaving a meeting with that parent. Such conduct violates the ethical 

code of the teaching profession and is unbecoming of a teacher. Even when faced with 

difficult students, parents, or co-workers, a teacher is expected to possess and exercise 

good judgment and self-control. Accordingly, the District established cause to dismiss 

respondent under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2). 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

9. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), a school district 

may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for “evident unfitness for service.” The 

term “evident unfitness for service,” means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified Sch. Dist. v. Com. on Professional Competence 

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term “connotes a fixed character trait, 

28 

presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) 

10.  Here, respondent continued to engage in the immoral and 

unprofessional conduct discussed above notwithstanding multiple warnings and 

progressive discipline by the District. Respondent’s pattern of misconduct reasonably 

suggests a temperamental defect of character rendering her unable or unwilling to 

conform her conduct to professional expectations. To be sure, respondent’s 

substantive knowledge or skills as a special education teacher are not in question. 

However, her continued inability to self-regulate and exercise self-control jeopardizes 

the emotional wellbeing of District students, staff, and parents, and renders her 

unsuitable for the profession of teaching. Accordingly, the District established cause to 

dismiss respondent under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 

PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF BOARD RULES AND REGULATIONS 

11. 

Under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), a school district 

may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for “[p]ersistent violation of or refusal 

to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the 

school district employing him or her.” A “single violation is not sufficient to warrant 

dismissal; it is the persistent disregard of school rules that the subdivision is designed 

to regulate.” (Governing Bd. of the Oakdale Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 

Cal.App.3d 77, 84.) 

12. 

Board Policy No. 4119.21 (Professional Standards) requires District 

employees to: 

29 

Maintain the highest ethical standards, behave 

professionally, follow district policies and regulations, abide 

by state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment 

when interacting with students and other members of the 

school community. Employees shall engage in conduct that 

enhances the integrity of the district, advances the goals of 

the district’s educational program, and contributes to a 

positive school climate. 

13. 

Board Policy No. 5131.2 (Bullying) provides “[n]o individual or group 

shall, through physical, written, verbal, or other means, harass, sexually harass, 

threaten, intimidate, retaliate, cyberbully, cause bodily injury to, or commit hate 

violence against any student or school personnel.” 

14. 

Board Policy No. 5137 (Positive School Climate) provides “[a]ll staff are 

expected to serve as role models for students by demonstrating positive, professional 

attitudes and respect toward each student and other staff members.” 

15. 

Board Policy No. 6145.2 (Athletic Competition) requires “[s]tudent 

athletes, coaches, parents/guardians, spectators, and others to “demonstrate good 

sportsmanship, ethical conduct, and fair play during all athletic competitions. They 

shall also abide by the core principles of trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, 

fairness, caring, and good citizenship . . . .” 

16.  Here, respondent violated the aforementioned policies when she used 

profanity towards District staff, parents, and students, and threatened the future 

employment of a District aide. Respondent failed to uphold her ethical responsibilities, 

failed to use good judgment, acted unprofessionally, and engaged in aggressive, 

30 

bullying, and disparaging behavior on multiple occasions. Taken as a whole, 

respondent’s behavior demonstrates a persistent disregard of Board rules and 

regulations. Accordingly, the District established cause to dismiss respondent under 

Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 

17. 

The Statement of Charges also alleged respondent violated additional 

Board rules and regulations. Any such additional violations were not established by a 

preponderance of the evidence. 

Propriety of Dismissal 

18. 

Even when cause for dismissal exists, the District must also demonstrate 

dismissal is appropriate because there is a factual nexus between respondent’s 

misconduct and her unfitness to teach. (Morrison v. State Bd. of Education (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 299.) In Morrison, the California Supreme Court provided a list of factors 

for assessing a person’s fitness to teach. The inquiry includes (1) the likelihood the 

conduct may have adversely affected others and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of 

certification held by the party involved; (4) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

teacher involved or other teachers. 

19. 

“The [Morrison] factors are not rules, but broad classes of issues to be 

considered to assist in determining whether to impose discipline. Only the relevant 

factors need to be analyzed.” (Ricasa v. Office of Admin. Hearings (2018) 31 

31 

Cal.App.5th 262, 285.) The factors may apply to all charges in the aggregate, 

considering the totality of offensive conduct. (Woodland Joint Unified Sch. Dist., supra, 

2 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1456–1457 [“When a camel’s back is broken we need not weigh 

each straw in its load to see which one could have done the deed.”].) 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE IMPACT AND DEGREE OF ADVERSITY 

20. 

Respondent stated another District teacher “just needs to shut the fuck 

up”; told parents they “look like two fucking idiots standing here with your stupid 

signs”; threatened a subordinate aide by telling her “you fucked me and when 

someone fucks me, they are done! You will never work at Rocklin High again!”; raised 

her voice and pointed her finger at a parent during a meeting; and told students at a 

wrestling match they were a “fucking disgrace.” Numerous witnesses testified they 

were shocked and/or intimidated by respondent’s statements and behavior. As such, it 

had a significant adverse impact on District students, parents, and staff. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

21. 

The vast majority of respondent’s misconduct occurred in 2022. As such, 

her misconduct is relatively recent. 

TYPE OF CERTIFICATION HELD 

22. 

Respondent holds a special education credential and is a special 

education teacher. Given special education students are a vulnerable student 

population, respondent’s inability to self-regulate and exercise self-control is even 

more troubling. 

32 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

23. 

The record does not contain credible or persuasive evidence of 

extenuating circumstances for the incidents of misconduct. To be sure, respondent 

encountered a difficult and combative parent at the August 20, 2022 meeting. 

Although she may well have been justified in leaving the meeting, she was not entitled 

to raise her voice and point her finger at the parent. Even when faced with difficult 

students, parents, or co-workers, a teacher is expected to possess and exercise good 

judgment and self-control. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES 

24. 

Respondent testified she confronted the students in the bleachers on 

December 14, 2022 because she was offended by their homophobic protest against 

the wrestling coach. Any homophobia or bigotry is unacceptable. Opposing it is 

laudable. However, the manner in which respondent addressed the issue was not 

praiseworthy. The students were not heckling or engaging in any overt actions at the 

wrestling match that required respondent’s imminent intervention. Instead of calmly 

raising the matter through appropriate channels, respondent aggressively confronted 

the students and used profanity towards them without specifying why she objected to 

their presence. Such conduct was blameworthy, not praiseworthy. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

25. 

As discussed above, respondent continued to engage in immoral and 

unprofessional conduct after multiple warnings and progressive discipline by the 

District. This suggests a temperamental defect likely to result in recurrence of such 

behavior. Additionally, respondent’s hearing testimony confirmed she fails to 

appreciate the seriousness of her misconduct. Although she acknowledged she could 

33 

have handled some of the incidents better, she also concerningly testified that using 

profanity at a student is not necessarily intimidating, harassing, or embarrassing. She 

thought it “depends on the situation.” Such troubling lack of insight does not bode 

well for respondent’s future ability to conform her conduct to professional 

expectations. 

ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT UPON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 

26. 

Respondent argued the discipline sought violates her parental rights and 

right to speak out against bigotry. That argument lacks merit. The District does not 

seek to discipline respondent for advocating for her son’s education or for opposing 

bigotry. Instead, it takes issue with the completely unprofessional manner in which she 

expressed herself. Her use of profanity and aggressive behavior was unnecessary to 

vindicate her constitutional rights. Thus, respondent’s discipline would not have an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of respondent or other 

teachers. 

CONCLUSION 

27. 

After considering the Morrison factors, respondent’s conduct in the 

aggregate indicates a factual nexus between her conduct and unfitness to teach. To be 

sure, respondent’s witnesses laud respondent’s substantive competence, caring nature, 

passion for teaching, and professionalism. However, those witnesses were generally 

unfamiliar with the Statement of Charges and conceded that the alleged conduct, if 

proven, would be highly inappropriate. Additionally, that the District requested 

respondent to continue serving two students on home hospital while placed on 

administrative leave is not dispositive. The dire need for home hospital coverage is 

well known in the special education community. Given respondent was only asked to 

34 

serve in a limited role in a controlled environment, it does not undermine the 

conclusion about her general unfitness to teach. In sum, based on the totality of the 

circumstances, dismissal is the appropriate discipline. 

Impact of Miller v. Chico Unified School District  

28. 

The California Supreme Court held a school board is prohibited from 

“basing any employment decision on its analysis of derogatory information unless the 

board has notified the employee of such derogatory information and has afforded him 

an opportunity to comment upon it.” (Miller v. Chico Unified Sch. Dist. (1979) 24 Cal.3d 

703, 707.) Respondent argued the District cannot rely on the January 9, 2020 incident 

to dismiss respondent because Dr. Limoges did not place the corresponding 

memorandum in her personnel file. As such, respondent did not have an opportunity 

to comment or respond to it. 

29. 

As an initial matter, respondent’s argument does not appear supported 

by the record in this case. The February 26, 2020 Conference Summary Memorandum 

reflected Dr. Limoges had a conversation with respondent about the January 9, 2020 

incident. Thus, respondent was provided notice of the derogatory information and had 

an opportunity to comment on it during her conversation with Dr. Limoges. Moreover, 

even though the February 26, 2020 Conference Summary Memorandum was not 

placed in respondent’s personnel file, respondent was not precluded from filing a 

written response. 

30. 

Even if the Commission were to exclude the January 9, 2020 incident 

from all consideration in this matter, it is not a “crucial element” in the Commission’s 

decision. (Miller, supra, 24 Cal.3d at p. 707.) The causes for dismissal and analysis of 

35 

the Morrison factors are amply supported by the other multiple proven instances of 

misconduct. 

ORDER 

Respondent Jennifer Kaiser is DISMISSED as a permanent certificated employee 

of the Rocklin Unified School District. 

DATE:  

DATE: 

DATE:  

SUSAN CAROL EVANS 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence 

JULIE MURDAUGH 

Commissioner 

Commission on Professional Competence 

WIM VAN ROOYEN 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional Competence 

36 

Susan Evans (Dec 6, 2023 09:19 PST)Susan Evans12/06/2023Julie Murdaugh (Dec 6, 2023 09:28 PST)12/06/202312/06/2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICE 

This is the final administrative decision; both parties are bound by this decision. 

Either party may appeal this decision to a court of competent jurisdiction within 90 

days. 

37 

