BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
AND A COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
FOR THE LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
YAMILA ESTRADA, (EN 566989), 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2023070207 
DECISION 
The Commission on Professional Competence, consisting of Jacqueline Tyler,
complainant’s designee, Stephanie R. Cobb, respondent’s designee, and Jennifer M. 
Russell, Senior Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by video conference on January 5, 8-12, 16-19, 
22-26 and February 5-9, 2024.
Susan Hyman and Leslie Chi, Assistant General Counsels, represented 
complainant Francisco J. Serrato, Ed.D., Interim Chief Human Resources Officer for the
Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD or District). Tamra M. Smith, Attorney at 
Law, with Ajilal Hassan, Law Clerk, of Equality Law LLP, represented respondent Yamila 
Estrada (Estrada), who was present on all hearing days. 2Complainant seeks dismissal of Estrada from the District based on allegations of 
unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for service, 
persistent violation of laws and regulations, and willful refusal to perform assignments 
without reasonable cause. Testimony and documents were received in evidence. The 
record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on February 9, 2024. The 
Commission determined complainant failed to establish by the preponderance of the 
evidence Estrada’s unfitness to teach. The Accusation is dismissed. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Estrada is a permanent certificated employee of the District. 
2. On June 7, 2023, the District filed and served on Estrada a Notice of the 
Board of Education Intention to Dismiss and Placement of Immediate Unpaid 
Suspension with a Statement of Charges alleging acts and omissions allegedly 
constituting Estrada’s unprofessional conduct in violation of Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(2), unsatisfactory performance in violation of Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(5), evident unfitness for service in violation of Education 
Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), persistent violation of or refusal to obey the 
school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 
the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the 
school district employing her, in violation of Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
district, in violation of Education Code section 44939.33. On July 7, 2023, Estrada filed a Request for Hearing and Notice of 
Defense objecting to the Statement of Charges on grounds that, among other things, 
it fails to state acts or omissions or a proper factual basis on which the District may 
proceed. 
4. On October 6, 2023, the District filed with OAH and served on Estrada an 
Accusation containing the Statement of Charges. The Accusation is the operative 
pleading in this matter. At hearing, pursuant to Government Code 11507, complainant 
amended the Accusation to omit Charges 1, 2, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 34, 35, and 
125. Concomitantly, discipline and directives pertaining to these omitted Charges are 
stricken from the Accusation. 
5. On November 9, 2023, Estrada filed a First Amended Request for Hearing 
and Notice of Defense asserting, among other things, the District seeks dismissal of 
Estrada in retaliation for certain protected union activity, in violation of Government 
Code section 3543.6, subdivision (a). 
6. All jurisdictional requirements are satisfied. 
District Standards, Student Assessments, and Teacher Evaluations 
COMMON CORE STATE STANDARDS
7. The California State Board of Education (Board) establishes the academic 
standards for all kindergarten through twelfth-grade students in the California 
education system as well as policies for curriculum, instructional materials, 
assessments, and accountability. The Board has adopted the Common Core State 
Standards (“the Standards”), which provide benchmarks in Mathematics and English
Language Arts and Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects 4(ELA) for students’ acquisition of the knowledge and skills necessary to progress from 
one grade to the next, eventual graduation from high school, and college and career 
readiness. (See Exh. 53.) The District adheres to the Standards. 
8. Students who are English language learners are required to achieve the 
benchmarks set forth in the Standards. Thus, English Language Development 
Standards (ELD) provide for instruction for English language learner students to 
develop their listening, speaking, reading, and written English skills in order for them
to access subject area content. 
9. Instruction for students with disabilities incorporates certain services and 
supports, including an Individualized Education Program (IEP), accommodations, and 
specialized teachers, therapists, and personnel, among other things, to meet the 
Standards. 
STUDENT ASSESSMENTS  
10. The Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS) is a series of 
procedures and measures administered to students in kindergarten through fifth 
grade to monitor and screen their acquisition of early literacy skills. 
11. Throughout their educational development, English language learner 
students are administered the English Language Proficiency Assessments for California 
(ELPAC) to measure their progress learning English and level of English proficiency. 
12. Reclassification is the process whereby English language learner students 
transitioning from elementary to middle school are deemed fluent and proficient in 
English after meeting various Board and District linguistic and academic criteria.
English language learner students unable to meet the criteria for reclassification by the 5fifth grade are required to continue with an ELA course of studies, and forego elective 
classes, in middle school until they do. 
TEACHER EVALUATIONS  
13. The LAUSD Teaching and Learning Framework (TLF) is a research-based 
teacher development and evaluation protocol. The TLF is used to provide teachers with 
guidance and feedback on areas of strength and where improvement is needed in 
their design and delivery of instruction to culturally, linguistically, economically, and 
academically diverse learners. The TLF is used in conjunction with classroom 
observations, professional conversations (i.e., planning conferences and pre-and post-
observation conferences), and artifacts such as lesson plans, samples of student work, 
samples of assessments, or other types of documentation evidencing a teacher’s 
practice to evaluate a teacher’s instruction design and delivery. 
14. Components of the TLF consist of five standards. Standard 1: Planning 
and Preparation, which includes demonstrating knowledge and command of subject 
area content and content-related pedagogical approaches, an awareness of students’ 
skills, knowledge, and language proficiency, and design of standard-based learning 
activities and assessment criteria; Standard 2: Classroom Environment, which includes 
the creation of an academic environment or climate of respect and rapport, the 
management of classroom routines, procedures, and transitions, as well as monitoring 
and responding to student behaviors; Standard 3: Delivery of Instruction, which 
includes communicating instructional aims or objectives, using academic language to 
deliver subject area content, and employing standard-based projects, assignments, 
and activities to engage students in learning; Standard 4: Additional Professional 
Responsibilities, which includes maintaining accurate records to track student 
progress, communicating with families, and demonstrating professionalism through 6ethical conduct and compliance with federal, state, district, and school regulation; and 
Standard 5: Professional Growth, which entails the use of reflection to inform future 
instruction and inquiry and collaboration with colleagues. For each of the five 
components of the TFL, there are four rating categories for evaluating whether and to 
what extent observed teaching practices are aligned with the Standards. The four 
rating categories are Ineffective Practice, Developing Practice, Effective Practice, and 
Highly Effective Practice. 
15. Article X of the 2019-2022 Agreement Between the Los Angeles Unified 
School District and United Teachers Los Angeles (Collective Bargaining Agreement) 
governs the evaluation requirements applicable to this case, including evaluation 
frequency, notifications to the employee being evaluated, and the selection of 
performance focus elements. (See Exh. RX 1192 at pp. 66-77 [B2348-B2359].) Typically, 
a District school’s administrator, the principal or assistant principal, conducts one or 
more informal observations of a teacher each academic year to ensure their teaching is 
in accordance with the Standards. The administrator meets with and provides feedback 
to the teacher. The teacher is afforded an opportunity to respond. If warranted, the 
teacher receives assistance and guidance through the Peer Assistance and Review 
(PAR) Program. The administrator documents the informal observation, matters 
discussed in the meeting, as well as any assistance, guidance, and directives provided 
the teacher. Subsequent informal observations may occur to determine whether the 
teacher implemented previous guidance and directives. 
16. Additionally, each academic year, the administrator conducts a planned, 
formal observation of the teacher’s classroom teaching. The administrator and teacher 
participate in an initial planning conference for the formal classroom observation 
where the teacher selects three focus elements from the TLF’s Standard 1, 2, or 3, the 7administrator selects three focus elements from the TLF’s Standard 3, and 
administrator and teacher jointly select one additional focus element. During the 
formal classroom observation, the administrator observes the teacher’s practice and 
collects evidence from the beginning to the end of the lesson. The administrator and 
the teacher participate in a post-observation conference to discuss teaching practices 
and next steps for the teacher’s professional development. 
17. At the conclusion of a typical academic year, the administrator provides 
the teacher with a Final Evaluation containing performance ratings in several 
categories. Performance ratings are either Below Standard Performance, Meets 
Standard Performance, or Exceeds Standard Performance. 
18. The District’s 2020-2021 academic year was atypical. In response to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, District schools closed for in-person instruction and adopted to 
an online Distance Learning program to prevent the spread of COVID-19. 
Concomitantly, the District and United Teachers Los Angeles (UTLA) entered into a 
2020-2021 Distance Learning Sideletter agreeing, “For the 2020-2021 school year, 
evaluation of unit members shall be limited to non-permanent employees (provisional 
and probationary).” (Exh. RX 1220 at p. 3 [B2805].) 
District Class Description-Elementary Teacher
19. According to the District’s “Class Description-Elementary Teacher,” dated 
July 2019, an elementary teacher’s essential functions include: teaching self-contained 
classes in kindergarten through grade six in elementary schools in accordance with the 
requirements of approved courses of study and at a rate and level commensurate with 
established student progress expectations using adopted textbooks and other 
instructional materials authorized for such courses; using information about individual 8students’ academic strengths, needs, and progress in planning; designing activities to 
engage students in cognitively challenging work aligned to standards; using resources 
to promote high levels of learning and student engagement in the classroom 
environment; closely monitoring student learning in order to understand how students 
are progressing toward learning objectives and providing students with instructive and 
timely feedback to move their learning forward; establishing a safe and supportive 
classroom environment, where risk-taking is encouraged and students feel free 
contributing their ideas, and teacher and student interactions are respectful and polite 
to promote a positive learning environment for all students; providing clear behavior 
expectations for students and monitoring student behavior throughout the class and 
school campus; communicating with families to create a partnership around student 
learning by providing information about the instructional program and the progress of 
their child(ren); and reflecting on practice and student work to determine what went 
well and what changes could improve instruction, and using reflection to inform future 
instruction. (See Exh. 73.) 
Alta California Elementary School 
20. The District’s Alta California Elementary School (Alta California) provides 
instruction to District students enrolled in transitional kindergarten through the fifth 
grade. As a “Title 1 school,” Alta California is a recipient of federally funded benefits 
intended to reduce the education achievement gap between students who are and are 
not from low-income households.
21. From 2015 to the present, Jose Benitez has served as Alta California’s 
principal. 922. From 2015 to 2021, Vanessa Victorio served as Alta California’s assistant 
principal. 
23. From 2021 to the present, Carolina Martin has been serving as Alta 
California’s assistant principal.
24. During the 2019/2020 academic year, Laura Tahmasebi served as the 
designated Fifth Grade Level Chairperson for Alta California. In that capacity, 
Tahmasebi convened bi-monthly meetings, during which data pertaining to student 
progress and assessments were analyzed and discussed along with instructional 
techniques and resources. 
25. Tahmasebi conducted no evaluation of Estrada’s classroom performance. 
As mentioned in Factual Findings 91 and 108, Estrada observed Tahmasebi’s classroom 
management.
26. During the 2019/2020 and 2020/2021 academic years and the 2021 fall 
semester, Christy Maar was the Title III EL Instructional Coach for several District 
schools, including Alta California. As a Title III Instructional Coach, Maar mentored 
teachers to improve their effectiveness as educators. Maar does not evaluate teacher 
classroom performance. As Maar variously testified, “I wasn’t there to evaluate. I was 
there to help improve teachers’ support of EL learners” and “I’m not there to say this is 
good or bad. I’m there to say you might want to take a look at this.” As noted in 
Factual Finding 91, Maar provided instructional coaching to Estrada, including lesson 
demonstrations and feedback on pre-teaching sessions. During instructional coaching, 
Maar provided no evaluative rating of Estrada’s classroom performance to Estrada. 
27. The Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) Program is a state-wide program 
to provide assistance and guidance to new and experienced classroom teachers to 10 improve their instructional skills. During the 2019/2020 academic year, Laurie Chase 
served as Estrada’s PAR consulting teacher. During the 2020/2021 academic year, 
Cheryl Mallin served as Estrada’s PAR consulting teacher. 
Respondent 
28. Estrada earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1995 and a Master of Arts 
degree in 2009 from California State University Northridge. Estrada has a Clear 
Multiple Subject Credential and a Bilingual Crosscultural Language in Academic 
Development (BCLAD) authorization to provide specialized instruction to individuals 
for whom English is a second language.
29. Estrada’s career as an educator working in the District began in 1985. 
Estrada has served as a teaching assistant, substitute teacher, and teacher at various 
District schools. From 2012 until the June 7, 2023 recommendation for her dismissal 
from the District, Estrada was an “Elementary Teacher” to Alta California. 
30. Estrada is an active member of UTLA. In April 2019, Estrada became the 
UTLA Chapter Chair for Alta California with responsibility for, among other things, 
apprising the membership of UTLA policies, organizing school site activities, and 
defending members’ professional rights. 
The Hearing Evidence 
31. For the 2018/2019 academic year, Estrada received a “Below Standard” 
rating on her Final Evaluation Report. (See Exh. 75.) Consistent with District practices, 
Estrada was further evaluated commencing with the 2019/2020 academic year. 
32. Victorio, Benitez, and Martin, the Alta California administrators, observed 
and evaluated Estrada’s classroom performance during the 2019/2020, 2021/2022, and 11 2022/2023 academic years, as discussed below. Collectively, Victorio, Benitez, and 
Martin testified that Estrada demonstrated ineffectualness in her preparation and 
planning of instructional activities for students, delivery of instruction consistent with 
the Standards, and maintenance of a classroom environment conducive for learning. In 
large measure, their testimony on direct examination conveyed their generalized 
impressions, conclusions, and opinions of Estrada’s classroom performance. However, 
during cross-examination, in several instances their testimony contradicted their 
reported observations documented in conference memoranda they prepared. 
33. Guided by Evidence Code section 780 and the decisional law, discussed 
in Legal Conclusions 3 through 7, the Commissioners assessed credibility and 
considered and weighed the substance of these three administrators’ testimony. 
Regarding Victorio, the Commissioners afforded diminished weight to Victorio’s 
testimony, in part, because Victorio repeatedly flouted provisions of the Collective 
Bargaining Agreement governing the sufficiency of a teacher’s preparation and 
planning. Confronted with a probing cross-examination, Victorio’s memory became 
conveniently absent. Victorio hesitantly recanted claims she made about observing 
multiple deficiencies during Estrada’s classroom instruction. Victorio’s failure to alert 
Estrada about dangerous student behaviors Victorio claimed she saw when she 
observed Estrada’s classroom called into question Victorio’s credibility and reliability as 
a narrator of events. 
34. Benitez’s credibility was similarly diminished because of his omission of 
material facts from his evaluation of Estrada’s performance, including the effect of 
COVID on in-person classroom instruction and the effect of a temporary medical 
condition on Estrada’s discharge of her duties. On several matters, Benitez grudgingly 
gave credit to Estrada although the evidence showed credit was warranted. Benitez, at 12 times, impugned his own written narration of what he purportedly observed occurring 
in Estrada’s classroom when he admitted to limitations in his scripting. In addition, the 
tenor of Benitez’s testimony suggested tension and personal animosity seeped into 
the professional relationship between him and Estrada, thus affecting his objectivity as 
an evaluator of her classroom. Benitez appeared incensed by Estrada’s practice of 
documenting their interactions. The Commissioners, however, rejected any suggestion 
that Benitez’s criticisms of Estrada resulted from union animus. 
35. Martin’s testimony was comparatively straight forward. Martin testified 
without prevarication. Nonetheless, Martin’s testimony revealed her tendency to 
dismiss instructional techniques she did not favor regardless of their merit. The 
Commissioners accorded moderate weight to Martin’s testimony. 
36. Estrada primarily countered Victorio, Benitez, and Martin’s testimony with 
her own testimony, documentation of her teaching practice, and corroborating 
artifacts and student samples. Estrada presented as earnest, direct, and truthful as she 
answered counsels’ questions to the best of her recollection. 
37. Several parents, students, and colleagues offered anecdotal evidence of 
Estrada’s commitment to her students’ academic success. Their collective testimony 
merits moderate weight. 
38. The Commission’s credibility determinations aided its assessment of the 
totality of the evidence in the record to reconcile the allegations in the charges, 
detailed in Factual Findings 38 through 290, as follows. 13 2019/2020 Academic Year 
39. In the 2019/2020 academic year, Estrada was assigned a fifth grade 
classroom with a roster of 28 students. At hearing, Victorio variously described the 
demography of Estrada’s classroom as comprised of “students with special education 
classifications,” “a variety of students at different learning levels,” “diverse learners,”
“emerging English learners,” “emergent bilingual students,” and “newcomer,” meaning 
students new to the United States of America. Maar variously described the 
demography of Estrada’s classroom as comprised of “some struggling students,” 
“some challenging students,” and “students with behavior issues that were 
challenging.” 
SEPTEMBER 26,2019  INFORMAL CLASSROOM OBSERVATION  
40. On September 26, 2019, between 8:22 a.m. and 9:25 a.m., Victorio
conducted an unannounced observation of Estrada’s classroom. Tamika Dixon, an 
LAUSD administrator, accompanied Victorio to support Victorio as an evaluator. 
Victorio reports she observed Estrada checking student answers to a math homework 
assignment related to a lesson on . (See Exh. RX 1030.) At 
hearing, Estrada testified she had “no prior information” about the observation and “in 
that moment all of a sudden [she] blanked out and made errors.” Estrada played music 
to calm herself down to transition to a writing activity titled . (See 
Exh. Rx 1075 [B871].) Victorio reports Estrada sat for most of the observation with a 
small group of students, to whom she periodically asked a question about their 
progress, did not provide any other supports, or monitor. Victorio further reports when 
she left the classroom, she observed Estrada seated in the front of the room 
occasionally calling out to students to ask if they were completing the assignment. 14 Victorio reports she observed the students independently working on tasks listed on 
the whiteboard. 
41. On October 4, 2019, Victorio convened a post-observation conference, at 
which time she discussed her observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and 
preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of classroom environment. 
Victorio subsequently prepared an October 7, 2019 conference memorandum 
containing her observations and statements Estrada purportedly made during the 
post-observation conference. 
42. The October 7, 2019 conference memorandum contains a list of
assistance and guidance Victorio offered Estrada, including instructions for preparing 
weekly lesson plans and a directive to submit them to Victorio on the Friday before the 
upcoming week no later than 3:00 p.m. The assistance and guidance list includes 
instructions for the preparation of a white board in advance of instruction, the 
communication of the purpose of the lesson prior to direct instruction, the 
maximization of instructional time, the design of intentional group structures to 
support student learning, the communication of clear, explicit directions prior to 
beginning a task, the monitoring of student learning, the delivery of accurate 
information, as well as the development and reinforcement of an effective classroom 
management plan. 
43. The October 7, 2019 conference memorandum informs Estrada 
classroom coverage would be provided to allow Estrada to visit Tahmasebi’s fifth 
grade classroom to observe the use of effective strategies in classroom management 
and instruction. Victorio instructed Estrada to take advantage of professional 
development classes and attached the 15 . Victorio additionally informed Estrada a PAR Consulting Teacher was 
available to assist Estrada. 
44. The October 7, 2019 memorandum informs Estrada that failure to make 
immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to the issuance of 
a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service 
and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from the District. On March 
9, 2020, Estrada submitted a written rebuttal to the October 7, 2019 memorandum. 
(See Exh. Rx1032.) 
45. Based on Victorio’s October 7, 2019 memorandum, the District alleges
specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as follows. 
46. The District alleges in Charge 3, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
plan complete and clear lessons that contained the sufficient level of detail needed to 
deliver standards-based instruction to the 28 students assigned to her class. According 
to the District, in reviewing the lesson plans for September 26, 2019, which Estrada left 
on her desktop, the following was observed: 
a. Estrada did not include time frames or instruction, with 
the exception for Physical Education. 
b. Estrada did not identify learning objectives, the skills she 
planned to teach, and the materials she planned to use. 
c. Estrada listed generic activities or programs such as, 
“Mystery Science” and “Go Noodle,” which did not 
include the necessary details to assist and to 
systematically teach a standard like, Next Generation 16 Science Standard 5-PS2-1: Support an argument that the 
gravitational force exerted by Earth on objects is 
directed down. 
d. For the 100-minute block of ELA time, Estrada did not 
clarify what she planned to teach: 
i. For the 
, Estrada listed 
eight related Common Core State Standards 
(“CCSS”).
ii. For the 
 activity, Estrada listed five related CCSS.
iii. For the 
activity, Estrada listed ten 
related CCSS. 
47. The District alleges in Charge 4, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
plan appropriate learning opportunities to ensure student access to core curriculum 
and Estrada did not address the specific learning needs of all 28 students assigned to 
her class. Estrada did not plan or include supports such as:
a. ELD supports available on line and in the Teacher’s 
Edition of the Benchmark Advance textbook for 26 EL 
students.17 b. frequent checks for understanding or chunking of 
instructions and information for the four students who 
have IEPs. 
48. Evidence relevant to Charges 3 and 4 was jointly entered into the record 
and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not support 
Charges 3 and 4. At hearing Victorio acknowledged, notwithstanding her contrary 
opinion, Article IX, Section 4.1 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement does not 
require a teacher to itemize time specific tasks. Victorio admitted she assumed Estrada 
did not plan for an instructional task if Estrada did not write it down. Victorio did not 
account for a posted Daily Schedule or check her assumption with Estrada. At the time 
of Victorio’s classroom observation, a Daily Schedule with time frames for subject 
matter instruction was posted in Estrada’s classroom. (See Exh. RX1185.) Estrada’s 
lesson plan book provides for teaching ELA writing on September 23 and 24, 2019. 
However, DIBELS testing occurred on those days and, as a consequence, Estrada was 
required to adjust her lesson plan accordingly, including teaching the ELA writing 
activity Victorio observed two days later on September 26, 2019. Victorio admitted it is 
common for a teacher to write instructional objectives in shorthand format, as Estrada 
did in her lesson plan book (See Exh. RX 1027.)
49. The District alleges in Charge 5, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide the students with rigorous, standard-based learning activities to provide 
higher levels of thinking and engage them in learning about powers and exponents 
when she merely provided them with the answers to the math homework and retaught 
the problems from the homework that most of the students missed or called on 
students to explain how they solved the problems. 18 50. The District alleges in Charge 6, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
effectively communicate to students what they would be learning prior to engaging 
them in descriptive writing activities. Estrada merely stated, “We will continue with 
writing the story,” or words to that effect. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. Estrada motioned towards the white board, projected an 
image of an outline of a human figure, and stated, “We 
have to cut out the figure and describe the character,” or 
words to that effect. 
b. Estrada did not introduce, discuss, or review any 
standards such as CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.5: 
. 
c. Estrada did not connect how students would use their 
descriptive skills in their writing, pause to engage their 
level of understanding regarding the descriptive writing 
assignment; instead, Estrada moved on. 
51. The District alleges in Charge 7, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not
deliver a teacher-directed ELA descriptive writing lesson about a character that 
followed a gradual release to independent student practice. The specific allegations 
are as follows:
a. Estrada did not guide the students to recognize that the 
purpose of descriptive writing is to describe a person, 
place, or thing in such a way that a picture is formed in 19 the reader’s mind as outline in the 
Teacher’ Edition and , 
Estrada led the students in a whole-group, low-level 
activity. 
b. For approximately 37 minutes, without a clear 
standards-based objective, Estrada assigned the 
students to independently complete a descriptive essay 
on a character they created as she sat at a table with five 
to six students who she announced, “need a little help.” 
i. Estrada alternated from sitting at the table with 
her elbow on the desk and her chin resting in the 
palm of her hand as the students in her small 
group silently worked and walked around the 
room tidying up bookcases and tables. 
ii. At times Estrada questioned the students at her 
table or those who sat at their desks around the 
room using words to the effect of “What are you 
doing,” “Are you ready to type,” “[Student Name], 
are you working,” “Are you writing,” and “Necesita 
ayuda [Spanish for ‘Do you need help?’].” 
c. Without referring to any standards, Estrada told the 
students to put their writing away, prepare for Universal 
Access Time, where she erased the previous “Must Do’s” 20 and “May Do’s” from the white board, and rewrote new 
activities for the students to complete. 
d. Estrada did not refer to: 
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3: Write narratives to develop 
real or imagined experiences or events using effective 
technique, descriptive details, and clear event 
sequences.
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3.d: Use concrete words and 
phrases and sensory details to convey experiences and 
events precisely 
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.6: With some guidance and 
support from adults, use technology, including the 
Internet, to produce and publish writing as well as to 
interact and collaborate with others; to demonstrate 
sufficient command of keyboarding skills to type a 
minimum of two pages in a single sitting.
52. The District alleges in Charge 8, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide students with clear verbal or written directions or expectations, clarify the 
criteria, sequence the tasks, or provide any further direction for the descriptive writing 
task. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. At approximately 8:33 a.m., as the students engaged in 
off-topic conversations, Estrada asked students to take 
out their character descriptive writing and then called 21 out, using words to the effect of, “Shh! Shh! We have to
describe the character using details! Cut it [the 
character] out. Do a Thinking Map. Then type it in 
Google.” 
b. Immediately after, Estrada called on student R  to 
explain the assignment to which he responded, “We 
have to do that,” or words to that effect. Student 
R  pointed to the image respondent projected of a 
character the students needed to create and describe. 
c. Estrada did not provide clear directions or set any 
expectations for the task at approximately 8:48 a.m. 
(about half-way into the assignment). Almost one-third 
of the students continued to engage in off-topic 
conversations and had not started, and those who did, 
wrote a description of their character with inattention to 
detail, spelling, or grammar. 
53. Evidence relevant to Charges 5 through 8 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 5 through 8. The evidence showed the students had been working on 
the activity for at least two weeks. Estrada testified when she first 
introduced the activity to students, she “went over the standards,” which she “reviewed 
the next day and, before [Victorio’s] visit, it was reviewed as well.” Estrada introduced a 
poster with the heading , on which several itemized traits descriptive of 
a character’s appearance and personality appear. (See Exh. Rx. 1189.) The evidence 
showed Estrada employed multiple scaffolding and supports, including circle maps, 
22 gradual release methods, and “I do/We do” technique, to introduce a  
character, which was used as a model during the writing exercise. (See Exh. Rx. 1075 
[B872-B877].) Estrada showed a video “as a different modality of teaching.” 
54. At hearing, Victorio admitted she assumed, without verifying, Estrada did 
not use “I do/We do” techniques because Estrada did not say the specific words, 
“Remember my writing.” When student R  pointed and stated, “We have to do 
that,” Estrada asked, “Can you give me a complete sentence?” Student R  
responded, “We have to describe a character.” Estrada testified she did not observe 
the students engaging in off-topic conversations. A poster titled  hung on the wall of Estrada’s classroom. (See Exh. RX 1184.) 
Victorio claimed not seeing the posted contract. Estrada sent the parents of her 
students a September 3, 2019 letter enclosing a Discipline Plan with guidelines for 
homework and behavioral responsibilities and classroom rules and expectations. 
Estrada required parents to sign and return the Discipline Plan to acknowledge their 
receipt and support of the classroom rules, consequences, and rewards. (See Exh. RX 
1024.) At hearing, Victorio admitted she was aware of Estrada’s practice requiring 
parental acknowledgement of expectations for acceptable classroom behaviors. 
55. The District alleges in Charge 9, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
form purposeful and productive instructional group structures to cognitively engage 
the small Newcomers group of students she worked with as the rest of the class wrote 
independently or provide them with the support needed to achieve the ELA Writing 
Instructional outcomes. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. Estrada did not provide the students seated in her group 
with any additional supports such as a modified 
23 assignment, the use of sentence stems or frames, or a 
word bank for completing the descriptive writing task. 
b. When asked, one of the students in the classroom stated 
that Estrada did not work with all the students and only 
called the students who need help. The student stated 
that everyone else has to try it on their own and stay at 
their desks. 
56. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 9. At 
hearing, Victorio admitted when she entered Estrada’s classroom she observed 
students on task working on math homework and then on the 
activity. Victorio observed Estrada working with a small group of students who were 
absent from class the previous day “to catch them up with the writing activity.” Estrada 
further explained she “had a plan for differentiating instruction.” Estrada had different 
sentence frames. Estrada created “a little; chart for students to answer questions.“ No 
evidence that Victorio sought verification of the student’s statement regarding which 
students Estrada offered help was entered into the record. 
57. The District alleges in Charge 10, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
use a variety of strategies, such as Thumbs Up/Down, individual white boards, or hand 
signals, to monitor the students’ understanding of the content and the task, which 
resulted in students sitting idly at their seats or engaging in off-task conversations and 
behaviors. The specific allegations are as follows:
a. Estrada sat at a table at the front of the room or 
circulated the classroom but did not ask the students 24 any probing questions to determine how they were 
doing with their writing or ask them to show their work. 
b. Estrada did not pause to ask the students if they were 
struggling with any part of the descriptive writing 
assignment so that she could address possible 
misunderstandings or challenges. 
c. As a result of Estrada’s failure to monitor and check for 
understanding the following occurred: 
i. Approximately five minutes after Estrada assigned 
the writing task, only approximately four students 
had taken out their descriptive writing draft and 
their graphic organizer while the other 24 
students engaged in off-topic conversations and 
off-task behaviors. 
ii. Approximately ten minutes after Estrada assigned 
the writing task, about nine students sat idly at 
their desks, without their writing materials. 
iii. Student M  V. asked student H  M. for 
help on the computer.
iv. Estrada walked by a male student who was typing 
on the computer, commented using words to the 
effect of, “Whenever you see red, it means it’s a 
spelling error,” and walked away from him 
25 without explaining how he could use spell check 
to resolve the spelling or grammar mistakes. 
v. Student H  C., who sat at the front of the 
classroom with her hood pulled over her head 
wrote one sentence on her paper and then sat 
idle for approximately 47 minutes. She did no 
other work. 
58. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 10. The 
evidence shows that, as students worked on the  activity, Estrada 
walked the room. Estrada assisted R  and A  by informing them where 
grammatical and spelling errors were indicated on their work. A  knew how to 
use the spell check feature to check for spelling errors. As she walked the room, 
Estrada observed students with their work on their desk. She encouraged peer support 
and collaboration. The off-topic conversations and off-task behaviors Victorio 
observed occurred as Estrada worked with a small group of students. Competent 
credible evidence did not establish Estrada’s awareness of the off-topic conversations 
or off-task behaviors. Evidence that Victorio sought verification of the unidentified 
student’s statement regarding which students Estrada helped or did not help was not 
offered at hearing. 
59. The District alleges in Charge 11, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
review the  homework ahead of time and reinforced at 
least one content error during the activity that could negatively impact the students’ 
ability to understand powers and exponents. The specific allegations are as follows:
26 a. Estrada projected Question 13(40=__) and called on a 
student to provide the answer. When the student 
answered, “10  Estrada incorrectly wrote the following 
on the blank line: 4  
b. When Estrada looked at the incorrectly completed form 
she had projected for the students to use to correct their 
own homework sheet, Estrada stated using words to the 
effect of, “Ugh, that’s wrong . . . let’s try again . . . Ugh, 
I’m sorry.” 
c. Estrada then attempted to use a calculator to find the 
answer before she called on a few more students who 
also provided incorrect answers. 
d. Estrada stared at the problem and again apologized to 
the student for not knowing the answer as the students 
made statements such as, “Man, I got everything 
wrong.” “How you do it [ ],” and “Did you get that?” 
e. Estrada then reached for her  
(TE) and projected a tine image of the worksheet for the 
students to see, as they yelled out, “I can’t see,” 
“Teacher, what’s it say [ ] and “What?” 
f. After studying the image for a while and still being 
unable to solve the problem or read the exponent in the 
answer (40=2³ x 5), Estrada quickly closed the TE and 
directed the students to put their math homework away, 27 as the students continued to yell out, “We didn’t finish,” 
“What about the Back,” and “Teacher, I got ‘em all 
wrong!” 
60. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 11. Estrada admits 
making the mathematical errors. During the post-observation conference, Estrada 
informed Victorio that she (Estrada) returned to the math 
lesson later during the September 26, 2019 instructional day to re-teach, through 
modeling, problems 13 through 16. (See Exh. RX 1029.) In mitigation, it is not 
uncommon for teachers to err and then model how to remediate their error to 
demonstrate to students the positive value of admitting to and accepting 
responsibility for one’s conduct. 
61. The District alleges in Charge 12, on September 26, 2019, Estrada did not 
monitor and redirect the following off-task and inappropriate student behaviors to 
establish a classroom culture conducive to teaching and learning: 
a. Approximately 19 (out of a total of 28) students 
socialized throughout the observation. Estrada 
unsuccessfully attempted to redirect them on several 
occasions, but they persisted in their off-topic 
conversations.
b. Estrada did not respond when Student A  G. 
continuously threw his four mechanical pencils across 
the desk top and towards student E  P., who was 
attempting to color his character. 
28 c. Student E  L. sat idly at his seat for approximately 22 
minutes. Estrada did not redirect him; (d) One male 
student repeatedly reeled back in his chair so that the 
back of the chair rested against the desk of the student 
who sat directly behind him. Estrada did not redirect this 
unsafe behavior. 
62. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 12. The off-
topic conversations and off-task behaviors Victorio observed occurred as Estrada was 
occupied working with a small group of students at the kidney desk in front of the 
classroom. At hearing, Victorio admitted not knowing whether Estrada was aware of or 
saw any unsafe behaviors. Victorio did not bring any of the unsafe behaviors she 
observed to Estrada’s attention for Estrada to remediate. OCTOBER 3, 2019 TAHMASEBI ‘S CLASSROOM INCIDENT 
63. The District alleges in Charge 18, on October 3, 2019, at the end of the 
school day, Estrada asked a custodian to open the door of the classroom assigned to 
Tahmasebi. Estrada entered the classroom and took photographs of a rubric that was 
posted. On October 4, 2019, Tahmasebi reported the incident, as Estrada entered her 
classroom and took photographs without her knowledge.
64. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 18. Estrada 
admitted she entered Tahmasebi’s classroom without Tahmasebi’s knowledge or prior 
consent to photograph a posted rubric Tahmasebi created for all fifth-grade teachers’ 
use in connection with a grading exercise. In mitigation, Estrada did not ask Tahmasebi 
for permission to enter the classroom and take the photograph because Tahmasebi 
already went home. Estrada testified, “In retrospect, I should have called but I didn’t 
29 think it was a major issue because she was the grade representative and she shared a 
lot to things.” Estrada apologized to Tahmasebi when she learned from Benitez that 
Tahmasebi considered it odd Estrada entered Tahmasebi’s workspace under those 
circumstances. (See Exh. RX 1223.) Estrada gave Tahmasebi “a card and a little pastry.”
In further mitigation, Estrada’s conduct might be properly understood as an effort to 
obtain information to improve her classroom performance. 
OCTOBER 18 AND 25, 2019 LESSON PLANS 
65. The District alleges in Charges 19 and 20, on October 18, 2019, Estrada 
did not submit lesson plans to Victorio and willfully refused to comply with Victorio’s 
October 4 and 7, 2019 oral and written directives to submit weekly lesson plans for 
each period by 3:00 p.m. on the Friday prior to the upcoming week beginning on 
Friday, October 18, 2019.
66. The District alleges in Charges 21 and 22, on October 25, 2019, Estrada 
did not submit lesson plans to Victorio and willfully refused to comply with Victorio’s 
October 4 and 7, 2019 oral and written directives to submit weekly lesson plans for 
each period by 3:00 p.m. on the Friday prior to the upcoming week beginning on 
Friday, October 18, 2019. 
67. Evidence relevant to Charges 19 through 22 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 19 through 22. On October 18, 2019, Victorio met with Estrada at 
2:40 p.m. At that time, Estrada showed Victorio her lesson plan book admitted in 
evidence as exhibit RX 1035. On October 25, 2019, all District schools in the San 
Fernando Valley, including Alta California, were closed due to poor air quality and 
safety concerns related to the Saddleridge Fire. As a consequence, a scheduled 30 October 25, 2019 meeting to review Estrada’s lesson plan was postponed to October 
28, 2019, when Victorio met with Estrada from 2:45 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. At hearing, 
Victorio admitted she was not aware of any evidence of Estrada's willful refusal to 
comply with the October 4 and 7, 2019 oral and written directives to submit weekly 
lesson plans. 
NOVEMBER 1, 2019 INFORMAL CLASSROOM OBSERVATION  
68. On November 1, 2019, from 11:14 a.m. to 12:15 p.m., Victorio, conducted 
an unannounced observation of Estrada teaching an ELA writing activity—the 
Constructive Response Task titled . At the time of the observation, the 
following sentence frame appeared on a chart hanging on the white board: 
. Victorio reports she observed Estrada delivering a lecture 
on how to make descriptive writing more interesting by including dialogue and details; 
several students reading completed sentence frames written on post-it notes and then 
attaching the post-it notes to the chart; students independently proofreading 
previously written assignments; students sitting idle or engaging in off-topic 
conversations and disruptive behaviors; and Estrada circulating the classroom without 
intention and pausing on occasion to briefly interact with a few of the students.
69. On November 14, 2019, Victorio convened a post-observation 
conference, at which time she discussed her observations of Estrada’s lesson planning 
and preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of the classroom 
environment. Benitez and Angela Vitalis, a District middle school teacher, were present 
at the post-observation conference. Victorio subsequently prepared a November 15, 
2019 memorandum containing her observations and the statements Estrada 
purportedly made during the post-observation conference. 31 70. The November 15, 2019 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to prepare weekly lesson plans and a 
directive to submit them to Victorio on the Friday prior to the upcoming week no later 
than 3:00 p.m.; clearly and explicitly communicate the purpose of the lesson prior 
direct instruction; deliver ELA writing activities in a clear and concise manner; actively 
monitor students as they engage in tasks to determine their level of understanding 
and adapt instruction as needed; be familiar with the content intended for sharing with 
students in order to deliver accurate information; establish and implement an effective 
classroom behavior plan that includes clear expectations, rewards, and consequences; 
develop, teach, model, and practice effective transitions, procedures and routines for 
the classroom; and reflect and implement strategies in the areas of routines, 
procedures, classroom management and well-sequenced direct instruction observed 
during a November 5, 2019 visit to Tahmasebi’s Grade five classroom. 
71. The November 15, 2019 memorandum instructs Estrada to take 
advantage of professional development classes and attached 
 and 
. Victorio additionally 
informed Estrada a PAR Consulting Teacher continues to be available to assist Estrada.
72. The November 15, 2019 memorandum informs Estrada that failure to 
make immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to the 
issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from 
the District. The evidence did not establish whether or when Estrada submitted a 
written rebuttal to the November 15, 2019 memorandum. 32 73. Based on Victorio’s November 15, 2019 conference memorandum, the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows. 
74. The District alleges in Charge 26, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
plan appropriate learning opportunities to ensure the students’ access to the core 
curriculum and to address the specific learning needs of all 28 students to her class. 
The specific allegations are that Estrada did not plan or include supports such as: 
a. the use of word bank that related to the topic on which 
the students would write. 
b. the use of an outline, including a section for topic 
sentences and supporting sentences for the 26 EL 
students. 
c. frequent checks for understanding or chunking of 
instructions and information for the four students with 
IEPs. 
75. The District alleges in Charge 27, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide the students with activities aligned to the ELA standard she listed in her lesson 
plan book
 in order to teach them to make their sentences more exciting. The specific 
allegations are as follows: 
a. Estrada posted a fill-in-the-blank sentence on the chart 
paper, asked the students to fill in the blanks to make 33 the sentence “more exciting,” and then called up 
individual students to read their sentences aloud for 
approximately nine minutes as the remaining students 
sat idle and disengaged. 
b. Estrada lectured about the Constructive Response 
Writing task for approximately 16 minutes as the 
students continued to sit idly at their seats and engage 
in off-topic conversations with their tablemates. 
i. Estrada did not provide explicit instruction that 
would develop the student’s descriptive writing 
skills. 
ii. Estrada did not model how to make sentences 
more exciting by presenting a short think-loud 
with clear examples of sentence and text 
structures. 
iii. Estrada did not provide the students with enough 
time to write and proofread with immediate 
guidance from her. 
iv. Estrada did not dedicate a few minutes for the 
students to share their writing to support their 
writing development. 
76. The District alleges in Charge 28, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
communicate to the students what they would be learning prior to the proofreading 34 activities, seek any student input, or engage the students in any discussion about the 
purpose of their activities. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. Estrada stated, “Let’s review the assignment that we’ve 
been working on,” or words to that effect, and then read 
the story, . 
b. Estrada did not review a learning objective before she 
asked the students to proofread their own writing to 
give them a context for their leaning such as, “Today we 
will proofread our work to identify common grammar, 
spelling, punctuation, and mechanic errors in our 
descriptive writing.”
77. The District alleges in Charge 29, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
deliver a teacher directed lesson with a clearly defined structure to teach students how 
to proof read their writing to make sentences more exciting and clarify their written 
message. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. Estrada asked the students to take out their 4-Point 
 and read it aloud using 
very non-specific language with words to the effect of, 
“You have to rewrite and add a conclusion. You are still 
in the process of proofreading, It needs to be four to 
five sentences . . . .You need to have quotation marks. . . 
. I ‘m putting these posters here for you to access.” 
b. For approximately 11 minutes, Estrada released the 
student to independently complete the 35 task. Based on the students’ 
behaviors, the students were unclear what Estrada 
wanted them to do. 
i. Students did not work on the assignment. They 
either sat idly at their desks or laughed and talked 
amongst themselves about subjects unrelated to 
the proofreading assignment. 
ii. Estrada walked around the room asking students 
to take out their writing assignment and used 
words to the effect of, “I don’t see you writing” 
and Te a abo de ense ar que tienes que hacer 
[Spanish for “I just showed you what you have to 
do.”] 
c. Estrada did not effectively close the Constructive 
Response Proofreading activities at approximately 11:50 
a.m. when she announced, with words to the effect of 
“Okay guys! We have to go. Please Line up!” 
78. Evidence relevant to Charges 26 through 29 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 26 through 29. At hearing, Victorio admitted to weekly planning 
meetings with Estrada “to go over subjects.” Victorio “talked through [Estrada’s] 
lessons and asked [Estrada] about what supports [Estrada] would put in place.” Victorio 
took credit for providing Estrada with “a lot of ideas” for planning the descriptive 
writing activity in connection with story. The day before the observation, 36 on October 31, 2019, Estrada introduced learning objectives for story to 
her students. Estrada’s testimony established she “gave explicit details,” “went over 
tasks with students,” “posted sentences,” and “used sticky notes to help with my own 
sentences.” The October 31, 2019 class session on the descriptive writing activity was 
disrupted, however, because Estrada’s students were required to attend a Dios de Los 
Muertos celebration at the Parent Center. After the celebration, Estrada resumed 
instruction in connection with the descriptive writing activity for  story 
with her students but additional time was needed to complete that instruction. 
Victorio began her November 1, 2019 classroom observation not knowing Estrada 
previously provided students with explicit instructions to develop their descriptive 
writing skills. At hearing, Victorio admitted Estrada called on students when working 
with fill-in-the-blank sentences but Victorio was critical “in terms of how [the 
sentences] were presented and how students were supported.” Victorio testified, “You 
have the opportunity for students to echo read and talk to partners about possible 
words to put in [the blanks]. . . . If there were more support and student participation 
and more exciting and more engaging, it would have been better.” Victorio admitted 
she saw students at the board sharing their writing but Victorio was critical about 
sequencing: “This had to do with the sequencing. [Estrada] started off with fill-in-the-
blank and then students went back to their seats for a writing task, a different task. I 
am not sure if they were writing or proof-reading.” Victorio admitted she speculated 
Estrada circulated the classroom without intention. Victorio testified, “I don’t know 
what her intention was.” 
79. The District alleges in Charge 30, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
use a variety of strategies, such as , individual white boards, or hand 
signals to monitor the students’ understanding of the content and the task and 
encourage their participation. The specific allegations are as follows:37 a. Estrada mostly stood at the front of the room. When 
Estrada circulated the classroom, she did not ask the 
students any probing questions to determine how they 
were doing with their writing. 
b. Estrada did not pause to ask the students if they were 
struggling with any part of the 
assignment so that she could address 
possible misunderstandings or challenges. 
c. As a result of the lack of monitoring and checking for 
understanding, the following occurred: 
i. At approximately 11:17 a.m., only approximately 
one-half of the students had taken out their 
 writing assignment while 
the other half of the students engaged in off-
topic conversations and off-task behaviors.
ii. At approximately 11:23 a.m., Estrada used words 
to the effect of, “You all should have your papers 
out,” as approximately nine students sat idly at 
their desks, without their writing materials.
iii. At approximately 11:35 a.m., Estrada asked if 
anyone had any questions and when only three 
students said, ”No,” Estrada announced she would 
“walk around.” 38 iv. At approximately 11:44 a.m., students F  V., 
J  T., A  G., K  S., A  C., 
R  O., E  T., and about six other students 
sat idly at their seats. 
80. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 30. Neither 
party’s evidence addressed whether Estrada used specific strategies used, including 
, to monitor student understanding. On one hand, Victorio was 
critical asserting Estrada was required to “sit with students not just walk around” to 
check for understanding, while on the other hand, Victorio admitted Estrada “did ask 
students about their confusion.” Samples of students’ work product in connection withstory, including J  T., A  C., K  S., and R  O.’s samples, 
undermine the allegation students sat idly at their seats. (See Exh1042.) 
81. The District alleges in Charge 31, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
correct at least one content error during the writing activity that could negatively 
impact the students’ ability to understand sentence structure. Estrada posted the 
following grammatically incorrect sentence on chart paper on the white board: ”The 
_____ oldest son that he planted the seed of the peach in the ground to grow a _____ 
peach so he could buy more.” The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. Five students read aloud their incorrectly completed 
sentences and placed them on the chart paper, and 
Estrada did not correct it. 
b. After the fifth student read her incorrect response, 
Estrada attempted to correct the error and rewrote 
another incorrect sentence on the chart paper: “The 
39 ______ oldest son told him that he planted the seed of 
the peach in the ground to grow a ______ peach so he 
could ______ a peach tree.” 
c. After Estrada read the second incorrect sentence frame 
aloud twice, she stared at the poster, shook her head, 
and began to lecture about the .
82. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 31. At 
hearing, Victorio equivocated and retracted her observation that Estrada posted 
grammatically incorrect sentences. Queried on cross-examination “What is incorrect 
about the sentence [Estrada] wrote?,” Victorio testified, “Off the top of my head, I 
don’t know. This is a sentence coming directly from the teacher’s manual. . . . I would 
have to look at the lesson again. . . . I’m not sure if I’m identifying the same sentence 
in the teacher’s manual or if there was a grammatical error. . . . No, I do not find a 
grammatical error in this sentence.” 
83. The District alleges in Charge 32, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
monitor and redirect the following off-task, and inappropriate student behaviors, to 
establish a classroom culture conducive to teaching and learning. The specific 
allegations are as follows:
a. Approximately 20 (out of a total of 25) students 
socialized. Estrada unsuccessfully attempted to redirect 
them on several occasions, but they persisted in their 
off-topic conversations.
b. Student A  G. continuously engaged in off-task 
and disruptive behaviors, such as laughing and talking 
40 with student A  C. who sat at another table but was 
crawling on the floor. Estrada made no attempts to 
redirect his behavior. 
c. Estrada did not redirect student F  E. when he laid 
his abdomen and torso across the seat of his chair for 
approximately 21 minutes or when he playfully threw a 
paperback book and pencil at student J  A., who 
sat directly across from him. 
d. Student A  G. engaged in off-task and disruptive 
behaviors such as standing at his seat and swinging his 
arms wildly and hopping back and forth across the front 
of the room. Estrada only asked him to sit at his seat 
once. 
e. Estrada did not redirect student J  A. when she (1) 
crawled across the floor and under students’ desks or (2) 
stretched her body across two desktops and engaged in 
a conversation across the room with a student H  C., 
as she called students to the front of the room to read 
their fill-in-the-blank sentence.
84. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 32. Victorio 
admitted Estrada redirected student A  C.’s behavior by requiring him to change 
his seat. Benitez testified Estrada acted appropriately by asking A  C. to change 
seats. Estrada did not observe any student throwing books, crawling on the floor, or 
laying across desktops. During the observation, Victorio did not bring any 
41 inappropriate student behaviors posing a threat to student safety to Estrada’s 
attention for Estrada to remediate. Estrada explained she knows student J  A. to 
be a quiet, shy, and respectful student. Given her knowledge of student J  A., 
Estrada believed it unlikely for student J  A. to engage in the inappropriate 
behavior Victoria ascribed to student J  A., and Estrada observed none. 
85. The District alleges in Charge 33, on November 1, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide an effective learning environment for students when she did not establish and 
practice effective routines, procedures, and transitions so that the students would 
know what she expected of them when they walked from her classroom to the Parent 
Center for the Dia de los Muertos exhibit. The specific allegations are as follows:
a. At approximately 11:50 a.m., Estrada dismissed the 
students from their desks to line up. Although Estrada 
repeatedly asked the students to show her how fifth 
graders should line up, the students laughed, talked 
boisterously, hugged, and playfully shoved one another 
in the line. 
b. As the students walked to the Parent Center, rather than 
walk quietly, as to not disturb other classrooms, 
approximately 14 (out of a total of 25) students talked 
and laughed loudly with their peers. 
c. At approximately 12:13 p.m., when Estrada let the 
students back to the classroom from the Parent Center, 
rather than walk behind the other, they clustered 
42 together and continued to laugh, push one another, and 
run from one area of the line to another.
i. Estrada walked at the front of the line and she 
periodically stopped and placed two fingers to 
her lips as a signal for the students to quiet down. 
ii. As soon as Estrada turned her back to continue 
walking, the students continued to engage in the 
same loud and disruptive behaviors. 
86. The preponderance of evidence does not support Charge 33. At hearing, 
Victorio admitted she assumed routines and procedures for transitioning from the 
classroom to elsewhere were neither established nor implemented. Victorio 
acknowledged Estrada instructed students to line up and Estrada put her fingers to her 
lips to signal students to quiet down, which Victorio admitted were appropriate 
classroom management techniques. Estrada additionally reminded her students that 
they were fifth graders and not kindergartners, who would also be present at the 
Parent Center. Estrada credibly testified her students were chatty with excitement but 
not unruly. 
DECEMBER 3. 2019F ORMAL CLASSROOM OBSERVATION  
87. On December 2, 2019, Victorio convened a planning conference to 
schedule a formal classroom observation and identify the TLF focus elements on which 
Estrada’s performance would be rated. During the planning conference, Estrada 
“walked [Victorio] through the lesson” she planned to teach—Unit 3: Cultivating 
Natural Resources. Estrada informed Victorio the lesson would be taught two to three 
days. Estrada explained to Victorio that she added a rotation activity to the lesson. 43 Estrada created six stations with items containing corn as an ingredient “after doing 
research” and realizing she “had items at home that could add realia to the lesson.” 
Estrada “warned” Victorio, “It might be loud because [the students] had not seen the 
realia before.” 
88. On December 3, 2019, between 11:00 a.m. and 12:15 p.m. Victorio 
conducted a formal observation of Estrada teaching an ELA writing activity on 
Developing Natural Resources to 26 students. Victorio noted several charts posted on 
the whiteboard included (
);  (
.); Vocabulary Chart; and  
(
.). Victorio reported she observed Estrada reading from the 
 and  charts. Victorio reported observing the following: Estrada 
asked students to read  charts and the vocabulary words 
“developed” and “resources” and their respective definitions. Estrada read aloud the 
and sections from the 
of the (TE). Estrada provided each 
student with a sheet of paper and asked them to create a Circle Map graphic organizer 
and to record two to three things that contain corn. Estrada abruptly moved from the 
Circle Map activity and directed the table groups to move about the classroom to 
observe items made from corn. Music played and the music was stopped to indicate 
when students should rotate from one box of item to another. During this time, 
Victorio reported she observed students laugh at the items, talked amongst 
themselves, and threw the bags of potato chips in the air. Victorio further reported she 44 observed Estrada provide each student with a packet to use for a 
 group activity. Estrada then read the roles of group members and 
assigned a role to each student in the table group. Estrada purportedly ended the 
activity by asking students to rate their  using the 
Observation Checklist for .
89. On December 11, 2019, Victorio convened a post-observation 
conference, at which time she discussed her observations of Estrada’s delivery of 
instruction and management of the classroom environment. Benitez was present at the 
post-observation conference. Victorio subsequently prepared a December 12, 2019 
memorandum containing her observations and the statements Estrada purportedly 
made during the post-observation conference. 
90. The December 12, 2019 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to clearly and explicitly communicate 
the purpose of the lesson prior to direct instruction to give students a context for their 
learning; maximize the use of instructional time in order to provide well-planned, 
sequenced, teacher-directed instruction to engage students in meaningful learning; 
provide clear directions to students before asking them to complete a task; provide 
students with multiple opportunities to develop oral English language skills; develop, 
teach, and continually reinforce an effective classroom management plan that includes 
clear expectations, rewards, and consequences. 
91. The December 12, 2019 conference memorandum, documents Estrada’s 
receipt of support from Maar; instructs Estrada to reflect on and implement the 
effective procedures in areas of routines, classroom management, and well-sequenced 
direct instruction demonstrated in Tahmasebi’s classroom; and informs Estrada a PAR 45 Consulting Teacher is available to assist her with developing and implementing 
rigorous lesson plans. 
92. The December 12, 2019 conference memorandum informs Estrada that 
failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to 
the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from 
the District. Victorio further informs Estrada, “If I were to evaluate you today, I would 
issue a Below Standard Evaluation . . . .” (Exh 11 at p. 8 [A409].)
93. Based on Victorio’s December 12, 2019 conference memorandum, the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows.
94. The District alleges in Charge 36, on December 3, 2019, Estrada did not 
effectively communicate to the students what they would be learning prior to the 
activities. After she read aloud the verbatim, she merely read the 
Unit Objectives, two vocabulary words, and the student objectives directly from the 
. The allegation continues as follows: 
a. Estrada then displayed the Cultivating Natural Resources 
article and read aloud several highlighted sentences.
b. Estrada did not connect how the students would use 
their critical thinking skills to engage in dialogue with 
their peers around the topic of natural resources, pause 
to engage the students in the discussion, or ask the 
students any questions, to gauge their level of 
understanding regarding the . 46 95. The District alleges in Charge 37, on December 3, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide the students with rigorous standards-based learning activities to cognitively 
engage them in learning about corn as a natural resource. Estrada spent approximately 
75 minutes lecturing to students. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. She read verbatim from three charts she posted on the 
white board, displayed a Circle Map for the students to 
copy, and then assigned them to add two to three more 
items made from corn. She discouraged student 
engagement when: 
i. The students began to talk with their table 
partners about items that are made from corn, 
she told them not to discuss what they were 
writing on the map using words to the effect of, 
“Don’t say it; just write it!” and “Write it. You are 
not sharing.” 
ii. Student A  exclaimed he needed to add the 
information from the class map to his own Circle 
Map, she told him he did not need to do so. 
b. Estrada assigned the students to rotate around the room 
to look in boxes containing items made from corn but 
did not ask them to add the additional information onto 
their . 
i. When student at Table 5 began to record the 
items they observed from the box onto their 
47 personal , she used words to the 
effect of, “You don’t’ need to record it.” 
ii. She told Student K  S. that she did not need to 
write the names of the objects on , 
as student K  S. was trying to add the 
information to her personal . 
c. Estrada continued to read verbatim from three more 
charts as she lectured and assigned the students work in 
groups of three to complete a . 
96. The District alleges in Charge 38, on December 3, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide the students with clear verbal and written directions or expectations or 
provide any further direction for both the rotation and  
activities. The students merely laughed and played with objects during the rotations 
and were unable to successfully complete the  activity. The 
specific allegations are as follows: 
a. During the rotation activity: 
i. Group of students loudly went to their assigned 
stations and began pulling items out of the boxes 
without a purpose. Estrada did not provide them 
with an exact task, such as identifying the items in 
the box or discussing with their group members 
how each item is used. 
48 ii. She did not monitor the noise level in the 
classroom. She told the students that they would 
rotate once the music stopped but she had to yell 
out over the students’ voices two to three times 
for them to rotate because the noise level in the 
classroom was high due to off-task behavior. 
1) During the activity, Estrada looked at the 
visiting administrator and used words to 
the effect of, “Sorry, it’s a little loud.” 
2) Estrada then began to call out the specific 
table groups using words to the effect of, 
“Mr. Gunter is next door.” 
3) Once the students returned to their seats, 
she told them that they were too loud. 
b. During the activity, Estrada 
did not provide the students with clear directions.
i. She told each student which of the three roles 
they would undertake within their groups, 
however, the majority of the students spent their 
group time arguing about [their roles]
1) Students A  G., A  A., and J  M. 
spent approximately four minutes 
reassigning themselves group roles. 
49 2) Student J  M. asked her group members 
to write the word ‘director’ and whichever 
student she determined had the neatest 
printing, would be the note taker. 
3) Student R  S., J  A., and F  
E. asked the visiting administrator for 
clarification on their assigned roles and the 
responsibilities that came along with them. 
ii. Estrada did not provide clear and concise 
directions to the students for how to complete 
the  worksheet. For 
example, student L  R’s group explained to 
the visiting administrator that they wrote the 
word corn in each of the three fill-in-the blank 
spaces because they did not know what else to 
write. 
c. Estrada did not model the responsibilities for each 
group role and provided whole group practice with the 
fill-in-the blank sentence frames on the  worksheet.
97. The District alleges in Charge 39, on December 3, 2019, Estrada did not 
provide the students with opportunities to comprehend and incorporate academic 
language during any of the ELA activities when she introduced two vocabulary words 
(develop and resources). The specific allegations are as follows: 
50 a. Throughout the entire ELA block of time, Estrada 
routinely accepted one-word answers from the students. 
She did not rephrase the students’ answers or model the 
use of complete sentences such as, “An item that 
contains corn is ______.” 
b. Estrada did not provide opportunities for the students to 
use the academic vocabulary that she placed on a chart 
and attached to the white board. For example, in the T-
Chart graphic organizer, Cultivating Natural Resources, 
Estrada did not provide the students with appropriate 
sentence frames so they would be able to appropriately 
respond and complete the  
worksheet, such as, “Developing resources help us 
______.” or “Developing resources harm us ________.” 
c. Estrada did not review all the realia items with the class 
which would have extended their knowledge about 
items containing corn. Estrada did not use this 
opportunity to provide support to the Newcomer 
students so they would have been able to make 
connections to some of the items made from corn that 
she listed on the . 
98. Evidence relevant to Charges 36 through 39 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 36 through 39. Estrada opened Unit 3: Cultivating Natural Resources 
by showing a video. Over multiple classroom sessions, Estrada relied on and 51 duplicated the sample statements and modeling discussed in the teacher’s resource 
guide for Unit 3. (See Exh. RX1060.) Estrada additionally implemented the teacher’s 
guide suggested ELD supports. (See Exh. RX1060 at B576.) Estrada worked with 
students to create circle maps and posters to reflect information students already 
knew about corn and its use as a natural resource. At hearing, Victorio admitted she 
inaccurately reported Estrada spent 75 minutes, the entire instructional time during 
the classroom observation, lecturing. Victorio admitted Estrada provided students with 
direction but Victorio objected to Estrada’s delivery of the directions because Estrada 
read verbatim to students. Victorio’s observation was limited to the beginning of the 
Cultivating Natural Resources unit. Victorio was not present during other instructional 
sessions culminating in Estrada’s closing of the Cultivating Natural Resources unit. 
Victorio’s observation therefore did not account for artifacts, including images and 
photographs of natural resources, illustrated vocabulary cards, sample guiding 
questions, model sentence frames, flip books, and bins of food and household items 
Estrada used and relied on to teach the Cultivating Natural Resources unit in its 
entirety. Documentation of students’ work product undermines Victorio’s reported 
observations and accompanying criticisms. (See Exhs. RX1059 at pp. 12-46 [B538-
B572], Rx1060, Rx1061, and RX1062.) At hearing, Victorio admitted to observing 
Estrada employing shared learning targets to inform students about the intention of 
the Developing Natural Resources unit and to direct and guide student learning. 
Victorio also admitted to observing Estrada “going over the essential question” and 
seeing “some posters” with “some of the targets.” Victorio further admitted to 
observing Estrada discussing guided questions to facilitate collaborative conversations 
among students and admitted the discussion is a technique used to close a lesson. 
Victorio admitted to observing Estrada use sentence frames designed for reclassifying
students and that such use constitutes differentiation. Victorio admitted she did not 52 know whether Estrada discussed the benefits and burdens of developing natural 
resources with students because she “was not in the classroom after the observation.” 
99. The District alleges in Charge 40, on December 3, 2019, Estrada did not 
monitor and redirect the following off-task, and inappropriate, behaviors to establish a 
classroom culture conducive to teaching and learning, as follows: 
a. Approximately 14 (out of a total of 26) students 
socialized throughout the observation. Estrada 
unsuccessfully attempted to redirect them on several 
occasions, but they persisted in their off topic 
conversations. 
b. Although Estrada awarded table points, she did not 
redirect students as they laughed, threw food items, and 
ran from each rotation. 
c. Students A  G. and J  M. argued over a seat 
during the  activity and 
Estrada did not appropriately redirect them when she 
merely asked what they were going to do when they 
attended middle school.
d. Estrada did not ask student E  T. to sit in his chair 
appropriately when he repeatedly rocked his chair from 
side to side causing a loud striking noise each time the 
legs of his chair hit the floor. 
53 100. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 40. 
Estrada’s testimony established students were excited and surprised learning about 
the various food and household items containing corn. Consequently, there was a lot 
of conversation among students during the gallery walk. Victorio admitted to 
observing Estrada award table points and that an award of table points is an 
acceptable technique for addressing any off-task or inappropriate classroom 
behaviors. Estrada did not observe any student throwing food items or running, and 
Victorio did not bring any such behaviors to Estrada’s attention for Estrada to 
remediate. 
101. The District alleges in Charge 41, on December 3, 2019, Estrada willfully 
refused to comply with the directive provided to her orally on November 14, 2019
during a conference with Victorio and was directed to “(1) Effective immediately 
deliver standards-based lessons with appropriate learning activities, (2) Effective 
immediately differentiate learning activities to meet the diverse needs of the students 
assigned to her class roster to provide them with equal access to the curriculum, (3) 
Effective immediately clearly communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and 
activities and review it again at the end, (4) Effective immediately develop, teach and 
reinforce an effective classroom behavior plan, and (5) Effective immediately 
consistently monitor and respond appropriately to students’ off-task and disruptive 
behaviors,” and provided to her in writing in the reference memorandum issued on 
November 15, 2019. 
102. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 41. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 36 through 41, Estrada 
complied with the directives Victorio provided to her orally during the November 14, 54 2019 conference and in writing in the conference memorandum issued on November 
15, 2019. 
JANUARY 27-31,  2020 LESSON PLANS 
103. The District alleges in Charge 42, on January 27, 2020, Estrada did not 
submit complete lesson plans for the week of January 27-31, 2020. According to 
Charge 42, Estrada’s plans: 
a. Listed only the following items for math instruction on January 30, 
2020, and provided no description of any material that she would use: 
Math 
Ch.8-Lesson 6 
Compare Fractions (cont’d) 
Std. 5NF.5 
GP-Review #1 
IP-#2-18 (odds)
b. Did not identify learning objectives for any of the content areas. 
104. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 42. At 
hearing, Victorio conceded the , which 
Victorio attached to the December 12, 2019 memorandum in connection with the 
December 3, 2019 formal classroom observation, provides for variation in lesson plan 
format based on teacher preferences, style, subject area, or what simply feels most 
intuitive. (See Exh. 11 at pp. 22-23 [A423-A424].) 55 JANUARY 30, 2020 INFORMAL CLASSROOM OBSERVATION  
105. On January 30, 2020, from 1:12 p.m. to 2:09 p.m., Victorio conducted an 
unannounced observation of Estrada teaching a fifth grade math activity on 
factorization and greatest common factors to 24 students. Victorio reported she 
observed students waiting approximately five minutes for Estrada to log onto her 
laptop, find the appropriate website, and turn on a projector. Estrada directed students 
to read aloud a posted standard and then played a video about greatest common 
factors. Victorio reported she observed Estrada pausing the video on occasion to 
lecture about the topic as most of the students stared at the screen. Victorio also 
reported Estrada projected a MyMath workbook page about prime factorization and 
greatest common factors. Estrada then read the page aloud and lectured as she solved 
sample problem herself, often pausing to ask student questions about the problem. 
The students then simply copied Estrada’s work. Victorio reported that for the 
remainder of the Math instructional block, she observed Estrada solve two more 
problems as students copied her answers into their workbooks or quietly engaged in 
off-task behaviors. According to Victorio, approximately 40 minutes into the workbook 
activity, most of the students had only copied three problems from Estrada’s sample 
and completed one additional Guided practice problem.
106. On February 7, 2020, Victorio convened a post-observation conference, 
at which time she discussed her observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and 
preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of the classroom environment. 
Benitez and Estrada’s UTLA representative Gregg Solkovits were present at the post-
observation conference. Purportedly, Estrada did not have anything to share during 
the post-observation conference. Purportedly, Solkovits asked about a Nationally 
Board-Certified teacher for Estrada to observe and Benitez clarified Estrada was 56 provided multiple opportunities to observe colleagues and would continue to provide 
such opportunities. Victorio subsequently prepared a February 11, 2020 conference 
memorandum containing her observations.
107. The February 11, 2020 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to submit physical copies of complete 
weekly plans, which should include learning objectives for each content area, the skills 
or strategies intended for introduction or review, and the materials intended for use; 
to post a Daily Schedule and follow the posted schedule; to differentiate lesson 
activities; to review information available in  TE in advance of instruction; to 
provide well planned, logically sequenced standard-based, teacher-directed 
instruction; to prepare questions focused on the learning objective in advance of the 
lesson; to model consistently accurate academic language and provide students with 
ample structured opportunities to engage in discussions about the concept or skill 
taught; to develop and utilize effective systems to keep track of students entering and 
exiting the classroom; and to use current and authentic student-produced work 
representative of all the students to establish a classroom environment that reflects 
and promotes student learning. 
108. The February 11, 2020 conference memorandum documents that Estrada 
was provided classroom coverage, on November 5, 2019, to observe Tahmasebi’s fifth 
grade class and Victorio would arrange for coverage and facilitate an opportunity for 
Estrada to visit a colleague’s classroom to observe effective practice in the area of 
discussion and participation strategies. Victorio attached the 
 and informed Estrada a PAR Consulting Teacher 
continues to be available to assist her. 57 109. The February 11, 2020 conference memorandum additionally informs 
Estrada that failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her 
performance may lead to the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline 
such as a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or 
both, and dismissal from the District. Estrada did not submit a written rebuttal to the 
November 15, 2019 memorandum. 
110. Based on Victorio’s February 11, 2020 conference memorandum, the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows. 
111. The District alleges in Charge 43, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
follow her submitted lesson plans. Estrada’s lesson plans for January 30, 2020, in the 
area of math, indicated that she would provide the students with instruction on 
comparing fractions, but Estrada did not follow them when she instead led the 
students through an activity on greatest common factors and made no connection to 
comparing fractions. 
112. The District alleges in Charge 44, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
follow her Daily Schedule posted on an easel in the back of the classroom. Estrada 
engaged the students in math activities during the social studies instructional block.
Charge 44 alleges Estrada’s schedule reflected the following: 
Posted Actual 
1:10-1:40 Math 1:12-2:209 Math 
1:40-2:10 Social Studies/Science 
Health/P.E./Art 58 113. Evidence relevant to Charges 43 and 44 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 43 and 44. Estrada began instruction on greatest common factors on 
January 29, 2020. Additional time was needed to clarify student understanding of the 
material. Estrada resumed instruction on greatest common factors January 30, 2020, 
the following day. On the same day, a fire/earthquake drill disrupted the posted Daily 
Schedule for that day. The start time for math instruction therefore shifted from 1:10 
p.m. to 1:12 p.m. Additional time was necessary for Estrada to clarify student 
understanding of greatest common factors, thus the math instruction concluded at 
2:09 p.m. instead of the scheduled 1:40 p.m. Victorio did not ask Estrada about the 
circumstances requiring Estrada to vary the allotted time for math and the scheduled 
instruction on comparing fractions. At hearing, Victorio acknowledged it was 
appropriate for Estrada to adjust her planned lesson for January 30, 2020 to clarify and 
complete her instruction on greatest common factors. 
114. The District alleges in Charge 45, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
address the diverse learning needs of the 25 students assigned to her class. (a.) Estrada 
did not plan for or use sentence frames, sentence starters, and a preview of content 
specific vocabulary (i.e., factors, common, prime factorization) for the 23 EL students, 
eight of whom were EL Level 0 or 1. (b) Estrada did not plan for or use math 
manipulatives, such as counters or tiles, to represent concretely the given numbers 
and their possible factors for the three students with IEPs. 
115. The preponderance of the evidence does no support Charge 45. Prior to 
observing Estrada’s classroom on January 30, 2020, Victorio met with Estrada and 
reviewed Estrada’s lesson plan for the week of January 27-31, 2020. At hearing, Estrada 
explained Victorio “indicated no issue with the lesson plan.” Victorio admitted during 59 her weekly planning meetings with Estrada, she did not tell Estrada she wanted Estrada 
to plan for or use sentence frames or manipulatives. The plan was for Estrada to ask 
clarifying questions should students raise their hands to suggest a gap in their 
understanding of the lesson. Estrada’s evidence of her subsequent use of sentence 
frames more than two years later, on August 26, 2022, is not credited here. (See 
Rx1189 at p. 86 [B2150].) 
116. The District alleges in Charge 46, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
clearly communicate to the students what they would be learning about finding the 
greatest common factor of a set of numbers and why. The specific allegations are as 
follows: 
a. Estrada stated words to the effect of, “Today’s lesson. 
Greater Common Factor [sic],“ and Estrada directed the 
students to chorally read aloud the posted 
 (CCS) for Math and an 
: 
Standard 5NBT3 
Interpret a fraction as division of the numerator by the 
denominator (a/b=a÷b). Solve word problems involving 
division of the whole number leading to answers in the 
form of fractions or mixed numbers. 
Essential Questions [sic]:
How are factors and multiples helpful in solving 
problems? 60 b. After the students read both items aloud:
i. Estrada did not pause to clarify any of the terms 
such as factors, or multiples. 
ii. Estrada did not explain the connection between 
the greatest common factor and finding common 
denominators when solving problems involving 
fractions.
iii. Estrada did not ask questions to check for student 
understanding. Instead, Estrada moved on to a 
video about greatest common factors. 
117. The District alleges in Charge 47, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
provide the students with a teacher-directed lesson that could engage them in higher 
level of thinking and provide them with the opportunity to learn how to use prime 
factorization to determine the greatest common factor of two or more numbers. For 
approximately 47 minutes, Estrada led the students through the following confusing, 
low-level activities.
a. Estrada spent approximately six minutes playing a 
video about greatest common factors. 
i. She paused the video on occasion to lecture 
about factorization and asked questions, which 
most of the students did not attempt to answer. 61 ii. As she lectured, several of the students called out 
“I don’t get it,” but she did not attempt to address 
their misunderstanding. 
b. Estrada projected page 557 of the  workbook 
onto the screen and directed the students to copy a 
two-sentence definition of the greatest common factor 
directly from their workbooks into their math journals. 
For approximately seven minutes, Estrada stood at the 
front of the room as the students copied the definition 
or quietly engaged in off-task behaviors. 
i. She did not ask the students any questions about 
the words ‘common,’ ‘greatest,’ or ‘factor’ to 
ensure they understood the meaning of the 
vocabulary. 
ii. Several students asked, “What do I do?” and 
“What do we copy?” Estrada responded by stating 
words to the effect of, “You have a math journal. 
Copy the definition,” and “All you have to do is 
copy.”
c. Estrada read the first half of page 557 of the  
workbook aloud verbatim and told the students to echo 
her as she read.
d. Estrada lectured at a rapid pace, as she solved the 
sample problem herself by filling in the responses on the 62 projected workbook page while the students copied her 
answers.
e. Estrada projected page 558 of  workbook on the 
screen and read aloud the directions to the students. 
i. She lectured again as she completed the sample 
problem and Guided Practice problem 1 while the 
students once again copied her answers.
ii. She paused on occasion to ask questions that 
most of the students did not attempt to answer 
and they instead waited for her to fill in the 
answers.
f. Estrada released the students to complete Guided 
Practice problem 2 independently. Most of the students 
stared at the page and did not begin to work. For 
approximately 16 minutes, Estrada circulated the 
classroom and approached individual students only if 
they needed help. 
i. Most of the students had not started the problem 
but approximately one minute into the activity, 
Estrada interrupted them to talk about the first 
Independent Practice problem located on the 
next page. 63 ii. She continued to circulate the classroom as most 
of the students continued to struggle with Guided 
Practice problem 2. 
iii. At approximately 2:07 p.m., Estrada called up 
student E  T. and asked him to write his 
solution to problem 2 on the projected work 
book page. As E  filled in his answers, the 
remaining 23 students copied his solution or 
changed their answers to match his. 
118. The District alleges in Charge 48, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not ask 
questions that could elicit higher-level thinking and help her gauge the level of 
student understanding about finding greatest common factors or the connection 
between greatest common factors and fractions. Estrada asked the following low-level 
recall questions using words to the effect of: 
a. “If you multiply 2 times 12, is it 24?” None of the 24 
students answered and Estrada added words to the 
effect of “Yes? or No?” Once again none of the students 
responded. 
b. “We did this earlier. What number multiplied by 4 is 20?” 
Approximately seven of the 24 students called out, 
“Five!” as the remaining 17 students sat and stared at 
the board. 
c. “What is [the answer to] number two?” Student R  
R. called out, “Ten.” 
64 119. Evidence relevant to Charges 46 through 48 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 46 through 48. As discussed in Factual Finding 113, Victorio was not 
present in Estrada’s classroom when Estrada first initiated instruction on greatest 
common factors on January 29, 2020. Victorio therefore did not observe how Estrada 
introduced the lesson on greatest common factors. At hearing, Victorio claimed not 
knowing the subject matter content of the video notwithstanding that in her February 
11, 2020 memorandum she repeatedly claimed Estrada used a video to 
instruct students on greatest common factors. Victorio admitted Estrada’s use of the 
video, including pausing it at times to provide students with information, is an 
appropriate teaching tool. Victorio equated providing students with information with 
“lecturing.” Victorio admitted Estrada was making “some effort” to interact with 
students by pausing to ask questions and was able to elicit feedback from some 
students. Victorio also admitted the selected dialogue or statements she attributed to 
Estrada in the February 11, 2020 memorandum are incomplete. Victorio further 
admitted the dialogue or statements she selected to report do they reflect Estrada’s 
efforts to engage students by modeling, i.e., providing a step-by-step explanation 
while solving a math problem. Victorio testified, “I can’t write everything she said 
down. . . .” 
120. The District alleges in Charge 49, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
use correct terminology. Charge 49 alleges Estrada made several errors throughout the 
math activities. 
a. Estrada incorrectly identified the term ‘greatest common 
factor’ as ‘greater common factor’. This error: (1) 
changed the meaning of the term from the superlative 65 to the comparative, and (2) provided the students with 
an incorrect model of the term.
b. Estrada posted the incorrect term ‘Greater Common 
Factor’ on the white board as a heading for the math 
activities.
c. On several occasions, Estrada stated words to the effect 
of, “Put them (i.e., the factors) in chronological order,” 
inaccurately using the word chronological, which refers 
to time or events, rather than use the term numeric 
order. 
121. The District alleges in Charge 50, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
model the correct use of academic language, or scaffold student learning by providing 
them with specific sentence frames, or structured opportunities to develop their oral 
English Language skills as follows: 
a. Estrada posted the following item on the white board, 
but never referenced it, nor did she encourage the 
students to use complete sentences: 
.
b. Estrada repeatedly accepted one-word answers or short 
phrases such as, “Ten,” “Twenty-four,” and “Four and 
seven.” She did not ask the students to elaborate upon 
their responses or provide them with a sentence frame 
such as ‘_____ and _____ are factors of ______,’ in order to 
support their language development. 66 c. Estrada incorrectly used the word “and,” which indicates 
the operation of addition, when discussing 
multiplication with the students. She continually made 
statements using words to the effect of, ”3 and 4 is 12” 
and “2 and 9 is 18.” 
i. The students repeated her errors making 
statements such as “16 and 2 is 32,” rather than 
“16 multiplied by 2 equals 32.” 
122. Evidence relevant to Charges 49 and 50 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence supports
Charges 49 and 50. Victorio’s unrebutted testimony established Estrada did not use 
correct terminology or model the correct use of academic language during instruction 
on greatest common factors. 
123. The District alleges in Charge 51, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
establish effective procedures to monitor and keep track of the students. The specific 
allegations are as follows: 
a. Approximately 33 minutes after entering the classroom, 
Estrada stated words to the effect of, “I’m sorry. Where’s 
A ?” indicating that student A  G. was 
missing from the classroom.
b. One of the students stated, “He went home at lunch.” 
Estrada responded, using words to the effect of, “Oh. I 
just noticed that he isn’t here.” Estrada did not contact 
67 the office to confirm the student had gone home and 
she instead continued with her activities. 
124. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 51. Student 
A  G. received therapeutic counseling services and at times was excused early 
from school to receive those services. Victorio was unaware of A  G.’s 
circumstances. Estrada asserted she confirmed A ’s absence from her classroom 
with the school office, in accordance with her customary practice. 
125. The District alleges in Charge 52, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
monitor and redirect the following off-task student behaviors to establish an academic 
culture conducive to teaching and learning as follows: 
a. Estrada told student A  C. to stop ripping paper. 
He angrily replied, “I’m not ripping anything, I’m just 
getting my book!” Estrada used words to the effect of, 
“Let’s be positive.” As all the students around him 
watched, A  angrily responded, “No one is positive 
here!” Estrada walked away without addressing A ’s 
inappropriate response. 
b. Student F  E. spent several minutes making a 
paper airplane rather than working on the math activity. 
Estrada did not redirect him back to the task. 
c. Student R  R. repeatedly yelled out off-topic 
comments throughout the activity. Estrada did not 
address his off-task behavior and R  continued to 
call out. 
68 d. Several of the students played with pencil sharpeners, 
doodled in their workbooks, rearranged items 
in their pencil boxes, rummaged for items in their desks, 
or exchanged markers with classmates rather than 
complete the activity. Estrada did not redirect them back 
to the task, or address any of their off-task behaviors. 
126. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 52. At hearing, 
Estrada had no recollection of the off-task behaviors Victorio observed. Estrada’s lack 
of recollection did not preponderate over Victorio’s unrebutted testimony that Estrada 
did not redirect students’ off-task behaviors on January 30, 2020. 
127. The District alleges in Charge 53, on January 30, 2020, Estrada did not 
establish an effective learning environment that is conducive to and reflective of the 
learning and accomplishments of the students when the student work samples on the 
Writing and ELD bulletin boards had not been updated since November 2019.
128. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 53. District 
school closures for Thanksgiving, Christmas, and winter breaks rendered it 
impracticable for Estrada to implement her customary practice of updating the Writing 
and ELD bulletin boards every six weeks in accordance with District policy. 
129. The District alleges in Charge 54, that on January 30, 2020, Estrada 
willfully refused to comply with the directive provided to her orally on December 11, 
2019 and November 14, 2019 during conferences with Victorio to “(1) Effective 
immediately deliver standards-based lessons with appropriate learning activities, (2) 
Effective immediately differentiate learning activities to meet the diverse needs of the 
students assigned to her class roster to provide them with equal access to the 69 curriculum, (3) Effective immediately clearly communicate the instructional purpose of 
all lessons and activities and review it again at the end, (4) Effective immediately 
develop, teach and reinforce an effective classroom behavior plan, and (5) Effective 
immediately consistently monitor and respond appropriately to students’ off-task and 
disruptive behaviors,” and provided to her in writing in the reference memorandum 
issued on December 12, 2019 and November 15, 2019.
130. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 54. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 43 through 53, Estrada 
complied with the directives Victorio provided to her orally during the November 14 
and December 11, 2019 conferences and in writing in the conference memoranda
issued on November 15 December 12, 2019. 
MARCH 3, 2020 INFORMAL CLASSROOM OBSERVATION
131. On March 3, 2020, between 8:11 a.m. and 9:04 a.m., Victorio conducted 
an unannounced observation of Estrada’s fifth grade Breakfast in the Classroom (BIC) 
and ELA activities initially with 23 students, then 20 students after three students were 
pulled out for the resource specialist program (RSP). Victorio reported students 
watched a CNN 10-minute video about the presidential primaries. (CNN-10 is a daily 
news show about current events and global issues.) In connection with the ELA activity, 
Victorio reported she observed Estrada distribute a worksheet titled 
 to students. Victorio further reported the worksheet contained 10 
sentences with verb tense errors. Victorio also reported the following: Estrada 
projected the worksheet without introducing a standard or learning objective. Estrada 
sat at a table with EL students and did not provide them with any direction or 
instruction. Estrada then spent 35 minutes looking at her laptop and pausing on 
occasion to circulate the classroom while most students struggled to complete the 70 worksheet. At 8:59 a.m., Estrada directed students’ attention to her projected sample 
worksheet. One student, whom Estrada selected, shared her response to the second 
item on the projected worksheet. The other students copied the response. 
132. Approximately, 10 months later, on January 15, 2021, Victorio convened a 
post-observation conference, which the COVID pandemic delayed. Victorio discussed 
her observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and preparation, delivery of instruction, 
and management of the classroom environment. Benitez and Solokovits, the UTLA 
representative, were present. Victorio subsequently prepared a January 15, 2021 
conference memorandum containing her observations. 
133. The January 15, 2021 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to submit physical copies of complete 
standards-based weekly plans that describe a clear sequencing of learning in each 
content area; to prepare her classroom in advance of instructional activities; to provide 
well planned, logically sequenced standard-based, teacher-directed instruction; to 
provide students with clear directions to support their completion of assignments; and 
to plan appropriate differentiated activities to meet the learning needs of Level 0 and 
Level 1 EL. 
134. The January 15, 2021 conference memorandum additionally instructs 
Estrada to deliver standard-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; to 
clearly communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review 
the purpose again at the end of the lesson; to develop, teach, and reinforce an 
effective classroom behavior plan; to monitor consistently and respond appropriately 
to students’ off-task and disruptive behaviors; and to post current and authentic 
student-produced work upon return to the physical environment. 71 135. The January 15, 2021 conference memorandum informs Estrada that 
failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to 
the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from 
the District. 
136. For reasons not established by the evidence, the January 15, 2021 
conference memorandum was subsequently revised on January 22, 2021. 
137. Based on Victorio’s January 15, 2021 conference memorandum, as 
revised January 22, 2021, the District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which 
the Commissioners resolve as follows. 
138. The District alleges in Charge 55, on March 3, 2020, Estrada submitted 
incomplete lesson plans for the Week of March 2-6, 2020, as follows: 
a. Estrada did not describe a sequence of learning that 
could help guide instructional delivery. The plans 
consisted of general activities (e.g. editing worksheets, 
continue answering text dependent questions).
b. Estrada did not identify learning objectives for any 
content area. 
c. Estrada did not follow her lesson plans. Estrada 
indicated she planned to teach students how to edit text 
for commas and semicolons in a series and 
capitalization, but assigned a one-page worksheet about 72 verb tenses that she did not include in her plans for 
Wednesday, March 3, 2020.
139. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 55. The 
evidence shows that on the Friday prior to the March 3, 2020 observation, Victorio and 
Estrada met and discussed deficiencies with Estrada’s lesson plan for instructing 
student how to edit text for commas and semicolons during the week of March 2-6, 
2020. Estrada made corrections to the lesson plan in accordance with Victorio’s 
instructions. For example, Victorio instructed Estrada to accommodate two students 
with IEPs by chunking assignments into smaller parts. At the time of the March 3, 2020 
observation, Estrada did not follow the lesson plan because students needed 
additional time to work on shifts in verb tenses. (See Exh. RX1067 [B764-B767].) 
Victorio did not observe Estrada identify learning objectives regarding shifts in verb 
tenses because Victorio was not present during previous instructional sessions when 
verb tenses were initially introduced to the class. (See Exh. 15 at pp. 10-11 [B600-
B601].) At hearing, Victorio admitted Estrada’s departure from the planned lesson on 
commas and semicolons to provide further instruction on shift in verb tenses was not 
wrong. 
140. The District alleges in Charge 56, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
prepare her classroom in advance of instructional activities, as follows: Estrada posted 
a standard and a learning objective that did not align to her English Arts activities 
about verb tenses and instead referred to Mathematics instruction about fractions. 
  73 Standard 5NF.2
Solve word problem involving additional and subtraction of fractions 
referring to the same whole, including cases of unlike denominators e.g., 
by using visual fraction models or equation [sic] to prevent a problem 
Objective 
Student [sic] will add unlike fractions and solve problems involving the 
addition of unlike fractions. 
141. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 56. 
Estrada’s lesson plan for the week of March 2-6, 2020 reflects Estrada planned 
instructional activities regarding Standard 5NF.2. (See Exh. 15 at pp. 10-11 [B600-
B601].) At hearing, Victorio admitted it was appropriate for Estrada to prepare her 
classroom in advance of those instructional activities by posting the math standard
and objective. Victorio claimed the posted standard and objective for planned math 
activities did not align with the English Arts activities she observed in Estrada’s 
classroom; however, Victorio did not report or testify that standards and objectives 
regarding planned ELA activities about verb tenses were not actually posted in 
Estrada’s classroom. 
142. The District alleges in Charge 57, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
address the diverse learning needs of the 24 students assigned to her class when she 
did not plan or include supports such as: 
a. Preview of content specific vocabulary such as verb, 
tense, past and present for the 22 EL students. 74 b. Chunking of the assignment (e.g., assigning only the 
odd numbered sentences) for the two students with 
IEPs. 
143. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 57. As 
discussed in Factual Finding 139, Estrada addressed the diverse learning needs of 
students by including accommodations, such as chunking assignments into smaller 
parts, in her lesson plan, as Victorio previously instructed her to do. 
144. The District alleges in Charge 58, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
clearly communicate to the students what they would be learning about verb tenses 
and why. The specific allegations are as follows: 
a. Estrada stated words to the effect of, “We are continuing 
with verb tenses. It will be in your IAB [Interim 
Assessment].” 
b. Estrada moved on to read the directions from the 
projected worksheet but did not (1) ask the students any 
questions about verb tenses to ensure that they 
understood the activity, or (2) ask the students to 
paraphrase the purpose of the activity.
145. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 58. As 
discussed in Factual Finding 139, Victorio was not present during previous instructional 
sessions when verb tenses were initially introduced to the class. Consequently, Victorio 
was not present to observe whether or how Estrada communicated why and what 
students would be learning about verb tenses. Nor was Victorio present to observe 75 whether Estrada checked to see if her students understood what they would be 
learning. 
146. The District alleges in Charge 59, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
deliver a teacher-directed lesson to teach the students how to identify a verb and use 
the correct verb tense in a sentence. According to Charge 59, for approximately 41 
minutes, Estrada lead the students through the following disjointed, low-level 
activities: 
a. Estrada distributed a photocopied worksheet entitled 
. She projected the 
worksheet and without providing any further 
explanation, she read aloud the first sentence. She wrote 
the response (i.e., the corrected sentence) on her 
worksheet as the students simply copied her answer.
b. Estrada directed several of the students to change seats 
and called one group of five EL students to sit at a table 
with her, before releasing the entire class to complete 
the worksheet independently. 
i. Estrada spent the majority of the next 
approximately 28 minutes seated at a table 
looking at the MISIS website on her laptop. 
ii. Estrada paused on occasion to circulate the 
classroom without intention. Many of the 
students attempted to complete the worksheet, 76 but most stopped working after completing only 
one, out of ten, sentences
c. Estrada interrupted the assignment and told the 
students that she had seen that many of them were 
making errors. Estrada proceeded to read the same 
worksheet directions aloud once more, circulated the 
room briefly, and then sat down again to look at a 
YouTube video about verb tenses on her laptop. 
d. Estrada directed the students to stop working and called 
up student H  M. to complete the second sentence 
on the projected worksheet while the remaining 
students sat and waited. 
i. H  M. completed the sentence correctly, and 
the remaining 22 students simply copied her 
work. 
ii. While most of the students sat idle, or socialized, 
Estrada asked H  M. to explain her work and 
Estrada simply stated that the sentence did not 
make sense. Estrada did not ask H  M. to 
identify the verb or the verb tenses in the 
sentence, nor did she clarify for the students that 
the verb tenses has been used incorrectly in the 
sentence. 
77 147. The preponderance of the evidence supports part of Charge 59. Victorio’s 
testimony established Estrada should not have been using MISIS during instructional 
time, even when students were working independently. Estrada admitted using MISIS 
but denied using it “that long.” Victorio’s testimony established students stopped 
working and sat unattended for approximately 20 minutes as Estrada circulated the 
classroom. Estrada’s testimony asserting she did not see students copying student 
H  M.’s work is not credited because H  was called to share her work on a 
worksheet projected for the entire class to see and reference. Neither party offered 
evidence regarding allegations in subparagraphs (a) and (c) of Charge 59.
148. The District alleges in Charge 60, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
provide clear directions to support students in completing the verb tense worksheet 
when she failed to provide a systematic demonstration of how to identify the verbs in 
each given sentence and determine the correct tense in each case. Instead, according 
to Charge 60, Estrada: 
a. Projected the worksheet, and stated words to the effect 
of “So, yesterday we practiced verb tenses. You need to 
read the directions [on the worksheet] right now.” 
Estrada read the directions aloud, while most of the 
students simply sat and listened and other echoed her 
reading. 
b. Read aloud the first sentence (i.e., When I finished the 
quiz, I check my answers.), and rather than ask the 
students to identify the verbs and verb tenses in the 
sentence, Estrada stated words to the effect of, “what’s 
missing?” 
78 i. Two of the students answered, “It’s wrong,” but 
Estrada did not ask them to explain their answers. 
ii. Estrada called on student H  M., who stated 
that the word “check” should be changed to 
“checked.” Estrada wrote the corrected sentence 
on her projected sample while the majority of the 
students simply copied her sample. Estrada did 
not pause to explain that the verb finished was 
the past tense, and therefore the verb check 
should also be changed to the past tense. 
c. Moved on stating words to the effect of “How many 
agree (i.e. with H ’s answer)?” Most of the students 
did not respond. Estrada stated words to the effect of, 
“So, I’m going to have you work together,” and Estrada 
released the students to finish the work sheet 
independently. Although the students socialized, they 
did not work with a partner to complete the worksheets. 
d. As a result of Estrada’s unclear and inadequate 
directions, the following occurred: 
i. One of the students directed himself to her and 
stated, “This is kind of hard.” Rather than ask him 
to clarify why he found the work difficult, Estrada 
stated words to the effect of “Just give it a try,” 
79 and she walked away without providing him any 
support. 
ii. Several of the students called out comments such 
as, “I don’t get it,” and “It’s difficult.” Estrada did 
not acknowledge their comments or offer any 
assistance.
iii. Approximately seven of the students were unable 
to identify the verbs in the sentence and did not 
know which of the words needed to be changed. 
Additionally, some of the students changed the 
words completely (i.e., the word “saw” to “buy” 
rather than the tense (i.e., “saw” to “see”). 
149. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 60. Estrada denied 
she heard and ignored students’ statements and comments and testified she “would 
have stopped and find a video to support learning” if the assignment were hard. The 
Commissioners did not credit this aspect of Estrada’s testimony in so far as it was 
aspirational. 
150. The District alleges in Charge 61, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
adjust her lesson or activities in response to the learning needs of the Level 0 and 
Level 1 English Learner students in her class, when she failed to employ differentiated 
strategies to meet their specific learning needs. Instead, according to Charge 61, 
Estrada: 
a. Called a group of five EL (Level 0-1) students to her table 
but provided them with no direction or guidance 80 regarding the worksheet assignment, and she looked at 
MISIS on her laptop. 
b. Four of the five students sat and stared at their 
worksheets, while one attempted to complete the 
sentence. Rather than provide the students with a 
targeted mini lesson, such as a review about the verbs 
and how to identify verbs, Estrada: 
i. Stated words to the effect of “Es muy dificil, van a 
agarrar Lexia. [It’s too difficult, you will do Lexia 
(i.e., an outline literacy program)].” Estrada then 
directed the students to retrieve Chromebooks 
from the computer cart but provided no further 
instructions or explanation. 
ii. Continued to sit at the table and watch a 
YouTube video about verb tenses on her laptop, 
which included screen shots of the verb tense 
worksheet. Estrada paused on occasion to 
circulate the classroom, while four of the EL 
students worked on basic reading skills on the 
Lexia program, and one the students attempted 
to complete the worksheet independently.
151. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 61. At 
hearing, Victorio admitted presenting EL students with a video about verb tenses is an 81 acceptable differentiation strategy. Estrada instructed the EL students to do Lexia while 
she searched for the YouTube video. 
152. The District alleges in Charge 62, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
establish clear behavioral expectations nor did she monitor and redirect the following 
off-task student behaviors to establish an academic culture conducive to teaching and 
learning. Specifically, Charge 62 alleges: 
a. Several of the students socialized and played with items 
at their desks such as notebooks, pencils, and pencil 
boxes, rather than complete the assigned worksheet. 
Estrada did not redirect them back to their task. 
b. One of the students directed himself to a student seated 
at his table and yelled, “Shut up!” on at least two 
occasions. Estrada did not address his inappropriate 
behavior. 
c. One male student directed himself to another student 
who had walked over to his table, and yelled, “!Metiche!
!Vete para allá! [Nosy! Go over there!]” Although Estrada 
was seated in close proximity to both of the students, 
she did not address the student who was walking 
around the classroom or the student who made the 
inappropriate comment.
d. One male student loudly commented about a female 
student seated at his table stating, “She’s too ugly.” 82 Once again, Estrada did not redirect the inappropriate 
behavior. 
153. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 62. The 
credible evidence did not establish Estrada’s awareness of the off-task behaviors 
Victorio claimed to have observed on Mach 3, 2020. The credible evidence did not 
establish Estrada failed to redirect any student or remediate any off-task behavior 
brought to her attention on March 3, 2020. 
154. The District alleges in Charge 63, on March 3, 2020, Estrada did not 
establish an effective learning environment conducive and reflective of the learning 
and accomplishments of the students when the student work samples on her “Writing” 
bulletin board had not been updated since November 2019. 
155. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 63. Estrada’s 
Writing bulletin board was not updated on March 3, 2020. 
156. The District alleges in Charge 64, on March 3, 3030, Estrada willfully 
refused to comply with the directives, provided to her orally during conferences held 
on November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, and February 7, 2020, and in conference 
memoranda issued to her on December 12, 2019, November 15, 2019, and February 
11, 2020, to deliver standards-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; 
differentiate learning activities to meet the diverse needs of students assigned to her 
class roster to provide them with equal access to the curriculum; clearly communicate 
the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review it at the end; develop, 
teach, and reinforce an effective classroom behavior plan, consistently monitor and 
respond appropriately to students’ off-task and disruptive behaviors. 83 157. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 64. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 55 through 63, Estrada 
complied with the directives Victorio provided to her orally during conferences held on 
November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, and February 7, 2020, and in writing in the 
conference memoranda issued to her on November 15, 2019, December 12, 2019, and 
February 11, 2020. 
2019/2020 Academic Year Below Standard Evaluation 
158. On April 22, 2020, Victorio issued a Below Standard Evaluation to Estrada 
for the 2019/2020 academic year. (See Exh. 17.) 
2020/2021 Academic Year 
JANUARY 27, 2021, FEBRUARY 5,2021,  FEBRUARY 12, 2021,F EBRUARY 
23, 2021, AND APRIL 6,2021  VIRTUAL CLASSROOM OBSERVATIONS  
159. Beginning in March 2020 and continuing throughout the 2020/2021 
academic year, the District suspended in-person instruction due to the COVID 
pandemic. The District replaced in-person instruction with three hours of online 
instruction in a virtual setting each school day.
160. The Commissioners determined Benitez’s evaluation of, which is distinct 
from supervision of, Estrada’s virtual classroom performance during the 2020/2021 
academic year was inconsistent with and contrary to the terms of the 2020-2021 
Distance Learning Sideletter discussed in Factual Finding 18. The Commissioners 
therefore make no factual findings regarding the District allegations in Charges 65 
through 75. Concomitantly, discipline in the form of notices of unsatisfactory service or 
suspension and directives Benitez provided to Estrada either orally during conferences 84 held on January 15, 2021, and on April 23, 2021, or in writing in conference 
memoranda issued on January 15, 2021, and on April 26, 2021 are not included in the 
Commissioners’ resolution of allegations discussed in Factual Findings 182, 209, 235, 
and 263.
2021/2022 Academic Year
161. District schools, including Alta California, resumed in-person instruction 
during the 2021/2022 academic year. 
OCTOBER 27,2021O BSERVATION
162. On October 27, 2021, from 10:57 a.m. to 11:48 a.m., Benitez conducted 
an unannounced observation of Estrada instructing 23 students in connection with two 
separate ELA activities—one on using commas and quotations and another adding 
descriptive details to  story. Benitez reported he observed the following: 
Fifteen students entered the classroom at approximately 10:57 a.m. Two students 
argued at the classroom doorway. An objective, purportedly for an unrelated lesson,
was written on the white board. The posted Daily Schedule had overlapping subject 
times. The day prior to Benitez’s observation, students completed a handout titled 
, the image of which was projected
from an overhead on to a screen. Benitez reported observing Estrada calling on 
volunteers one at a time to the overhead to write their answers. Volunteers disputed 
the order in which they were to take turns writing their answers as other students sat 
and waited for each volunteer to write an answer. Benitez reported Estrada told each 
volunteer which correction they should make to their answer. The volunteers took 23 
minutes to complete six questions. The exercise was disrupted when one of the 
volunteers tripped over and unplugged the overhead projector’s power cord. Benitez 85 reported, at approximately 11:20 a.m., Estrada moved on and began to touch upon 
various topic:  assignment, brainstorming, narrative, dialogue, four-point 
rubric and character traits. Estrada then read directly from handouts and charted paper 
while lecturing to students and directing them to what they know. The students 
watched Estrada lecture and shuffled through their papers. After Estrada lectured, she 
instructed students to start a draft. Students were unsure about the assignment and 
raised questions. Estrada explained the directions again. 
163. On November 15, 2021, Benitez convened a post-observation 
conference, at which time he discussed his observations of Estrada’s lesson planning 
and preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of the classroom 
environment. Benitez subsequently prepared a November 16, 2021 conference 
memorandum containing his observations and Estrada’s statement that she would 
provide a written response. Benitez informed Estrada she may respond in writing by 
November 29, 2021. Estrada’s response to the November 16, 2021 conference 
memorandum was admitted as Exh. RX1117. 
164. The November 16, 2021 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to design and plan standards-based 
lessons and describe a clear sequence of instruction in each content area; 
communicate clearly to students what they will be learning and why it is important; 
provide standards-based, teacher-directed instruction that is well planned, logically 
sequenced, and engages students in meaningful learning; develop lessons that are 
effectively using instructional time; monitor student behavior at all times; reflect on 
areas needing improvement and adapt and utilize support when offered; consider 
signing up for the PAR Coaching Support resource; and take advantage of available 
professional development classes. 86 165. The November 16, 2021 conference memorandum instructs Estrada to 
deliver standard-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; to clearly 
communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review the 
purpose again at the end of the lesson; to develop, teach, and reinforce an effective 
classroom behavior plan; to monitor consistently and respond appropriately to 
students’ off-task and disruptive behaviors; implement strategies to support checks for 
student understanding and avoid reading through material without further discussing 
content with students; and to ensure instructional time is effectively utilized and 
refrain from having students wait. 
166. The November 16, 2021 conference memorandum additionally informs 
Estrada that failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her 
performance may lead to the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline 
such as a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or 
both, and dismissal from the District. 
167. Based on Benitez’s November 16, 2021 conference memorandum, the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows. 
168. The District alleges in Charge 76, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
follow the posted Daily Schedule. According to the allegations, Estrada engaged the 
students in ELA activities during the ELD and Math instructional blocks. The posted 
Daily Schedule stated the following, as set forth in Charge 76: 
Posted    Actual 
10:50 – 11:20 ELD (cont.)  10:57 – 11:48 ELA 87 10:20 – 11:30 Math 
12:30 – 1:10 Lunch 
169. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 76. Each 
Wednesday during the 2021/2022 academic year, the entire Alta California student 
population was subject to COVID testing in the Multi-Purpose Room (MPR). October 
27, 2021 was a Wednesday. At hearing, Benitez admitted Estrada had to deviate from 
the Daily Schedule posted in her classroom and engage her students in ELA activities 
during the scheduled time for ELD and Math instruction because she was required to 
take her students to the MPR for weekly COVID testing. 
170. The District alleges in Charge 77, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
address the diverse learning needs of the 23 students assigned to her class, when she 
did not plan or include supports such as , pair sharing, questions, 
or scaffolding. The particular allegations are as follows: (a) Estrada delivered her lesson 
to the whole group without any differentiation. (b) Seven students were ELD 1, eleven 
students were ELD 2, and the remaining had yet to be identified.
171. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 77. On 
October 27, 2021, Estrada translated the Peaches story from English to Spanish. 
Benitez admitted observing Estrada “referencing” storyBenitez observed 
Estrada working with four students in Spanish, which Benitez admitted at hearing is a 
form of differentiation. Benitez further admitted, testifying, “Yeah, Yeah,” that Estrada 
had posters on her classroom walls evidencing scaffolding strategies for her ELD 
students. 
172. The District alleges in Charge 78, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
post a standard or an objective for the lessons to give the students a context for their 88 learning. The specific allegations are as follows: (a) An unrelated objective was written 
on the whiteboard. It stated: I will be able to: read with purpose and understanding, 
preread to identify and annotate key events, summarize a text and share my thinking 
with peers. (b) Estrada apologized to the class for not having a standard by stating, 
“We are going to close the lesson. I took out the standard. I apologize. I put another 
poster up there,” or words to that effect.
173. The District alleges in Charge 79, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
clearly communicate to the students what they would be learning to give them a 
context for their learning, as follows: 
a. Estrada began the lesson regarding commas and 
quotations by having a student write the answer on the 
overhead. Estrada did not explain or review the 
importance of commas and quotations in their writing. 
i. Estrada concluded the lesson without clarity by 
stating, “Alright. We are going to close the lesson. 
I took out the standard. I apologize. I put another 
poster up there.” “Using commas to set up words 
like ‘yes’. ‘Yes’ and put a comma and ‘no’. “And 
‘tag’. They call it a tag question. We talked about 
that for the rest of the sentence.” “I am going to 
have you click over to the Peaches Assignment.” 
ii. Estrada then moved into the next activity without 
reviewing the importance of commas and 
quotations marks in their written work. 89 b. Estrada began the lesson that concluded with writing a 
draft, with a lecture on a variety of topics including a 
Peaches Assignment, brainstorming, narrative, dialogue, 
rubric and character traits. 
i. At the end, students asked, “Do we also have to 
write Ms. Estrada?” “What do we do if we are 
finished?” “Do you have to write the story and do 
it again?” “Ms. Estrada, what do I do?” 
ii. Estrada did not make any connections between 
the activities or explain how they align with the 
larger unit of study. 
174. Evidence relevant to Charges 78 and 79 was jointly entered into the 
record and discussed together here. The preponderance of the evidence does not 
support Charges 78 and 79. The comma and quotation marks lesson Benitez observed 
was a continuation of Estrada’s ELA lesson from the previous day. Estrada’s 
continuation of the comma and quotation marks lesson was disrupted by the required 
weekly COVID testing discussed in Factual Finding 169. Students had just returned 
from COVID testing when Benitez arrived at the classroom. Estrada reviewed a 
homework assignment, which included students’ responses to questions on the 
Commas and Quotation Marks worksheet Estrada projected on the overheard. (See 
Exh. Rx1117 [B130]). Benitez was not present when Estrada first initiated the ELA 
activity involving commas and quotation marks and he therefore could not know 
whether or not Estrada communicated standards or objectives to contextualize the 
students’ learning about commas and quotation marks. To close that ELA activity, 
Estrada projected and read to students the Standards. In the conference memorandum 90 and at hearing Benitez did not and was unable to identify which students purportedly 
asked questions noted in subparagraph b.i. of Charge 79. 
175. The District alleges in Charge 80, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
provide students with a teacher-directed lesson to engage them in higher levels of 
thinking and provide them with the opportunity to learn how commas and quotations 
are used or how to write a draft. The allegations in Charge 80 state: 
a. Estrada spent approximately 23 minutes calling one 
student volunteer at a time. Estrada waited for each 
volunteer to rewrite their response onto the overhead 
projector. Estrada directed students to make corrections 
as the volunteer wrote on the overhead. As the 
volunteers wrote, the remaining students watched them 
write, looked around the room, and spoke out of turn to 
participate, and looked at their answers. 
i. Estrada did not check for understanding within 
the whole group to ensure the class understood 
comma and quotations. She spoke only to the 
student at the overhead and made closed 
statements towards the class.
ii. Estrada told a student asking for help, “So you 
needed to read sentence adding commas to the 
correct place. That is all they are asking you to do. 
The task is just to add the comma.” 91 iii. After a student completed writing on the 
overhead, you stated, “Everyone check your 
paper,” without any accountability or oversight. 
b. Estrada asked questions without allowing students to 
respond. Estrada asked questions without allowing 
students to respond. She asked, using words to the 
effect of: 
i. “This is correct? I am hoping this is a capital D. 
Ok. Afterward, what somebody said. That is 
correct? Who is next?” 
ii. “Ok, anybody disagrees? No, are we going to 
have an extra comma?”
iii. “That is correct? You forget to. This comma is 
correct. You need to put it there.” 
c. Estrada made a blanket statement regarding student 
understanding when referring to one student using 
words to the effect of “G . So far you guys are 
getting them. All this work paid off. All this work.” 
d. Estrada did not allow for collaboration within the whole 
group for students to make meaning.
i. A student writing on the overheard made an 
error, a student at his desk asked, using words to 
the effect of: “Can I help him?” Estrada responded 
92 using words to the effect of: “No, I need him to 
make the corrections.” 
ii. Students longing to collaborate spoke out of turn 
stating words to the effect of “Can I do number 
3?” “Can I do number 4 or 5?” Estrada stated, 
using words to the effect of: “Hold on a minute. 
Let me write names down.” 
e. Estrada did not attempt to engage students when the 
projector turned off and had to restart. She waited two 
minutes. During this time, she did not give students a 
task to complete and they quietly sat for the projector to 
restart. 
f. Estrada did not give clear and consistent statements 
with her feedback. Estrada stated using words to the 
effect of: 
i. “So where is the quotations? No, not the 
quotations. Cause we already have the quotation 
marks. Where is the comma?”
ii. “No, that is correct. It is inside the quotations. You 
have a period and a comma. Just a few pointers, 
she capitalized and end with a period.”
iii. “She did it correctly. This one goes inside of the 
quotation marks. Right here (Pause) Could fix that 93 here? You see how it looks like it is outside. It 
goes inside (Pause) You did that one correctly.” 
iv. “That is correct. You forgot to. This comma is 
correct. You need to put it there.” 
g. Estrada spent approximately 23 minutes lecturing at 
students about a variety of topics and did not provide 
the student with clear verbal or written directions or 
expectations. 
i. Estrada began by stating the review was for a few 
students. She stated using words to the effect of: 
“Because we had a few people. Yeah. The 
brainstorm. Because we had a few people absent 
yesterday, we need to go back and review.” 
ii. A student with a one-on-one assistant asked 
Estrada to move because he was copying from 
the board and she was blocking his view. Estrada 
stated using words to the effect of “Ok. I’ll give 
you two minutes.” The class waited and were 
unsure of what to do.
iii. Estrada continued to lecture without clarity. She 
stated using words to the effect of: “Ok, E , I 
need to review. I have to remind everybody when 
we write the assignment.” “Notice there is a lot of 
dialogue in here. Here they end up with an 
94 exclamation.” “When you are writing you are 
going to change the words. You are going to add 
descriptive words. You are going to an 
exclamation. Question mark.” “We talked about 
this morning. Oh, let me again review the task. 
We have to rewrite the story.” “D , G  
you should have your paper out.” 
iv. Estrada continued to lecture without connecting 
topics. Estrada stated using words to the effect of:
“Rewrite your story by having dialogue. The 
second thing you need to do is add dialogue.” 
“Number three, you need to add descriptive 
details. We have been working on adding 
descriptive details and a conclusion or ending 
without changing the events.” 
v. Estrada read word or word all four points of the 
rubric and mentioned a variety of topics without 
clarity. She stated using words to the effect of: 
“Some evidence. You included some conclusion 
that supports the text. Yesterday, I showed you 
previous examples from some students.” “That is 
not the conclusion you need to expand your 
conclusion. One sentence is not good enough. “A 
2, limited evidence of the ability to write. May be 
you added one dialogue and forgot the other.” 
95 vi. Estrada jumped from topic to topic. She stated 
using words to the effect of: “So yesterday we 
worked on the brainstorming, and you were to 
describe the character. Right? So hopefully, you 
had a chance to do that.” “I have extra copies for 
those that need. Some people needed one of 
these yesterday, so I am going to five you one so 
raise your hand.” 
h. Estrada did not give clear directions so that the students 
understood what to do. 
i. She gave a series of unclear directions. She stated 
using words to the effect of: “You have to review 
your writing practice. You have to write a 
narrative writing. I will be collecting the papers so 
you guys.”
ii. Estrada read word for word “What is Narrative 
Writing” and “What is a Dialogue” posters on the 
whiteboard without stopping to check for 
understanding or having students accountable for 
learning. 
iii. Estrada gave unclear feedback and directions. She 
stated using words to the effect of: “Before recess 
I told you we were going to work on this, so I am 96 going to show you how. You have the description, 
but it is fuzzy.” 
iv. Estrada gave indistinct directions. She stated 
using words to the effect of: “If you need a 
computer to find more words. We are going to go 
1 through 23. You have the paper called character 
traits. Some of you have description.” 
v. Estrada did not provide sequential directions and 
did not provide clarity. She stated, using to the 
effect of: “You have a list. You have a story to 
write. Some of you are done. What you need to 
work on is adding descriptive details. You are 
going to start your draft.” 
vi. Estrada gave indistinct directions. She stated, 
using words to the effect of: “Stop! So, notice 
what I added.” “One windy afternoon, a 
hardworking of smart farmer bought peaches. We 
put a line and color coated descriptive words.” 
“The oldest brother had one color. The second 
son had another color.” “He gave one to his 
beautiful wife and one to his four.” “This is my 
draft and made some mistakes. Is the draft a 
polished paper?” 
1) Student replied aloud, “No.” 97 2) Estrada responded using words to the 
effect of: “So, I am going to work with a 
few student that need my assistance in 
Spanish.” 
3) The students responded using words to 
the effect of: “I know Spanish. I know 
Spanish too.” 
4) Estrada responded using words to the 
effect of, “I am going to work with four 
students. Can I get a thumbs up? (Pause) 
Can I get a thumbs up? If you know what 
you need to do and can work 
independently?” 
vii. Estrada gave unclear directions. Sthe stated, using 
words to the effect of “Hold up I can’t hear you. 
There is a lot of noise. What are the jobs for you 
today?” 
1) There was no response from the students.
2) Estrada then stated, using words to the 
effect of “I already did the four characters 
for you. What are you going to do right 
now?” 
3) A student responded, “The Peaches.” 98 4) Estrada stated, using words to the effect of: 
We did the brainstorming. What is the next 
thing?” “There is a lot of noise going on. I 
can’t hear you. I am going to have to walk 
over there.” “What is that called? A draft. 
Can everyone say draft?”
5) Estrada continued using words to the 
effect of: “I am going to give you a new 
piece of paper. It is not giraffe. It is draft.” 
“I want you to give me that quotation mark 
paper. I am going to collect it.” “If you 
need a computer to look up descriptive 
details. You need to have this paper out.” 
176. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 80. The 
evidence offered at hearing did not address with specificity the itemized allegations 
set forth in Factual Finding 175, except that Benitez admitted Estrada called on 
students but claimed Estrada “was only soliciting responses from her six volunteers.” 
Benitez admitted Estrada likely collected student work to check the students 
understood the assignment. Benitez admitted Estrada attempted to sequence the 
lesson, as a sample of student work illustrates. (See Exh. RX1117 {B1305].) 
177. The District alleges in Charge 81, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
monitor student behavior outside her classroom as students entered. Students were 
arguing outside her door as they were entering the class. Estrada remained seated in 
front of her class next to the overhead projector and did not intervene. 99 178. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 81. Estrada 
did not observe any student behaviors, including students arguing, that required her 
intervention. Estrada observed students quietly waiting in line to sanitize their hands in 
accordance with District guidelines. 
179. The District alleges in Charge 82, on October 27, 2021, Estrada did not 
have effective procedures for teacher-to-student or student-to-student interaction 
based on the following:
a. Multiple times throughout both lessons, student would 
talk without raising their hand. Talking was centered 
around wanting to collaborate or asking clarifying 
questions when they did not understand. 
b. Estrada responded to this behavior by repeatedly 
stating, using words to the effect of: “Please raise your 
hand” and “It is getting noisy,” with inconsistent results 
from the students.
c. Approximately 14 of 23 students sat in silence and did 
not speak throughout the entirety of the lessons. Estrada 
did not incorporate any sentence starters or strategies 
to engage the students in the learning.
180. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 82. During 
the ELA writing activity in connection with  story, Estrada’s students asked 
questions for clarification and about collaboration without first raising their hands. 
Estrada politely reminded students to raise their hands and students complied. 100 Students who were engaged in their brainstorming processes did not speak during 
The Peaches story ELA activities. 
181. The District alleges in Charge 83, on October 27, 2021, Estrada willfully 
refused to comply with the directives, provided to her orally during conferences held 
on November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, and February 7, 2020, and in writing in 
conference memoranda dated November 15, 2019, December 12, 2019, and February 
11, 2020, to deliver standards-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; 
differentiate learning activities to meet the diverse needs of students assigned to her 
class roster to provide them with equal access to the curriculum; clearly communicate 
the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review it at the end; develop, 
teach, and reinforce an effective classroom behavior plan, consistently monitor and 
respond appropriately to students’ off-task and disruptive behaviors; implement 
strategies to support understanding and avoid reading through material without 
further discussing content with students; set expectations and create a rubric for 
student participation and engagement; post current and authentic student-produced 
work upon return to the physical environment; create a reward system to encourage 
student participation and promote classroom expectations; address student behavior 
in a timely manner.
182. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 83. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 76 through 82, Estrada 
complied with the directives provided to her orally during conferences held on 
November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, and February 7, 2020, and in writing in 
conference memoranda dated November 15, 2019, December 12, 2019, and February 
11, 2020. 101 NOVEMBER 30, 2021 CLASSROOM OBSERVATION  
183. On November 29, 2021, Benitez convened a pre-observation planning 
conference with Estrada. They reviewed Estrada’s instructional sequence, which 
included the purpose and objectives of a planned lesson on Cultivating Natural 
Resources. 
184. On November 30, 2021, between 11:00 a.m. and 12:14 p.m., Benitez 
conducted an observation of Estrada’s ELA/ELD activities in connection with a lesson 
on Cultivating Natural Resources. Benitez reported he observed a 16 feet by 4 feet 
whiteboard covered with teacher-created charts variously labeled Student Objectives, 
Essential Question, Unit Objective, Vocabulary Words, Self-Evaluate, Reflect and Close 
the Lesson, Photographs of 9 Natural Resources, Collaborative Conversation, Student 
Share Activity, Sentence Frame (1), Observation Checklist for Collaborative 
Conversation, Prior Knowledge, Sentence Frame (2), Student Objectives, Vocabulary 
Chart with Spanish Cognates, Preview Genre, a circle map on “Items made of corn,” 
and an image of a corn plant with labeled parts. Benitez further reported Estrada read 
the charts and reviewed with students an activity requiring them to pair and complete 
a circle map on “items of corn.” The students completed that activity and shared out. 
Estrada explained to students a second activity which required them to get into 
groups, circulated from station to station, and identify items containing corn. The 
students shared out items containing corn. Estrada next showed a video on cultivating 
natural resources and explained a third activity requiring students to complete the ELD 
sentence frames. Students shared their responses. Estrada ended the lesson by 
restating what the students learned during a self-evaluation activity.
185. On December 16, 2021, Benitez convened a post-observation conference, 
at which time he discussed his observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and 102 preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of the classroom environment. 
Benitez subsequently prepared a December 16, 2021 conference memorandum 
containing his observations and Estrada’s statement that she would provide a written 
response. Benitez informed Estrada she may respond in writing by January 14, 2022.
Estrada’s response to the December 16, 2021 conference memorandum was admitted 
as Exh. RX1125. 
186. The December 16, 2021 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to narrow the focus of her lessons so as 
not to cover too much material during each lesson; create an interactive lesson using 
student-created charts or charting responses; provide clear and concise directions; 
check for understanding using random selection and open-ended questions; 
implement lessons with differentiation of assignments; refrain from making judgement 
statements toward students; bring closure to each activity by checking for 
understanding and connecting it back to the objective; engage in purposeful feedback 
with students; implement pre-conference recommendations and any 
recommendations applicable into future lessons; implement differentiated lessons for 
EL students and potential reclassification students; focus on one or two standards and 
objectives throughout a lesson to ensure mastery; avoid lecturing or reading through 
lessons without meaningful interactions; establish and teach clear routines and 
procedures to students so that they understand expectations; consider signing up for 
the PAR Coaching Support resource; and take advantage of available professional 
development classes. 
187. The December 16, 2021 conference memorandum additionally directs 
Estrada to deliver standard-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; clearly 
communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review the 103 purpose again at the end of the lesson; develop, teach, and reinforce an effective 
classroom behavior plan; implement strategies to support checks for student 
understanding and avoid reading through material without further discussing content 
with students; set expectations and create a rubric for student participation and 
engagement; avoid judgment statements towards students and abide by the District’s 
policy regarding Respectful Treatment of All Persons; and implement 
recommendations and feedback. 
188. The December 16, 2021 conference memorandum further informs 
Estrada that failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her 
performance may lead to the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline 
such as a Notice of Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or 
both, and dismissal from the District. 
189. Based on Benitez’s December 16, 2021 conference memorandum, the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows. 
190. The District alleges in Charge 84, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
narrow her focus of standards. According to the allegations, Estrada included too 
many standards (8 CCSS [California Common Core State Standards] standards and 6 
ELD standards) that could not be fully taught or learned by students. 
191. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 84. Estrada 
previewed her lesson plan for teaching the Cultivating Natural Resources lesson with 
Benitez during the November 29, 2021 pre-observation conference. At hearing, Benitez 
admitted he reviewed the lesson plan, which incorporated standards from Benchmark 104 Advance, the District’s adopted curriculum program. Benitez admitted he did not 
direct Estrada to narrow the focus of the lesson plan he reviewed. 
192. The District alleges in Charge 85, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
randomly select students to check for understanding to gauge student learning. 
193. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 85. At 
hearing, Benitez admitted he and Estrada discussed random selection using popsicle 
sticks during the November 29, 2021 pre-observation conference. Estrada explained to 
Benitez she did not favor that technique having learned from attending a training 
session about possible negative consequences affecting EL students, including a 
lowering of their affective filter. (See Exh. 1208) Estrada incorporated alternative 
strategies, including providing EL learners with English and Spanish words and pre-
teaching the lesson. 
194. The District alleges in Charge 86, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
deliver a lesson that provided student accountability. According to the allegations, 
Estrada’s lesson was scripted on the board using teacher created charts and she 
lectured the students as she read through chart after chart. The students simply sat 
quietly and watched. The District further alleges Estrada did little to engage her 
students in any learning activities and notes the following:
a. Estrada read aloud from the first chart, “Today’s 
objective is I will be able to connect essential question. I 
will be able to connect essential question to information 
I already know.” Students repeated her readings without 
any connection. 105 b. Estrada then read four standards from the overheard 
and had students recite them. 
c. Estrada read through lists of activities: “collaborative
discussions, groups are teacher lead, prepare read or 
studied required materials, agreed upon rules, activity in 
groups of three, post the response to specific questions, 
regroup, review, express your own conclusion.” 
d. Estrada cited, “This is out of the comprehension 
collaboration for the common core.” 
e. During the time that Estrada read through the list of 
activities, the students listened without interaction with 
her or each other.
f. Estrada also recited definitions for vocabulary words and 
referenced photographs. As Estrada recited the 
information, students watched and listened. 
g. Estrada read Support of Collaborative Conversations: 
Group Roles and Discussion Prompts to the class from a 
handout and on a chart while the students listened 
silently. 
h. Once Estrada finished reading, she asked using words to 
the effect of: “A , can you repeat what I said? I know 
I said a lot.” A  could not provide an answer, and 
Estrada moved on.
106 195. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 86. At 
hearing, Benitez admitted students did not simply sit quietly and watch Estrada. 
Estrada engaged students in learning activities by leading students in choral reading, 
Benitez admitted choral reading is a practice aimed at helping EL students with 
reading and pronunciation. Benitez also admitted Estrada was previously written up for 
not going over learning objectives and standard with students and Estrada 
incorporated that feedback and directives to do so when she projected standards on 
the overhead, read the standards to students, and students in turn recited the 
standards. Regarding Estrada’s interaction with student A , Benitez admitted his 
reporting about that interaction was possibly incomplete. Benitez testified he 
attempted to do his best when scripting his observation but, “I’m not as well-skilled as 
a court reporter. . . . I get everything that I can but I can’t get everything.” 
196. The District alleges in Charge 87, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
give clear and cohesive instructions to students. According to the allegations, 
throughout the lesson, Estrada started and stopped, skipped, went back, moved 
forward, or gave vague explanations in the following instances: 
a. Estrada moved forward during the lesson when students 
yearned to give answers. She stated, using words to the 
effect of “Can you list one resource we have in 
Panorama City?” “I will wait for more hands.” Two 
students responded, “Tree” and “Dirt.” Estrada then 
stated, “Hold your thoughts. We are going to start the 
lesson.” 
b. Estrada gave an incoherent explanation when she stated, 
using words to the effect of: “When we have natural 
107 resources, we use them for our benefit but when we 
produce a lot, it can also hurt us.” “I want you to think 
about that.” “How, making a lot of natural resources, 
using a lot of natural resources can hurt us.” “I want you 
to think about natural resources that you can probably 
have around you in Panorama City.” 
c. Estrada skipped through the purpose of the video. Prior 
to showing a video on Cultivating Natural Resources, 
she stated using words to the effect of: “You haven’t 
seen this video so pay close attention.” After playing a 
short video, Estrada stated, using words to the effect of, 
“What happens when resources are no longer there?” 
What do we choose?” “What resources are important to 
develop more of?” Without allowing any of the students 
to answer the questions, Estrada moved on and said 
using words to the effect of: “We are going to go onto 
the next activity.” 
d. After students shared their items of corn on the circle, 
Estrada ended the discussion by stating, using words to 
the effect of: “Alright, we are going to stop.” “Ok. We are 
going to take a gallery walk.” When getting into groups, 
Estrada corrected her instructions by stating using words 
to the effect of: “What you need. Sorry, I forgot to tell 
you.” “Besides this, O . You need this paper. I forgot.” 
108 e. Estrada gave incohesive directions when she stated, 
using words to the effect of “Are you ready D ?” 
“You need to stay on topic, listen respectfully, building 
on each other and supporting each other.” “The more 
you participate the more knowledge you have.” “We are 
going to do the next part of the lesson.” A student 
responded aloud, “What?” Estrada stated using words to 
the effect of “We already did a lot of it as a group.”
f. Estrada stopped her thought, answered her question, 
and moved forward when she stated, using words to the 
effect of: “Why do humans use so much corn?” “Why do 
they use it so much?” “We have it because it tastes 
good.” “We are done with this part of the lesson. We are 
running behind. We are going to self-evaluate.” 
197. At hearing, the parties did not address Charge 87. As discussed in Factual 
Finding 195, Benitez admitted he is not a skilled reporter and is not able to record 
everything when scripting his observations. Under these circumstances, without 
credible corroborating testimony or documentation, the preponderance of the 
evidence does not support Charge 87. 
198. The District alleges in Charge 88, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
check her students understood the lesson. According to the allegations, Estrada’s 
attempts to check for understanding yielded one-word answers and uniform 
responses as follows: 
109 a. Students gave one-word answers when she asked using 
words to the effect of: “Can you list one resource we 
have in Panorama City?” “I will wait for more hands.” 
Two students responded, “Tree” and “Dirt.” 
b. Estrada solicited thumbs up as the answer. When 
students began to list items of corn on a circle map, she 
directed the class using words to the effect of “Give me 
a thumbs up. I want to make sure everyone has at least 
one item.” “I need to make sure everyone is giving me 
thumbs up.” 
c. When students shared circle map items, the majority of 
students responded using words with corn: popcorn, 
corn seed, corn flakes, corn chips, corn soup and etc. 
They did not expand beyond the word corn. 
d. When sharing out after viewing and realizing various 
products contain corn, students responded with one-
word answers: Takis, Skittles, and gum. Estrada did not 
encourage any of the students to respond using 
complete sentences. 
e. Prior to showing a video on Cultivating Natural 
Resources, Estrada stated using words to the effect of: 
“You haven’t seen this video so pay close attention.” 
After playing a short video, Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: ”What happens when resources are no 110 longer there?” “What do we choose?” “What resources 
are important to develop more of?” “We are going to go 
into the next activity.” There were no references or 
connection to the video observed. 
f. Estrada praised a one-word response when she asked 
using words to the effect of: “What would happen if we 
ran out of water? Who else would it affect?” When a 
student responded, “Animals,” Estrada said using words 
to the effect of: “Great job guys. Give yourselves a pat 
on the back.” 
g. Estrada did not solicit any response beyond a one-word 
answer. Estrada asked using words to the effect of: “ 
What else is made of wood.” A student responded, 
“Paper.” Estrada questioned using words to the effect of: 
“What else is made of wood? Really important. We need 
it.” Another student responded, “Houses.” Estrada then 
asked using words to the effect of: “What about plants?” 
and another student stated, “More food.” Again Estrada 
made no attempts to have the students expand on their 
answers or respond using complete sentences. 
h. Estrada solicited correct uniform responses when she 
asked using words to the effect of: “Did we create 
information in regards to natural resources?” “Were able 
to create or connect to prior knowledge?” “Everyone 
needs to give me answer.” “Show me your circle map. 111 Were you able to list one or two items?” “Give me a 
thumbs up.” “Were she able to work in a group?” All 
students responded, yes.
199. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 88. 
Regarding subparagraph (a) of Charge 88, the student answering “tree” was a 
newcomer student, who initially answered in Spanish. Estrada directed the newcomer 
student to answer using “tree” in a sentence in English. Regarding subparagraph (b) of 
Charge 88, Benitez admitted at hearing “thumbs up” is a technique for checking 
understanding. Although Benitez was critical of the “thumbs up” technique, he 
admitted Estrada was incorporating feedback she received from Victorio (See Exh 8 at 
p.5 [A331].) Regrading subparagraph (c) of Charge 88, Benitez admitted fifth-graders 
sharing their knowledge about corn are expected to use the word “corn” on their circle 
maps. (See Exh. RX 1125 [B1358-B1359].) The students used their circle maps during a 
think/share activity. Benitez admitted he opined to Estrada that students were “highly 
engaged” and the circle map was the “peak of the lesson.” Benitez did not include his 
opinion in the December 16, 2021 conference memorandum claiming he was “trying 
not to confuse [Estrada] by putting something like that in the memo,” Regarding 
subparagraph (d) of Charge 88, Estrada posted sentence frames which students used 
during the think/share activity. (See Exh. RX1125 [B1357, B1360].) Regarding 
subparagraph (e) of Charge 88, the video on Cultivating Natural Resources is admitted 
in evidence as exhibit RX 1127. Estrada’s questions and statement—”What happens 
when resources are no longer there?” “What do we choose?” “What resources are 
important to develop more of?” “We are going to go into the next activity.”—reference 
and are connected to the content of the Cultivating Natural Resources video. 
Regarding subparagraphs (f) and (g) of Chage 88, students had sentence frames on 
their desks. Students incorporated one-word responses into their sentence frames. 112 (See e.g. Exh. RX 1125 [B1360].) Students used the sentence frames during the 
Collaborative Conversation activities. Regarding subparagraph (h) of Charge 88, 
Estrada engaged students in a self-reflection exercise to close the lesson using the 
Self-Evaluate, Reflect, and Close the Lesson activity from the ELD Practicum (See Exh. 
RX 1125 [B1361].) 
200. The District alleges in Charge 89, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
provide a clear and concise lesson. According to the allegations, students did not 
understand the purpose of the lesson, which was centered around the importance of 
cultivating natural resources. Charge 89 alleges Estrada did not ensure that students 
understood the lesson based on the following: 
a. A student struggled to give a response to what was 
learned when Estrada asked, using words to the effect 
of: “G , can you explain why you said no?” “This 
question is in every lesson, so we have to connect to 
prior knowledge.” “Connect to essential question.” 
“Resources we already know are these.” “List the items 
about corn.” Student G  remained silent. 
b. Estrada directed students to what was learned rather 
than having them explain their learning when she stated, 
using words to the effect of: “Were we able to create or 
connect to prior knowledge?” “Everyone needs to give 
me answer.” “Show me your circle map. Were you able 
to list one or two items?” “Give me thumbs up.” “Were 
you able to work in a group?” Students responded, 
“Yes.” Estrada stated, using words to the effect of: 
113 “G , you are still not giving a response. You look 
very puzzled.”
c. At the conclusion of her lesson, Estrada prompted a 
student by using a sentence frame and stating: ”Today, I 
learned to.” The student answered, using words to the 
effect of: “Corn uses.” Estrada continued by stating, “We 
are going to continue onto the next part of the lesson.”
d. At the conclusion of her lesson, Estrada did not give 
students the ability to express what was learned, but 
rather lead them through a self-evaluation exercise 
where students were unsure of how to respond. 
201. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 89. Based 
on student G ’ silence, Benitez opined students did not understand the 
importance of cultivating natural resources. Estrada, however, told Benitez that G  
is a confident student and his presence unnerved G . G  shared with Estrada 
that Benitz stood behind her and she felt very nervous responding to Estrada's 
question. Students raised their hands to share what they learned. As discussed in 
Factual Finding 199, students participated in a Self-Evaluate, Reflect, and Close the 
Lesson activity.
202. The District alleges in Charge 90, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
differentiate her teaching for students who were EL learners and potential 
reclassification students as specified in her lesson plan. According to the allegations in 
Charge 90, two groups of students completed both sections of the integrated ELD 
114 handout. There were no instructions given that distinguished that one section was for 
EL students and the other was for Potential Reclassification students. 
203. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 90. Estrada 
differentiated her instruction for EL students and potential reclassification students. 
Estrada provided wait time for students with IEPs. Estrada used visual aids, including 
realia. Estrada translated vocabulary from English to Spanish to facilitate newcomer 
student participation. Estrada introduced sentence frames for use during circle map 
activities. Estrada paired students according to ability and interest during collaborative 
conversation activities. At hearing, Benitez acknowledged Estrada’s use of these 
differentiation techniques while asserting, “I don’t know if they were effective.” 
204. The District alleges in Charge 91, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
establish, teach, and reinforce a set of classroom routines for the following activities. 
a. When working in groups, Estrada stated using words to 
the effect of: “There is no talking right now.” However 
she did not review a set of group norms and 
expectations before she placed the students in their 
assigned groups. 
b. When asking for responses, Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: “If you have participated, put your hand 
down.” Estrada did not use equity sticks or any other 
type of system to track the students whom she had 
called upon. 
205. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 91. At 
hearing, Benitez testified he did not recall Estrada assigning students to groups to 115 discuss the Cultivating Natural Resources video. Benitez testified, “If I did, it would 
have been in my notes.” Under these circumstances, Benitez likely had no knowledge 
of whether Estrada reviewed a set of group norms and expectations before placing 
students in an assigned group. Neither party presented evidence pertinent to whether 
or what type of system Estrada used for tracking students she called on. 
206. The District alleges in Charge 92, on November 30, 2021, Estrada did not 
interact with a student in a way that projects respect and creates a safe and supportive 
learning environment as follows: 
a. Estrada made two judgment statements towards a 
student during an exchange. Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: “Are you having a fuzzy moment?” and 
“You look very puzzled.” After each statement, the 
student remained silent and did not respond. 
207. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 92. At 
hearing, Benitez admitted having no evidence the student viewed Estrada’s statements 
negatively. 
208. The District alleges in Charge 93, on November 30, 2021, Estrada willfully 
refused to comply with the directives, provided to her orally during conferences held 
on November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, February 7, 2020, January 15, 2021, April 
23, 2021, and November 15, 2021, and in writing in conference memoranda dated 
December 12, 2019, February 11, 2020, January 15, 2021, April 26, 2021, and 
November 15, 2021, to deliver standards-based lessons with appropriate learning 
activities; differentiate learning activities to meet the diverse needs of students 
assigned to her class roster to provide them with equal access to the curriculum; 116 clearly communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review it 
at the end; develop, teach, and reinforce an effective classroom behavior plan, 
consistently monitor and respond appropriately to students’ off-task and disruptive 
behaviors; implement strategies to support understanding and avoid reading through 
material without further discussing content with students; set expectations and create 
a rubric for student participation and engagement; post current and authentic 
student-produced work upon return to the physical environment; create a reward 
system to encourage student participation and promote classroom expectations; 
address student behavior in a timely manner; and ensure instructional time is 
effectively utilized and refrain having students wait. 
209. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 93. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 84 through 92, Estrada 
complied with the directives provided to her orally during conferences held on 
November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, February 7, 2020, and November 15, 2021, 
and in writing in conference memoranda dated November 15, 2019, December 12, 
2019, and February 11, 2020, and November 15, 2021. 
FEBRUARY 4, 2022 CLASSROOM OBSERVATION  
210. On February 4, 2022, between 7:58 a.m. and 8:45 a.m., Benitez conducted 
an observation of Estrada’s fifth grade ELA activities. Benitez entered the classroom at 
7:58 a.m. Benitez reported observing all students were seated with materials out. A 
Behavior Intervention Implementation (BII) assistant was in the classroom. The door 
between Estrada classroom and the classroom of her neighboring colleague, Mr. 
Gunter, was open. Mr. Gunter closed the door when he saw Benitez. The bell rang at 
8:01 a.m. Estrada entered her classroom at 8:03 a.m. Benitez reported Estrada seemed 
unsure who let her students into the classroom. Estrada posted charted questions on 117 the board titled “News Report Question” and “Current Events CNN 10.” Estrada played 
the CNN 10 video for February 4. Benitez further reported Estrada paused the video 
several times to give the class unclear information. After the video Estrada instructed 
the students to complete responses to the charted questions. Some students 
voluntarily shared their written responses. Estrada then read Standard WS 5.1 and a 
circle map during the social media lesson. The students then voluntarily read aloud 
social media handout passages. 
211. On February 18, 2022, Benitez convened a post-observation conference, 
at which time he discussed his observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and 
preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of the classroom environment. 
Benitez subsequently prepared a February 18, 2022 conference memorandum 
containing his observations and Estrada’s statement that she would provide a written 
response. Benitez informed Estrada she may respond in writing by February 28, 2022. 
212. The February 18, 2022 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to plan and prepare materials prior to 
the day’s lessons; provide clear directions to students so they clearly understand 
expectations; check for understanding using random selection (equity sticks) and 
asking open-ended questions; give feedback to students; add differentiation to the 
lesson; open and close the lesson with the purpose of students understanding and 
learning; develop rules for student participation; pick up students and begin 
instruction on time; consider signing up for PAR Coaching resource; and take 
advantage of available professional development classes.
213. The February 18, 2022 conference memorandum directs Estrada to 
deliver standard-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; clearly 
communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review the 118 purpose again at the end of the lesson; develop, teach, and reinforce an effective 
classroom behavior plan; implement strategies to support checks for student 
understanding and avoid reading through the material without further discussing 
content with students; set expectations and create a rubric for student participation 
and engagement; pick up and supervise students at 7:56 a.m. and begin instruction at 
8:01 a.m.; and implement recommendations, assistance and guidance, and feedback. 
214. The February 18, 2022 conference memorandum informs Estrada that 
failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to 
the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from 
the District. 
215. Based on Benitez’s February 18, 2022 conference memorandum, the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows. 
216.  The District alleges in Charge 94, on February 2, 2022, Estrada did not 
plan and prepare her materials prior to the day’s lesson. According to the allegations, 
when she entered the classroom two minutes after the start of the instructional period, 
she did not have materials prepared. Estrada first had to gather the materials in order 
to begin the lesson while the students waited for her. 
217. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charges 94. 
Estrada’s classroom daily schedule is evidence of her planned instruction in connection 
with the CNN 10 video.(See Exh. RX1116.) At hearing, Benitez’s testimony failed to 
explain how Estrada could “gather” materials when she purportedly “did not have 
materials prepared.” 119 218. The District alleges in Charge 95, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
give clear and cohesive instructions to students so that they clearly understood what 
to do, as follows: 
a. Estrada posted two charts without explanation: “News 
Report Question” and “Current Events CNN”. She stated 
using words to the effect of: “I am going to put up the 
questions, so you write them down.” She did not clearly 
explain to the class what she intended for them to do 
with the questions.
b. After the video and giving time for students to write, 
Estrada stated using words to the effect of: “Remember 
you only need to pick one news. There was a lot of news. 
The one you feel comfortable reporting.” She did not 
explain how they would be reporting on the news area 
that they picked.
c. During social media activity, Estrada read standard WS 
5.1 without any follow-up or explanation and moved on. 
219. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 95. Viewing 
CNN 10 and engaging in related instructional activities are established routines in 
Estrada’s classroom. (See Exh. RX 1116.) As such, it was not necessary for Estrada to 
reintroduce the CNN 10 video each day. Students were accustomed to the established 
routine of using a “Student News Analysis” graphic organizer while watching the video 
and then writing and sharing their journal entries about a selected news story. Estrada 
provided sentence frames for guidance on how to report selected news stories. (See 120 Exhs. RX1132, RX1134.) During the social media activity, Estrada read Standard WS 5.1 
and reviewed its instructional objective with students. Several students, including 
M , G , G , D , A , B , D , C , E , R , 
and V , participated in reading aloud portions of an article titled 
under Estrada’s guidance. (See Exh. 1211 [B2758].) 
220. The District alleges in Charge 96, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
check for student understanding or give feedback throughout the lesson. According to 
the allegations in Charge 96, Estrada’s attempts to check for understanding yielded 
one-word answers, voluntary responses, thumbs up, and quiet claps, as follows: 
a. When referring to the previous day’s CNN 10 video 
regarding military sent, Estrada asked using words to the 
effect of: “Just to review, yesterday we had how many 
people sent?” Several student responded aloud, “3,000.” 
Estrada stated using words to the effect of: “How many 
countries?” Students responded aloud with a variety of 
countries.
b. Estrada informed the class prior to completing the CNN 
writing assignment that she would only take volunteers 
and only chose volunteers.
c. During sharing CNN responses, student D  recited 
his response to lightsabers. Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: “Anybody disagree with him, thumbs 
up?” “Quiet clap.” A second student read their response 
regarding vending machines. Estrada responded using 
121 words to the effect of: “Ok awesome. Give her a quiet 
clap.” A third student read their response regarding 
terrorism. Estrada stated, using words to the effect of: 
“Good. Quiet clap.” 
d. During the social media activity, Estrada only selected 
volunteers for reading. 
221. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 96. Estrada 
reviewed the content of the previous CNN 10 video by posting review questions. (See 
Exh. RX 1132 [B1388].) As students viewed the CNN 10 video shown during the 
observation, Estrada frequently paused the video to ask students questions or give 
students additional information about a news topic. Additionally, Estrada rewound the 
CNN 10 video to replay certain segments so that students could view news stories 
multiple times. At hearing, Benitez admitted these are techniques to check for student 
understanding. Samples of student works illustrate students used sentences to answer 
questions. (See Ex. RX 1132 [B1403-B1407].) At hearing, Benitez admitted his scripting 
did not capture what D  stated using complete sentences about vending machines 
and terrorism. Benitez further admitted to the possibility students shared out 
sentences he did not write down. Benitez testified, “If I didn’t write it down, I don’t 
know.” Estrada encouraged use of thumbs up and quiet clap from volunteering 
students to check for understanding because that practice is consistent with her 
understanding that students without prior knowledge of English need a low affective 
filter. (See Factual Finding 193.)
222. The District alleges in Charge 97, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
provide a clear and concise lesson, as follows: 
122 a. During the video of CNN 10, Estrada stopped and stated 
random information without purpose. Estrada paused the 
CNN 10 video at various points. She stated, using words 
to the effect of the following during the pauses: “So, you 
can write down the capture of ISSI [ ] leader, and 113 
people, that is that data,” “13 people including civilians,” 
“It is called a raid by special forces,” “If you are writing 
about vending machines 20% sells increased,” and 
“Machines can also detect earthquakes or other things 
that they can do.”
b. During the CNN writing assignment, Estrada stated using 
words to the effect of “Some of you came late, write what 
you can.” A student stated using words to the effect of, 
“It is kind of long.” Estrada responded using words to the 
effect of: “You have the questions here, but you already 
have them.”
c. After giving students time to write, Estrada began to 
explain the activity by stating, using words to the effect 
of: “Remember your report should be about, if you are 
writing about the vending machines, a question that you 
have regarding that view . . . .” “A piece of evidence.”
d. While students were writing their CNN responses, Estrada 
gave the purpose of the activity by stating, using words 
to the effect of: “The point of you watching the news is to 123 get ready for ELPAC. You are going to have to listen to 
audio.” 
e. After the CNN writing activity, Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: “E  [ ], we have to test you. Do you 
want to test now or after.” Student E  [ ], 
responded, “After.” Estrada responded using words to the 
effect of: “We have to take it today.” Student E  [ ], 
left the room five minutes later for RSP. 
f. Prior to a student reading the social media handout, 
Estrada stated using words to the effect of: “We have 
been practicing fluency, read loud and clear. 
g. Estrada did not provide clear explanation of the social 
media activity. She said using words to the effect of: “We 
are going to do a tree map and list the pros and con of 
social media. You are going to use the graphic organizer.” 
“Are you in favor or against?” “Just to review, we did a 
circle map.” She then listed the apps and social media site 
and stated using words to the effect of “Go ahead and 
highlight that.” 
223. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 97. 
Regarding subparagraph (a) of Charge 97, Estrada pausing the CNN 10 video is an 
appropriate technique to check for understanding and to provide students with 
additional information regarding a news topic, as discussed in Factual Finding 221. 
Regarding subparagraph (b) of Charge 97, late students joining the class know they 
124 are expected to join in participating in the ongoing CNN 10 activities. Regarding 
subparagraph (c) of Charge 97, it is not inappropriate to interject additional 
information as students engage in a writing activity. Regarding subparagraph (d) of 
Charge 97, it’s appropriate to inform students their writing or note-taking skills will be 
assessed in the listening domain of the ELPAC (English Language Proficiency 
Assessments for California). Regrading subparagraph (e) of Charge 97, Student 
E ’s special education services require Estrada to inform him of scheduled 
activities, including testing, to ensure his appropriate transition from activity to activity. 
E  left the classroom for his scheduled RSP services. Regarding subparagraph 
(f) of Charge 97, Estrada’s statement acknowledging students were reading aloud to 
increase fluency is accurate. Regarding subparagraph (g) of Charge 97, samples of 
student contributions to the creation of a chart on the pros and cons of social media 
and a “What is Social Media?’ circle map (that Estrada previously created with her PAR 
coach) rebut the allegation Estrada did not provide a clear explanation of the social 
media activity. (See Exh. RX1132 [B1409-B1410].) 
224. The District alleges in Charge 98, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
review the purpose of the CNN video or the social media activity to give the students a 
context for their learning, nor did she revisit it at the end, as follows:
a. Prior to the CNN video, Estrada did not introduce, state 
the purpose, or set expectations. At the end of the CNN 
video and the writing activity, Estrada did not close or 
tie together what was learned. 
b. At the opening of the social media activity, Estrada 
stated using words to the effect of: “We are going to 
continue with social media.” Student began to pull out 
125 their handouts. “We are going to review.” Students 
continued pulling out their handouts. Estrada read 
standard WS 5.1 without any follow-up or 
understanding. 
225. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 98. 
Regarding subparagraph (a) of Charge 98, student viewing of the CNN 10 video and 
engagement in related instructional activities are established routines in Estrada’s 
classroom, as discussed in Factual Finding 219. As such, it was not necessary for 
Estrada to reintroduce the CNN 10 video each day. At hearing, Benitez admitted 
Estrada stated a purpose for why students were viewing the CNN 10 video—to prepare 
for ELPAC. Regarding subparagraph (b) of Charge 98, Benitez observed Estrada 
opening the social media activity with the article titled "What is Social Media?” As 
discussed in Factual Finding 219, Benitez observed students taking turns reading 
paragraphs from the article titled "Social Media: Wow! Or Woe?” Benitez exited 
Estrada’s classroom before she concluded the social media activity. Consequently, 
Benitez was not present, and therefore could not observe, when Estrada closed the 
social media activities. 
226. The District alleges in Charge 99, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
give opportunities for student-to-student engagement to allow them opportunities to 
collaborate, as follows: 
a. While observing the video and during pauses, students 
were not given the opportunity to discuss and simply sat 
quietly in their seats. 126 b. Estrada asked the students to complete all activities 
independently and did not allow opportunities for them 
to work with a peer. 
227. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 99. As 
discussed in Factual Findings 223 and 225, instructional activities related to the CNN 
10 video are intended to develop students’ listening skills. Estrada paused the video 
for students to record in their journals what they heard. Under these circumstances the 
act of recording or writing did not require any peer collaboration. Each student had to 
record what he or she independently heard. 
228. The District alleges in Charge 100, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
remain on topic. When asked to highlight a passage, Estrada and a student went off 
topic and discussed where and who could have made the highlighter disappear. 
229. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 100. 
Neither party presented evidence of a purported off-topic discussion about making a 
highlighter disappear. 
230. The District alleges in Charge 101, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
have procedures in place for calling on students to share their responses. According to 
the allegations in Charge 101, when soliciting a response to a question or requesting a 
volunteer, students responded aloud and spoke over each other.
231. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 101. 
Neither party presented evidence whether procedures existed regarding how students 
should respond when Estrada asks a question. 127 232. The District alleges in Charge 102, on February 4, 2022, Estrada did not 
pick up her students during the first bell at 7:56 a.m. and did not begin instruction at 
8:01 a.m. According to the allegations in Charge 102, Estrada’s partner teacher, Mr. 
Gunter, escorted Estrada’s students to class and supervised them until approximately 
7:58 a.m. Estrada did not arrive at class until approximately 8:03 a.m. When entering 
the room, she stated, “Was the door open? Did you guys open the door?” 
233. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 102. In mitigation, 
however, Estrada suffered an injury to her foot that affected her mobility, and she 
sought urgent medical treatment on December 3, 2021. Estrada’s treating physician 
placed her on modified activity, required her to use a boot, brace and cane, as needed, 
and requested the District grant her extra time to travel within the Alta California 
campus. Estrada promptly notified appropriate District personnel, including Benitez, 
about her medical condition and related restrictions. Estrada requested 
accommodations in the form of having school aides or other colleagues, including Mr. 
Gunter, pick up and escort her students from the school yard to her second floor 
classroom in the mornings. Benitez did not grant the requested accommodation. 
Instead, Benitez instructed Estrada to stand near the stairwell on the second floor 
balcony and wave to her students to signal when they should take the stairs and enter 
the classroom. Estrada tried standing near the stairwell. Estrada testified, “I didn’t feel 
safe. I almost got run over two times. Kids are not looking as they move from one area 
to another.” Estrada informed Benitez his instruction for her to stand near the stairwell 
jeopardized her safety. Thereafter, Estrada remained on the first floor to supervise her 
students’ movement up the stairs to the second floor classroom. Estrada then took the 
elevator to her second floor classroom. At the time of the February 4, 2022 
observation, Mr. Gunter offered to escort Estrada’s students to her classroom. Estrada 
and Benitez crossed paths on the first floor as Estrada walked to the elevator. 128 234. The District alleges in Charge 103, on February 4, 2022, Estrada willfully
refused to comply with the directives, provided to her orally during conferences held 
on November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, February 7, 2020, January 15, 2021, April 
23, 2021, November 15, 2021, and December 16, 2021 and in writing in conference 
memoranda dated November 15, 2019, December 12, 2019, February 11, 2020, January 
15, 2021, April 26, 2021, November 15, 2021, and December 16, 2021, to deliver 
standards-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; differentiate learning 
activities to meet the diverse needs of students assigned to her class roster to provide 
them with equal access to the curriculum; clearly communicate the instructional 
purpose of all lessons and activities and review it at the end; develop, teach, and 
reinforce an effective classroom behavior plan; consistently monitor and respond 
appropriately to students’ off-task and disruptive behaviors; implement strategies to 
support understanding and avoid reading through material without further discussing 
content with students; set expectations and create a rubric for student participation 
and engagement; post current and authentic student-produced work upon return to 
the physical environment; create a reward system to encourage student participation 
and promote classroom expectations; address student behavior in a timely manner; 
and ensure instructional time is effectively utilized and refrain having students wait; 
and implement recommendations and feedback.
235. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 103. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 95 through 102, 
Estrada complied with the directives provided to her orally during conferences held on 
November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, February 7, 2020, November 15, 2021, and 
December 16, 2021, and in writing in conference memoranda dated November 15, 
2019, December 12, 2019, and February 11, 2020, November 15, 2021, and December 
16, 2021. 129 APRIL 1,2022C LASSROOM OBSERVATION  
236. On April 1, 2022, between 1:18 p.m. and 2:10 p.m., Benitez conducted an 
observation of Estrada’s fifth grade math lesson to 22 students. Benitez reported he 
observed the following: Students seated quietly waiting for Estrada’s directions. The 
overhead projector was on and Estrada was preparing materials. For one minute, 
Estrada played a video with low volume. The video demonstrated how to find the 
product of 3.2 x 2.1 at a quick pace using academic vocabulary. Estrada paused the 
video and asked unrelated questions. Estrada reviewed and completed the problem ¼ 
x 25/25. A student corrected Estrada when she wrote “ten” rather than “tenths.” 
Estrada played the video then paused it as directed to find the product of 32 x 21. 
Estrada worked out the problem. Estrada called on students who purportedly knew 
how to multiply. Estrada referenced the “placeholder,” which one student knew. 
Estrada played and paused the video again. Estrada referenced 10 x 10 as units and 
worked out that problem. Estrada played and paused the video again. Estrada asked 
students to write the decimal while she walked around to check their work. Some 
students needed further help. Estrada purportedly played the video, which gave 6.72 
as an answer. Five students celebrated aloud. Estrada paused the video and discussed 
whole number and fractions discussed the previous day. Estrada continued the video 
with problem 3.1 x 1.4 and paused to ask, “What is the reasonable product?” No 
student responded to the question. Estrada continued the video then paused to ask a 
question about “fraction form.” Estrada played the video, walked around, and paused 
the video again to tell students to write fraction form and unit form. Estrada then 
worked out the problem on the board calling on students. Students began to talk 
when a student did not know the answer. Estrada reinforced, “Please use wait time to 
allow other to participate.” Estrada continued to solve the problem. Estrada played the 
video, which solved the problem. After the video, Estrada transitioned to Eureka Math 130 page 231. Estrada reviewed sample problem A and worked out problem B with the 
class. Students talked over each other to solve the problem. Estrada assigned 
problems C and D for students to solve. Students worked on the math problems. 
Estrada told student to check their work and go on ST Math when they were finished. 
Estrada then called students to the kidney table with 14 minutes remaining in the 
class. 
237. On April 22, 2022, Benitez convened a post-observation conference, at 
which time he discussed his observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and preparation, 
delivery of instruction, and management of classroom environment. Benitez 
subsequently prepared an April 25, 2022 conference memorandum containing his 
observations and Estrada’s statement that she would provide a written response. 
Benitez informed Estrada she may respond in writing by May 2, 2022. 
238. The April 25, 2022 conference memorandum contains a list of assistance 
and guidance, including for Estrada to consider giving instructions, pausing, and then 
asking a student to repeat the instructions to ensure there is clarity; explain a concept 
step by step when teaching or reviewing the concept; check for understanding using 
random selection (equity sticks) and open-ended questions throughout the lesson; 
teach multiplication; add differentiation to the lesson; open and close the lesson with 
the purpose of students understanding and learning; develop rules for student 
participation; develop clear classroom expectations; consider signing up for the PAR 
Coaching Support resource; and take advantage of available professional development 
classes. 
239. The April 25, 2022 conference memorandum instructs Estrada to deliver 
standard-based lessons with appropriate learning activities; to clearly communicate 
the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities and review the purpose again at 131 the end of the lesson; to develop, teach, and reinforce an effective classroom behavior 
plan; to monitor consistently and respond appropriately to students’ off-task and 
disruptive behaviors; to implement strategies to support checks for student 
understanding and avoid reading through material without further discussing content 
with students; and to implement recommendations, assistance and guidance, and 
feedback. 
240. The April 25, 2022 conference memorandum informs Estrada that failure 
to make immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to the 
issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from 
the District. 
241. Based on Benitez’s April 25, 2022 conference memorandum the District 
alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as follows. 
242. The District alleges in Charge 104, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not plan 
and prepare materials for her lesson in advance, as follows: 
a. At approximately 1:18 p.m. students were waiting to 
begin instruction as Estrada prepared materials by 
setting up her computer and walking to and from her 
desk. A keyboard was being projected on the overhead. 
b. Estrada followed the video as it played, pausing, and 
working out the problems on her own and with limited 
interaction with the students. There was no evidence of 
scaffolding or differentiation planned throughout the 
lesson. 132 c. Estrada gave an assignment to answer problems C and 
D with 14 minutes left in the day. 
243. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 104.
Estrada did not have to prepare materials for the April 1, 2022 lesson Benitez 
observed. Estrada’s laptop was setup for students’ viewing of the Eureka Math video 
on Model 4, Leson 18, titled Multiplying Multi-Digit Decimal Factors. Estrada testified, 
“I chose to use the video because according to math training, I can use a visual for 
students to access the information.” Estrada did not consider the video “too advanced” 
for her students. The video includes differentiation for all students to access 
information. The video projects a transcribed text of the video instructor’s statements, 
including use of academic language, for students to write in their journals. The video 
instructor directs when the video should be paused for Estrada to model problem 
solving and for students to write responses. At hearing Benitez admitted Estrada’s 
showing of the video is a type of scaffolding. Students were not limited to 14 minutes 
to answer problems Cand D when, as Estrada testified, two instructional days were 
required to complete the lesson. 
244. The District alleges in Charge 105, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not 
introduce the objective, topic, or standard to give the students a context for their 
learning and establish rigorous goals for them, as follows. 
a. Prior to the video beginning, Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: “We are going to continue. Remember 
yesterday, you learned how to write out the decimals. 
Thirty-two over a hundred. Now they are starting with 
the decimal.” 133 b. When the video began, the audio was low, and the 
introduction could not be heard. After 55 seconds, 
Estrada turned up the audio, but did not restart the 
video for students to hear the objective.
245. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 105. On 
April 1, 2022, Estrada provided her students with the relevant math standards prior to 
the lunch recess preceding Benitez’s observation. At the beginning of the video, the 
video instructor communicated learning objectives to students. At hearing, Benitez 
admitted he did not know how Estrada began the math lesson because his observation 
started during the middle of the lesson. Benitez further admitted no student told him 
they were unable to hear the video’s audio. Benitez assumed students could not hear 
the video because he could not hear the video’s audio. 
246. The District alleges in Charge 106, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not 
engage students and use strategies to generate participation when she: 
a. Worked out a problem on her own for the class without 
allowing input from any of the students. 
i. She stated using words to the effect of: “So again, 
yesterday, just for review so if you were absent.” 
Estrada turned off the projector and pulled up the 
screen and stated using words to the effect of: 
“This is one of the problems, we did yesterday.” 
ii. She completed the following problem on the 
board: ¼ x 25/25=25/100=.25. There was no 
interaction with the students who were absent or 134 present. At the end, a student corrected Estrada 
by stating, using words to the effect of: “The 
answer should be tenths, not tens.” 
b. She answered her own questions instead of guiding students to 
understand the content using words to the effect of: “What is a 
reasonable product?” No student responded. “More or less. It does 
not have to be exact.” “A whole number.” “The other one was 6.”
“What would this one be? More or less.” “The whole number is 3 and 
this is one.” “We did 3 and 4.” No student responded. 
247. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 106. At 
hearing, Benitez contended Estrada “just solved the problem for students” rather than 
modeled how to solve the problem through an interactive step-by-step process. 
However, Estrada’s statements recounted in subdivision (b) of Charge 106, if accurate, 
suggest an interactive step-by-step process. Benitez testified “students followed 
along.” Estrada’s credible testimony how she modelled problem solving on the white 
board coupled with supporting documentation rebutted Benitez’s contention. (See 
Exh. RX1139 [B1565].) Neither party presented evidence regarding the claim that a 
student corrected Estrada.
248. The District alleges in Charge 107, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not 
provide rigor and she worked through the multiplication problem dismissing students’ 
multiplication ability, as follows: 
a. Estrada paused the video when she video prompted the 
class to solve “32 x 21” She stated, using words to the 
effect of: “Ok. We’ll do it together. Thumbs up if you 135 have the answer.” There were 10 thumbs up. Estrada did 
not call on any of the students who had their thumbs up 
so they could lead the class in solving the problem. 
Estrada stated, using words to the effect of: “Anybody 
needs help. I know some of us don’t know the 
multiplication, so we’ll go over it.” Estrada called on 
Genesis, “What is 2x1?” Estrada continued to work out 
the problem using basic multiplication (3x1, 2x2, 3x2). 
249. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 107. At 
hearing, Benitez admitted Estrada asked for a showing of “thumbs up” to check for 
understanding. Benitez testified he understood Estrada was “generalizing” if, as 
reported, she stated, “I know some of us don’t know the multiplication . . . .” Benitez 
admitted he did not know how many students, if any, actually did not know 
multiplication. 
250. The District alleges in Charge 108, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not teach 
and reinforce the term, placeholder, when most students did not understand the term, 
as follows:
a. When referencing the term “placeholder,” Estrada stated 
using words to the effect of: “What is that one word we 
use?” Students shouted answers: “simplifying,” “revamp,” 
“you put the zero,” “you carry the zero,” etc. 
b. Estrada stated using words to the effect of: “We are not 
dividing.” A student stated, “Placeholder.” Estrada stated 
using words to the effect of: “Thank you” and moved on 136 without ever clarifying for the students what the term 
meant. 
251. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 108. 
Estrada responded to students’ incorrect responses by asking them to think about the 
question she asked. Estrada engaged students in a think pair share activity, after which 
students provided an answer demonstrating their understanding of placeholder in 
multiplication. 
252. The District alleges in Charge 109, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not check 
for student understanding and gave limited opportunities for all students to 
demonstrate their understanding of multiplying fractions, as follows: 
a. During a pause in the video, Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: “What happens to the unit 10x10. If you 
know the answer give me thumbs up.” Ten students 
gave a thumbs up. 
b. Estrada stated using words to the effect of: “Ok. R  
I know you know this.” Student R  responded in a 
soft tone. Estrada said using words to the effect of: “Oh, 
a hundred. Do we agree with him?” “Any disagree with 
him. So, we agree. The same thing is going to happen 
here.” 
c. Estrada did not pause to ensure that the remaining 
students understood the concept before moving on with 
the math problem. 
137 d. When reviewing a problem, Estrada said using words to 
the effect of: “What is this one called? Can someone tell 
me. D ?” D  paused. Estrada pointed to the 
answer using words to the effect of “Right here.” D  
responded, “Unit form.” Estrada replied, “Beautiful.” 
253. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 109. 
Estrada asked for a showing of “thumbs up” to check for understanding. Benitez 
admitted Estrada employed prompting as an additional strategy to check for 
understanding as well as to generate participation in the classroom. Benitez further 
admitted not hearing the substance of R ’s answer to Estrada. 
254. The District alleges in Charge 110, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not 
provide support to the student who was absent the day prior so that the student could 
complete the assigned task, as follows: 
a. During a pause in the video, Estrada stated using words 
to the effect of: ”If you know how, would you write the 
decimals in a hundred? We are writing the decimal.” “Let 
me walk around.” 
b. Estrada approached a student and said using words to 
the effect of: “I know you were absent yesterday. I will 
work with you.” Estrada walked away from the student 
needing help, leaving them to wait eight to 10 minutes 
until she returned. 
255. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 110. The 
credible evidence established Estrada walked around the classroom for eight to 10 
138 minutes to monitor newcomers and students receiving RSP services. As noted in 
Benitez’s post-observation conference memorandum, Estrada returned to the student,
whom she recognized needed support. 
256. The District alleges in Charge 111, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not 
adequately provide appropriate instruction and did not pace the activities, as follows: 
a. Estrada said using words to the effect of: “Ok. We are 
going to work this out.” A student stated, “I did this 
already.” Other students nodded their heads. 
b. Estrada did not adjust the lesson and moved onto the 
next portion. Estrada pulled up the screen and said 
using words to the effect of: “You are taking your notes; 
make sure you have fraction form and unit form. It is 
going to come up on the test.” A different student 
stated, “I did it already Ms. Estrada.” She ignored the 
student. 
c. When the video concluded, a student responded aloud 
using words to the effect of: “Yes, this is easy.” Estrada 
responded using words to the effect of: “Try to do this 
one. Go ahead to page 231.” “It looks like you are 
getting the lesson.” 
257. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 111.
Benitez opined the pace of the instruction “should have been slower,” “slowed down 
and taught step-by-step.” Benitez further opined about reteaching missed steps and 
hitting “an 80 percent mark” to determine “the majority learned the lesson and move 139 forward.” Benitez’s post-observation conference memorandum reporting students’ 
purported responses stating and celebrating their successful completion of assigned 
math problems or activities support the reasonable inference Estrada provided 
students with appropriate instructions and satisfactorily paced the instruction related 
to the Eureka Math video on Model 4, Lesson 18, titled Multiplying Multi-Digit Decimal 
Factors. 
258. The District alleges in Charge 112, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not give 
clear expectations and instructions to the class during independent practice time, as 
follows: 
a. To begin, Estrada stated to the class using words to the 
effect of: “We are going to do C and D.” “Let me walk 
around to see if we are doing it.” Eight students started 
working and the other students were unsure of what to 
do and looking around. A student asked, “What do we 
do when we are done?” Estrada replied to the class 
using words to the effect of: “I am going to have you 
check it. If you don’t have it correct you need to go 
back.” The instruction “go back” was never clarified.
b. Eight minutes into independent practice time, Estrada 
stated to the class using words to the effect of: “How 
comfortable do you feel doing it? I know you know it. If 
you get them all correct you can move on to the next 
one.” Estrada did not clarify the context of “next one.” 
Estrada continued by stating words to the effect of: “You 
can do ST Math while you are waiting. Estrada did not 140 clarify the context of “waiting” for students. A student 
asked, “This is all you have to do?” 
c. Estrada replied aloud to the class using words to the 
effect of: “You are only doing one so finish up.” Estrada 
proceeded to give an unsure follow up response by 
stating using words to the effect of: “I believe we did B 
already, so we are doing C and D.” “Some of us don’t 
know our multiplication so you are only checking right 
here.” 
d. Without stating how a student would “fix” an error, 
Estrada stated using words to the effect of: “If you have 
any errors, you need to go back and work on it.” “If you 
get it wrong, then you need to fix it.” 
e. After these exchanges, Estrada wrote on the board the 
directions: .
259. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 112. The 
evidence offered at hearing did not address with specificity the itemized allegations.
260. The District alleges in Charge 113, on April 1, 2022, Estrada did not 
reinforce the classroom rules and redirect students’ off-task behaviors. According to 
the allegations in Charge 113, Estrada did not redirect the following behaviors: 
a. Throughout the lesson, student G  would speak 
out of turn resulting in other students interrupting to 
141 shout out answers in order to compete for attention. 
Estrada allowed him to continue to shout out. 
b. During independent practice time, students were talking 
and getting out of their seats. Four students were trying 
to figure out how to get the correct answer and how to 
check their answers, while five students visited their 
friends for an answer. Several students retrieved their 
computers in random fashion with little redirection from 
Estrada. 
261. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 113. As 
noted in Benitez’s post-observation conference memorandum, Estrada reinforced 
classroom rules when students talked out of turn by stating, “Please use wait time to 
allow others to participate.” Estrada additionally, directed students’ attention to the 
whiteboard on which a written wait-time reminder appears. (See Exh. Rx1143 [B1582-
B1584].) Student G  repeatedly raised his hand to share an answer but he did 
not speak out of turn. During independent time, students were given an opportunity 
to do ST Math, an online program, which required them to get up and retrieve their 
computers.
262. The District alleges in Charge 114, on April 1, 2022, Estrada willfully 
refused to comply with the directives, provided to her orally during conferences held 
on November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, February 7, 2020, January 15, 2021, April 
23, 2021, November 15, 2021, December 16, 2021, and February 18, 2022, and in 
writing in conference memoranda dated November 15, 2019, December 12, 2019, 
February 11, 2020, January 15, 2021, April 26, 2021, November 15, 2021, December 16, 
2021 and February 18, 2022, to deliver standards-based lessons with appropriate 
142 learning activities; differentiate learning activities to meet the diverse needs of 
students assigned to her class roster to provide them with equal access to the 
curriculum; clearly communicate the instructional purpose of all lessons and activities 
and review it at the end; develop, teach, and reinforce an effective classroom behavior 
plan; consistently monitor and respond appropriately to students’ off-task and 
disruptive behaviors; implement strategies to support understanding and avoid 
reading through material without further discussing content with students; set 
expectations and create a rubric for student participation and engagement; create a 
reward system to encourage student participation and promote classroom 
expectations; address student behavior in a timely manner; and ensure instructional 
time is effectively utilized and refrain having students wait; and implement 
recommendations and feedback. 
263. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 114. Based 
on the Commissioners’ resolution of the allegations in Charges 104 through 113, 
Estrada complied with the directives provided to her orally during conferences held on 
November 14, 2019, December 11, 2019, February 7, 2020, November 15, 2021, 
December 16, 2021, and February 18, 2022, and in writing in conference memoranda 
dated November 15, 2019, December 12, 2019, and February 11, 2020, November 15, 
2021, December 16, 2021, and February 18, 2022.
2021/2022 Academic Year Below Standard Evaluation 
264. On May 6, 2022, Benitez issued a Below Standard Evaluation to Estrada 
for the 2021/2022 academic year. (See Exh. 39.) 143 2022/2023 Academic Year 
JANUARY 25,2023F ORMALCLASSROOM OBSERVATION
265. On a date not established by the evidence, Martin convened a pre-
observation planning conference with Estrada. 
266. On January 25, 2023, between 8:20 a.m. and 9:40 a.m., Martin conducted 
a formal observation of Estrada teaching an ELA activity on Cultivating Natural 
Resources to 19 students. The substance of Martin’s observation are reflected in the 
allegations of Charge 115. 
267. On February 27, 2023, Martin convened a post-observation conference, 
at which time she discussed her observations of Estrada’s lesson planning and 
preparation, delivery of instruction, and management of the classroom environment. 
Martin subsequently prepared a February 27, 2023 conference memorandum 
containing her observations and Estrada’s statement that she would provide a written 
response. Martin informed Estrada she may respond in writing by March 6, 2023. 
268. The February 27, 2023 conference memorandum contains a list of 
assistance and guidance, including for Estrada to plan and prepare materials in 
advance of each lesson to reduce the loss of instructional time; deliver the lesson as 
indicated by the description of LEAP2 in the  pages 35-37; limit the 
focus of the lesson an focus on the lesson objectives; clearly state the lesson objectives 
at the beginning of the lesson to provide students a context for learning; open and 
close the lesson by reviewing the purpose to the activity and give students and 
opportunity to explain their learnings to each other; provide clear directions to 
students so that they clearly understand expectations; establish and include clear 
routines, procedures, and expectations; check for understanding using random 144 selection (equity sticks) and open-ended questions throughout the lesson; deliver 
standards-based lessons that include rigorous instruction to challenge students and 
elicit their thinking; reflect on your practices and utilize feedback from previous 
conferences; implement strategies that support EL students according to their EL 
levels; teach and reinforce the strategies that will aid in student participation; pace 
each lesson to ensure coverage of all necessary material over the course of the day; 
provide closure to each activity before going on to the next activity and check for 
understanding; and develop student centered learning. 
269. The February 27, 2023 conference memorandum informs Estrada that 
failure to make immediate and sustained improvement in her performance may lead to 
the issuance of a Below Standard Evaluation or discipline such as a Notice of 
Unsatisfactory Service and/or Act, or Notice of Suspension, or both, and dismissal from 
the District. 
270. Based on Martin’s February 27, 2023 conference memorandum the 
District alleges specific charges against Estrada, which the Commissioners resolve as 
follows. 
271. The District alleges in Charge 115, on January 25, 2023, the following 
occurred in Estrada’s classroom: 
a. At approximately 8:20 a.m. Martin entered the 
classroom. All 19 students on Estrada’s roster were 
present. Students were seated at their desks in groups of 
five or six. Displayed on the whiteboard were various 
teacher-created anchor charts. The charts were titled 
Student Objectives; Essential Question; Unit Objectives; 145 Vocabulary words; Self-Evaluate, Reflect and Close the 
Lesson; Collaborative Conversations; Students Share 
Activity; Observation Checklist for Collaborative 
Conversation; Prior Knowledge; Circle map titled “Items 
made with corn” and images of natural resources. 
b. Martin observed pods of tables closest to the front of 
the classroom without students assigned to it.
c. The lesson began with Estrada saying to the students: 
“You would be doing a lesson on natural resources.” 
d. Estrada checked to ensure students had the materials 
needed and provided directions to students for them to 
write their names and date on their papers.
e. Estrada asked students individually if they needed 
pencils and provided them with a pencil. 
f. Estrada read word by word what was included on the 
posters Student Objectives; Essential Question; Unit 
Objectives; Vocabulary words; Self-Evaluate, Reflect and 
Close the Lesson; Collaborative Conversations; Students 
Share Activity; Observation Checklist for Collaborative 
Conversation. 
g. Estrada reminded a student in Spanish that he was 
absent and would need to follow along. 146 h. Estrada then shared experiences of times when Estrada 
had eaten corn and talked about items that contain corn 
syrup. 
i. At approximately 8:40 a.m. while students sat at their 
seats, Estrada directed students to write two items that 
contain corn on their circle map where the time allotted 
to complete task was unclear. 
j. At 8:50 a.m. Estrada then asked for students to volunteer 
to share what they wrote on their circle map. 
k. At 9:00 a.m. students were grouped into groups of three 
or four where the task was to visit four stations located 
in different areas of the classroom that contained a 
plastic bin with items that contained corn. The students 
had to write on their circle maps the names of the items 
that contained corn that were inside the plastic bin. 
When that activity was completed, Estrada asked the 
students to go back to their seats and to volunteer to 
share what they wrote on their circle map. Estrada then 
set up the computer to play a video from the curriculum 
provided, Cultivating Natural Resources. Once the video 
ended, Estrada directed students to meet in their groups 
again where they will each had assigned roles, would be 
engaging in a group discussion and would complete a 
teacher created handout. 147 272. The preponderance of the evidence supports Charge 115. Martin’s 
unrebutted testimony established the narrated events, as alleged, occurred during the 
January 25, 2023 observation. 
273. The District alleges in Charge 116, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
follow recommendations, despite having been provided with assistance, guidance and 
directives to do so by Martin. According to the allegations in Charge 115, Estrada: 
a. Failed to incorporate a strategy where students were 
randomly selected to participate rather than to 
volunteer. Throughout the lesson Estrada chose 
volunteers to share. Estrada said in Spanish to a student 
who raised his hand to share “Hay que dar oprtunidad a 
otros departicipar, tu ya participaste” [We have to give 
an opportunity for others to participate. You have 
already participated.] 
b. Failed to reflect and plan for supporting the fourteen 
(14) LTEL’s [Long-Term English Language Learners] in 
her classroom. Estrada stated during a prior meeting she 
would include strategies to support them in her lesson.
c. Failed to incorporate strategies that support how 
children learn. Estrada’s classroom is comprised of 
English Learner levels 1-3 where LEAP2 (Language and 
Literacy in English Acceleration Program, formally SEI) is 
the elementary instructional master plan program for 
her classroom. Instead Estrada:148 i. Throughout the delivery of the lesson, 
continuously translated the content and 
directions of the lesson from English to Spanish 
which caused the lesson to be prolonged. 
d. In the area of Classroom Environment: 
i. Estrada failed to establish a culture for learning 
with high expectations for learning and 
achievement.
ii. Estrada regularly called on students who 
volunteered their responses, instead of putting 
systems in place that would allow all student to 
share their thinking. 
iii. Estrada regularly called on students who 
volunteered their responses, and did not allow all 
students to share, especially if they had not raised 
their hands to volunteer.
iv. Estrada failed to establish a culture for learning 
with a suited physical environment conducive to 
student learning. Specifically, Estrada: 
a) Had a pod of tables closet to the front of the 
classroom without students assigned to it. The 
pod of tables was utilized for instructional 
materials. 149 274. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 116. 
Estrada’s unrebutted testimony established Martin and Estrada discussed during a pre-
observation conference the use of popsicle sticks to randomly call on students. Martin 
asked Estrada to include the use of popsicle sticks in the lesson and Estrada responded 
stating she “did not want to put students on the spot.” Estrada explained to Martin her 
belief, based on the literature (see exhibit RX1208), that random cold calling 
heightened the affective filter of students acquiring a second language. Estrada 
testified, “She (meaning Martin) said she knew there are different ways of involving 
students.” Martin’s hearing testimony extolling the benefits of random selection over a 
heightened affective filter underscored a difference of opinion between Martin and 
Estrada, who did not believe Martin’s suggested use of popsicle sticks was a directive. 
At hearing, Martin acknowledged the District valued a positive environment where 
students can share without making mistakes. Estrada’s statement telling a volunteering 
student who already participated that he had to give others the same opportunity 
suggests Estrada incorporated a strategy for inclusion in the classroom discussion. 
Estrada credibly testified she provided English-to-Spanish and English-to-Russian 
translation of particular words, such as “sun,” “air,” “water,” “wood,” “oil,” and “plants,” 
to support students whose primary languages are Spanish or Russian but did not 
translate the entire lesson, thus prolonging the lesson. At hearing, Martin admitted the 
Language and Literacy Acceleration Program (LEAP) permits language translation for 
EL students when needed. (See Exh. RX1227.) Estrada supported LTEL students in her 
classroom with strategies from 
, including pre-teaching academic vocabulary, using sentence frames, 
providing realia for hands-on learning, creating circle maps, and participating in 
assigned heterogeneous groupings. Students rotated among several pods of tables on 150 which instructional materials were displayed. At hearing, Martin admitted she did not 
know but assumed pods of tables were unassigned for student group activities. 
275. The District alleges in Charge 117, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
establish routines for management of routines, transitions, and management or 
materials. Charge 117 specifically alleges: 
a. Instead of incorporating procedures that would support 
the distribution of materials, Estrada asked students if 
they had all their materials. Estrada then asked students 
individually if they needed pencils and provided them 
with a pencil. 
b. Estrada had only one student distribute paper to each of
the students which resulted in the loss of instructional 
time. Incorporating classroom jobs such as a table 
monitor will support in saving instructional time during 
distribution of classroom materials.
c. When prompting students to stop from rotating to the 
next station Estrada said, “5, 4, 3, 2, 1.” However, 
students continued to talk, and she continued with the 
lesson while all students continued to talk. Estrada then 
counted again “5, 4, 3, 2, 1” and all students were still 
not ready to continue.
276. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 117, with 
the exception of subparagraph(a). As set forth in Factual Finding 271, Estrada asked 
students individually if they needed pencils and provided them with a pencil as a check 151 to ensure students had the necessary materials. The student distributing paper was the 
assigned paper monitor for the classroom. Estrada counted 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 to signal when 
students should rotate to the next station or pod. Students were expected to engage 
in discussions about the items they encountered. 
277. The District alleges in Charge 118, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
communicate the purpose of the lesson to establish learning goals for the students.
The specific allegations are as follows: 
At the beginning of the lesson, Estrada introduced nine 
anchor charts that were posted, one of them which included 
the objectives, I will be able to: 
i. Connect the Essential Question to information 
I already know. 
ii. Work with a group to ask questions and think 
ideas. 
iii. Play a specific role in a group discussion.
Instead, Estrada simply read over the chart that had the 
objective written on it and did not present it in a way that 
the students could easily reference it since it was mixed in 
with other information. 
278. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 118. 
Samples of student work establish students were able to reference the stated 
objectives set forth in subparagraphs i, ii, and iii. (See Exh. RX1170 [B1871-B1902].)152 279. The District alleges in Charge 119, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
deliver a lesson with a defined structure and with appropriate pacing. Specifically, 
Charge 119 alleges Estrada delivered a lesson from the District provided curriculum, 
 that indicated the lesson would be 15-20 minutes in length. Estrada’s 
delivery of the lesson lasted 1 hour and 20 minutes, as follows:
a. The first 20 minutes of the lesson were dense with 
information where Estrada read student objectives, 
essential questions, unit objectives, vocabulary words, 
collaborative conversation roles, sentence frames, and 
an observation checklist for collaborative conversation. 
This information should have been introduced at 
different times throughout the lesson. 
b. Estrada charted and displayed nine anchor charts on the 
white board. Estrada presented and read the anchor 
charts to the students.
c. Students were not provided with time to make 
connections or demonstrate understanding. 
280. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 119. Martin 
was present in Estrada’s classroom when students were engaged in a collaborative 
activity. Samples of student work establish students were able to make connections or 
demonstrate understanding of the lesson and activity. (See Exh. RX1170 [B1871-
B1902].) At hearing, Martin testified, “The corn lesson was rushed. . . . Students added 
items on a circle map then had to write. . . . [Estrada] should have allowed for 
conversations to reflect, reinforce, and review.” The gist of Martin’s testimony 153 contradicted the implicit claim that Estrada used an inordinate amount of instructional 
time for a lesson requiring 15 to 20 minutes. Martin’s testimony that the lesson was 
rushed is therefore not credited. 
281. The District alleges in Charge 120, on January 25, 2023, Estrada did not 
provide students with an opportunity to engage in constructed collaborative 
discussions to increase their English Language oral skills. The specific allegations are as 
follows: 
a. Estrada read through a total of nine charts while the 
students sat quietly at their seats. Although Estrada 
asked students to read after her, Estrada ended up 
reading the majority of the information aloud to the 
class. 
b. After Estrada read out aloud from the nine anchor 
charts, she then wrote two items that contain corn on 
the circle map. Without giving an opportunity to discuss 
items that contain corn to improve their English oral 
language skills, Estrada simply asked them to complete 
the same activity individually.
c. Without giving the student an opportunity to share with 
a partner what they included on their circle map, Estrada 
asked the class to look at items in plastic bins located 
around the classroom. Estrada then instructed the 
students to add the names of the items onto their maps. 
The students then rotated to four additional plastic bins 154 and repeated the process. Again, without giving the 
students an opportunity to share what they had written 
on their maps with a partner, Estrada put the class into 
groups and asked them to complete a teacher created 
handout with fill in the blank statements. The fill in the 
blanks would be items from the red plastic bins that 
contain corn. 
d. After the groups completed the teacher created 
handout, Estrada called a group to share with the class; 
however, even though Estrada told the students that 
each member would have to share only one student did 
so. 
282. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 120. Martin 
was present in Estrada’s classroom when students were engaged in the gallery walk 
rotating from one pod to another to identify items containing corn and then 
collaborating in their pre-assigned groups about their discovery. As established in 
Factual Finding 271, Martin observed Estrada providing opportunities for students to 
share with their partner or within their preassigned groups their ideas and what they 
wrote on circle maps. The resulting samples of student work rebut the allegation 
students were not provided an opportunity to engage in constructed collaborative 
discussions to increase their English Language oral skills. (See Exh. RX1170 [B1871-
B1902; B1905-B1907].) The assignment called for each preassigned group’s designated 
director to take turn reporting to the entire class. 155 283. The District alleges in Charge 121, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
incorporate the use of academic language and/or constructive conversation skills that 
support EL students in further developing language. Instead, Charge 121 alleges,
a. Estrada said, “E  I will start with you.” E  
responded with a one-word response, “Skittles.” Estrada 
then said, “Read it, can you read it . . . Okay, alright . . . 
can you say it louder.” Estrada waited and then she told 
the class she had not provided sentence frames for them 
to reference. Estrada then retrieved the sentence frames 
from another area of the class and placed it onto the 
whiteboard. 
b. Estrada said, “J  you gave me popcorn, can you 
give me a new one . . . have you participated? J  
then responded with another one-word response, “Jiffy.” 
c. Estrada did not allow either of these students to expand 
their oral English language vocabulary by providing 
sentence stems or encouraging and reminding them to 
respond using complete sentences. 
284. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 121. Martin 
testified Estrada “didn’t model academic language in the lesson.” However, the 
purported dialogue between Estrada and student E , as reported by Martin, is 
incomplete. Ellipses suggest E  responded to Estrada but his responses are 
omitted, thus precluding an accurate determination regarding E ’s use of complete 
sentences or academic language. Notably, Estrada retrieved sentence frames from 
156 another area of the classroom. One of the charts Martin observed in the classroom is 
titled  and contains sentence frames to assist students with their 
response to a query about items containing corn. (See Exh. 1170 [B1907].) Neither 
party offered testimony or other evidence in connection with student J ’s 
response. 
285. The District alleges in Charge 122, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
incorporate questions that challenge students and elicit higher level thinking. 
According to the allegations in Charge 122, Estrada asked several low-level recall 
questions that only required one-word or short phrase responses, as follows: 
a. When introducing the circle map, Estrada asked: “What 
items are made of corn?”
b. When writing in the circle map, Estrada asked, “What is 
something you have eaten at home that contains corn?” 
c. When speaking to a student Estrada said, “Que tiene 
maiz?” [What contains corn?]
d. When reviewing items found in a red bin Estrada said, 
“What was an item that surprised you that was in the 
bin?” 
286. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 122. The 
questions Estrada posed were intended for students to draw on their prior knowledge. 
Neither party’s evidence addressed the absence or presence of students’ level of 
thinking. 
157 287. The District alleges in Charge 123, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
establish discussion techniques and strategies to generate student participation, when 
she called on specific students without utilizing a random selector strategy or any 
other engagement strategy, as follows: 
a. During the lesson students volunteered or Estrada 
selected a student to share causing the same students 
to volunteer multiple times. Estrada said, “If you 
participated, don’t participate anymore, we want to be 
fair.” 
b. When asking students what items contain corn Estrada 
called on student C  without giving others an 
opportunity to volunteer. 
c. When asking students what items contain corn Estrada 
immediately called on student J  without giving the 
other students an opportunity to share their response. 
d. When asking students what items contain corn Estrada 
called on Student T , but he did not respond and 
instead remained quiet. Estrada then had him repeat the 
sentence after her. 
e. Estrada asked a student who raised his hand ”?Ya 
participaste?” [“Have you already participated?”] The 
student then said, “Yo solo quiero preguntarle algo.” [“I 
just want to ask you something.”] Estrada then told the 
student “Ahora no, espera.” [“Not now, wait.”] 
158 f. Estrada said “One minute, you want to be facing the 
person, do eye contact. You share one item that was 
corn. So, you want to be sharing.” “Make sure all people 
participate.” 
288. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 123. 
Evidence offered at hearing did not establish student C , J , or T  as 
volunteering students. The evidence suggests Estrada randomly called on these three 
students. Evidence offered at hearing also did not establish other students were 
deprived of an opportunity to participate as a result of Estrada calling on these three 
students. The evidence suggests Estrada was utilizing an “engagement strategy” to 
prompt T ’s participation when he remained silent and she instructed him to 
repeat the unspecified sentence. 
289. The District alleges in Charge 124, on January 25, 2023, Estrada failed to 
deliver standards-based lessons that included rigorous instruction to challenge the 
students and elicit their thinking, as follows: 
a. Students completed a circle map with the items that 
contain corn, some items Estrada provided for them. 
Estrada said, “Write two things on your circle map that 
contain corn.” 
b. Estrada provided a worksheet where students had the 
task of filing in the blanks. 
c. When students shared items that contain corn that they 
wrote on their circle map, students gave one-word 
answers, such as “Corn,” “tortilla,” “chips.” 
159 290. The preponderance of the evidence does not support Charge 124. Martin 
credibly testified the circle map activity she observed is a DLK 1 activity used for 
gathering background information. However, Estrada’s instruction in connection with 
the Cultivating Natural Resources lesson required additional instructional days, which 
Martin did not observe. Consequently, Martin had no opportunity to determine 
whether Estrada delivered a standards-based lesson on Cultivating Natural Resources. 
291. On May 8, 2023, Martin issued a Below Standard Evaluation to Estrada for 
the 2021/2022 academic year. (Exh. 46.) 
292. The Accusation alleges, on page 72, line 24, Estrada did not meet her PAR 
goals during the 2019/2020 and 2020/2021school years. The PAR Program is not 
intended to replace or supplant the evaluation procedures of Article X of the Collective 
Bargaining Agreement. Additionally, the outcome of a teacher’s participation in PAR is 
not a precondition for any disciplinary action. (See Exh. RX 1192 at pp. 71-77 [B2354-
B2359].) Consequently, the Commissioners make no factual findings in connection with 
PAR services provided to Estrada. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Standard and Burden of Proof 
1. The District has the burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence 
cause exists pursuant to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939 to dismiss Estrada 
from the District. (  (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 160 2. “‘Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has more 
convincing force than that opposed to it.’ [Citations.] . . . [T]he sole focus of the legal 
definition of ‘preponderance’ in the phrase ‘preponderance of the evidence’ is the 
of the evidence. The  of the evidence presented by each side is 
irrelevant.” ( (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325; 
italics in text.) In meeting the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence, the 
District “must produce substantial evidence, contradicted or un-contradicted, which 
supports the finding.” ( . (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 322, 339.)
Evaluating Credibility 
3. Evidence Code section 780 catalogs several factors for evaluating 
credibility: the demeanor and manner of the witness while testifying, the character of 
the testimony, the capacity of the witness to perceive at the time the events occurred, 
the capacity of the witness to recollect and communicate, the character of the witness 
for honesty, the existence or nonexistence of bias or other motive, a statement by the 
witness that is consistent or inconsistent with the testimony, the existence or absence 
of any fact to which the witness testified, the attitude of the witness toward the 
proceedings, and admissions of untruthfulness at the proceedings.
4. The carriage, mannerisms, tone of voice and hesitation, eye contact, and 
facial expressions of a witness are “wordless language,” which, although difficult to 
describe in such a way that the reader truly understands what warranted believing or 
disbelieving a witness, were part of the evidence for the Commissioners’ consideration 
as well as evidence on which factual determinations were made. (See 
 (2nd. Cir. 1952) 201 F.2d 265, 268-269.) 161 5. “On the cold record a witness may be clear, concise, direct, unimpeached, 
uncontradicted—but on a face to face evaluation, so exude insincerity as to render his 
credibility factor nil. Another witness may fumble, bumble, be unsure, uncertain, 
contradict himself, and on the basis of a written transcript be hardly worthy of belief. 
But one who sees, hears and observes him may be convinced of his honesty, his 
integrity, his reliability.” ( . (1971) 17 Cal.App.3d 127, 140.) As 
observed in . (2d. Cir., 1949) 175 
F2.d 77, 80, the best and most accurate record or hearing transcript is like a 
dehydrated peach; it has neither the substance nor the flavor of the fruit before it was 
dried. 
6. In addition, the decisional law acknowledges fact finders, such as the 
Commissioners, are permitted to “accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject 
another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (
. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) Furthermore, the Commissioners may “reject part 
of the testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the 
accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other 
witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.” ( ., at pp. 67-68, 
quoting from (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 777.) The Commissioners 
may even reject testimony that is not contradicted. (
(1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.) 
7. “Although impeaching evidence in the nature of contradictions or 
otherwise has been received, it is still the right as well as the duty of the 
[Commissioners] to determine to what extent [they] believe or disbelieve the 
testimony. [Citations.] [The Commissioners] may likewise give credence to a witness . . . 162 [citation] whose testimony contains contradictions or inconsistencies.” (
. (1946) 28 Cal.2d 154, 184.)
Applicable Law 
8. Education Code (Code) section 44932 authorizes the dismissal of a 
permanent, certificated employee only for certain specified causes including, 
unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, evident unfitness for service, and 
persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, reasonable regulations prescribed by the 
governing board of the school district employing him or her. 
9. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides a teacher’s 
“willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed 
by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district” is ground for 
dismissal. 
10. As a threshold matter, evaluation of a teacher’s alleged misconduct must 
demonstrate unfitness to teach. Abstract characterization of a teacher’s conduct as 
“unprofessional,” for example, is an insufficient basis for discipline. (
 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235.) A rational connection or nexus must exist 
between alleged misconduct and competence or ability to teach effectively. The 
determinative test is whether conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach. (See 
. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691.) Unfitness to teach is a question of ultimate 
fact. (. at p. 698, fn. 3.)
11.  identifies several relevant factors, formally codified at California 
Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, to determine unfitness to teach. They are 
as follows: the likelihood the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 
teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of adversity anticipated; the 163 proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of credential held by the 
person involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 
conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct; the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; the extent to which 
disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; and the 
publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 
12. All  factors need not be present to reach a determination 
regarding (un)fitness to teach. In other words, an item-by-item analysis of each 
established individual fact is not required. Rather,  calls for a comprehensive 
analysis of the accumulated established facts.” (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.)
13. Unprofessional conduct is conduct violating the rules or ethical code of a 
profession or which is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing. 
(  (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) The conduct in question must 
indicate unfitness to teach. (  (1983) 
149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 
14. Evident unfitness for service is established by conduct demonstrating a 
teacher is “‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by 
reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.’” ( , , 2 Cal.App.4th at 
1444.) 
15. Persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, a district’s governing board’s 
reasonable regulations requires a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to 
cooperate.” (164  (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) Such conduct is presumed to render a 
teacher unfit to teach. ( ,, 1 Cal.3d at pp. 227-230.) 
Discussion 
16. The Commissioners considered 124 charges alleging Estrada was 
ineffectual in her preparation and planning of instructional activities for students, 
delivery of instruction consistent with the Standards, and maintenance and 
management of a classroom environment conducive for learning. The District proved 
nine of the 124 charges by a preponderance of the evidence. These nine proven 
charges arose from classroom observations conducted in several different academic 
years. 
17. In particular, the District proved Estrada provided students with incorrect 
answers during a math lesson powers and exponents on September 26, 2019; however, 
Estrada admitted she erred and re-taught the class, thus demonstrating to students 
the positive value of admitting to and accepting responsibility for one’s conduct 
(Charge 11; Factual Finding 60); Estrada entered Tahmasebi’s classroom without 
Tahmasebi’s knowledge or prior consent; however, in mitigation, Estrada’s conduct 
might be properly understood as an effort to obtain information to improve her 
classroom performance (Charge 18; Factual Finding 64); Estrada did not model or use 
correct academic terminology during a math lesson on greatest common factors on 
January 30, 2020 (Charges 49 and 50; Factual Finding 122); Estrada did not monitor 
students off-track behaviors on January 30, 2020 (Charge 52; Factual Finding 126); 
Estrada used MISIS during instructional time on March 3, 2020 (Charge 59; Factual 
Finding 147); Estrada did not offer assistance to students completing a verb tense 
work sheet on March 3, 2020 (Charge 60; Factual Finding 149); Estrada did not update 
the Writing bulletin board on March 3, 2020 (Charge 63; Factual Finding 155); Estrada 165 did not begin instruction at 8:01 a.m. on February 4, 2022; however, in mitigation, a 
foot injury affected Estrada’s mobility and Estrada needed accommodations for extra 
time to travel within the Alta California campus (Charge 102; Factual Finding 233); and 
Estrada delivered instruction on January 25, 2023 as described in Charge 115 (Factual 
Finding 272). 
18. The Commissioners determined these nine proven charges, separately 
and in the aggregate, are insufficient to demonstrate Estrada is unfit to serve as a 
teacher or to warrant her dismissal. As indicated above, Estrada’s proven conduct at 
issue in Charges 11, 18, and 102 was either mitigated or excused by extenuating 
circumstances. Regarding Estrada’s proven conduct at issue in Charges 49, 50, 52, 59, 
60, and 63, the evidence showed Estrada was able to and took steps to correct her 
classroom performance, thus demonstrating her commitment to professional growth, 
development, and improvement. Where remediation has occurred, there is no longer 
any grounds for dismissal. (See e.g.  
(1990) 225 Cal.App.3d. 334.) 
19. In general, the accumulated credible evidence refuting the 115 unproven 
charges showed Estrada planned and designed instructional activities using 
information about the academic capabilities of the students in her classroom to 
engage them in learning. Estrada incorporated District-approved techniques and 
practices to differentiate instructional activities for newcomers and student with 
special education classifications. Estrada demonstrated knowledge and understanding
acquired through training about EL students’ learning processes, and she deployed her 
training to support EL students in a classroom environment supportive of risk-taking. 
Notwithstanding one proven instance of unmonitored off-track behavior, the overall 
scheme of Estrada’s classroom included clear expectations and consequences for 166 students’ behavior. Anecdotal evidence provided by several parents and students 
suggests Estrada’s practice of partnering with parents to encourage their active 
participation in their children’s academic progress and success. In sum, the 
preponderance of the credible evidence showed Estrada reflected on and strived to 
comply with and implement directives Victorio, Benitez, and Martin provided to her 
orally during conferences and in written conference memoranda. (See Factual 
Findings102. 130, 157, 182, 209, 235 and 263.) 
20. The Commission has broad discretion to determine whether discipline is 
warranted. ( ( ) (1988) 45 Cal.3d. 208, 
220-222.) “The Commission has board discretion in determining what constitutes 
unfitness to teach . . . , and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate 
sanction. [Citing , , 45 Cal3d at pp. 220-222.] “[A] disciplinary discharge 
often involves complex facts and may require a sensitive evaluation of the nature and 
seriousness of the misconduct and whether it warrants the grave sanction of dismissal.’ 
[Citation.]“ ( . (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 342-344.) The 
Commissioners unanimously agree the nine proven charges do not support dismissal 
of Estrada from the District given the totality of the credible evidence in the record. 
21. No cause exists for the dismissal of Estrada pursuant to Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(2), for unprofessional conduct.
22. No cause exists for dismissal of Estrada pursuant to Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(5), for unsatisfactory performance.
23. No cause exists for dismissal of Estrada pursuant to Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(6), for evident unfitness for service. 16724. No cause for dismissal of Estrada pursuant to Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), for persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the 
state or reasonable regulations prescribed for government of public schools by the 
State Board of Education or by the District.
25. No cause exists for dismissal of Estrada pursuant to Code section 44939, 
for willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause.
ORDER
The Accusation against Yamila Estrada is Dismissed.
DATE:
DATE:
DATE:JACQUELINE TYLER
Commissioner
STEPHANIE R. COBB
Commissioner
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL
Senior Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
