BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE  
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
DELHI JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 

LESA PRINE, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Respondent 

OAH No. 2023051012 

DECISION 

This matter was heard before a Commission on Professional Competence 

(Commission) for the Delhi Joint Unified School District (District) on October 23 

through 25, 2023. The Commission included Amy Burdick, Rachel Merino-Ott, and 

Matthew S. Block, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

presiding from Sacramento. 

Chelsea A. Tibbs, attorney at Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented the District. 

Joshua F. Richtel, attorney at Tuttle & McCloskey, represented Lesa Prine 

(respondent), who was present throughout the hearing. 

Evidence was received and the record closed on October 25, 2023. The matter 

was submitted for decision when the Commission concluded its deliberations on 

October 30, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District. She is 

assigned to Delhi High School in Delhi, California. 

2. 

On November 4, 2022, respondent was placed on paid administrative 

leave. On April 18, 2023, District Superintendent Jose Miguel Kubes filed with the 

District’s Board a Statement of Charges and Notice of Immediate Suspension Without 

Pay and Charges for Dismissal (Notice), which the Board approved the same day. The 

Statement of Charges alleged grounds for the termination of respondent’s 

employment with the District based on: (1) immoral conduct; (2) evident unfitness for 

service; and (3) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 

the reasonable regulations of the State Board of Education or the District. 

3. 

Respondent was served with the Notice on May 2, 2023. She timely filed 

a request for hearing, and this hearing followed. On July 25, 2023, Mr. Kubes signed 

and thereafter filed with the District’s Board the Amended Statement of Charges, 

which is the operative pleading in this matter. 

District’s Evidence 

4. 

Respondent has worked for the District since 2004. She presently teaches 

12-grade English, Journalism/Yearbook, and Expository Writing. She previously taught 

English Language Development (ELD). Her immediate supervisor is Principal Ed Taylor. 

5. 

On October 31, 2022, respondent attended a staff meeting at Delhi High 

School. The purpose of the meeting was to explain changes in protocol for entering 

2 

data into Aeries, which is a secure portal by which parents and students may access 

student information such as attendance, test scores, and grades. Several teachers in 

attendance, including respondent, expressed frustration that more was being asked of 

them when entering student data into Aeries. The teachers were particularly frustrated 

that the protocol was being modified for the third time in the relatively new school 

year. 

6. 

Adeline Amador is a teacher at Delhi High School and testified at 

hearing. She was present at the staff meeting on October 31, 2022. Ms. Amador 

described respondent as “upset” and “a little hostile” toward Behavioral Support 

Counselor Veronica Sandoval, who was leading the discussion about the protocol 

modifications to Aeries. According to Ms. Amador, respondent abruptly walked out of 

the meeting before it ended. Respondent’s behavior was reported to Mr. Taylor, and 

she was placed on paid leave pending a District investigation into what had occurred 

at the meeting. 

7. 

During the investigation into respondent’s behavior at the meeting, 

several individuals alleged that students reported respondent using inappropriate 

racial language in the classroom, specifically about African Americans and Hispanics. 

Students also reported that respondent was inappropriately affectionate with a 

particular student, Student K. The District assigned Mr. Taylor to investigate the new 

allegations. He testified about his investigation and findings at hearing. 

8. 

Mr. Taylor began his investigation by having his secretary randomly 

select five students to interview from each of the six classes respondent taught per day 

and print their student profile page from the Aeries system. The District provided Mr. 

Taylor with a series of questions and statements to discuss with each student. They 

were as follows: 

3 

(1) Tell me about your experience in Ms. Prine’s class. 

(2) Do you enjoy the class? Why? Why not? 

(3) Has Ms. Prine ever made comments that make you uncomfortable? Please 

explain. 

(4) Have you ever heard Ms. Prine make inappropriate or racial comments? 

Please explain. 

(5) Have any of your friends told you about comments made by Ms. Prine? 

Who? 

(6) We ask that you keep this conversation confidential and do not discuss it 

with your friends or district employees. If Ms. Prine or any other district 

employee tries to talk to you about these questions, please let me know. 

9. 

Mr. Taylor met with each student individually and asked the District’s 

questions. If a student answered a question in the affirmative, Mr. Taylor wrote the 

number of the question and the student’s answer on their profile page. If the student 

answered all questions in the negative, Mr. Taylor discarded the printed profile page. 

He did not keep a record or note the identity of the students who had nothing bad to 

report about respondent. At hearing, he admitted he has no training in conducting 

interviews of this nature. He also felt he had a conflict of interest in the matter, and 

that an independent third party should have conducted the investigation. 

INITIAL STUDENT INTERVIEWS 

10.  One of the students who reported hearing respondent use offensive 

language was Student A. Student A was in respondent’s ELD class during the 

4 

2021/2022 school year, and in her English class during the 2022/2023 school year. 

Student A told Mr. Taylor that during the 2021/2022 school year, respondent used the 

racially derogatory slur “nigger,” hereafter referred to as the N word, while teaching a 

lesson on the book To Kill a Mockingbird. Student A also told Mr. Taylor that 

respondent frequently used the word in class, including during the 2022/2023 school 

year. 

11. 

Student B was in respondent’s English class during the 2022/2023 school 

year. She told Mr. Taylor that respondent made racist jokes about Mexicans and 

African Americans, though she was unable to provide any details about the substance 

of the jokes. She said respondent used the N word during the 2022/2023 school year 

while joking about “a trend.” She also said that immediately after saying it, respondent 

had a look on her face suggesting she knew “she messed up.” Finally, Student B told 

Mr. Taylor that respondent is very “flirty” and “touchy” with the students in her classes. 

12. 

Student C was in respondent’s English class during the 2022/2023 school 

year. She told Mr. Taylor that respondent routinely used rude and disrespectful foul 

language, and that she had a bad attitude with students. She recalled respondent 

using the N word while discussing a “silly video.” She also told him respondent is “very 

touchy” with students and pushed her hand up the shirt sleeve of a male student, 

Student K. 

13. 

Students D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, and L were all in various periods of 

respondent’s Expository Writing class during the 2022/2023 school year. Student D 

told Mr. Taylor she heard from another person that respondent used the N word, but 

she could not remember who she heard it from. Student E heard from friends that 

respondent used the N word but had no personal knowledge of it. Students F and G 

told Mr. Taylor that respondent discussed her personal life in class. They also told him 

5 

their friends said she used the N word in class, but neither had personal knowledge of 

it. Similarly, Student H told Mr. Taylor that respondent discussed her personal life in 

class, and that she heard from friends that respondent used the N word. However, 

Student H never personally heard respondent use the N word. 

14. 

Students I and J told Mr. Taylor that they personally heard respondent 

use the N word in class. Student K did not hear respondent use any inappropriate 

racial language, but he told Mr. Taylor that respondent would occasionally touch him 

and make comments about his appearance that made him uncomfortable. Student L 

dated Student K during the 2022/2023 school year. Student L told Mr. Taylor 

respondent acted “weird” toward Student K. Specifically, she said respondent hugged 

Student K in class, held his hand, and said he looked “handsome.” 

15. 

Students N and O were in respondent’s Journalism/Yearbook class during 

the 2022/2023 school year. Student N told Mr. Taylor that on one occasion, 

respondent showed the class a Taco Bell commercial and drew a correlation between 

the commercial and illegal immigration. Student O also said respondent showed the 

commercial in class but did not elaborate on the context in which it was shown. 

FOLLOW-UP STUDENT INTERVIEWS 

16. 

For reasons that were unclear at hearing, Mr. Taylor interviewed several 

of the students a second time in February 2023, one of whom was Student A. Student 

A told him that when respondent used the N word during the 2021/2022 school year, 

she told the class she was only going to do so because it was in the novel. Student A 

also told Mr. Taylor that respondent used the N word during the 2022/2023 school 

year while teaching a lesson because it was printed in a journal or a novel the class 

was reading. 

6 

17.  Mr. Taylor reinterviewed Student B. She told him that when respondent 

used the N word it was during the last five minutes of class. Student B could not recall 

what, if anything, respondent was teaching at the time. She said respondent would 

occasionally make “kinda racist” comments about immigrants and the United States 

Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Student B also told Mr. Taylor that 

respondent flirted with Student K, but she could not remember anything specific that 

respondent ever said to him. 

18.  Mr. Taylor reinterviewed Student C. She told him that respondent used 

the N word in class after a “happy birthday video” was played. She said it was the only 

time respondent used the word, but “[respondent] would tell jokes about that.” 

Student C also said that on one occasion, respondent placed her hand under the shirt 

sleeve of Student K. When Student C said this, she pointed at the top of her wrist. 

19.  Mr. Taylor reinterviewed Students I and J. They both previously told him 

they personally heard respondent use the N word. However, in the second interview, 

Student I told Mr. Taylor that respondent’s alleged use of the N word was just a rumor 

that students were spreading on campus. Student J admitted he was not even in 

respondent’s class the day she was alleged to have used the N word. 

20.  Mr. Taylor reinterviewed Student L. She told him respondent would tell 

Student K he was her favorite and was “touchy” with him. She said this would make 

other students in the class uncomfortable. However, she also told him she only saw 

respondent being affectionate with Student K on one occasion. 

STUDENT TESTIMONY 

21. 

Student A testified at hearing. She admitted she does not care for 

respondent. She described her relationship with respondent as “strained” and said 

7 

they didn’t “click.” She denied hearing respondent use the N word at any time other 

than when teaching the lesson on To Kill a Mockingbird during her junior year. She 

also testified she told Mr. Taylor she heard from friends that respondent used it during 

the 2022/2023 school year, but that she never personally heard respondent use it. 

22. 

Student B testified at hearing. She explained that she suffers from an 

auditory processing disorder, and that she tends to be forgetful and to hear and 

interpret things incorrectly. According to Student B, when respondent used the N word 

it was during the last five minutes of her seventh period English class. She cannot 

remember what other students in the class were doing at the time, but she does not 

believe respondent was teaching a lesson. Student B heard the word but did not 

actually see respondent say it because respondent was behind Student B at the time. 

Student B believes respondent made a comment about immigrants on one other 

occasion, but she cannot remember when or what was said. Student B observed 

respondent rub Student K’s shoulder on one occasion. She observed respondent 

speaking to Student K but never heard what respondent said to him. 

23. 

Student C testified at hearing. She heard respondent use the N word 

during the same class as Student B. However, Student C has a different recollection of 

when and how the word was used. According to Student C, when students entered the 

classroom, respondent had a video projected onto a screen to celebrate the birthday 

of a male student in the class. Student C does not remember anything about the video, 

but said that after it was played, the student asked respondent to play another video 

in front of the class. Respondent replied that the video better not feature drinking or 

drugs. Moments later, Student C believes she heard respondent use the N word. 

Student C recalls this occurring during the first 10 minutes of class, and said 

respondent used the word loud enough for the entire class to hear. 

8 

24. 

Student L testified at hearing. She admitted she never personally 

observed respondent act inappropriately toward Student K, and that her knowledge 

was limited to what Student K told her. She acknowledged respondent would talk 

about immigration on occasion but never in a way that was derogatory or 

inappropriate. In fact, Student L testified that respondent was compassionate about 

the struggles that immigrants face. 

25. 

Student M testified at hearing. She confirmed that respondent made a 

comment comparing immigration to moving away to college but was unable to 

describe the circumstances under which the comparison was made or what specifically 

was said. 

26. 

Student N testified at hearing. She feels she and respondent had a 

“normal” student-teacher relationship. She recalls respondent showing students the 

Taco Bell commercial during class but does not remember the context or whether the 

video was shown during a lesson. She testified respondent did not draw any 

connection between the commercial and illegal immigration. 

27. 

Student O testified at hearing. He and his friends did not get along with 

respondent. On one prior occasion, respondent sent him out of class for behavioral 

issues. Student O’s friends told him respondent said the entire class “should run for 

the border.” However, Student O did not personally hear respondent make the 

comment. 

28. 

Students D, E, F, G, H, I, and J did not testify at hearing. Student K also 

did not testify at hearing. Mr. Kubes testified that the District made multiple 

unsuccessful attempts to serve Student K with a subpoena to ensure his appearance. 

9 

Respondent’s Evidence 

CHARACTER WITNESS TESTIMONY 

29. 

Respondent called two character witnesses to testify on her behalf at 

hearing. The first was Estela Ramos. Ms. Ramos has been an academic counselor with 

the District for 21 years. She was present at the staff meeting on October 31, 2022. Ms. 

Ramos admitted that respondent and other teachers were frustrated during the 

meeting. However, respondent did not use verbally abusive language, and she did not 

walk out of the meeting before it was over. Ms. Ramos has known respondent for 

approximately 20 years and believes her to be a very good teacher who is well-

regarded by students. 

30. 

Christine Abraham also testified on respondent’s behalf. Ms. Abraham 

was a special education teacher at Delhi High School before she retired. According to 

Ms. Abraham, respondent was extremely well-regarded by students, who nicknamed 

her “Mama Prine.” 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

31. 

Respondent testified at hearing. She has worked for the District since 

2004. During her time at Delhi High School, she has taught English, English Language 

Development, Journalism/Yearbook, and Expository Writing. She has also volunteered 

as a basketball and cheerleading coach. 

32. 

Respondent admits she was frustrated at the staff meeting on October 

31, 2022, and that she may have appeared unprofessional to those in attendance. 

However, she denies leaving the meeting before it was over, and she does not believe 

her behavior was abusive or harassing. 

10 

33.  When respondent taught To Kill a Mockingbird during the 2021/2022 

school year, she played a recording of actress Sissy Spacek reciting the novel using 

different voices for the various characters. Respondent admits that the N word was 

used in the recording, but adamantly denies ever using the word herself, in a 

classroom or otherwise. 

34. 

Respondent has known Student K since he was in kindergarten because 

he was in the same grade level as respondent’s son. She described Student K as an 

attention seeker, who would frequently ask her if he was her favorite student. In reply, 

respondent would say that all the students were her favorites. She admits she probably 

touched Student K on the shoulder at some point, and that she has touched other 

students in similar fashion over the course of her career. However, she denies rubbing 

Student K’s shoulders or placing her hand up the sleeve of his shirt. She also denies 

hugging Student K or flirting with him. 

35. 

The student body at Delhi High School is predominantly Hispanic. 

Respondent is aware that some of her students have had to deal with immigration 

issues within their families. She is particularly sensitive to issues involving immigration, 

and she has always tried to show genuine compassion when discussing it in class. As a 

result, she “doesn’t know what to make” of the allegations that she made derogatory 

or insensitive statements about immigrants, and adamantly denies doing so. 

36. 

Respondent admits showing a Taco Bell commercial from the 1990s in 

her Journalism/Yearbook class during the 2022/2023 school year. That particular year 

was the 25th anniversary of Delhi High School’s opening. The students were interested 

in using a retrospective theme for the yearbook which incorporated cultural elements 

from the 1990s. That interest prompted a class discussion about how what was once 

thought to be funny can be deemed offensive. Following the discussion, respondent 

11 

researched commercials from the 1990s which may no longer be deemed culturally 

acceptable. She found a recording of multiple different commercials on YouTube, 

including the Taco Bell commercial, and played it in class the next day to illustrate her 

point. She did not attempt to draw a correlation between the commercial and illegal 

immigration, and she did not tell the students that they all needed to run for the 

border. 

37. 

Respondent never compared immigration to going away to college. 

However, she frequently began her classes with a discussion about life after high 

school, which involved the topic of leaving home to attend college. 

Analysis 

38. 

The Commission must resolve two issues in this case. First, it must 

determine whether respondent engaged in the conduct alleged in the Amended 

Statement of Charges. If so, it must determine whether that conduct indicates that 

respondent is unfit to teach. 

39. 

The District called multiple past and present student witnesses to prove 

the allegations in the Amended Statement of Charges. Evidence Code section 780 sets 

forth various factors to consider when determining the credibility of a witness. 

Relevant factors include: (1) the witness’s demeanor while testifying; (2) the character 

of the witness’s testimony; (3) the witness's capacity to perceive and recollect; (4) the 

existence or nonexistence of bias; (5) prior statements of the witness that are 

consistent or inconsistent with their testimony at hearing; (6) the existence or non-

existence of a fact testified to by the witness; and (7) the witness’s attitude toward the 

action in which he or she testifies. The Amended Statement of Charges alleges three 

12 

categories of behavior that constitute cause for dismissal, each of which will be 

addressed in turn below. 

USE OF THE N WORD 

40. 

It is alleged that respondent used the N word while teaching a lesson 

about the novel To Kill a Mockingbird during the 2021/2022 school year. The District 

failed to prove the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. 

41.  Out of an entire classroom of students, the District called only Student A 

to testify she heard respondent use the N word. Student A admitted at hearing that 

she does not care for respondent and described their relationship as “strained.” 

42.  When Mr. Taylor first interviewed Student A, she told him respondent 

“frequently” used the N word, including during the 2022/2023 school year. When Mr. 

Taylor reinterviewed Student A in February 2023, she maintained that respondent used 

the N word during the 2021/2022 school year. However, she told him respondent 

qualified her use of the word by telling the class she was only going to use it because 

it appeared in the text of the novel. She was unsure of the context in which respondent 

used the word during the 2022/2023 school year but believed it to be when the class 

was reading a journal or novel because she recalls the word being printed in the 

document the class was reading. 

43. 

In her testimony at hearing, Student A said she only heard respondent 

use the N word on one occasion during the 2021/2022 school year when the class was 

reading To Kill a Mockingbird. She said she told Mr. Taylor she heard from friends that 

respondent used the N word during the 2022/2023 school year, but she never 

personally heard respondent do so. 

13 

44. 

Given the inconsistencies in Student A’s multiple statements and her bias 

against respondent, the Commission afforded her testimony minimal weight. As such, 

when all the evidence is considered, the District failed to prove it is more likely than 

not that respondent used the N word while teaching To Kill a Mockingbird. 

45. 

It is alleged that respondent used the N word during the 2022/2023 

school year when students were discussing a video they were watching, and also while 

discussing a trending YouTube video. It was unclear at hearing whether the District 

alleges these to be the same or separate incidents. In either case, the District failed to 

prove the allegations by a preponderance of the evidence. 

46. 

The District called two witnesses, Students B and C, to testify that they 

heard respondent use the N word at or around the time that students were watching a 

video. Student B suffers from an auditory processing disorder. While she alleged to 

have heard the word spoken, she was not looking at respondent at the time she heard 

it. Student C testified that she both heard and saw respondent speak the word. 

However, her account of how and when the incident occurred was markedly different 

than Student B’s. It was also noteworthy that the District called only two students from 

the entire class, particularly given Student C’s belief that the word was spoken loudly 

enough for the entire class to hear it. Given Student B’s admitted issues with 

perception and recollection, and the stark inconsistencies between her testimony and 

that of Student C, the District failed to prove it is more likely than not that respondent 

used the N word during the 2022/2023 school year. 

47. 

It is alleged that multiple students and staff members “credibly reported” 

hearing second-hand that respondent used the N word. Whether true or not, students 

and staff members hearing something second-hand is not evidence that what they 

heard in fact occurred and is not a ground for dismissal. 

14 

INAPPROPRIATE INTERACTIONS WITH STUDENT K 

48. 

It is alleged that respondent told Student K he looked “good,” “cute,” and 

“handsome,” that she hugged him when he indicated he wanted a handshake, and that 

she “flirted” with Student K in class. The District failed to prove these allegations by a 

preponderance of the evidence. Student K failed to appear at hearing to testify to any 

statements respondent allegedly made regarding his appearance or her behavior 

toward him. The only evidence of the comments was the testimony of Student L, who 

admitted she has no independent personal knowledge of what respondent said to 

Student K. 

49. 

Student M testified she heard rumors about respondent rubbing Student 

K’s shoulders, and that she personally saw respondent touch his shoulder on one 

occasion. She also saw respondent shake Student K’s hand for what she believed to be 

too long. Student M never heard anything respondent ever said to Student K. 

50. 

Student C testified respondent frequently rubbed Student K’s shoulders. 

However, she was unable to provide any significant detail regarding the context in 

which respondent would do so, or how long each encounter lasted. Additionally, 

Student C told Mr. Taylor in her initial interview that respondent was “touchy” with 

multiple students regardless of gender. She testified she saw respondent touch 

Student K inappropriately under his clothing. However, including her testimony at 

hearing, Student C has now provided different accounts of what the touching 

consisted of. In her initial interview with Mr. Tayor, Student C said she saw respondent 

push up the sleeve on Student K’s shirt. In her follow-up interview with Mr. Taylor, she 

said respondent placed her hand up Student K’s sleeve and pointed to the top of her 

wrist. At hearing, she testified that respondent pushed her hand all the way up Student 

K’s sleeve to his bicep and left it there for 40 seconds. Given the inconsistencies in 

15 

Student C’s multiple statements, her testimony in this regard was afforded minimal 

weight. 

51. 

Respondent admitted in her testimony that she very likely touched 

Student K on the shoulders, as well as other students in her classes throughout her 

career. However, that admission is insufficient to establish that the allegations of 

inappropriate behavior toward Student K are true. When all the evidence is considered, 

the District failed to prove it is more likely than not that respondent engaged in 

inappropriate interactions with Student K. 

DEROGATORY COMMENTS ABOUT IMMIGRANTS AND HISPANICS 

52. 

It is alleged that respondent made an offensive remark about immigrants 

going to college. The District failed to prove the allegation by a preponderance of the 

evidence. During her interview, Student M told Mr. Taylor respondent compared 

immigration to moving to college. She testified respondent said that moving away to 

college was like saying goodbye to one’s family. Absent further context or explanation, 

the Commission failed to find that the comparison, even if it were made, is offensive. 

53. 

It is alleged that respondent made a comment about Taco Bell and 

immigrants running to the border. The District failed to prove the allegation by a 

preponderance of the evidence. Mr. Taylor testified that when he first spoke to 

Student N, she told him respondent showed her Journalism/Yearbook class a Taco Bell 

commercial and made some sort of comparison to illegal immigration. Student N 

testified at hearing that respondent did show her class a Taco Bell commercial during 

the 2022/2023 school year. While she could not recall the specific context in which it 

was shown, she does not recall respondent making or attempting to make any 

16 

comparison between the commercial and illegal immigration, and she does not recall 

telling Mr. Taylor that respondent did so. 

54. 

Student O told Mr. Taylor that respondent made a comment about 

running to the border, but he was unable to provide any specifics or the context in 

which the statement was made. At hearing, Student O admitted he and his friends did 

not get along with respondent. He testified respondent told his entire class they 

should “run for the border.” However, he admitted he did not actually hear the 

comment, and it was only something his friends told him about. 

55. 

Respondent admitted showing her Journalism class an old Taco Bell 

commercial from the 1990s. The class was interested in the 1990s because that was the 

decade in which Delhi High School opened and they were interested in a 1990s theme 

for the yearbook. Respondent credibly testified that she showed the Taco Bell 

commercial, along with several others, to illustrate her point from a class discussion 

the day prior that what was once considered amusing or socially acceptable may be 

considered offensive in the present. Given the testimony of respondent and Student N, 

and Student O’s bias against respondent, the District failed to prove it is more likely 

than not that respondent likened the Taco Bell commercial to illegal immigration or 

told her students they should all “run for the border”. 

56. 

It is alleged that Student O reported that respondent made offensive 

jokes about immigration control and about “ICE” coming to take immigrants. The 

District failed to prove the allegation by a preponderance of the evidence. There is no 

indication Student O reported this comment in his interview with Mr. Taylor. Moreover, 

Student O did not testify at hearing that respondent made the comment. Thus, in the 

absence of any evidence in support of the allegation, the District failed to prove it is 

more likely than not that respondent made jokes about ICE taking immigrants away. 

17 

57. 

It is alleged that staff members “credibly reported” hearing second-hand 

that respondent made racist comments about Mexicans and African Americans. 

Whether true or not, staff members hearing something second-hand is not evidence 

that what they heard in fact occurred and is not a ground for dismissal. 

Conclusion 

58. 

The District failed to prove respondent engaged in the conduct alleged in 

the Amended Statement of Charges. Thus, it is unnecessary for the Commission to 

consider whether the conduct indicates she is unfit to teach. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

A school district seeking to dismiss a permanent certificated employee 

from employment bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. 

(Gardner v. Comm’n on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035; Bevli v. 

Brisco (1989) 211 Cal.App.3d 986.) The term preponderance of the evidence means 

“more likely than not.” (Sandoval v. Bank of Am. (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1).) In describing what constitutes 

immoral conduct within the context of the Education Code, the court in Board of 

Education of San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 

808 said: 

18 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

(Id., at p. 811, quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734,740.) 

3. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

evident unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6).) That term means “clearly 

not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 

Comm’n on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term 

“connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 

notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the school district.” (Ibid.) 

The court held that the Morrison factors “must be analyzed to determine, as a 

threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service.” (Id. at p. 

1445.) As the Woodland court explained, “[i]f the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the 

next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident,’ i.e., whether the offensive 

conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Ibid.) 

4. 

A school district may dismiss a permanent certificated employee for 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or 

19 

by the governing board of the school district employing her. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(8). 

Causes for Dismissal 

5. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause 

does not exist to dismiss respondent for immoral conduct. 

6. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause 

does not exist to dismiss respondent for evident unfitness for service. 

7. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause 

does not exist to dismiss respondent for persistent violation of or refusal to obey the 

school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 

the public schools by the state board or the governing board of the District. 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

20 

ORDER 

The Amended Statement of Charges is DISMISSED. There is no legal basis for 

dismissing respondent Lesa Prine from her employment with the Delhi Joint Unified 

School District. 

DATE:  

DATE:  

DATE:  

AMY BURDICK 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

RACHEL MERINO-OTT 

Member 

Commission on Professional Competence 

MATTHEW S. BLOCK 

Administrative Law Judge, Chair 

Commission on Professional Competence 

21 

Amy Burdick (Nov 20, 2023 11:33 MST)11/20/202311/20/202311/21/2023 
 
