BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
AND A COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR 
THE HUNTINGTON BEACH UNIO N HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
FABIAN LUNA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024100508 
 
DECISION 
 
This matter was heard by a Commission on Professional Competence on August 
25 through 29, 2025, in Huntington Beach, California. The Commission members were 
Michael Anderson, Gregg Primeaux, and Erlin da Shrenger, Administrative Law Judge 
(ALJ), Office of Administra tive Hearings (OAH), State of California, who presided. 
Lauren Ruvalcaba and Anthony P. De Marc o, of the law firm Atkinson, Andelson, 
Loya, Ruud & Romo, represented the Hunt ington Beach Union High School District 
(District). 
Arthur Four, of the law firm Reich, Ad ell & Cvitan, represented Fabian Luna 
(respondent), who was presen t throughout the hearing. 2  Oral and documentary eviden ce was received. At the co nclusion of the hearing, 
the record was held open for the parties to upload exhibits to Case Center by 
September 2, 2025, as follows: Respondent to  upload Exhibit VV and the District to 
upload Exhibits 28, 29, and 30. Hard copies of the exhi bits were provided to the 
Commission members at the hearing. The pa rties timely uploaded  their respective 
exhibits to Case Center. 
Additionally, on August 29, 2025, the Dist rict provided the ALJ and respondent’s 
counsel with a brief regard ing admissibility of hearsay and photographic evidence, 
which is marked for identifi cation as Exhibit 31. The record was held open for 
respondent’s counsel to file and serve a response to the District’s briefing by 
September 8, 2025. Respondent’s counsel timely filed and se rved an opposition brief, 
which is marked for identi fication as Exhibit WW. 
The record closed and the matter was su bmitted for decision on September 8, 
2025. 
 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
 
Jurisdictional Matters 
 
1. Respondent is a permanent certific ated employee of the District. 
 
2. The District immediately suspende d respondent without  pay effective 
August 14, 2024. (Exh. 3.) 
3. On August 22, 2024, the District se rved respondent with a Notice of 
Intention to Dismiss, notifying him of the Dist rict’s intent to dismiss him within 30 days 
unless he made a written reques t for a hearing. (Exh. 3.) Th e Notice of Intention to 3  Dismiss included a Statement of Charges, a Request for Hearing form, and copies of 
relevant Education Code sections. 
4. On September 19, 2024, respondent se rved the District with a Request 
for Hearing and Notice of Defense, whic h contained his request for a hearing to 
determine whether cause exists to terminate his employment. (Exh. 4.) 
5. All jurisdictional matters have been met. 
 
Respondent’s Background 
 
6. Respondent is 54 years old. He has be en employed by the District since 
2006. Respondent holds a single-subject credenti al in social studies. He received his 
credential in 1995 or 1996. He holds a bachel or’s degree in political science with a 
minor in economics, and a mast er’s degree in education. 
7. Respondent was hired by the Paramount  Unified School District in the 
1997-1998 school year. He taug ht at Paramount High Sc hool starting in 1999. He 
taught history for 10th an d 11th graders, and Govern ment and Economics for 12th 
graders. He also coached boys basketball at Paramount  High School. Respondent 
taught at Paramount High Schoo l for a total of eight years. 
8. Respondent was hired by Huntington Beach High School (HBHS) in 2006. 
According to respondent, he was hired as a social studies teacher who would also 
coach varsity basketball. 
Huntington Beach High School 
 
9. HBHS operates on a semester sche dule. Economics and Government 
were one-semester courses taken by students in their senior year. Seniors would take 4  one of the courses in the fall semester, and then take the other course in the spring 
semester. Respondent taught  the Economics and Govern ment courses at HBHS. 
10. At all relevant times, respondent’ s classroom was located in the “B” 
Building on the HBHS campus. A diagram ( not to scale) of respondent’s classroom, 
showing the location of respondent’s desk an d students’ desks, was presented. (Exh. 
HH.) 
District Policies 
 
11. District policies are reviewed annua lly during professional development 
days. District Board Policy 1130 provides in part: “All employees are expected to use 
kindness, tact and tolerance in their rela tionships with students, parents and the 
general citizenry ......... The staff shall exhibit high personal and professional standards of 
conduct at all times.” (Exh. 2, p. A48.) 
 
12. District Board Policy 4119.2/4219.2/ 4319.2 provides in part: “The 
relationship between the school employee and the student should be one of 
professional cooperation and respect. All empl oyees, whether certificated or classified, 
have a responsibility to conduct themselv es in a manner that will maintain an 
atmosphere that is conducive to learning.” (Exh. 2, p. A50.) 
13. The certificated job descri ption maintained by the District for the position 
of “Teacher” provides, in perti nent part: “The teacher is directly responsible to the 
school principal, or designate, ...........The teache r has the responsibility, as part of a high 
school teaching assignment, to guide and facili tate the learning experience of students 
in accordance with established educationa l goals of the district. In addition, the 
teacher shares with other st aff responsibility for the safety and welfare of students and 
staff members.” (Exh. 2, pp. A51-A52.) 5  14. The job duties of the position of “Teach er” for the District include, but are 
not limited to, the following: “Establishe s and maintains standards necessary to 
preserve a suitable learning en vironment.” (Exh. 2, p. A52.) 
Former HBHS Student Witnesses 
 
15. At hearing, the District presented testimony from the following former 
HBHS students (identified by initials to prot ect their privacy): B.S., G.C., E.H., A.J., K.A., 
C.C., and L.B. All of these former students  graduated from HBHS in 2023, except for 
A.J., who graduated in 2022. 
16. At hearing, respondent presented te stimony from the following former 
HBHS students (identified by initials to prot ect their privacy): K.B., C.K., V.S., B.R., and 
R.A. All of these former students graduate d from HBHS in 2023, except for R.A., who 
graduated in 2022. 
17. The Commission determined that th e former HBHS students who 
testified appeared to have used their best efforts to provide truthful and complete 
answers to the questions posed to them . The Commission determined the former 
students’ testimonies  were credible. 
Student Complaints and District’s Investigation 
2021-2022 S CHOOL YEAR 
18. Michelle Pendergast has been the Student Support School Psychologist 
at HBHS for 21 years. As School  Psychologist, her duties incl ude, but are not limited to, 
providing crisis counseling and walk-in counseling for students. 6  19. In March 2022, Ms. Pendergast receiv ed a written stat ement from A.J. 
regarding inappropriate conduct by responden t. (Exh. 3, p. A104.) As discussed more 
fully in Factual Findings 37 through 39, below, A.J. was a student in respondent’s 
Government class and reported that respon dent stared at her chest area as she 
attempted to discuss her grad e with him. On March 18, 2022,  Ms. Pendergast assisted 
with A.J.’s mid-semester transfer out of respondent’s Government class. (Exh. 14.) No 
further action was taken in the 2021-2022 sc hool year regarding A.J.’s allegation of 
inappropriate conduct by resp ondent. A.J. graduated from  HBHS at the end of the 
spring 2022 semester. 
2022-2023 S CHOOL YEAR 
 
20. Safe-to-Speak is a platform for st udents to report to the HBHS 
administration any concerns or inappropriat e conduct relating to other students or 
staff. Students may remain anonymous wh en making a Safe-to-Speak report. Email 
notifications are sent to administrators and the School Psychologist Ms. Pendergast 
when a Safe-to-Speak report is filed. 
21. On December 22, 2022, B.S, who wa s a 12th grade student, submitted a 
report to the Safe-to-Speak platform rega rding inappropriate behavior by respondent. 
(Exh. 3, p. A111.) The report states, in pertinent part: 
[Respondent] has consistently has [ sic] harassed and has 
been saying that if we want a better grade in his class we 
have to spend "one on one time with him", and has also  
said to me and my friends that  he has "special liking for us", 
and has made inappropriate comments on our appearances 
and what we are wearing. It is  getting to a point where I am 7  uncomfortable to even come to this class. I am really glad 
that I only have to be in this class for a semester .......... I would 
appreciate it if there would actually be some action taken 
towards this situation because I am worried for how far he 
will take it and if he will take action to his comments. I am 
worried for the saftey [ sic] of not only me but the many 
other students he have [ sic] to go through the same 
experiences. I would appreciate  if he will not [know] that 
this safe to speak has come from me. 
(Exh. 3, p. A111.) 
 
22. At hearing, B.S. explained she fille d out and submitted the Safe-to-Speak 
report form on her laptop computer duri ng respondent’s class on December 22, 2022. 
B.S. testified that on December 22, 2022, du ring class, respondent had repeatedly said 
to her “You’re crazy.” When B.S. responded  “no,” respondent continued saying she was 
crazy. Respondent’s comments made B.S. f eel uncomfortable. B.S. felt respondent’s 
comments came off as “very se xual,” like he was asking if  she was crazy in a sexual 
way. 
23. On February 14, 2023, Ms. Pendergast se nt an email to Assistant Principal 
Dave Yonts, asking if he had contacted respondent regarding B.S.’s Safe-to-Speak 
report. (Exh. 27.) Mr. Yonts’ re ply email states: “I have g one up there a few times and 
he hasn’t been in his room or had students  in the room. I’ll talk to him soon.” On 
February 15, 2023, Ms. Penderga st sent an email to Mr. Y onts, stating in part: “OK 
thanks, I only ask because a staff member spoke to me who was concerned about the 
same things from [respondent].” ( Ibid.) 8  24. On March 15, 2023, Ms. Pendergast forwarded B.S.’s Safe-to-Speak 
report to HBHS Principal Danny Morris. (Exh. 3, p. A106.) 
25. In March 2023, Ms. Pendergast met wi th B.S. regarding her Safe-to-Speak 
report about respondent’s inappropriate conduc t. During that meeting, B.S. mentioned 
J.S., another female student in the class. Su bsequently, Ms. Penderga st spoke with J.S. 
about her concerns of inapprop riate conduct by respondent. 
26. Additionally, in March 2023, Ms. Pender gast spoke with another student, 
K.A., about inappropriate conduct by resp ondent that occurred in the previous 2021-
2022 school year. As discussed more fully bel ow, respondent was the proctor for the 
California Science Test (CAST) given to 11t h grade students. K.A.  took the CAST in 
respondent’s classroom in th e 2021-2022 school year. K.A. reported that when she 
asked respondent for another laptop charge r during the CAST, respondent stared at 
her chest almost the entire time. 
27. Ms. Pendergast obtained written stat ements from B.S., J.S., and K.A., 
regarding respondent’s inappropriate c onduct. (Exh. 3, pp. A107-A108 (J.S.’s 
statement) and p. 103 (K.A.’s statemen t); and Exh. 12 (B.S.’s statement).) Ms. 
Pendergast reviewed each student’s written statement to verify they were complete 
and consistent with their ve rbal statements to her. 
28. After obtaining the written student statements, Ms. Pendergast called 
Child Protective Services, which then re ferred her to the Huntington Beach Police 
Department. The police came to Ms. Penderga st’s office and separately interviewed 
B.S., J.S., and K.A. Ms. Pendergast wa s present during the police interviews. 
29. On March 16, 2023, Ms. Pendergast se nt an email to Principal Morris 
regarding J.S.’s interview wi th the police. The email noted J.S. was the third student 9  interviewed by the police and was in the same  class as B.S. The email states in part: 
“During the interview[, J.S.] k ept saying he was ‘creepy’ and the police asked her what 
that meant. She shared a few things, one of which was invasion of personal space. 
Then she said I have a picture I took. Both  B.S. and J.S. said [respondent] would 
frequently come up behind th eir desks and lean over with  his face right near their 
faces. ....... This particular day J.S. was on he r phone when [respondent] was close to her 
and so she snapped a pic. She said [respondent] said ‘did you just take a picture’ and 
she said ‘yep.’” (Exh. 5.) 
30. Daniel Bryan is the Assistant Superi ntendent of Human Resources for the 
District. On March 14, 2023, Mr . Bryan received information from Principal Morris that 
respondent engaged in inappropriat e conduct with female students. 
31. On March 15, 2023, Principal Morris sent  an email to Mr. Bryan regarding 
B.S.’s Safe-to-Speak report. (Exh. 6.) Prin cipal Morris had been informed about the 
Safe-to-Speak report by Sc hool Psychologist Michelle Pendergast. Respondent was 
placed on administrative leave on March 15 , 2023, while the District investigated the 
allegations against him. 
32. Mr. Bryan and an administrator from another high school in the District, 
Stacy Robison, began interviewing studen ts around March 15, 202 3. Ms. Robison has 
been employed by the District  since 2016 and is currently the Principal at Valley Vista 
High School. Ms. Robison was also prev iously involved with the Academy for 
Performing Arts magnet program (APA program) on the HBHS campus. The APA 
program has about 700 students that come from different schools in the District. Ms. 
Robison recognized some of the female stud ents interviewed as participants in the 
APA program. Ms. Robison neve r met respondent but may ha ve seen him in meetings. 10  33. The District interviewed approx imately 30 to 40 students and 
approximately 8 to 10 adults. The District st arted with interviewing  students who wrote 
incident reports and statements. After thos e students, the next students interviewed 
were selected from the rost ers of respondent’s classes. 
34. Ms. Robison’s impression from intervie wing the male students was that 
respondent generally paid more attention to female students than male students in his 
classes. Some male students indicated female students di d not feel safe or 
comfortable in respondent’s  classroom. Ms. Robison’s impression from interviewing 
the female students was that there was a “d efinite overall concern” they did not feel 
safe in respondent’s classroom, respondent had a “creepy vibe,” an d female students 
were warned that once they were in respond ent’s class, they should be covered up and 
not wear provocative clothing. 
35. The District’s investigation was comp leted in summer 2023. Based on the 
investigation, the District concluded resp ondent engaged in conduct that created an 
unsafe atmosphere for students due to the se xual and harassing nature of his conduct, 
which rendered him unfit as a classroom teacher. 
36. In July 2023, respondent was intervie wed by the District’s counsel. He 
denied engaging in the conduct alleged by  the female students. In February 2024, 
respondent was offered a Skelly meeting but declined to participate. (Exh. 1, p. A1.) 
2021-2022 School Year 
TESTIMONY OF STUDENT A.J. 
37. A.J. was a 12th grade student in respondent’s Government class in the 
2022 spring semester. On March 11, 2022, during  a break in the school day, A.J. went 11  to respondent’s classroom to speak with re spondent because the grades for some of 
her assignments were entered incorrectly in  the gradebook. A.J. spoke with respondent 
as he was seated at his desk in the classroom . As A.J. spoke, resp ondent stared at her 
body, particularly her chest area. A.J. fe lt respondent was not listening because he 
made no eye contact with her and asked he r to repeat what she said two or three 
times. Respondent’s staring at her body and chest area made A.J. feel uncomfortable. 
38. As a result of the interaction with re spondent, A.J. was in shock. She went 
to the library and told the lib rary assistant, David, what had happened. David provided 
A.J. with a blank Student Statement form . A.J. completed and signed the Student 
Statement form on March 15, 2022. She described the inci dent with respondent, in 
part, as follows: 
Throughout our discussion, whic h lasted approximately five 
minutes, [respondent] was starin g at my body, particularly 
my chest area. I attempted to hol d eye contact to little avail. 
He continuously asked me to  repeat myself, not paying 
attention to my inquiries. In an attempt to escape the 
situation, I made several e fforts to end the conversation 
after he fixed my grade on Canvas .......... He continued the 
conversation, talking over me and still staring at my body, 
and made me feel utterly trapped and uncomfortable. I 
wrapped up the interaction with  short, direct responses, 
wanting to exit his classroom  as soon as possible. . . . 
[Respondent] made little to no eye contact with me and 
spent more time staring at my chest than he did my face. As 12  a student, I feel mortified and objectified by this behavior 
exhibited by my teacher. 
(Exh. 3, pp. A104 and A112.) 
 
39. A.J. transferred out of respondent’s Government class approximately one 
week after the March 11, 2022 incident. On March 18, 2022, Ms. Pendergast sent an 
email to A.J.’s guidance counselor indica ting Principal Morris had approved A.J.’s 
transfer from the class. The em ail explained that A.J. “filled out an incident report last 
week and has been missing he r Gov[ernment] class with [r espondent] ever since due 
to the fact that she doesn’t feel comforta ble. She asked if she can be in another 
teacher’s class and I ran it by [Principal Morri s] this morning and he said yes.” (Exh. 14.) 
TESTIMONY OF STUDENT K.A. 
 
40. K.A. was an 11th grade student in the 2021-2022 school year. She 
graduated from HBHS at the en d of the 2022-2023 school year. 
41. K.A. did not have respondent as a teacher while a student at HBHS. 
However, she knows respondent because she took the CAST in respondent’s classroom 
in March 2022, when she was a junior. Resp ondent was the proctor and, according to 
K.A., the only teacher present during the testing. There were 25 to 30 students, 
including K.A., who took the CAST in respondent’s classroom. 
42. While taking the CAST in March 2 022, the battery for K.A.’s laptop 
computer began losing power. K.A. approa ched respondent and asked him for another 
laptop charger. K.A. testified respondent star ed at her chest during this interaction, 
which lasted approximately fi ve minutes. K.A. told anothe r student about the incident 
at the time it happened. Howe ver, K.A. did not make a report or complaint to any 13  school administrator or staff at  that time. K.A. testified sh e blocked the incident from 
her mind. 
43. C.C. was the student K.A. told about the incident with respondent. C.C. 
was also a junior in the 2021-2022 school year. C.C. did not have respondent as a 
teacher until the following school year, when he was a senior. C.C.  testified that, in 
March 2022, K.A. told him about respondent staring at her chest during the CAST and 
how it made her feel uncomfortable. C.C. te stified he was not surprised to hear about 
K.A.’s incident with respond ent, because there were lots  of rumors about respondent 
at the time. 
44. One year later, in Ma rch 2023, K.A. was contacted by Ms. Pendergast 
regarding the incident with respondent du ring the CAST. K.A. told Ms. Pendergast 
about the incident and agreed to make a written statement because other students 
were coming forward to report similar incide nts involving respondent. At hearing, K.A. 
explained that knowing others faced similar situations as hers, she wanted to provide 
her information. Although she did not make a report to school officials in March 2022, 
K.A. felt her incident with respondent “was a big deal when it was happening.” 
 
45. On March 13, 2023, K.A. completed an d signed a Studen t Statement form 
in which she described the incident with re spondent as follows: “I went to ask for a 
charger because I was in his cl ass for the CAST testing and he was looking at my chest 
almost the entire time.” (Exh. 3, p. A103.) 
46. After completing her written stat ement, K.A. was called to Ms. 
Pendergast’s office a second time and was interviewed by po lice officers. K.A. told the 
police officers about her incident and re iterated the information in her written 14  statement. K.A. reported  that respondent’s conduc t made her feel “very 
uncomfortable.” 
2022-2023 School Year 
TESTIMONY OF STUDENT B.S. 
47. B.S. was a 12th grade student in the 2022-2023 school year. She 
graduated from HBHS at the end of that  school year. B.S. was a student in 
respondent’s fifth peri od Economics class. 
48. B.S. did not feel comfortable going to respondent’s class because 
respondent had a “weird demeanor” towards fe male students and he seemed to target 
them. Respondent stared at female students’ bodies. B.S. testified respondent stared at 
her body, specifically her chest. She descri bed respondent’s conduct as a “direct stare.” 
B.S. felt uncomfortable when respondent st ared at her chest. B.S. was aware her 
classmates J.S. and A.H. were made to f eel uncomfortable by re spondent’s conduct. 
B.S. felt respondent favored female students  over male students in class. Respondent 
was “very blunt and straight to the point” wi th male students, but “had many follow up 
questions” with female students. 
49. B.S. testified that respondent comme nted on students’ appearances and 
commented on how long her legs  were. He told B.S., “Wow your legs are so long.” 
(Exh. 12.) Respondent also made comments about the cl othing worn by female 
students in the class. B.S. recalls re spondent making a comment about a female 
student who wore her volleyball shorts to cl ass. B.S. does not recall the exact comment 
but remembers it seemed inappropriate. 15  50. B.S. testified respondent would stan d uncomfortably close to students. 
On one occasion, respondent was standing so  close to her that she could feel his  
breath behind her ear. When respondent stood too close, B.S. felt scared and was in a 
fight-or-flight mindset. In her written stat ement, B.S. wrote: “[ Respondent] would get 
uncomfortabl[y] close to mine and [another st udent’s] desk, almost like he didn’t know 
what personal space was.” (Exh. 12.) B.S. test ified that, on another occasion, J.S. took a 
“selfie” picture with her cell phone to s how how close responden t was standing behind 
her as she sat at her desk. (Exh. 10.) B.S. was present wh en J.S. took the picture. 
51. B.S. testified respondent made inap propriate comments to her and her 
classmates J.S. and A.H. Respondent’s comments made B.S. feel uncomfortable. 
Specifically, respondent told B.S., J.S., and A. H., that he had a “special liking” for them. 
In her written statement, B.S. wrote: “During th e first semester in [respondent’s] class, I 
was consistently uncomfortable with the word s that would come out  of [respondent’s] 
mouth. He would say things like ‘I have  a special liking for you.’” (Exh. 12.) 
52. B.S. testified respondent told students that if they wanted  a better grade, 
they must spend more time with him, wh ich B.S. also noted in her Safe-to-Speak 
report. (Exh. 1, p. A29.) B.S. testified sh e overheard respondent tell J.S. that if she 
wanted a better grade, she must spend more one-on-one time with him. This 
testimony is supplemented by J.S.’s wr itten statement that  respondent “often 
threaten[ed] my grade and givi ng me zeros or bad grades if I didn’t spend ‘extra time 
with him outside of class.’” (Exh. 3, p. A107.) 
53. B.S. testified respondent made J.S. si t on a stool next to his desk during 
class. Respondent told J.S. she had to sit on the stool if she wa nted her assignments 
graded. When J.S. sat on the stool, respond ent asked her questions about her personal 
life and if she had a boyfriend. B.S.’s te stimony is supplemente d by J.S.’s written 16  statement in which she wrote, in part: “Every  week I had to sit there [i.e., on the stool] 
for up to a[n] hour sometimes while he talk ed about me joining the family, meeting his 
son, his own life problems, family issues, and other things in his personal life.” (Exh. 3, 
pp. A107-A108.) 
54. B.S. took a picture of J.S. sitting on the stool. (Exh. 11.) B.S. took the 
picture because she thought it was strange th at respondent made J.S. sit on the stool 
when J.S. was visibly uncomfortable. J.S. told B.S. she felt uncomfortable when 
respondent made her sit on the stool. In  her written statem ent, B.S. wrote: 
“[Respondent] would make [J.S.] sit at a st ool behind his desk for no reason and talk to 
her about very random topic[s] and said ‘I know you don’t like me but I have a special 
liking for you.’” (Exh. 12.) 
55. B.S. testified she was made to fe el uncomfortable when respondent 
played the movie “Freakonomics”  in class. A segment of the movie discussed how the 
first name given to a person at birth ma y impact the person’s economic and social 
status when they become an adult. One of  the names featured was B.S.’s first name, 
which the movie associated with a woman who was a stripper and in a lower economic 
status. One scene in the movie showed fem ale strippers dancing on a stage wearing 
only bikini bottoms, with a gr aphic of their first name covering their breasts. One 
stripper’s breasts were covered by a graphic of  B.S.’s first name. B.S. felt the movie was 
directed towards her. B.S. was uncomfortable while the mo vie played in class because 
other students were staring at he r and respondent was chuckling. 
56. B.S. submitted the Safe-to-Speak re port while in respondent’s class on 
December 22, 2022, after respond ent repeatedly told her, “Y ou’re crazy.” Although B.S. 
replied, “No,” respondent kept  stating she was crazy. B.S. felt respondent’s comment 
came off as “very sexual” and made B.S. feel  uncomfortable. At hearing, B.S. explained 17  that she came forward with a Safe-to-Spea k report because she had heard over the 
years that respondent was a creepy teacher,  which she experience d herself and did not 
want other students to experience. B.S. fe lt strongly that resp ondent’s staring at 
female students and making inapprop riate comments needed to be reported. 
TESTIMONY OF STUDENT G.C. 
 
57. G.C. was a 12th grade student in the 2022-2023 school year and 
graduated from HBHS at the end of that  school year. G.C. was a student in 
respondent’s fifth period Economic s class. B.S. and J.S. were also students in the class. 
In respondent’s classroom, G.C.’s desk was in the front row and faced respondent’s 
desk. As such, G.C. overhear d respondent’s conversations wi th students at his desk. 
58. G.C. testified respondent singled out J.S. during class. Respondent made 
J.S. sit on the stool next to his desk on more than three occa sions. G.C. overheard 
respondent’s conversations with  J.S. at his desk. Responde nt told J.S. she was behind 
in class and needed to work on some things. G.C. heard respondent tell J.S. that if she 
wanted a good grade, she would need to spend more one-on-one time with him. 
Respondent told J.S. she needed “special attention” because of her grades. G.C. 
testified she did not see J.S. doing class work when respondent made her sit on the 
stool. Respondent would not allow J.S. to retu rn to her desk when she asked to do so. 
59. G.C. overheard respondent have per sonal conversations with J.S. 
unrelated to Economics. G.C. felt respondent, when speaking with J.S., sounded like he 
was speaking with a friend at a bar, and not like he was a teache r speaking with his 
student. G.C. testified respond ent asked J.S. if she had a boyfriend, asked her about a 
school dance, and asked if anyone asked her to go to the dance with them. He also 
told J.S. she must have a lot of boys interested in her. 18  60. Both B.S. and G.C. testif ied that respondent’s conver sations with J.S. when 
she sat on the stool were about personal matter s, such as respondent asking J.S. if she 
had a boyfriend or if she was going to a school dance. Their testimonies are 
supplemented by J.S.’s written statement in which she wrote, in part: “One time at his 
desk he asked me if I was going to the school  dance and I said yes, he asked to see my 
dress and asked if I was going with a boy. I said no I was just go ing with my friends 
and he said ‘Why you’re a pretty girl’; ‘I bet your [ sic] popular’; ‘very popular with the 
boys’; ‘do you like boys’; ‘I know a lot of boys must like you’; ‘I know your [ sic] popular 
with the boys so you must be popular around school’; ‘the girls must hate you’; ‘I 
wouldn’t let you go alone.’” (Exh. 3, p. A108.) 
61. G.C. testified she felt uncomfortabl e when respondent began calling J.S. 
up to his desk more frequently. G.C. felt  “something was not right” and she had to 
listen to respondent’s conversations with J.S.  at his desk “to make sure nothing bad 
was happening.” As a result, G.C. was unabl e to concentrate on he r class work. G.C. 
was worried for J.S. because J.S. appeared uncomfortable and did not seem to want to 
talk to respondent at all, even about her gr ades. G.C. could tell J.S. was uncomfortable 
from her body language and the way she re sponded to respondent’ s conversation, if 
she responded at all. 
62. Additionally, G.C. felt uncomfortable  being in respondent’s class because 
he would comment on her appearance, s pecifically her make-up and clothes. 
Respondent would lean into G.C.’s face to l ook at her make-up. This made G.C. feel 
uncomfortable and, as a result, she wore less  make-up and wore a coat during class so 
respondent would not comment on her appe arance. G.C. testif ied respondent would 
lean in “very close” to her face, which made her fearful. 19  63. G.C. did not like being in respondent’ s class. She felt “extreme dread” 
about her safety and J.S.’s safety. She worri ed about respondent standing physically 
too close to her. G.C. did not share her concerns about respondent with anyone on 
campus. She did not speak with J.S. about her concerns. G.C. was “very shy” and, 
although they were in the same class, she an d J.S. were not friend s and did not run in 
the same circle of friends. G.C. testified the only person she told about her concerns 
about respondent was her mother. G.C. told  her mother respondent would lean in 
close to her face and comment on her make-up.  G.C. also told her mother she did not 
want to go to respond ent’s class anymore. 
64. G.C. did not file a complaint agai nst respondent. G.C. explained she 
“wanted to believe maybe respondent was just  being friendly” or she was making the 
situation seem like “a bigger problem than it  was.” G.C. was scared to come forward 
because it might affect her grades. She was a senior and just wanted to graduate. She 
thought of her experience in respondent’s class as “one weird experience” that she 
could put behind her and forget about. At hear ing, G.C. testified, "Now I wish I would 
have said something sooner. But I was scared.” 
65. G.C. testified respondent’s conduct ma de her reluctant to participate in 
class. She felt nervous any time respondent stopped to speak with J.S., whose desk was 
near G.C.’s desk. G.C. did not want to ask respondent any questions during class 
because she was afraid of  being treated like J.S. 
TESTIMONY OF STUDENT E.H. 
 
66. E.H. is a former student of HBHS . She was a senior  in the 2022-2023 
school year and graduated at the end of that  school year. E.H. was in respondent’s fifth 
period Economics class in th e 2023 spring semester. 20  67. E.H. testified she heard rumors about  respondent, but the rumors did not 
necessarily make her feel uncomfortable about responden t. However, there was one 
incident that raised a concern for E.H. On e day in respondent’s classroom, E.H. and 
another female student were having a conv ersation. When respondent said he and the 
female student lived in the same neighborh ood, E.H. went back to her desk but she 
could still hear the conversation between the female student and respondent. The 
female student’s house was br ought up on Zillow. E.H. do esn’t remember who pulled 
up the female student’s house on Zillow. 
68. The layout of the female stud ent’s house was shown on Zillow. 
Respondent asked where the female student’s bedroom was located in the house in 
relation to her parents’ bedr oom, which made E.H. feel unc omfortable. E.H. thought it 
was weird for respondent to ask about th e layout of the female student’s house. 
Respondent pointed to a bedroom in the house and said he wanted to go in there. 
E.H. could not recall the exac t words, but respondent wanted  to see the inside of the 
female student’s house and a specific bedroom . E.H. sat at her desk and thought how 
weird the conversation was. 
TESTIMONY OF PRINCIPAL MORRIS  
 
69. Principal Morris has been a principal in  the District for 15 years. He has 
been the Principal at HBHS for nine years.  Respondent has been a teacher at HBHS 
during that time. 
70. Principal Morris testified, during hi s tenure as princi pal, people would 
inform him of things they were hearing ab out respondent, primaril y his inappropriately 
looking at people, looking at women’s ches t areas, and being creepy. Principal Morris 
testified he did not necessarily have conc erns about respondent’s behavior, but the 21  comments made by others about  respondent were “in the ba ck of my mind to think 
about.” He did not fully addr ess the comments with respondent other than to tell him 
to be careful. 
71. Principal Morris noted that staff intera ctions with students are discussed 
as part of professional development. He testified that recommendations for staff 
interactions with students included keep ing their classroom doors open and having 
someone else present in the room, such as another adult or other students. Principal 
Morris advises his staff to “stay safe and prot ect themselves.” With regard to teacher 
interactions with students, Principal Morr is has advised respondent, “We are guilty 
until proven innocent.” 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL FRITCHOFF  
 
72. Michael Fritchoff has been employed by the District as a teacher since 
2007. He has taught at HBHS for 18 years and currently teaches World History and 
Social Psychology. Mr. Fritchoff knows resp ondent, who was already employed by the 
District at the time Mr. Fritchoff was hired. 
73. Mr. Fritchoff taught one of the Gove rnment classes for seniors in the 
2022 spring semester. A.J. was a studen t who transferred from respondent’s 
Government class to his class in approxim ately March 2022. Mr. Fritchoff was told by 
the librarian, David, of an incident where respondent stared at A.J.’s chest area. Mr. 
Fritchoff believes A.J. transferred to his class because of that incident. 
74. Mr. Fritchoff testified about an inci dent in his classroom in the 2023 
spring semester involving another student,  J.S. Mr. Fritchoff had a student-teacher 
working in his classroom. During a group activity, the student-teacher went from 
group to group. Mr. Fritchoff saw J.S. flinch when the st udent-teacher got physically 22  close to her and heard J.S. say that she had PTSD from respondent. Mr. Fritchoff 
testified J.S. flinched by rocking to the left  and leaning away from the student-teacher. 
Respondent’s Testim ony and Contentions 
 
75. Respondent currently resides approx imately one mile from the HBHS 
campus. His three children attended HBHS when they were youn ger. When respondent 
began teaching at HBHS, he was a teacher and a coach. His teaching goals were to 
help students grow academically, prepare  for college, learn re sponsibility and life 
lessons, and build character. Respondent felt  his students were receptive to him and 
enjoyed his classes. The vibe of the classroom  indicated the students were excited to 
come to his class. 
ALLEGATIONS REGARDING STUDENT A.J. 
 
76. At hearing, respondent testified he did not remember much about 
student A.J., who was in his Government  class in the 2022 spring semester. 
Respondent recalled she had attendance issu es and was no longer in the class after 
the first six weeks of the semester. 
77. At hearing, respondent denied that he stared at A.J.’s body and chest 
area as she alleged. Respondent claimed, “I didn’t do that. I’m not that type of person.” 
Respondent testified he does not remember any such interaction but believes A.J. may 
have “misinterpreted” his l ooking up from his desk, wher e he was seated and working 
when she approached him to talk about her grade. Respond ent testified he does not 
believe he stares at students. Respondent test ified if he knew he made a student feel 
uncomfortable, he would apologize to the student and tell them that was not his 
intention. Respondent claimed he did not k now the reason A.J. tr ansferred from his 
class at the time of the transfer. He cl aimed, “I was never told the reason.” 23  ALLEGATIONS REGARDING STUDENT K.A. 
 
78. At hearing, respondent denied having  any conversation with K.A. during 
the CAST. Respondent explained teachers do  not have laptop chargers available 
during the CAST, and students are told to prepare for the CAST by making sure their 
laptop computers are fully charged. Re spondent denied he was the only teacher 
present during the CAST as K.A. claimed.  Respondent testified there was a second 
teacher present, a math te acher whose name respondent could not recall; however, 
respondent presented no evidence to corroborate this testimony. 
79. Respondent testified he has no idea why K.A. would feel he was staring at 
her chest. Respondent testified,  if a concern was brought to his attention that he made 
a student feel uncomfortable, he would fe el terrible and make  sure the student 
understood it was not his intention to  make them feel uncomfortable. 
GUIDANCE FOR 2022-2023  SCHOOL YEAR 
 
80. Respondent testified the 2022-2023 school  year was the first school year 
after the COVID-19 pandemic that students  were back at school on a full schedule. 
Respondent claimed “my normal approach” to  teaching was what was being pushed 
by administrators. On staff development da ys, there was a push for “social emotional 
learning concepts.” Teachers were encour aged to build connections with students, 
such as by standing at the classroom door  and greeting students. Respondent claimed 
there was no specific guidance for interacting with female students or students of the 
opposite sex. The focus was on getting to know the students and making connections 
with them, which respondent claimed he was already doing as a coach. 24  ALLEGATIONS REGARDING STUDENT J.S. 
 
81. Respondent testified he had a stool in his classroom next to his desk that 
he used to rest his knee on during lectures. He claime d students sometimes borrowed 
the stool for group work during class. Re spondent denied making any student sit on 
the stool to get a result from him, su ch as grading an assignment. Respondent 
testified he has no idea why J.S. would allege he had a “special stool” for her. 
Respondent claimed the only ti me he remembers J.S. usin g the stool was when she 
informed him she would be on vacation fo r three weeks near the end of the fall 
semester. On rebuttal, the District presented evidence of J.S.’s attendance record to 
refute respondent’s claim that J.S. was abse nt from school for three weeks. (Exh. 28.) 
The Commission finds that if th e winter break period is count ed, then J.S.’s attendance 
record arguably shows she was absent fo r three weeks from December 24, 2022, 
through January 13, 2023. Thus, respondent’s claim of this one occasion J.S. used the 
stool is plausible. 
82. Respondent testified he never noticed  J.S. feeling uncomfortable around 
him or avoiding him. He is “perplexed” and “feels horrible” that J. S. claimed he stared 
at her and took a “special interest” in he r. Respondent noted his classroom desk was 
nowhere close in proximity to J.S.’s desk in the classroom. 
83. Respondent is aware of the “selfie” picture J.S. took of him standing 
behind her during class. (Exh . 10.) Respondent claimed studen ts were working in small 
groups as he walked around the classroom. Respondent “assumes” one of the groups 
flagged him down, and J.S. took the pict ure as he walked over to the group. 
Respondent testified, “I did not know the picture was taken.” Respondent claimed the 
first time he saw the picture was in July 2023, during his intervie w with the District. 
However, Ms. Pendergast, in her email to Principal Morris dated March 16, 2023, noted 25  J.S. indicated in her police interview that  respondent knew she had taken a picture of 
him. (See Exh. 5.) 
84. At hearing, respondent described J. S. as a teenager with a quirky 
personality who did things not within the nor m. Respondent testif ied J.S. was “brand 
new” to HBHS and had transferred to HBHS for her senior year from Mater Dei High 
School. That testimony, however , was refuted by evidence of  J.S.’s attendance record, 
indicating she attended HBHS for all four years of high school. (Exh. 28.) 
85. B.S. and J.S. were friends and resp ondent had to remind them not to 
socialize during class. Resp ondent did not remember havi ng any unusual interactions 
with B.S. and claimed he had only limited interactions with her. 
86. During the first three days of the semester, while taking attendance, 
respondent commented to J.S. that she and his daughter had the same first name and 
spelled it the same way. Respondent clai med it was not uncommon for him to ask 
students about their names at  the start of a semester. Re spondent testified he did not 
notice J.S. respond to his comment, so  he moved on to the next student. 
DISCUSSIONS WITH STUDENTS UNRELATED TO CLASS SUBJECT  
 
87. Respondent testified he discussed extr a-curricular activities and events 
with his students occasionally, during the seven-minute passing period between 
classes. For example, he asked athletes about their last game. Respondent described 
these interactions with students as “norma l interactions to build rapport.” Respondent 
testified he did not ask studen ts who they were dating. Howe ver, if he was putting up 
a flyer on the Smart Board for a school event,  such as a school da nce, and he knew a 
student was going to the danc e, he would ask the student about who they were going 
with and whether they were going with friends, just sm all talk. Respondent claimed, if 26  knew a student did not want the conversa tion, he would immediately halt it and 
apologize. 
88. Respondent denied he di scussed his family and personal life with his 
students. Respondent claimed the only time his family came up in class was during an 
activity where he paired off students to interview each other and then have the 
students tell the class about themselves. At the end of the activity, respondent told the 
class about his background, wife, and family. 
89. At hearing, respondent testified about a conver sation he had with a 
female student about how they both lived in the same neighbor hood. (This was the 
conversation overheard by student E.H.) Re spondent claimed the female student took 
out her laptop computer an d pulled up her house on Goog le maps. Respondent told 
the student he recognized the area and th en asked her which mo del or style of home 
she lived in. Respondent explained he asked that question because he was interested 
in architecture and thought he might want  to remodel his home, and it would be 
interesting to see the layout of other homes  in the area. Respondent asked the student 
about the different rooms in her house but he never went to the student’s house. 
Respondent testified the female student neve r appeared to be uncomfortable during 
their conversation. Respondent claimed the first time he heard about the student 
feeling uncomfortable was during his inte rview with the District in July 2023. 
COMMENTING ON FEMALE STUDENTS ’ BODIES AND APPEARANCES  
 
90. Respondent testified he would neve r comment on the bodies of female 
students. He recounted one incident wher e he commented that a student had long 
legs. The student sat behind J.S. near the trash can by the classroom door. Respondent 
claimed when he went to dispose of trash,  he propped open the classroom door, the 27  student behind J.S. stood up, respondent noti ced she was very tall and asked her if she 
played sports, the class bell rang, and the students dispersed. 
91. Respondent testified he would comme nt “very rarely” about students’ 
clothing. Respondent recalled te lling one student who had original Air Jordans that he 
was “cool looking.” He testif ied he would also comment if  a student wore a Raiders 
shirt. 
92. Respondent testified about his interact ions with student G.C., who was in 
his Economics class in the fall 2022 semest er. Respondent claimed G.C. was moved to 
his class halfway through the semester beca use she was struggling in another class. 
Respondent thought he would be  able to help her. Respond ent testified G.C. sat in 
seat 13, in the front row facing respondent’ s desk, so her wheelc hair could be placed 
next to her desk. (See Exh. HH.) Respondent sometimes had “small talk” with G.C. He 
never noticed G.C. appearing to be  uncomfortable in his classroom. 
93. Respondent testified G.C. was a “p lain Jane” and dressed simply. 
Respondent recalled one occasion when he made a comment to G.C. that she had 
make-up on and looked nice. He testified G.C. typically did not wear make up. 
Respondent claimed if he had known his co mment made G.C. feel uncomfortable, he 
would have apologized and let her know it  was not his intenti on to make her feel 
uncomfortable. Respondent testified, “I ha ve no problem admitting when I’m wrong.” 
FREAKONOMICS MOVIE 
 
94. Respondent testified he showed one segment of the movie Freakonomics 
on the last day of class of the fall semester. He used th e movie as a time-filler. The 
movie was just playing in the background wh ile he was finalizing grades and students 
were using their phones or ta lking to each other. Responde nt testified he gave a brief 28  introduction before playing the movie. Respondent testified he did not focus on the 
naming segment of the movie, which he  notes is a PG-13 rated documentary. 
95. Respondent testified he has no idea why B.S. would think the movie was 
directed at her. He claimed he was not aware of any conc erns related to showing the 
Freakonomics movie in class until his inte rview with the District in July 2023. 
RESPONDING TO DISTRICT ’S ALLEGATIONS  
 
96. Respondent claimed the first time  he was questioned about the 
allegations made against him was during hi s July 2023 interview with the District. In 
testimony, he seemed to imply that the he aring was his first op portunity to explain 
himself. However, by his own admissions  on cross examination, respondent had 
opportunities to explain himself but he chos e not to do so. In addition to the July 2023 
interview, the District had a meeting with respondent in September 2023 and 
scheduled a Skelly meeting in February 2024. Respond ent chose not to participate or 
provide information at those meetings. Resp ondent’s claim that he did not know how 
to participate in those meetings was not convincing, given that  he was accompanied 
by his legal counsel to the July 20 23 and September 2023 meetings, and was 
represented by legal counsel for the Skelly meeting. 
97. Additionally, respondent was not forthcoming during the July 2023 
meeting with the District. On rebuttal, Assi stant Superintendent Bryan testified the July 
2023 meeting lasted approximately two hours,  during which the District’s counsel 
asked respondent questions regarding the a llegations made against him. Mr. Bryan 
was present at the meeting. He recalled that  when respondent was asked about J.S., he 
initially claimed he had no recollection of he r. The District’s c ounsel asked questions 
that gave respondent context clues about J.S. Mr. Bryan testified respondent did not 29  remember J.S. until 45 minutes into the meet ing, after being asked multiple questions 
about J.S. Mr. Bryan’s impr ession is respondent remembered more specific details 
about J.S. in this hearing than he did at  the July 2023 meeting. At this hearing, 
respondent claimed J.S.’s name did not init ially spark his memory at the July 2023 
meeting. This claim is not convincing, espe cially since J.S. and respondent’s daughter 
share the same first name and spell it the same way. 
98. Respondent contends the allegations made against him are not in line 
with his character and do not reflect who he is as a teacher, father, and devout 
Catholic. He testified he di d not engage in the alleged conduct, he never had any ill 
intent towards anyone, and he was never given a chance  to apologize. Respondent 
testified he is now much more aware and cautious when interacting with female 
students. He realizes his intentions can be misinterpreted. Respondent acknowledged, 
as a teacher, he is responsible for avoidi ng conversations with students that could 
make them feel uncomfortable. Respondent ju st wants his life to go back to normal. 
He wants to return to teaching  students and coaching sports. 
Respondent’s Character Witnesses 
STUDENTS K.B. AND B.R. 
99. K.B. and B.R. were 12th grade stud ents in the 2022-2023 school year and 
were in respondent’s fifth period Economics class in the 2022 fall semester. B.S., G.C., 
and J.S. were also in this class. K.B. testified she enjoyed having respondent as a 
teacher and learned a lot in his class. Simila rly, B.R. testified he enjoyed respondent’s 
class and felt respondent wa s the most engaging teache r out of all his classes. 
100. K.B. did not notice respondent favori ng any students. She felt respondent 
treated all students with the same level of respect. She neve r felt uncomfortable 30  around respondent. K.B. only vaguely remember s B.S. being in the class. She did not 
personally know B.S. but reca lled they attended the same  middle school. K.B. did not 
know if B.S. had any concerns about resp ondent because she an d B.S. never had any 
direct conversations. 
101. K.B. did not know J.S. personally but knew her behavior in class. 
According to K.B., J.S. was constantly late to class, she was disrespectful to respondent 
and other students, and she was defensive wh en asked questions du ring class. K.B. 
also never saw J.S. sit on a stool  during class. On cross-exam ination, K.B. explained that 
J.S. got defensive and had a disrespectful tone when re spondent called on her during 
class. K.B. assumed J.S.’s defensiveness wa s because she did not k now the answer. J.S. 
was the only student K.B. remembered being disrespectful. K.B. felt respondent “was 
just trying to be a good teacher” and made every effort to get J.S. to engage in the 
classwork. K.B. never heard re spondent tell J.S. to see him af ter class to work with him 
one-on-one. K.B. did not remember wa tching the Freakonom ics movie during 
respondent’s class. 
102. B.R. recalled that B.S. was in resp ondent’s fifth period economics class 
but he barely knew her and spoke to her only a few times. B.R.  did not notice B.S. 
appearing uncomfortable in respondent’s cla ss. B.R. heard that some students felt 
uncomfortable being in respondent’s class, but he personally neve r saw it. B.R. heard 
“chatter” midway through the semester that  respondent acted inappropriately. After 
hearing that, B.R. started to take notice of students appear ing to be uncomfortable in 
respondent’s class. However, B.R. “never actually saw behavior by respondent that 
seemed out of place.” 
103. B.R. did not feel respondent, as a te acher, was too engaged or crossed a 
line with students. He felt re spondent was just being friend ly with students to show 31  that he cared, which B.R. a ppreciated. B.R.’s ex perience with other teachers was that 
they did not care, while respondent “seemed lik e he cared about us.” B.R. recalled J.S. 
was a student in the class and there was a ru mor she was made to sit on a stool during 
class, but B.R. does not recall that happeni ng. B.R. did not reme mber the Freakonomics 
movie being shown during class. 
STUDENTS C.K., V.S., AND R.A. 
 
104. C.K. and V.S. were 12th grade st udents in the 2022-2023 school year. 
They were in respondent’s fourth period Economics class in the 2022 fall semester. 
They were not in the fifth pe riod Economics class with B.S., G.C., and J.S. Thus, C.K. and 
V.S.’s respective testimonies are not prob ative on the issue of respondent’s conduct 
involving B.S., G.C., or J.S. duri ng the fifth period Economics class. 
105. C.K. testified she enjoyed respondent’ s class and did not have any issues 
on how respondent treated her in class. Sim ilarly, V.S. testifie d respondent’s Economics 
class was one of her favorite classes an d she did not see any concerning behavior 
during the class. Both C.K. and V.S. testified they never saw respondent engage in any 
inappropriate conduct toward any studen t during class or outside of class. 
106. R.A. graduated from HBHS at the end of the 2021-2022 school year. She 
was in respondent’s classes for Economics an d Government during her senior year. 
R.A. testified respondent was one of her favorite  teachers at HBHS because he cared 
about what he was teaching and about th e well-being of his st udents. Since R.A. 
graduated at the end of th e 2021-2022 school year, R.A.’s testimony has no probative 
value regarding the allegations involving B.S. , G.C., or J.S. that occurred during the 
2022-2023 school year. 32  ANDY VERDONE  
 
107. Andy Verdone has worked for the District  a total of 42 years, all at HBHS. 
Mr. Verdone is currently the head of the Ph ysical Education (P.E .) Department, as well 
as a P.E. teacher and the he ad surfing coach. Mr. Verdone has been in the P.E. 
Department for the past eight years. 
108. Prior to the P.E. Department, Mr . Verdone worked in the Special 
Education Department at HBHS. During that  time, his classroom was next door to 
respondent’s classroom in the “B” Building on campus. Mr. Verdone testified he and 
respondent co-taught subjects in the Spec ial Education Department for at least 10 
years. Mr. Verdone attended  respondent’s Economics and Go vernment classes with his 
special education students who were senior s. Respondent did most of the teaching 
while Mr. Verdone assisted th e special education students. 
109. Mr. Verdone and his wife are good fr iends with respondent and his wife, 
and they socialize together. Mr. Verdone opined respondent is a person of “excellent 
character,” an outstanding teac her who cares about his studen ts, a good father to this 
children, and he attends church. Mr. Ve rdone has never had any concerns about 
respondent’s behavior with female studen ts and has never been made aware of any 
such concerns. 
110. Mr. Verdone is aware that allega tions have been made against 
respondent’s character but is unaware of the basis of the allegations. Mr. Verdone is 
not surprised the allegations against resp ondent were made by female students 
because, in Mr. Verdone’s view, girls some times “make stuff up” and they know the 
“power of accusation. ” Mr. Verdone claimed he has te acher friends who have been 
removed based on such accusations. Mr. Verd one was previously the faculty advisor 33  for the girls’ dance team. He never allowe d the girls to “make stuff up” about him, 
because he would take attendance and th en leave for an hour to get coffee. Mr. 
Verdone made sure to remove himself from the room with the girls’ dance team and 
their female instructor, who was not a District  employee and not a certificated teacher. 
111. Mr. Verdone acknowledged it is inappr opriate for a teacher to stare at 
female students’ bodies and teachers shoul d not do it. But he commented that HBHS 
is like “fashion school” since the school elim inated the dress code , and students wear 
“the latest styles.“ Mr. Verdone also ac knowledged it would be inappropriate for a 
teacher to comment on fe male students’ bodies. 
112. At hearing, Mr. Verdone was often combative with the District’s counsel 
during questioning and responded in a host ile manner by making statements such as 
“I’m not on trial here!” Mr. Verdone also  complained about having to attend the 
hearing after teaching his firs t day of new school year and, at times, did not seem to 
take the hearing seriously. 
ROBERT DECK 
 
113. Robert Deck is currently a teache r at Lexington J unior High School 
(Lexington) in the Anaheim Union High School  District. Mr. Deck teaches P.E. to 7th 
and 8th grade male and female students. This  is Mr. Deck’s 26th year of teaching at 
Lexington. Mr. Deck knows respondent be cause they attended the same master’s 
degree program. 
114. Mr. Deck considers respondent to  be a close personal friend. He 
described respondent as a person who is tr ustworthy, dependable,  and respectable. 
Mr. Deck does not know respondent to have done anything as a teacher that could be 
considered inappropriate. He has never obse rved respondent teaching in a classroom. 34  He has never heard concerns about respond ent’s interactions with female students. 
Mr. Deck is aware there are allegations of  inappropriate conduct against respondent 
but he does not know the specifics. 
115. Mr. Deck believes that allegations of respondent leering at female 
students, invading the personal space of fe male students, and flirting with female 
students, are not in line with respondent’ s character as he knows it. On cross-
examination, Mr. Deck testified he woul d never stare at or comment on female 
students’ bodies, and he would have c oncerns about any teacher who did that. 
JEFFERY RUSSELL  
 
116. Jeffery Russell is currently in his third year as the Athletic Director for the 
Anaheim Union High School District. Prior to  that, Mr. Russell worked at Cypress High 
School for 27 years, where he taught Social Science and Economics, and was also the 
head basketball coach. 
117. Mr. Russell knows respondent throug h coaching. He met respondent in 
the early 2000s. Mr. Russell was coaching in  the youth basketball league in Cypress 
and respondent was the head basketball co ach at HBHS, and their teams would meet 
in scrimmage games. Mr. Russell also  knows respondent through professional 
development activities in Economics. 
118. Mr. Russell has observed respondent  interacting with students at 
sporting events, but not in a classroom. He has never seen respondent behave 
inappropriately with female students. Mr. Russell’s two daug hters graduated from  
HBHS in 2018 and 2021, respectively, and were  in respondent’s Economics class during 
their senior years. He had no concerns ab out his daughters having respondent as a 
teacher. Mr. Russell never heard concerns from anyone, including parents and other 35  teachers at HBHS, about resp ondent’s interactions with female students. Mr. Russell 
would not have allowed his daughters to be in respondent’s class if he had any 
concerns about respondent. 
Discussion 
 
119. The totality of the evidentiary record  established respondent engaged in 
inappropriate and harassing conduct toward female students. During the 2021-2022 
school year, respondent stared and leered at  the bodies and ches t areas of students 
A.J. and K.A. when they a ttempted to speak with him re garding school related matters. 
 
120. During the 2022-2023 school  year, respondent engaged in inappropriate 
and harassing conduct toward female stud ents including the following: staring and 
leering at the bodies and chests of fema le students; commenting on female students’ 
bodies, appearances, and clothi ng; telling female students they needed to spend one-
on-one time with him to get a better grade;  telling female studen ts he had a “special 
liking” for them; expressing inappropriate af fection for female students; discussing his 
personal life with students; asking students about their dating relationships; standing 
or leaning in too close to female students  and invading their personal space; making 
inappropriate comments to students, such as “you’re crazy”; and speaking with a 
female student about the location of bedrooms in her house. 
121. During the 2022-2023 school year, respondent failed to maintain proper 
teacher-student boundaries and failed to  maintain proper classroom decorum. 
Respondent conversed with students regard ing his personal life. He asked students 
about their dating relationships . Respondent spoke to students  as if he were speaking 
with his social peers at a ba r rather than as a teacher speaking with his students. 36  122. During the 2022-2023 school  year, respondent played the Freakonomics 
movie during class, when B. S. was present. One section of the movie showed topless 
female strippers wearing onl y bikini-bottoms dancing on a stage, and associated 
student B.S.’s first name with a stripper in  a lower social and economic status. It is 
understandable B.S. would feel uncomfortable watching that part of the movie in the 
presence of her peers. Respondent reasonabl y should have known that students with 
names featured in a negative light in the movie would likely feel uncomfortable. 
Respondent played the movie as  “time-filler” and did not pr esent the movie as part of 
any classroom instruction or lesson. Respond ent showed a lack of judgment by playing 
the Freakonomics movie to a classroom of  12th graders, who were minors and may 
not have the developmental and maturity levels appropriate for the material. 
123. Respondent’s interactions with stud ent J.S. were established by the 
testimonies of other students in the class who witnessed the intera ctions, specifically 
B.S. and G.C. (J.S.’s written statement was appropriately considered as hearsay to 
explain and supplement the testimonies of B.S. and G.C.) The Commission found G.C.’s 
testimony particularly convincing. During high  school, G.C. was shy an d kept to herself. 
She and J.S. did not share the same circle of friends, and they did not speak with each 
other. G.C. was able to over hear respondent’s conversations with J.S. when J.S. sat on 
the stool. G.C.’s desk was located in the fr ont row of the classr oom, near respondent’s 
desk, which enabled her to overhear respondent’s conv ersations with J.S. The 
Commission also found B.S. testified credibly  regarding respondent’ s interactions with 
J.S. B.S.’s testimony was clear and straightforward. 
 
124. Respondent’s claim that he was mere ly building rapport with students 
did not mitigate or excuse his inapprop riate conduct. Respondent’s inappropriate 
conduct and comments caused female stud ents to feel uncomfortable. As an 37  experienced educational professional with mu ltiple years of experience, training, and 
knowledge about District expec tations, respondent’s lack of insight into his conduct 
and likely negative impact on students are concerning. Respondent claimed his 
“normal approach” to teaching was to c onnect with and build rapport with his 
students. However, he failed to maintain  proper teacher-student boundaries that 
would obviate confusion, misunderstandings,  or mischaracterizations by students. 
Respondent’s demeanor at hearing reflected a sense of entitlemen t and an attitude 
consistent with that of his character witness, Andy Verdone, that female students have 
a tendency to make false accusations agains t male teachers. At hearing, respondent’s 
demeanor was nonchalant de spite the gravity of the charges confronting him. 
 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
 
1. The Commission has jurisdiction to proc eed in this matter, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44944 and Factual Findings 1 through 5. All further 
undesignated statutory references  are to the Education Code. 
2. The District has the burden of proof in this matter and the standard of 
proof is preponderance of the evidence. ( Gardner v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 164 Cal. App. 3d 1035, 1 038-1039.) “Preponderance of the 
evidence” means evidence that has more co nvincing force than that opposed to it. 
(Glage v. Hawes (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325.) 
3. It is settled that the tr ier of fact—in this case the three members of the 
Commission—may “accept part of the testimony  of a witness and reject another part 
even though the latter contradi cts the part accepted.” ( Stevens v. Parke Davis & Co . 
(1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact ma y also “reject part of  the testimony of a 38  witness, though not directly contradicted, an d combine the accepted portions with bits 
of testimony or inferences from the testim ony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth 
of truth out of selected material.” ( Id., at 67-68, quoting from Neverov v. Caldwell 
(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.) The testim ony of “one cred ible witness may 
constitute substantial evidence.” ( Kearl v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance, 189 
Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) 
4. The grounds for dismissal alleged by the District agai nst respondent are 
immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to 
obey school laws or reasonable regulations. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. (a)(1), (6), (8).) 
Immoral Conduct 
 
5. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1), for immoral conduct, based on Factual Findings 18-74 and 119-124. 
6. The term “immoral conduct” has been defined to include conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicati ve of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 
to the opinions of respectable members of  the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare. ( Board of Ed. Of San Francisco 
Unified School Dist. V. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
7. “Moreover, the definition of immoral . . . conduct must be considered in 
conjunction with the uniqu e position of public schoo l teachers, upon whom are 
imposed 'responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 
regard to other callings.” (San Diego Unif ied Sch. Dist. v. Comm'n on Professional 
Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) 39  8. The District proved by a preponder ance of the evidence respondent 
engaged in immoral conduct. Respondent’s c onduct toward his female students, which 
included making inappropriate comments an d staring and leering at their bodies, 
showed moral indifference to the opinions  of respectable members of the school 
community, and an inconsiderate attitude to ward good order and the public welfare. 
Respondent’s conduct made female studen ts feel uncomfortable and fearful of 
attending his class. As a teacher for the Di strict since 2006, respondent reasonably can 
be expected to have known his conduct was c ontrary to the standa rds of the teaching 
profession and District policies, which teachers review annually. 
Evident Unfitness for Service 
 
9. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(6), for evident unfitness for service, based on Factual Findings 18-74 
and 119-124. 
10. Evident unfitness for service means “cle arly not fit, not adapted to or 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by  reason of temperamental defects or 
inadequacies.” ( Woodland Joint Unified School Di st. V. Commission Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) Evident unfitness for service “connotes a 
fixed character trait, presumab ly not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s 
conduct fails to meet the expectations  of the employing school district.” ( Id.) 
11. The District proved by a preponderan ce of the evidence respondent is 
evidently unfit for service by reason of  a non-remediable temperamental defect. 
Respondent’s conduct toward female students  reflected a lax atti tude at maintaining 
proper teacher-student boundaries and a classroom environment conducive to 
learning for all students, not just those he  favored. He interacted and communicated 40  with students more like their friend rather than their teacher. Hi s repeated pattern of 
inappropriate interactions with female students reflects a disregard of his 
responsibility to establish and maintain prop er teacher-student b oundaries and proper 
classroom decorum. The totality of respond ent’s inappropriate conduct demonstrates 
his unfitness as a classroom teacher. 
Persistent Violation of School Laws and Regulations 
 
12. Cause exists for respondent’s dismissal pursuant to section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8), for persistent violation or refusal to obey school laws or regulations, 
based on Factual Findings 18-74 and 119-124. 
13. In order for a teacher to be terminat ed under section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(8), for violations of school laws or rules, th e violations must be ei ther “persistent” or 
“motivated by an attitude of  continuous insubordination.” ( Gov. Board of Oakdale 
Union School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81.) A single violation of a 
school board’s rules is not of it self cause for dismissal; it is  the persistent disregard of 
school rules that the subdivisi on is designed to regulate. ( Id., at p. 84.) Isolated events 
or incidents involving an issue unresolved over a period of ti me are generally not 
considered persistent violation of rules. ( Bourland v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) 
14. In Governing Board of Oakdale Unio n School District v. Seaman (1972) 28 
Cal.App.3d 77, 82, the court stated: “The word  ‘persistent’ is defined by lexicographers 
as ‘refusing to relent; continuing, especially  in the face of opposition . . . stubborn; 
persevering . . . constantly repeated.’ (Web ster's New World Dict. (College ed.); see 
Webster's Third New Internat. Dict.) And in th e judicial decisions of this, as well as 41  other states, the word has been  interpreted to mean ‘continui ng or constant.’ [citations 
omitted].” 
15. The District proved by a preponder ance of the evidence respondent 
engaged in a persistent violation of District  policies during the relevant school years. 
As a certificated teacher at HBHS si nce 2006, respondent received training on 
professional standards and Dist rict policies. The totality of respondent’s conduct was 
inconsistent with District policies requir ing all staff adhere to high personal and 
professional standards of cond uct, maintain a relationship of professional cooperation 
and respect with students, and conduct th emselves in a manner that maintains an 
atmosphere conducive to learning. 
Morrison Factors 
 
16. Proven causes for discipline against a te acher must relate to his fitness to 
teach within the meaning of the fa ctors enumerated in the case of Morrison v. State 
Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. Here, the District established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that caus e exists to dismiss respondent based on 
immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service,  and persistent violation of school rules. 
With regard to those causes  for dismissal, the Commission considered all the factors 
suggested by Morrison and compared them to the facts established above. Not all 
Morrison factors need be present for the Morrison test to be satisfied. ( Governing 
Board of ABC School District v. Haar (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) Moreover, the 
Morrison analysis need not be conducted on each individual fact established, but 
rather can be applied to the accumulated esta blished facts. "When the camel's back is 
broken we need not weigh ea ch straw in its load to se e which could have done the 
deed." ( Woodland Joint Unified School Distri ct v. Commission on Professional 
Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.) 42  17. The case of Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
229, sets forth the following factors for determ ining a teacher’s fitness to teach: (1) the 
likelihood that the conduct may have advers ely affected students or fellow teachers; 
(2) the degree of such adversity anticipated;  (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of 
the conduct; (4) the type of certificate he ld by the teacher; (5) extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances surrounding th e conduct; (6) the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in  the conduct; (7) the likelihood that the 
conduct in question will recur; and (8) the ex tent that discipline will cause an adverse 
chilling impact on the constituti onal rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. 
18. Based on application of the Morrison factors, the Commission finds that 
respondent’s inappropriate conduct with female students in the 2021-2022 and the 
2022-2023 school years, is related to teaching  and respondent’s fitness to teach. The 
Morrison factors apply in respondent’s case as follows: 
(1) The likelihood the conduct may adversely affect students or fellow teachers. 
Respondent’s conduct adversely affected fema le students at HBHS. Female students 
were made to feel uncomfortable and fe arful by respondent’s comments and conduct 
in the classroom. The District no longer has confidence in respondent’s ability to 
properly serve as a teacher. 
(2) The degree of such adversity. Respond ent’s conduct caused a high degree of 
adversity among female st udents in his classes. 
(3) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s conduct 
occurred recently, in the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 school years. 43  (4) The type of teaching certificate held  by the party involved. Respondent’s 
misconduct is related to his duties as a cl assroom teacher authorized by his single 
subject credential. 
(5) The existence of extenuating or a ggravating circumstances, if any, 
surrounding the conduct. The Commission finds no extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances surrounding  respondent’s conduct. 
(6) The praiseworthiness or bl ameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct. Respondent is blameworthy and cu lpable for his inappropriate conduct. 
Respondent cannot justify or excuse his cond uct by claiming, after-the-fact, he had no 
intention to cause any harm to students. 
(7) The likelihood of recurrence of th e questioned conduct. The Commission 
finds there is a likelihood of recurrence of respondent’s misconduct. Respondent has 
failed to acknowledge he engaged in misc onduct or accept responsibility for his 
misconduct. He has shown no remorse for his misconduct. 
(8) The extent discipline may cause ad verse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of th e teacher involved or othe r teachers. Not applicable. 
Disposition 
 
19. “The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 
unfitness to teach . . . , and whether dism issal or suspension is the appropriate 
sanction.” ( California Teachers Associat ion v. State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 
343-344.) Thus, even where cause for dismi ssal has been established, the Commission 
still has broad discretion to de termine whether such disciplin e is actually warranted. 
(Fontana Unified School District v. Burman (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.) 44  20. The Commission finds respondent has not  accepted responsibility for his 
inappropriate conduct, has not  expressed remorse, and has not engaged in any self-
reflection. Teachers are trained to know appropriate teacher-student boundaries and 
are responsible to conform their conduct accordingly. Teachers must know the 
students they are teaching. Respondent faile d to demonstrate basic familiarity with his 
students and situational awareness. At hear ing, respondent repeatedly stated he did 
not recognize or realize he made his students feel uncom fortable. Respondent testified 
he never noticed J.S. or G.C. appearing to be  uncomfortable with hi m. (Factual Findings 
82, 92, 93.) Respondent claimed A.J.’s allegati on that he stared at her chest was due to 
her misinterpreting his looking up from hi s desk. (Factual Finding 77.) Respondent 
claimed he had no unusual interactions wi th B.S.; however, he made B.S. feel 
uncomfortable with his comment that he had a “special liking” for her and her friends, 
telling her “You’re crazy,” and staring at her chest. (Fac tual Findings 22, 48, 51.) 
Further, respondent failed to recognize he made B.S. feel uncom fortable by showing 
the Freakonomics movie during class, which depicted B.S.’s  first name in a negative 
and embarrassing way. (Factual Finding 55.) 
21. Based on the foregoing, the unanim ous decision of the Commission in 
this case is that respondent shall be dism issed from employment  with the District. 
(Factual Findings 1-124; Legal Conclusions 1-20.) 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 
 
/// 45  
 
 ORDER 
 
Respondent Fabian Luna shall be di smissed from employment with the 
Huntington Beach Union High School District. 
 
 
 
 
DATE: 11/25/2025 
 
 
 
DATE: 11/26/2025  Michael Anderson  
Michael Anderson (Nov 25, 2025 07:44:10 PST)  
MICHAEL ANDERSON 
Commission Member 
 
GREGG PRIMEAUX 
Commission Member 
 
DATE: 11/30/2025  Erlinda Shrenger  
Erlinda Shrenger (Nov 30, 2025 16:38:26 PST)  
ERLINDA SHRENGER 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 