BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SAN MATEO-FOSTER CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
BRON HANTZIS, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024060669 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by 
videoconference on November 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, and 13, 2024. The Commission’s 
members were Laura Andrews, Davis Joint Unified School District; Carissa Carrera, 
Coachella Valley Unified School District; and Administrative Law Judge Karen 
Reichmann, State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings, who presided.
Attorneys Georgelle Cuevas and Erika Rodine represented the San Mateo-Foster 
City School District.
Respondent Bron Hantzis represented himself. 
The Commission received oral opening statements, testimonial and 
documentary evidence, and oral closing arguments. The record was held open to 
permit the parties to file briefs regarding the standard of proof. The District’s brief was 
timely filed and marked for identification as Exhibit 71. Respondent previously briefed 2 and argued the issue and did not file an additional brief. The record closed and the 
matter was submitted for decision on November 19, 2024.
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Procedural Background 
1. Respondent Bron Hantzis holds a clear multiple subject teaching 
credential. 
2. Respondent has been a permanent certificated employee of the San 
Mateo-Foster City School District (District) since 2014. He began teaching at the 
District as a substitute in approximately 2009. 
3. On March 5, 2024, Diana Tavares, the District’s Assistant Superintendent 
of Human Resources, sent respondent a letter notifying him of the District’s intention 
to recommend to the Board of Trustee (Board) that he be dismissed. Respondent was 
provided with a proposed Statement of Charges detailing the allegations against him 
and was afforded the opportunity to respond to the charges in writing or in person. 
Respondent, through counsel, submitted a written response. On March 29, 2024, 
District Assistant Superintendent of Student Services Dennis Hills, in the role of 
officer, notified respondent that the Statement of Charges would be presented to the 
Board.
4. On March 29, 2024, Tavares signed the Statement of Charges which was 
served on respondent and sent to the Board. 3 5. At a meeting on April 25, 2024, the Board voted to immediately suspend 
respondent without pay and dismiss him from employment. Respondent timely 
requested a hearing and filed a motion for immediate reversal of suspension. 
6. Respondent’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension was granted 
by an administrative law judge on June 18, 2024, and respondent was restored to paid 
status. 
7. On August 6, 2024, Executive Director of Human Resources John Cosmos 
signed a Revised Statement of Charges which corrected misnumbering of paragraphs 
and other typographical errors, including a single instance where the incorrect school 
district was named. This Revised Statement of Charges was not presented to the Board 
because it did not contain any substantive changes. 
8. Prior to the hearing, respondent filed a motion to exclude evidence 
pertaining to any allegations of misconduct which took place more than four years 
prior to the filing of the notice of dismissal, and to strike any references to any 
misconduct from more than four years ago from the Statement of Charges, which was 
granted. The District provided an Amended Revised Statement of Charges, redacting 
the excluded allegations. 
9. The Amended Revised Statement of Charges alleges numerous incidents 
involving respondent bearing on his fitness for continuing service. The District 
characterizes these incident as cause under the Education Code to dismiss respondent 
from employment for: 1) evident unfitness for service and 2) persistent violation of or 
refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for 
the government of the public schools. 4 10. The Commission has considered all testimonial and documentary 
evidence, and weighed all witnesses’ credibility, in making the factual findings. 
11. Respondent declined to testify at hearing and, when called as a witness 
by the District, would not answer any of the District’s questions. Respondent 
characterized each of the District’s questions as “an attempt to violate or actual 
violations” of his right to due process and other rights, and stated that he was 
invoking the protections of the United States constitution, the California constitution, 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 
Labor Code section 6310, the Fair Employment and Housing Act, and the Reporting by 
School Employees of Improper Governmental Activities Act. Respondent continued to 
refuse to answer the District’s questions even after being admonished that he did not 
have a right to refuse to testify in this proceeding. Respondent insisted that he was not 
refusing to answer questions and that he was cooperating with the proceeding. 
12. Similarly, prior to hearing, respondent would not meaningfully answer 
questions posed to him by the District at deposition, even after an order was issued 
granting the District’s motion to compel him to attend the deposition and ordering 
him to pay sanctions due to his bad faith and/or frivolous refusal to cooperate at a 
prior deposition session. 
Allegations 
2022-2023  SCHOOL YEAR
13. During all times relevant to the Amended Revised Statement of Charges, 
respondent taught fourth grade at the District’s Brewer Island Elementary School. 5 14. Respondent had a practice of requiring students to write essays or write 
out sentences dozens or hundreds of times as a corrective measure. For example, 
respondent might direct students who forgot to put their names or the date on an 
assignment to write their name or the date or a sentence such as “I am a 
disappointment” multiple times, or to write an essay about why what they had done 
was wrong. Students were directed to perform these writing exercises during recess 
and lunch time, in public view. Some students were observed performing these writing 
exercises during breaks for multiple days or weeks in a row. Respondent’s students 
have also been seen writing in chalk on the asphalt ground of the school yard 
statements such as “there are reasons why our class expectations are good.” Brewer 
Island principal Rebecca “Becky” Stephan had expressed to respondent concerns that 
assigning these writing exercises was not an effective practice. 
15. In February 2023, the parents of a student in respondent’s class, V.P., 
contacted Stephan about concerns they had about their son. Stephan directed them to 
try to resolve any issues with respondent directly and offered to meet with them if 
their efforts were unsuccessful. 
16. In early May 2023, respondent assigned his students to write essays on 
the topic, “Why I Appreciate [Respondent].” V.P. wrote that he did not like respondent
because he was disrespectful, and gave an example that respondent made vegetarians 
touch a dead fish. V.P. also wrote that respondent’s “rules are dumb,” giving as 
examples that respondent made students “write” if their bodies were not facing 
someone speaking or if they made a lot of mistakes, and that he made students sit in 
the office if they forget to write the date three times. 
17. On May 9, 2023, respondent sent an email to V.P.’s parents and to the 
parents of another student in his class. Respondent notified both sets of parents in this 6 email that both students would not be permitted to attend an upcoming overnight 
field trip to Coloma. This field trip is tied to the fourth grade California history 
curriculum. Respondent’s rationale for prohibiting the students from attending the 
field trip was their misbehavior when they had been sent to the school office. When 
V.P.’s parents emailed respondent asking about V.P.’s behavior that justified this 
punishment, respondent wrote, “lying, dishonesty, not communicating” and laying on 
the ground in the office. Respondent had not reached out to Stephan to discuss the 
two students’ behaviors prior to notifying their parents that their children would not 
be allowed to attend the field trip. 
On May 15, 2023, respondent notified both sets of parents that their children 
would be allowed to attend the field trip due to the difficulty of obtaining refunds for 
the families. 
18. Around May 16, 2023, V.P.’s parents contacted Stephan with concerns 
about what they viewed as respondent’s excessive discipline of their son and the stress 
he was experiencing. They complained that V.P. had been sent to the office during 
recess for two weeks and had been made to write sentences during the entire lunch 
period. They were concerned that he had not had any time to eat during the school 
day. They were also concerned that respondent had made students touch a dead fish 
in class and ate a fish in class in front of students, and questioned what could be the 
educational purpose of these actions. They also noted that the discipline had increased 
after V.P. had submitted the essay stating that he did not like respondent. V.P.’s 
parents kept him out of school between May 17 and May 19 due to their concerns 
about how respondent was treating him. 
19. Stephan arranged for a meeting with respondent and V.P.’s parents. Prior 
to the meeting, respondent requested that V.P. attend the meeting, and also 7 suggested that the parents meet to discuss their concerns in respondent’s classroom 
in front of the entire class. Stephan notified respondent that she did not support 
meeting in front of the whole class, and that V.P.’s parents preferred to meet with him 
without V.P. present, at least initially. 
20. Respondent attended the meeting with Stephan and V.P.’s parents on 
May 19. The parents asked respondent why he had assigned students the assignment, 
“Why I Appreciate [Respondent],” why he had students touch a dead fish, and why he 
ate a sardine in class. Respondent would not answer the parents’ questions without 
V.P. present and left after only 10 minutes. He sent an email later apologizing for 
having attended the meeting in the first place without V.P.’s presence, stating that 
“choosing to exclude [V.P.] goes against everything I’ve ever been taught.” Respondent 
wrote that he would be willing to meet V.P.’s parents for a discussion “with [V.P.] about 
his behavior.” 
21. In May 2023, respondent engaged in a classroom activity whereby he had 
students publicly rank other students’ reliability and honesty on a scale of 1 to 4. 
Students were required to publicly state how they ranked other students and explain 
why. This exercise is not part of the District’s curriculum. 
22. On May 23, 2023, V.P.’s father wrote to Stephan, stating that he had 
heard from other parents that respondent had bad-mouthed V.P. behind his back in 
front of the class. He had heard that respondent was ranking students on a scale of 1 
to 4 and had given V.P. the lowest rating. He wrote that he was scared for V.P.’s safety 
and wanted him moved out of respondent’s class. 
23. On May 24, 2023, Stephan notified respondent by email to stop having 
students rank each other in class connected to performance or behavior, and not to 8 talk about students who are not present. She also spoke with him verbally that day and 
he acknowledged having students rank each other. Respondent replied by email the 
following day, “I object to your request to stop doing things based on hearsay. My 
reasoning is that such a request is unlawful, new and unreasonable as well as unsafe 
and/or unhealthy. Even if not hearsay, I object for the same reasons.” 
24. Respondent met with Stephan on May 25. He would not answer 
Stephan’s questions related to V.P.’s parents’ concerns. 
25. Stephan decided to move V.P. to another classroom, even though there 
were only eight days left of school. She notified respondent by email on May 25, 2023, 
that V.P. would be moved to Claire Cremers’s class the following day, a Friday. Her 
email to respondent was sent at 2:48 p.m. Stephan addressed the students in both 
respondent’s class and Cremers’s class, explaining that V.P. would now be in Cremers’s 
class and requesting that the students not make him uncomfortable by asking him 
why. 
26. Stephan emailed respondent on May 26 and asked him to provide by 
May 31 a copy of his “classroom expectations and classroom discipline practices as 
shared/communicated with your students’ parents/guardians at Back to School Night 
or otherwise.” Respondent sent Stephan a document from a Back-to-School Night 
presentation from the 2021-2022 school year and stated that her request was “new 
and unreasonable, unlawful and safe [ ] or cause undue injury.” 
27. Stephan met with some of respondent’s students on May 30. Students 
reported that respondent had publicly rated students on reliability and had given V.P. 
the lowest score. It was also reported that respondent stated to the class that V.P. is 9 dishonest, talked about V.P.’s move to Cremers’s class, and said V.P. was escaping 
what he needs to do. 
28. Stephan directed respondent to send V.P.’s grades to Cremers. 
Respondent sent an email to Cremers on June 2. Respondent wrote that V.P.’s grade in 
the following three areas of social responsibility was “seldom”: 1) shows respect for 
self, others, and property; 2) takes responsibility for actions; and 3) makes sense of 
problems and perseveres in solving them. Cremers was surprised when she saw these 
grades because respondent had previously graded V.P. as “most of the time” in these 
areas and she was concerned about respondent’s motive for the lower marks. She did 
not observe V.P.’s conduct to warrant the low scores respondent gave him in social 
responsibility. 
29. On June 1, 2023, Stephan notified respondent to plan to attend a 
meeting with her and Christian Rubalcaba, Director of School Leadership, on June 5, at 
9:30 a.m., related to the concerns raised by V.P.’s parents regarding punishment, 
bullying, and harassment. 
30. On June 5, 2023, Stephan talked to a student from respondent’s class 
who reported that respondent had written prompts about V.P.’s removal from his class 
on the chalkboard for students to write about and discuss, and that he told the 
students that they could sign a “form” if they wanted V.P. back in their class. 
31. Also on June 5, 2023, at around 8:30 a.m., two of respondent’s students 
came to the door of Cremers’s class and asked for V.P. Cremers was in the middle of a 
lesson, and told them she would not send V.P. outside to meet with them. Respondent 
and the rest of his students joined the first two students at the door to Cremers’s 
classroom and stated that he wanted to give V.P. his library card. Cremers told 10 respondent that he was not to have contact with V.P. Respondent stood in the 
doorway with his entire class standing around him, and addressed V.P., stating “we 
miss you and we want you to come back to our class” and that he was going to deliver 
a petition for V.P. to return to his class. Cremers’s students responded by saying 
“oooh,” indicating that they understood that something unusual was happening or 
that someone was in trouble. Cremers observed V.P. looking uncomfortable, confused, 
and nervous. Cremers was uncomfortable during the incident and had to “steady” 
herself after respondent and his class finally left, in order to stay calm and resume 
teaching her students. 
32. Several students in respondent’s class signed a petition which stated  
“We object to [V.P.] being removed from our class community of room 21. Please 
return him to us.” 
33. Respondent met with Stephan, Rubalcaba, and a union representative at 
9:30 a.m. on June 5. Respondent provided Stephan with a written timeline prior to the 
meeting. Respondent objected to many of the questions Stephan asked. Respondent 
acknowledged discussing V.P.’s removal from his class with his students. He expressed 
disappointment that his students had not asked him why V.P. had been transferred to 
Cremers’s class and that only five or six students signed the petition to have V.P. 
returned. Stephan advised respondent that he was not following the District’s 
discipline policies, including by trying to prevent students from attending an 
educational field trip. Respondent asserted that participation in field trips is “earned” 
and not a right. Stephan directed respondent not to approach or talk to V.P. Stephan 
sent respondent an email at 3:29 p.m. that day, stating in part, “The directive stated 
and agreed upon at the end of the meeting is for you to have no contact of any kind 
or proximity to [V.P.].” 11 Respondent replied to this email the following morning, stating: 
With regards to the meeting yesterday that I understand 
was unreasonable, unlawful, unsafe, unhealthy, new, 
intimidatory and unethical: 
I officially object to that directive as unsafe, unhealthy, 
unreasonable, impossible, unreasonable [ ]. I also object 
to it as unethical and intimidatory. That being said, I’m not 
planning on approaching [V.P]. 
34. Cremers wrote an email at 3:09 p.m. on June 5 to respondent stating that 
she had felt very uncomfortable with respondent “towering over” her to give a 
message to her class, and that she wished to have no further contact with him for the 
rest of the school year. 
35. Respondent replied to Cremers’s email the following morning. He wrote:
Our class came to speak with [V.P.] and deliver his library 
card together and let him know that we were making a 
petition to bring him back to our class. I was also there to 
check in on [V.P.]. When two kids asked for [V.P.] to come 
out because they had something for them, you came 
outside and let me know that you had a directive from 
Becky that you couldn’t let me talk or see [V.P.] - something 
like that. I was shocked and unaware of that. I fully 
recognize how being given a directive then having 
someone come in conflict with your directive could make 
you feel uncomfortable. 12 I believe it’s important that I provide reasoning to you for 
why I spoke with [V.P.]. 
I said something like I understood, then poked my head 
inside and let [V.P.] know something like I didn’t know he 
was going to be removed from our class and I wish he 
could stay with us. He was looking at me, I let him know 
things like I believe in him and made it clear that he can 
accomplish anything in life. Myself and our class thought 
[V.P.] was out sick since Coloma. I myself didn’t have a clue 
[V.P.]  be moving classes until you told me the 
Wednesday before our field trip to the tech museum that 
Becky was going to transfer [V.P.] to your class on Friday. 
Again, I was shocked , because I had no clue about that. 
Becky first sent me an email on that Friday morning, which I 
didn’t see because I was out on the field trip. I’m also 
currently objecting to [V.P.]’s transfer and need for me to 
write grades.
All that being said, I fully respect your request, but please 
recognize we may pass each other or need to send emails 
to our team and such.
A few minutes later, respondent sent a follow up email to Cremers stating, 
“Forgot to mention, but feel it’s important to include that as I left, [V.P.] and I 
exchanged peace signs.”13 36. Cremers did not believe respondent when he wrote that he was 
“shocked.” She believed respondent was aware that he was not supposed to have 
contact with V.P. Even if there had not been a non-contact directive, Cremers would 
have found respondent’s conduct disruptive and inappropriate. 
37. In the afternoon of June 6, respondent sent an email to Stephan stating: 
Just thought I’d let you know that as I turned a corner 
today, [V.P.] was about 50ft away from me and began 
engaging with me in a game that I’ve taught class before. I 
engaged back, as I normally would, as if none of this was 
still going on (and per my objections), and we did it a 
couple times, then as the class caught up, they interacted as 
well. Just natural, figured I would give you a heads up.
38. On June 7, the last day of school, Cremers noticed after morning recess 
that V.P. had a can of soda that she recognized as the same type of soda respondent 
had given his students the previous day during an activity on the school yard. Cremers 
asked V.P. about the soda and he told her that a student from respondent’s class had 
given it to him and told him it was from respondent. 
Cremers observed that V.P. looked nervous, although he told her that he was 
“okay.” Cremers took the soda because she thought it was making V.P. uncomfortable 
to have it. She notified Stephan about her concern that respondent had made indirect 
contact with V.P. by sending a student to deliver the soda to him. 
39. On June 23, 2023, Cremers wrote a complaint to the Board about her 
concerns about respondent. She described the incidents with V.P., and expressed her 
fear that respondent will continue to harm children emotionally. Cremers sent this 14 letter despite being afraid of respondent and even though she was moving to a 
different school site the following school year. 
REPRIMAND  
40. On June 7, 2023, Stephan met with respondent, a union representative, 
and Rubalcaba and delivered to respondent a letter of reprimand stating that 
respondent’s actions relating to V.P.’s parents’ concerns and Stephan’s attempts to 
reach a resolution with them did not align with the District’s mission. Stephan 
identified the following inappropriate conduct in the letter of reprimand: 
Respondent expected V.P. to attend a discussion with V.P.’s 
parents regarding his mental health connected to 
respondent’s discipline and their allegations that 
respondent engaged in bullying, abuse, and/or harassment 
towards V.P. 
Respondent engaged in bullying and/or harassing, 
behaviors towards V.P., including when he continued 
speaking about V.P. in a negative manner and when he 
addressed him in another teacher's classroom, in front of 
the other teacher’s class, telling V.P. that he did not know 
he was going to be removed from his class, that he wished 
he would stay in your class, and that he believed in him. 
Respondent made negative and/or shameful comments 
towards students or had students make negative and/or 
shameful comments towards other students on numerous 
occasions, including ranking students and having students 15 publicly rank or characterize other students based on 
reliability or honesty. 
Respondent inappropriately sent an e-mail to the parents of 
two different students’ parents containing a description of 
the students’ behaviors and relevant consequences, thereby 
revealing confidential information pertaining to the 
students.
Respondent consistently assigned or recommended 
consequences that did not align with District policies or 
practices, such as assigning or recommending the loss of 
recess or part or all of lunch play time for two weeks, and 
recommending that a child be excluded from a scheduled, 
educational overnight field trip. 
Respondent repeatedly ignored or disregarded Stephan’s 
requests and directives. 
Respondent was dishonest in emails to other staff 
members. 
41. Respondent was advised that further conduct placing students or other 
teachers in mental distress would not be tolerated. He was directed to have no contact 
with V.P. and to follow school policies and discipline matrixes. 
42. On June 21, 2023, respondent sent an 11-page document in response to 
the reprimand to the District’s Human Resources department. He wrote that it was his 
understanding that “the contents and filing of the letter of reprimand” were “unlawful.” 16 Respondent stated that a portion of the document titled “Letter to Agencies” would be 
sent to “certain governmental agencies under protection as a whistleblower.” He also 
wrote that, other than the directives in the “honesty” section of the reprimand, the 
directives in the letter of reprimand were “new and/or unreasonable, unlawful, unsafe, 
unhealthy, unethical and unprofessional.” 
In the “Letter to Agencies” section, respondent accused Stephan of repeated 
issuance of illegal orders, improper governmental activities, retaliation, fraud, 
negligence, malice, corruption, coercion, bullying, creating and maintaining a hostile 
work environment, cyberbullying, harassment, and willful omission to perform duty. 
2023-2024 School Year 
AUGUST 22, 2023, DISCIPLINE MATRIX MEETING 
43. Pursuant to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the 
District and the union representing the District’s elementary school teachers, the staff 
at every school site must meet twice a year, in late spring and in early fall, to discuss 
the District’s student discipline policy.
44. The District has promulgated a discipline matrix. Each school site 
develops an individualized matrix, consistent with the districtwide matrix.
45. Although some witnesses testified that respondent attended a meeting 
on May 30, 2023, at which the discipline policy was discussed, the evidence established 
that he was not present at that meeting. This conflicting testimony did not render 
other testimony of the witnesses less credible.17 46. Respondent was present at the meeting to discuss the discipline policy 
on August 22, 2023. Respondent objected to the discussion taking place, claiming that 
it was unlawful, unhealthy, new, unsafe, and unreasonable. 
47. At this meeting, respondent was argumentative and interrupted others. 
He insisted that it was his right to discipline his students as he sees fit and appeared 
unwilling to adhere to the matrix. He was loud, accusatory, and demeaning. 
Respondent’s behavior at this meeting was consistent with his behavior at previous 
staff meetings. 
48. When some individuals expressed their view that respondent’s discipline 
methods, including making students write sentences, were punitive, ineffective, and 
fell outside the discipline matrix, respondent became upset. Some expressed concern 
that writing sentences could be counterproductive for some students, including those 
who are neurodivergent, and respondent was dismissive and unwilling to listen to this 
perspective. 
49. First grade teacher Elizabeth Martin was troubled by respondent’s 
statements at the meeting. She was particularly concerned for two reasons. First, there 
was a tentative plan for Martin to chaperone a field trip with respondent’s class and 
for respondent, who was not planning on attending the field trip, to teach Martin’s 
class while she was out. Martin did not want respondent teaching her students after 
what she heard him express at the meeting. Second, Martin’s daughter was a third 
grade student at the time of the meeting, and Martin was concerned that her daughter 
could be placed in respondent’s class the following year. She believed that 
respondent’s philosophy and discipline practices would be damaging to her daughter. 18 50. A few days after the meeting, respondent sent an email to all Brewer 
Island teachers. He wrote that he objected to Stephan “facilitating or permitting 
discourse as done in the 8-22-23 and 5-30-23 meetings is new, unreasonable, 
unlawful, unsafe, unhealthy and/or places new and unreasonable burdens upon staff, 
including myself.” He stated that he intended to report Stephan’s “ongoing actions.” 
Respondent then included a summary of some of the discussions from the meeting, 
identifying teachers as “T1” through “T7” and attributing different statements to them. 
A teacher responded to this email stating that she believed she was “T2” referred to by 
respondent and that he had misrepresented her statements at the meeting. Two other 
teachers who were both union representatives responded that meetings to discuss 
student discipline are required by the MOU. 
51. On August 29, 2023, Martin filed a complaint against respondent, stating 
that respondent created an uncomfortable and hostile working environment and 
describing his behavior at the staff meeting. She expressed her belief that 
respondent’s behavior was having a negative impact on school staff and students. 
STUDENT V. 
52. Student V. was assigned to respondent’s fourth grade classroom for the 
2023-2024 school year. V. receives special education services pursuant to an 
Individualized Education Program (IEP). V. has a history of trauma and severe 
emotional needs. Brewer Island implemented a therapeutic or “TLC” classroom during 
the 2023-2024 school year. V. and other students were allowed access to this room if 
they needed behavioral or academic support. 
53. On August 28, 2023, V. was dysregulated and elected to stay in the TLC 
room instead of returning to respondent’s classroom after lunch. Special education 19 teacher Janella Cambaya and paraeducator Amy Chivers were in the TLC room calming 
V. and encouraging V. to return to class. Chivers went to respondent’s classroom to 
request V.’s classwork so that V. could work on it in the TLC room, but respondent 
would not give it to her and told her V. had to return to class. He said he would be 
documenting their discussion, and then made a statement to Chivers that she did not 
understand, to the effect of “we wouldn’t need to document if we lived in the forest.”
Chivers had previously been uncomfortable with respondent. She observed him giving 
below-grade level work to V. that was different from the work being done by the other 
students. She had also observed a classroom environment where students pressured 
each other and managed each other’s behavior. 
54. Chivers returned to the TLC room. A short while later, V. had calmed 
down and was preparing to return to respondent’s room. V. was sitting on a bean bag 
chair and was about to put her shoes on when respondent came to the TLC room. 
Respondent asked V. whether her parents pick her up if she starts crying in a store and 
she said “No.” 
55. Respondent then stated that if V. did not get up in a count of four, he 
would pick her up and bring her to the office. He told Cambaya and Chivers that he 
knew his rights as a teacher and that he had a right to pick up V. He stated that he had 
been trained on how to carry students. He started to count down from four in a loud 
voice. 
56. Chivers and Cambaya believed that respondent was going to pick up V., 
but respondent left the TLC room and did not pick up or touch V. 
57. V. returned to respondent’s class that afternoon, but after the incident, 
Chivers and Cambaya observed V. being increasingly uncooperative and resistant to 20 returning to class, even after she was assigned to another teacher for general 
education. 
58. Chivers and Cambaya were troubled by respondent’s statements about 
picking up V., both because it was upsetting to V. and because they thought his 
statement that he had a right to pick her up was incorrect and contrary to District 
policy. They reported the incident to Kaci St. John, Assistant Director of Special 
Education, who in turn reported it to Cosmos. St. John obtained statements from 
Chivers and Cambaya and talked to V. V. confirmed to St. John that respondent said he 
was going to pick her up and carry her to the office. 
59. St. John explained at hearing that respondent was not authorized by 
District policy to pick up V. and that doing so would have violated V.’s rights. The 
District follows a “hands off” philosophy regarding touching students. Staff are not to 
touch students unless there is imminent danger of harm to the student or others. The 
District does not permit touching a student merely because the student is 
dysregulated or uncooperative. Only seven staff members, not including respondent, 
have been trained in physical holds to be used in limited circumstances. 
60. St. John reported that the incident had a negative impact on V., who was 
new to this school. V. was allowed to spend time in the TLC room when needed and it 
was not a violation of her IEP for her to be there instead of in her general education 
classroom. 
61. Shortly before noon on August 29, 2023, respondent was called to meet 
with Stephan, Cosmos, and a union representative. Cosmos directed respondent not to 
touch V. Respondent stated that he disagreed but understood. 21 62. Respondent was placed on paid administrative towards the end of the 
day on August 29, 2023. 
Investigation 
63. The District hired attorney J. Kayleigh Chevrier to investigate the 
complaint submitted by Cremers and the complaint submitted by respondent. Tavares 
notified respondent in writing on June 30, 2023, that Chevrier would be investigating 
both the complaint he submitted (Finding 42) and the complaint submitted by 
Cremers against him (Finding 39). 
64. Chevrier began her investigation that summer. The scope of Chevrier’s 
investigation expanded to include the complaint filed by Martin (Finding 51). Tavares 
notified respondent by letter dated September 6, 2023, that Chevrier would also be 
investigating Martin’s complaint. 
65. Chevrier conducted her investigation in accordance with District policy. 
She interviewed numerous witnesses including respondent. She collected documents 
from the District and the witnesses and received and reviewed written submissions 
from respondent. 
66. Respondent did not acknowledge that any of his behavior was 
inappropriate. He defended his practices of making students write sentences 100 or 
more times, withholding field trips, and having students rank each other based on 
honesty and trustworthiness. 
67. Respondent admitted that he refused to answer V.P.’s parents’ questions 
without V.P. present. He defended bringing his class to Cremers’s classroom to 
communicate with V.P. He asserted that he had a right to communicate with V.P. 22 despite Stephan’s directive not to communicate with him after he had been removed 
from respondent’s class. Regarding the incident with the soda, respondent told 
Chevrier that one of his students suggested giving the soda to V.P., and that he had 
told the student it was okay, as long as it came from the student and not respondent. 
Respondent claimed that it was his students’ idea to circulate a petition and go talk to 
him in Cremers’s classroom. Chevrier found these claims not credible. 
68. Respondent denied threatening to pick up V. but stated that it was within 
his rights and training to do so. 
69. At least four witnesses told Chevrier that respondent’s conduct at the 
August 22, 2023, staff meeting made them uncomfortable. Respondent denied 
creating a hostile work environment and blamed Stephan. 
70. Respondent did not articulate the basis of his assertions of unlawful 
behavior by Stephan and provided no specific evidence other than his own assertions. 
71. Chevrier prepared a report with her determinations regarding the three 
complaints, which was signed by Tavares and mailed to respondent on October 9, 
2023. 
72. Chevrier determined that none of respondent’s allegations against 
Stephan were substantiated. No other teacher corroborated respondent’s assertions 
that Stephan behaved unlawfully, interfered with teachers’ rights and duties, bullied or 
harassed respondent, or created a hostile work environment. 
73. Chevrier determined that most of the allegations in Cremers’s and 
Martin’s complaints were substantiated. This included a finding that respondent 23 engaged in practices that did not align with the District’s educational philosophy and 
values. 
74. Chevrier concluded that respondent’s behavior made other staff 
uncomfortable but did not rise to the level of creating a hostile work environment. 
Testimony of Respondent’s Colleagues Regarding Respondent’s 
Negative Impact on Students and Staff 
75. The District’s witnesses all testified persuasively about respondent’s 
negative impact on students and staff.
76. Tavares believes that respondent’s conduct was damaging to students
and terrifying to other staff members. Based on her interactions with respondent, 
Tavares does not believe that he would follow District policies if he were retained. She 
found him unwilling to change his behavior to conform to District policy. She believes 
he does not have the personality to teach. She believes his continued employment 
with the District would have a significant negative impact on students and staff.
77. Cosmos views respondent’s behavior as unprofessional, unlawful, and 
harmful to children. He believes respondent would not follow District polices and state 
law if reinstated. He believes that reinstating respondent would negatively impact 
students’ safety and social and emotional wellbeing.
78. Stephan stated that it was “questionable” whether respondent would 
follow District policy in the future. She agreed that respondent’s behavior had a 
negative impact on students and staff, especially Cremers. 
79. Chivers stated that she would not feel comfortable working with 
respondent based on her interactions with him concerning V. and what she observed 24 in his classroom. Cambaya also stated that she would not be comfortable working with 
respondent. 
80. Martin testified that respondent’s behavior had a negative impact on her 
and other staff and that meetings have become more professional, respectful, and 
positive without his presence. She also does not believe respondent would follow 
District policy or management directives should he return to work at Brewer Island. 
81. Teacher and union representative Lisa Fahey believes that respondent 
would not change his behavior should he return to work, would not follow District 
guidelines on student discipline or management directives, and would not collaborate 
with staff in discussing the discipline matrix. Fahey reported that respondent’s 
confrontational and intimidating behavior during staff meetings had a chilling effect. 
Fahey reported that respondent frequently claimed that policies or directives were 
unlawful without explaining why. Fahey was also troubled by her observation that 
respondent’s students policed each other’s behavior and enforced respondent’s 
discipline on each other. 
82. Cremers also stated that she would not feel comfortable working with 
respondent again, describing him as “volatile.” Based on his past behavior, she does 
not believe respondent would follow District policy. 
83. Cremers and Martin both believe respondent’s behavior had a negative 
impact on V.P. Cremers observed V.P.’s discomfort when respondent brought his class 
to her classroom to communicate with him and when he was given the soda. Martin 
was familiar with V.P., who had been in her class in first grade. She noticed him 
become more withdrawn which she believes was due to his experience in respondent’s 
class. 25 84. St. John, Chivers, and Cambaya all believe respondent’s behavior had a 
negative impact on V. based on their observations of her behavior in the aftermath of 
the August 29, 2023 incident. 
Violations of Board Policies and Directives
85. Board Policy 4119.21(Professional Standards) states:
The Board of Trustees expects district employees to 
maintain the highest ethical standards, behave 
professionally, follow district policies and regulations, abide 
by state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment 
when interacting with students and other members of the 
school community. Employees shall engage in conduct that 
enhances the integrity of the district, advances the goals of 
the district's educational programs, and contributes to a 
positive school climate. . . Each employee is expected to 
acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to fulfill his/her 
responsibilities and to contribute to the learning and 
achievement of district students.
[. . .] 
Inappropriate employee conduct includes, but is not limited 
to:
1. Engaging in any conduct that endangers students, 
staff, or others, including, but not limited to, physical 
violence, threats of violence26 2. Engaging in harassing or discriminatory behavior 
towards students, parents/guardians, staff, or community 
members . . . 
[. . .] 
4. Engaging in inappropriate socialization or 
fraternization with a student . . . 
[. . .] 
6.  Using profane, obscene, or abusive language against 
students, parents/guardians, staff, or community members 
[. . .] 
9. Being dishonest with students, parents/guardians, 
staff, or members of the public . . . 
10. Divulging confidential information about students, 
district employees, or district operations to persons or 
entities not authorized to receive information 
86. Respondent violated this policy by bringing his entire class to Cremers’s 
classroom to communicate with V.P. after he had been removed from respondent’s 
class (Finding 31); interacting with V.P. after being directed not to have contact with 
him (Finding 38); stating that he would pick up and carry V. to the office (Finding 55); 
discussing V.P.’s transfer to Cremers’s class with his students after having been 
directed not to discuss it (Findings 30, 33.); and sharing student disciplinary 
information with parents of another student (Finding 17). 27 87. Board Policy 4119.21 also includes a Code of Ethics of the Education 
Professions, which states, in part: 
The educator, believing in the worth and dignity of each 
human being, recognizes the supreme importance of the 
pursuit of truth, devotion to excellence, and the nurturing 
of democratic principles. Essential to these goals is the 
protection of freedom to learn and to teach and the 
guarantee of equal educational opportunity for all. The 
educator accepts the responsibility to adhere to the highest 
ethical standards. 
The educator recognizes the magnitude of the 
responsibility inherent in the teaching process. The desire 
for the respect and confidence of one's colleagues, of 
students, of parents, and of the members of the community 
provides the incentive to attain and maintain the highest 
possible degree of ethical conduct. The Code of Ethics of 
the Education Profession indicates the aspiration of all 
educators and provides standards by which to judge 
conduct. 
Principle I. Commitment to the Student 
The educator strives to help each student realize his/her 
potential as a worthy and effective member of society. The 
educator therefore works to stimulate the spirit of inquiry, 28 the acquisition of knowledge and understanding, and the 
thoughtful formulation of worthy goals. 
In fulfillment of the obligation to the student, the educator: 
[. . . ] 
4. Shall make reasonable effort to protect the student 
from conditions harmful to learning or to health and safety 
5. Shall not intentionally expose the student to 
embarrassment or disparagement
[. . .] 
8. Shall not disclose information in the course of 
professional service unless disclosure serves a compelling 
professional purpose or is required by law
88. Respondent violated the Code of Ethics by embarrassing and disparaging 
students and failing to protect students from conditions harmful to learning or to 
health and safety (Findings 14, 18, 20, 21, 27, 30-33, 38, 54, 55); and by disclosing 
confidential information to parents and other students (Findings 17, 33). 
89. Board Policy 0100 (Philosophy) provides that it is the philosophy of the 
District that “[h]ighly skilled and innovative staff, teachers, and administrators support 
students to achieve academic success and emotional well-being” and that a “safe, 
nurturing environment and positive school climate are necessary for learning, 
academic achievement, and student development.”29 90. Respondent violated Board Policy 0100 by failing to support students’ 
emotional well-being and failing to provide a safe, nurturing environment and positive 
school climate (Findings 14, 16-18, 21, 23, 27, 31, 38, 53, 55). 
91. Board Policy 5000 (Concepts and Roles) sets forth the Board’s intention 
to “make every effort to maintain a safe, positive school environment and student 
services that promote student welfare and academic achievement.” 
92.Respondent violated Board Policy 5000 by creating a harmful negative 
environment for his students. (Findings 14, 16, 17, 21, 22, 27, 30, 31, 38, 53, 55.)
93. Administrative Regulation 5131.41 (Use of Seclusion and Restraint) 
provides: 
District staff shall enforce standards of appropriate student 
conduct in order to provide a safe and secure environment 
for students and staffon campus, but are prohibited from 
using seclusion and behavioral restraint to control student 
behavior except to the limited extent authorized by law. 
Behavioral restraint includes mechanical restraint or physical 
restraint used as an intervention when a student presents an 
immediate danger to self or to others. 
[. . .] 
Seclusion and behavioral restraint of students shall not be 
usedinanyform as a meansofcoercion, discipline, 
convenience, or retaliation . (Education Code 49005.8).30 94. Respondent violated Administrative Regulation 5131.41 by stating that 
he would pick up V. as a consequence for her not returning to his classroom, and by 
asserting that he has a right to do so. (Finding 55, 68.) 
95. Board Policy 6141 (Curriculum Development And Evaluation) provides 
that the District’s curriculum “shall be aligned with the district's vision and goals for 
student learning, Board policies, academic content standards, state curriculum 
frameworks, state and district assessments, graduation requirements, school and 
district improvement plans, and, when necessary, related legal requirements.”  
96. Respondent violated Board Policy 6141 by giving his students 
assignments that fell outside the curriculum and were not in alignment with the 
District’s vision and goals for student learning. (Findings 14, 16, 18, 21, 27, 30.)
97. Board Policy 5144 (Discipline) provides that the Board is “committed to 
providing a safe, supportive, and positive school environment which is conducive to 
student learning and achievement and desires to prepare students for responsible 
citizenship by fostering self-discipline and personal responsibility.” It further provides 
that:
At all times, the safety of students and staff and the 
maintenance of an orderly school environment shall be 
priorities in determining appropriate discipline. When 
misconduct occurs, staff shall attempt to identify the causes 
of the student's behavior and implement appropriate 
discipline. When choosing between different disciplinary 
strategies, staff shall consider the effect of each option on 
the student's health, well-being, and opportunity to learn. 31 Staff are directed to use, to the extent possible, “disciplinary strategies that 
keep students in school and participating in the instructional program.” Examples of 
disciplinary strategies are provided in Board Policy 5144, including: 
 Discussion or conference between school staff and the student and 
parents/guardians 
 Participation in a restorative justice program 
A positivebehaviorsupportapproach withtieredinterventions thatoccur 
during the school day on campus  
 Recess restriction as provided in the section titled “Recess Restriction” 
 In accordance with Board policy and administrative regulation, 
restriction ordisqualificationfrom participation in extracurricular activities
The “Recess Restriction” section of the Discipline policy provides: 
Teachers may restrict a student’s recess time only when 
they believe that this action is the most effective way to 
bring about improved behavior. When recess restriction 
involves the withholding of physical activity from a student, 
teachers shall try other disciplinary measures before 
imposing the restriction. Recess restriction shall be subject 
to the following conditions:
1. The student shall be given adequate time to use the 
restroom and get a drink or eat lunch, as appropriate.32 2. The student shall remain under a certificated 
employee’s supervision during the period of restriction. 
3. The student’s teacher shall inform the principal of 
any recess restrictions imposed. 
98. Respondent’s disciplinary methods violated Board Policy 5144 . (Findings 
14, 17, 18.) 
99. Respondent violated Stephan’s directives by refusing to answer V.P.’s 
parents’ concerns, interacting with V.P. after being directed to have no contact, 
refusing her directive to stop having students rank each other, and talking about V.P. 
with his class after he had been transferred. (Findings 23, 26, 30, 37, 38.) 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. In teacher dismissal proceedings, the school district ordinarily bears the 
burden of proving the facts and circumstances constituting cause for dismissal by a 
preponderance of the evidence. (
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 
2. Respondent contends that he is entitled to a clear and convincing 
standard of proof, relying on Education Code section 44114. Pursuant to section 
44114, subdivision (e), a teacher who has been retaliated against for statutorily 
protected “whistleblowing” may assert that as an affirmative defense in an 
administrative hearing regarding adverse action by an employing school district. 
Section 44114, subdivision (e), places on the teacher the initial burden of proving “by a 33 preponderance of the evidence that an activity protected by this article was a 
contributing factor in the alleged retaliation.” To constitute an activity protected under 
section 44114, the teacher must demonstrate that he or she had a reasonable and 
good faith belief that an improper governmental activity occurred. A “protected 
disclosure” is defined by section 44112, subdivision (e), as “a good faith 
communication that discloses or demonstrates an intention to disclose” an “improper 
governmental activity,” which section 44112, subdivision (c), defines as an “activity 
[that] violates a state or federal law or regulation,” or “is economically wasteful or 
involves gross misconduct, incompetency, or inefficiency.” 
If the teacher meets his or her burden of establishing the elements described 
above, the burden shifts to the District to demonstrate by clear and convincing 
evidence that the adverse action would have occurred for legitimate, independent 
reasons, even if the teacher had not engaged in the protected activity. (Ed. Code, 
§ 44114, subd. (e).) 
3. The District contends that: 1) this provision of the Education Code does 
not apply in teacher dismissal proceedings; 2) even if it does apply, respondent never 
filed any report of unlawful activity that would trigger application of this provision; and 
3) the District would be prejudiced by application of this provision because respondent 
did not assert it until hearing. The District further contends that even if a clear and 
convincing standard of proof applies in this proceedings, it has met that higher 
burden. 
4. The District’s contentions are persuasive. The Commission doubts that 
the burden-shifting provision of section 44114 applies to teacher dismissal 
proceedings. Assuming it does apply, respondent’s baseless complaints of unlawful 
activity were not made in good faith, and respondent has not met his burden of 34 establishing that any protected activity on his part was a contributing factor in the 
District’s decision to dismiss him from employment. Respondent has not established 
that the burden-shifting and heightened standard of proof set forth in Education Code 
section 44114 apply to this case. 
Alleged Due Process Violations
5. Prior, during, and at the conclusion of the hearing, respondent moved to 
dismiss this action based on alleged violations of his right to due process. Respondent 
has not established that his rights have been violated. Respondent was notified prior 
to the District’s investigation and was provided the opportunity to present evidence on 
his behalf. Respondent was then afforded the opportunity to respond to the 
allegations prior to the presentation of the Statement of Charges to the Board, and did 
so. The errors in the original Statement of Charges were not substantive or prejudicial, 
and respondent’s rights were not violated by the issuance of the Revised Statement of 
Charges without additional Board approval. Respondent did not establish that the 
District violated his rights by unreasonably delaying issuing the Statement of Charges, 
which was approved by the Board approximately eight months after respondent was 
placed on administrative leave. 
Finally, respondent’s right to due process has been honored through this 
administrative hearing by a Commission of three individuals with no prior relationship 
or involvement with the District or any of the District’s witnesses.
Summary of Respondent’s Contentions 
6. Respondent contends that he cannot be found to have violated or 
refused to obey directives or to have been insubordinate because he raised objections 
to the directives as unlawful. This contention lacks merit; respondent’s numerous, 35 baseless objections to lawful directives did not relieve him of his obligation to follow 
District policy and management directives. 
7. Respondent contends that he is being disciplined for protected activity, 
including expressing his views at the staff meeting. This contention lacks merit 
because respondent is being disciplined for the aggressive, defiant manner in which he 
expressed his views and for his refusal to follow District policy, not for engaging in 
protected activity. 
8. Respondent asserts that there was no evidence that V.P. was upset by 
anything respondent did. This assertion was contradicted by the evidence, which 
showed that respondent’s conduct negatively impacted V.P. 
9. Respondent asserts that the District cannot discipline him for disagreeing 
with the directive not to touch V. because the directive was “unlawful.” Respondent 
appears to argue that the directive was unlawful because it did not include an 
exception for him to touch the student if she was in imminent danger. Respondent’s 
contention is rejected because the District’s dismissal is based on respondent’s 
persistent violation of and refusal to comply with numerous other lawful policies and 
directives, and his misstatements about his right to touch students. It is not premised 
on respondent violating Cosmos’s directive. 
10. Respondent contends that the District’s allegations and evidence at 
hearing are based on biased witnesses. This contention is rejected. Respondent had 
the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses to expose any bias. The Commission 
weighed the credibility and considered the motives of the witnesses in making the 
Factual Findings. 36 11. Respondent contends that his behavior was professional and his motives 
were praiseworthy. These contentions were refuted by the evidence. 
Causes for Dismissal 
12. The District alleges two statutory causes for respondent’s dismissal: 
evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)), and persistent violation 
of, or refusal to obey, reasonable regulations prescribed by the Board ( , subd. (a)(8)).
PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS
13. As set forth in Factual Findings 85 through 99, respondent engaged in 
persistent violations of Board Policies, Administrative Regulations, and directives from 
principal Stephan. Cause for dismissal for persistent violation was established. 
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
14. The Education Code authorizes a school district to dismiss a permanent 
certificated employee who is “clearly not fit, not adapted to, or unsuitable for teaching, 
ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (
 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 
1429, 1444.) Such evident unfitness may exist, for example, when a teacher is 
repeatedly and incurably insubordinate, or is incapable of maintaining cordial, 
cooperative relationships with colleagues. ( , at pp. 1436-1440.)
15. The Commission must evaluate a teacher’s unfitness for service 
considering several criteria, including likelihood and degree of adverse impact on 
students and fellow teachers, proximity or remoteness in time of the relevant conduct, 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the 
teacher’s motives, the likelihood of recurrence, and the extent to which disciplinary 37 action might inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights 
of the teacher. ( (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230.) In 
addition, the Commission must evaluate whether the conduct demonstrating unfitness 
“is caused by a defect in temperament.” ( , , 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1445.)
Respondent’s actions of sharing confidential student information; asserting that he has 
a right to pick up students; using intimidation and bullying tactics; making negative 
statements about students to other students; refusing to consider other teachers’ 
perspectives at staff meetings; failing to follow District values; failing to take 
accountability for his misconduct; failing to meet with V.P.’s parents without V.P. 
present; failing to answer V.P.’s parents’ questions; interacting with V.P. after he was 
removed from respondent’s class; threatening to pick up V.; using disciplinary 
measures that do not follow the District’s discipline matrix; and encouraging students 
to make negative statements about other students; together and separately establish 
respondent’s evident unfitness for service. 
Adverse Impact on Students and Fellow Teachers 
16. Respondent’s conduct had a significant adverse impact on students and 
fellow teachers. There was ample evidence that V.P. suffered as a result of 
respondent’s excessive discipline, to the point that he was moved to another 
classroom with only eight days left in the school year. V.P. and the other student were 
negatively impacted by respondent’s attempt to exclude them from the field trip. 
Following V.P.’s transfer to another class, respondent continued to inflict harm on V.P. 
by discussing the move with other students and continuing to communicate with him, 
even after being directed to have no contact. Respondent’s students were harmed by 
the ranking activity and by being publicly shamed. Cremers was negatively impacted 
by respondent’s behavior on June 5, when he interrupted her class to communicate 38 with V.P. Respondent’s students and Cremers’s students were also negatively impacted 
by this incident. V. also suffered as a result of respondent’s actions, as did the two staff 
members who witnessed respondent threaten to pick her up. The negative impact of 
respondent’s demeaning and humiliating behavior may persist over time. 
Fellow teachers at Brewer Island were negatively impacted by respondent’s 
disruptive and demeaning behavior at staff meetings and in email communications. 
Proximity or Remoteness in Time 
17. The bulk of the allegations transpired within the last two years and are 
proximate in time.
Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 
18. There are no extenuating circumstances. Aggravating circumstances 
include respondent’s protracted negative interactions with V.P.; his inappropriate 
attempt to discuss V.P.’s parents’ concerns in front of his entire class; his apparent 
retaliation against V.P. in the form of lower grades in social responsibility; his 
interference with V. receiving special education services in the TLC classroom; his 
interruption of class time by bringing his class to Cremers’s class; and his threatening 
statement to V., a child with a history of trauma.
Respondent’s Motives 
19. Respondent’s motives are blameworthy and not praiseworthy. He 
accepted no responsibility for his actions. His refusal to answer V.P.’s parents’ concerns 
was unjustified. He made repeated baseless allegations of unlawful activity in bad faith 
and in an apparent attempt to justify his misconduct and avoid compliance with lawful 39 directives. He is indifferent to the effect his actions have had on students and other
teachers. 
Likelihood of Recurrence 
20. Overwhelming evidence established that if the District retained
respondent as a teacher, respondent would continue to violate District policy and to 
resist any efforts by District administrators to correct his discipline methods and 
change his behavior. Respondent has a history of rejecting directives. Respondent is 
steadfast in his views that his behavior and teaching approach are professional and 
that any criticism of him is unlawful. Respondent cannot be trusted to abide by Board 
policy or state law, especially involving the use of appropriate, effective discipline 
methods. 
Chilling Effect 
21. The evidence did not establish that any constitutional right will be 
adversely impacted by disciplinary action against respondent. Respondent’s 
allegations of unlawful activity were unsubstantiated and had no role in the District’s 
decision. Respondent is not being disciplined for exercising any constitutional right.
Determination 
22. Although the Commission has found cause to dismiss respondent, the 
Commission has discretion to decline to dismiss him. (
(1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.)
23. The Commission determined that respondent is not temperamentally 
suited to teach, as evidenced by his demeaning conduct towards students and 
colleagues, his protracted harassing behavior towards V.P., his threat to pick up a 40 student, his refusal to follow Board policy, and his repeated, baseless accusations of 
unlawful actions by others. Respondent disingenuously denied refusing to follow laws 
and policies and depicted his conduct as justified noncompliance with unlawful 
directives. 
Respondent’s attitude towards this proceeding provided further evidence of his 
unfitness to teach. Respondent refused to meaningfully participate at deposition and 
refused to respond to questions at hearing. He persisted in stating that he was 
cooperating when he was not. Respondent engaged in serious misconduct with 
significant negative impact on students and fellow teachers. He expressed no remorse 
and accepted no responsibility for his actions. It is overwhelmingly likely that 
respondent would continue to engage in similar misconduct if returned to the 
classroom. Dismissal from his position is warranted. 
 41ORDER
Respondent Bron Hantzis is dismissed from his position as a permanent 
certificated employee of the San Mateo-Foster City School District due to his 
persistent violation of and refusal to obey reasonable Board policies and directives and 
his evident unfitness for service. 
DATE:
KAREN REICHMANN
Commission Member
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
DATE:
LAURA ANDREWS
Commission Member
DATE:
CARISSA CARRERA
Commission Member
