BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SAN FRANCISCO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
KATELAND JEAN HARTE, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, Respondent.  
OAH No. 2024010722 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence convened to hear this matter on 
August 2, 2024, by videoconference. are Jacqueline 
Gerosolimo, Devin Triplett, and Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Holly M. Baldwin, State 
of California, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), who served as Chair. 
Senior Deputy General Counsel Christine Lee represented complainant Amy 
Baer, Associate Superintendent of Human Resources, San Francisco Unified School 
District. 
There was no appearance by or on behalf of respondent Kateland Jean Harte. 
The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on August 2, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS 
1. The San Francisco Unified School District (District) seeks to dismiss 
respondent Kateland Jean Harte from employment. Cause for dismissal under 
Education Code section 44932 is based on allegations of immoral conduct; persistent 
violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 
or the governing board of the District; evident unfitness for service; and dishonesty. 
2. Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District, 
teaching English at Galileo Academy of Science and Technology, a high school. 
3. At a meeting of the San Francisco Board of Education (Board) on 
December 12, 2023, the Board approved a Statement of Charges against respondent 
alleging cause for dismissal under Education Code section 44932, and adopted a 
Resolution of Intent to Dismiss, directing that respondent would be dismissed from 
employment with the District 30 days after service of notice upon her, unless she filed 
a written request for hearing within that 30-day period. (At the same meeting, the 
Board also adopted a separate resolution immediately suspending respondent without 
pay, which is not a matter before the Commission.) 
4. On December 15, 2023, respondent was personally served with a Notice 
of Intent to Dismiss, the Statement of Charges, and the Resolution of Intent to Dismiss. 
5. Respondent timely requested a hearing. The matter was subsequently 
referred to OAH to set the matter for hearing and convene a Commission on 
Professional Competence pursuant to Education Code sections 44934 and 44944. 3 6. This matter was previously set for hearing on June 11 through June 13, 
2024. ALJ 
Holly M. Baldwin, by videoconference and telephone. The hearing did not proceed on 
that date, because not all Commission members had yet been designated. The ALJ 
ordered that the hearing be continued, and determined that the matter would be 
reduced from three days to one day of hearing. 
counsel were present, a date for the continued hearing was agreed upon: August 2, 
2024, at 9:00 a.m. The ALJ confirmed with respondent her current contact information. 
7. On June 11, 2024, the ALJ issued an Order Reducing Number of Days of 
Hearing, and Continuing Hearing, setting the continued hearing for August 2, 2024, at 
9:00 a.m., by videoconference, with respondent allowed to appear by telephone if she 
was not able to appear by video. OAH served this order on respondent on June 11, 
2024, by U.S. mail and email. Complainant also served respondent with a copy of this 
order on June 12, 2024, by U.S. mail and email. Prior to the hearing date of August 2, 
2024, OAH provided videoconference and telephone access information to respondent 
 by email. 
8. Respondent did not appear at hearing on Friday, August 2, 2024. 
9. A  
request for hearing. The Commission deliberated and determined that respondent was 
properly served with notice of the continued hearing; declared respondent in default 
pursuant to Government Code section 11520; and deemed respondent to have 
withdrawn her request for hearing, as set forth below in Legal Conclusion 4. 
10. On Sunday, August 4, 2024, after the record had closed in this matter, 
respondent sent an email message to OAH regarding her dismissal hearing, without 4 copying . A notice of communication was issued by 
OAH and served on the parties pursuant to Government Code section 11430.50. 
 email message has not been considered by the Commission. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. Under Education Code section 44934, subdivision (b), the governing 
board of a school district seeking to dismiss a permanent employee of the district shall 
give notice to the employee of its intent to dismiss the employee at the expiration of 
30 days from service of the notice, unless the employee demands a hearing. 
2. Under Education Code section 44944, charges against respondent have 
been referred to the Commission to conduct a hearing. ( , subd. (c).) The Commission 
shall prepare a written decision containing findings of fact, determinations of issues, 
and a disposition that shall be, solely, one of the following: that the employee should 
be dismissed; that the employee should be suspended for a specific period of time 
without pay; or that the employee should not be dismissed or suspended. ( , subd. 
(d)(1).) The decision of the Commission shall be deemed to be the final decision of the 
governing board of the District. ( , subd. (d).) 
3. In  (2012) 207 Cal.App.4th 170, 
permanent 
employee dismissal hearings. The court concluded that a commission on professional 
competence must conduct a hearing and act on the charges, but found that the 
hearing was not required to be an evidentiary hearing on the merits of the charges. 
[T]here is nothing in the statutory scheme that requires an 
evidentiary hearing  of the charges in the 5 accusation. The most that can be said is the hearing had to 
proceeding
determination of facts pursuant to which an agency 
formulates and issues a decision. 
( at p. 177 (emphasis in original; internal citations omitted).) 
4. The Commission has determined that proper notice of the hearing was 
given, and respondent failed to appear. (Factual Findings 7-9.) The Commission has 
declared respondent in default pursuant to Government Code section 11520, 
subdivision (a), under which the agency may take action following 
to appear. (Factual Finding 9.) Respondent has been provided the opportunity to 
respond to the charges, and she has failed to do so. Respondent is deemed to have 
withdrawn her request for hearing. (Factual Finding 9.) 
5. Pursuant to Education Code section 44937, respondent shall be 
dismissed from her employment with the District, effective January 14, 2024 (30 days 
after she was served with the notice of intent to dismiss on December 15, 2023) (see 
Factual Finding 4). 
  6ORDER
Respondent Kateland Jean Harte is hereby dismissed from her position as a 
permanent certificated employee of the San Francisco Unified School District, as of 
January 14, 2024.
DATE:
JACQUELINE GEROSOLIMO
Commission Member
DATE:
DEVIN TRIPLETT
Commission Member
DATE:
HOLLY M. BALDWIN
Commission Chair
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
