BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
SALINAS UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
CHRISTOPHER BRABANT, a Permanent Certificated 
Employee, Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024080851 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by 
videoconference on January 13 through 17 and 21 through 24, 2025. The 
are Milton Hambly, King City Union School District; Logan 
Loya, Roseville Joint Union High School District; and Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. 
Cox, State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings, who presided. 
Attorneys Gabriela D. Flowers and Selina Ayala-Patlán represented the Salinas 
Union High School District. 
Attorney Melissa Yoest represented respondent Christopher Brabant, who was 
present throughout the hearing. 
The Commission received oral opening statements and testimonial and 
documentary evidence. The record remained open for the parties to provide written 
closing arguments. They provided these documents timely. The record closed and the 
matter was submitted for decision on April 4, 2025. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS 
1. The Salinas Union High School District operates several middle and high 
schools in Monterey County. 
2. Respondent Christopher Brabant began serving as a high school social 
during the fall 
semester of the 2016 2017 academic year. He continued in this role until February 
2024, when the District placed him on administrative leave. 
3. On June 25, 2024, acting in his official capacity as former 
Superintendent, Dan Burns presented a Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of 
Charges against respondent to Trustees. The 
adopted these charges
employment. 
4. Burns served the Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Statement of Charges to 
respondent on June 26, 2024. Respondent timely requested a hearing. 
 
5. Respondent graduated from California State University, Fullerton, in 2012 
with a bachelor of arts degree. He then enrolled in a teaching credential program at 
California State University, Monterey Bay. 
6. The evidence does not establish where respondent taught before joining 
the EAHS faculty in 2016. His student teaching during the credentialing program was 
at Watsonville High School, and he also had undergone some training at EAHS before 
becoming an EAHS faculty member. 3 7. At EAHS, respondent taught World History (a 10th grade course), United 
States Government (a 12th grade course), and Ethnic Studies (a 9th grade course). 
8. During his tenure at EAHS, respondent has been active in his union. He 
also has served as a department chair and as president of the faculty senate. 
Classroom Mismanagement 
9. The District alleges numerous ways over several years in which 
respondent not only failed to prevent but encouraged student misconduct in his 
classroom. 
PERMITTING UNROSTERED STUDENTS TO DISRUPT CLASSES 
10. Over several years, and despite repeated admonitions from multiple 
administrators at EAHS, respondent welcomed students into his classroom during 
instructional periods who were not enrolled in his classes for those periods (or, in 
some cases, who were not enrolled in any of his classes that semester). Some students, 
on some days, stayed only for short times. Other students, or on other days, spent 
the classrooms to which those students were assigned during those class periods. In 
addition to missing their own instruction, these guest students often interfered with 
receive instruction from respondent. Numerous 
examples of such conduct are in evidence. 4 April 2022 
11. In April 2022, EAHS Principal1 Katherine Redondo encountered students 
on two occasions during instructional periods who had left their classes to visit 
instant noodles, for which they paid respondent. They also had prepared the noodles 
by adding boiling water. On one of these occasions, Redondo encountered a student 
a student who 
had come from a different class to get noodles. 
12. Redondo met with respondent regarding her concern that students were 
skipping their own classes and disrupting his classes to get snacks. She summarized 
their meeting in a memorandum to respondent dated April 21, 2022, that instructed 
him specifically 
 
October 2022 
13. On October 5, 2022, EAHS Assistant Principal2 Guillermo Arenas received 
a telephone call from a parent who stated that one of her s teachers had 
informed her that her child was rarely present for  class. Instead, the 
parent reported, and Arenas confirmed, that the child usually skipped the 
 
1 Redondo was the principal at EAHS between December 2019 and June 2023. 
2 EAHS has four assistant principals. Arenas was an assistant principal at EAHS 
between fall 2020 and spring 2024. 5 assigned class and sat in The child was not enrolled in 
any class with respondent; in fact, this student provided a written statement to Arenas 
suggesting  
14. On October 21, 2022, a different Arenas for help 
locating the . Soon thereafter, an officer from the Salinas Police 
Department also called Arenas about the same student. The parent told Arenas that 
the student had been missing from home 
student  was at the EAHS campus. The student was not enrolled in any 
classroom, during an instructional period. 
15. Respondent testified that although the student Arenas had found in 
developed a relationship with her in which she would confide in him. He went on to 
identify several other  
16. Respondent denied having taken time away from his own students to 
interact with students who were visiting his classroom, stating instead that he 
attended to student guests only while his assigned students were working 
independently. In light of all evidence, this testimony is not credible. 
17. Arenas prepared a memorandum to respondent, dated November 4, 
The memorandum also stated clearly the basis for 
this directive: 6 Your conduct negatively impacted student attendance. 
Students are being marked absent or truant. It is also 
affecting the efficient operation of our attendance 
department. Your conduct has also resulted in parents 
worrying about the whereabouts of their students. Your 
conduct also negatively impacts instructional time for your 
students and the students not on your roster who visit your 
classroom. Your actions also negatively impact the 
instructional programs of your colleagues. 
18.
response to the Letter of Reprimand. This statement characterized  
hosting students who were not them 
because they were .It stated further that respondent had seven students 
problems: from boyfriend drama, food insecurities at home, anxiety, depression, and 
 statement asserted that because EAHS 
administrators had directed him no longer to host these seven students in his own 
classroom while they skipped their other classes, the students had suffered multiple 
3 
 
3 No evidence addressed whether these statements by respondent about these 
students were true. 7 April 2023 
19. In mid-April 2023, 
students engaged in an argument over where some of them would sit. The students 
were arguing not over student seats in the classroom, but over the privilege to sit 
. The students who had claimed these positions, and refused 
to yield  Eventually, the 
avoid a physical fight with the intruding students. 
20. On April 25, 2023, respondent was not at school. The District assigned 
es. Hernandez had 
significant substitute teaching experience during the 2022 2023 academic year, 
including experience in other classrooms at EAHS. 
21. During each of the first three instructional periods, Hernandez 
encountered four to six students in  classroom who were not on that 
Late in the morning, before lunch, he emailed the school 
secretary to say that he did not want to return to the classroom on subsequent days 
because the students were so unruly. Hernandez acknowledged that students in other 
classrooms and at other schools also were unruly, but testified credibly that the 
 classroom were by far the most insolent and 
unmanageable that he ever had encountered. He noted as well that students told him 
consistently that respondent tolerated similar behavior. 
Summer 2023 
22. On most mornings during the summer school session in 2023, lead 
Campus Safety and Security Officer (SSO) Adriana Espinoza noticed a former EAHS 8 student she recognized entering
that the student was enrolled in summer school. Late in the summer session, however, 
she learned that the student was not enrolled in any EAHS summer course. 
December 2023 
23. On December 8, 2023, EAHS English teacher Brian Tumminelli covered 
-period class because respondent had been called away from the 
classroom. At the beginning of the class period, several students who were not on the 
class roster came into the classroom and 
efforts to make them leave to go to their own classes. During the class, additional 
students came to the door to seek entry. Some of these students told Tumminelli 
falsely that they were on re  
January 2024 
24. In mid-January 2024, Arenas received a complaint from a student about 
other students smoking or vaping near the complaining student during a class period 
Arenas investigated this complaint and took written 
statements from several students (none of whom testified at the hearing). Some of 
these students reported that respondent routinely tolerated students in his classroom 
periods, and that these students usually congregated in the back of the classroom to 
play music, talk, and smoke or vape nicotine or cannabis. Other students reported that 
classroom. One such student explained that he 
than attending a visited 
 9 25. On January 23, 2024, EAHS Principal4Miguel Ocampo saw several 
students  during an instructional period. 
during that class period. 
February 2024 
26. In addition to social science courses, respondent was responsible during 
the 2023 About 25 students were assigned to 
2024 academic year homeroom. Homeroom sessions occurred only 
once per week, on Thursdays. 
27. During homeroom sessions, respondent sometimes needed to make 
announcements to the class about upcoming school events. In addition, during some 
homeroom sessions, students received special presentations on topics such as mental 
health and personal relationships. Aside from these purposes, a homeroom session 
functioned as a study hall or help period. Students in all homerooms, including in 
 often would leave their assigned homerooms to seek special 
help from teachers in their academic classes, or to join classmates from different 
homerooms to work on collaborative projects. Although homeroom sessions did not 
have lesson plans or syllabi, their intent was not simply for students to socialize. The 
District considered homeroom to be an instructional period, and respondent knew that 
homeroom qualified as an instructional period. 
 
4 Ocampo has been the principal at EAHS since July 2023. 10 28. 2024 academic year 
homeroom testified credibly that homeroom sessions usually were . 
These students testified that many students from other homerooms would come to 
classmates on schoolwork but rather to smoke or vape, socialize, and play music. 
These students testified that the classroom often held many more students during 
homeroom than chairs. 
29. On February 15, 2024, respondent hosted an especially crowded and 
chaotic homeroom session. Forty or more students were present, in a room with at 
most 36 seats. SSO Clarissa Hernandez, who visited the classroom during that 
homeroom session (as summarized below in Findings 43 through 46) testified credibly 
that the room was dark and smoky, and that 
style music . 
30. Respondent agreed that he had admitted numerous students to his 
homeroom on February 15, 2024, who had no instructional or homeroom-related 
reason to be there. He testified that he did so because he believed that allowing these 
students to visit his classroom during homeroom might discourage them from visiting 
his classroom during other instructional periods. 
TOLERATING IN-CLASS ALCOHOL AND CANNABIS USE 
31. Students regularly used cannabis, usually with vaping devices, in 
 and in his presence. They also sometimes drank alcohol. 
Respondent was aware that students engaged in these behaviors. Occasionally he 
chastised or discouraged them, but he never made disciplinary referrals for alcohol or 
drug use. Moreover, through his own behavior as well as through decorations that he 11 allowed students to display in his classroom, respondent conveyed to students that he 
condoned both cannabis and alcohol use. Multiple examples of such conduct are in 
evidence. 
32. Both students whose testimony is summarized in Finding 28 stated 
specifically and credibly that they regularly saw other students vaping during 
homeroom. Although vaping students sometimes attempted to conceal their 
misbehavior, such as by ducking behind friends, the two student witnesses said that 
the cannabis smell in the classroom should have made any reasonable person know 
that people were using cannabis. Several other students provided credible written 
statements (but not testimony) to the same effect. 
33. EAHS has a formal disciplinary referral procedure. A faculty member who 
suspects a student of using alcohol or cannabis during school must call an 
discipline. Although District records show that respondent occasionally mentioned 
show that he never made any disciplinary referrals for such behavior. 
Classroom Artwork 
34.
which people could use thumbtacks or push pins to hang up lightweight items. Items 
 
a. A cartoonish drawing of a human hand holding a rolled cigarette. The 
drawing also includes a depiction of a cannabis leaf. It is 
is decorated around the perimeter with additional drawings of rolled cigarettes. 12 b. A drawing of a woman wearing a business suit and pillbox hat, who is 
standing outside two saloon doors. The woman , and her 
knees are wobbly. She holds a bottle, and a carton with other bottles is near her feet. 
The drawing  
c. A drawing of a cannabis leaf, encircled by a rainbow. This drawing was 
above a white board and directly below a District-issued poster listing conduct 
expectations for EAHS students. 
35.
display in his classroom before he went on administrative leave in February 2024. 
According to this testimony, a student had hung the drawing on the wall one day after 
school, and respondent found it the next morning. Rather than simply removing the 
for the classroom. District administrators placed him on administrative leave that same 
day, however, and he was not able either to speak to the student or to remove the 
drawing. 
36. The testimony summarized in Finding 35 is not credible. Multiple credible 
2024 academic year. 
37.
He said that the student had 
told him that the drawing depicted a flight attendant. Respondent professed not to 
have known until the District commenced this proceeding to terminate his 13 refers to a woman who is intoxicated by 
alcohol.  ignorance of Spanish is not at all credible.5 
January 2024 
38. As noted above in Finding 24, a student complained to Arenas in 
mid-January 2024, about other students smoking or vaping near her during a class 
with respondent. In conversation with Ocampo about this complaint, respondent 
acknowledged that he had seen a student vaping in his class on that day. Respondent 
did not summon an SSO or refer that student for discipline. 
39. In March 2024, while respondent was on administrative leave as 
summarized above in Finding 2, a student who followed respondent on Instagram sent 
him two photos. standing 
while drinking brown liquid from a bottle with a Hennessy Cognac label. Both 
 At least one other 
 
40. The photographs indicate that someone took them on January 18, 2024, 
at 9:07 a.m., although no evidence confirms that this date and time indication is true. 
Respondent was in his classroom on January 18, 2024, at 9:07 a.m., but testified that 
he does not recall having seen any students either taking or posing for these 
photographs. Respondent recognizes the student in the photographs, but is not sure 
 
5 Later in the hearing, respondent used the Spanish word to describe 
someone, instead of using the English word ip. He also testified proudly about 
having numerous family members with Mexican heritage. 14 (and no evidence establishes) whether this student was on class roster 
for a morning class period in the spring 2024 semester. 
41. The photographs in evidence include no accompanying message, but 
respondent testified that the student who sent them asked whether the photos had 
 Respondent forwarded copies of 
the photographs to his union representative, but not to any District staff member. 
42. The photographs described in Findings 39 and 40 show that the students 
involved in making them were comfortable drinking alcohol, or simulating drinking 
alcohol,  If respondent 
had been supervising his class properly, he could not have overlooked these students. 
And if respondent saw these students posing for and taking these photographs, he 
should have referred them immediately for discipline, regardless of what liquid actually 
was in the bottle. 
February 2024 
43. The overcrowded, chaotic homeroom session on February 15, 2024, came 
to SSO Hernandez  when a student approached her outside the classroom 
to At about the same time, lead SSO 
Espinoza received a report from a different SSO who overheard a student elsewhere on 
the EAHS campus saying 
a liquor bottle. Espinoza directed SSO Hernandez and SSO Sandra Garcia to go to 
tigate. 
44.
classroom on February 15, 2024, the room smelled of both cannabis and alcohol. She 
did not see any students drinking or vaping, however. She also did not see respondent 15 until he stepped forward from a corner and asked for her help identifying students 
who should and should not be in the classroom. 
45. After SSOs Hernandez and Garcia came to the classroom, they 
summoned Espinoza. Espinoza testified that the District has authorized SSOs to walk 
through classrooms to look for and at items that are in plain view. An SSO may search 
an individual student s person or possessions only with individualized probable cause 
to believe that the student has a prohibited item, however, and only with an 
administrative staff member present. Espinoza and Garcia walked through the 
classroom, but observed no vaping devices or liquor bottles. 
46. The SSOs attempted several times to summon an administrative staff 
member to the classroom, but no administrative staff member responded promptly. 
They concluded that waiting further would be futile, because without authority to 
would not find any alcohol bottle or 
vaping device or identify any particular student who had been drinking, smoking, or 
vaping. As the SSOs left the classroom, respondent asked Espinoza whether they had 
found the bottle. 
47. After the SSOs had left the classroom, EAHS Assistant Principal Jer 
Soriano arrived. He had been unable to respond sooner to the SSOs  request because 
he was in a meeting with other staff members and a student s parent. Soriano entered 
the classroom and observed many more students than seats. Several students left, and 
 
48. Respondent admits that he saw at least one student vaping during 
homeroom on February 15, 2024. Rather than calling immediately for an SSO when he 16 saw the student exhale vapor, respondent left his classroom and went to the classroom 
next door. Although respondent testified that he asked that teacher to call for an SSO, 
she did not do so. Respondent also testified that when SSOs Hernandez and Garcia 
arrived, he assumed they had come because the neighboring teacher had called, and 
that he pointed out the student who had exhaled vapor to SSO Garcia. This testimony 
is not credible; although Garcia did not testify, she provided a more credible statement 
no . 
Also, numerous students who did not testify provided written statements to the effect 
that students smoked and vaped regularly during homeroom, in front of respondent, 
and he did nothing. Respondent knew that students were vaping in his homeroom on 
February 15, 2024, and he neither intervened to stop them nor called for any campus 
SSO or administrative staff member. 
49. Respondent denies having seen any student drink anything he suspected 
to be alcohol during homeroom on February 15, 2024. Despite this denial, the 
testimony by Espinoza and Soriano summarized above in Findings 46 and 47 is 
non-hearsay evidence that respondent did understand alcohol to be present in the 
classroom, whether or not he saw students drink it. 
15, 2024, were passing around a labeled liquor bottle and discussing it loudly. 
Respondent knew or should have known that students were drinking alcohol in his 
homeroom on February 15, 2024, but he neither intervened to stop them nor called for 
any campus SSO or administrative staff member. 17 STORING SHARP AND FLAMMABLE ITEMS IN UNSECURED LOCATIONS  
50. Respondent stored a set of tools for ornamental wood carving in his 
classroom, in his desk.6 The evidence does not establish whether any students ever 
saw respondent use these tools or knew where he stored them. 
51. Respondent also kept a variety of flammable materials in his classroom, 
including candles and a refillable flame lighter with lighter fluid. The lighter and lighter 
fluid were in a locked cabinet. 
52. Respondent testified that he used the lighter and lighter fluid in his 
Ethnic Studies curriculum, to teach students about the custom among some Native 
American groups of burning sage or similar aromatic plants to purify a space. He 
testified further that EAHS Assistant Principal Ricardo Vazquez had given him 
permission to burn sage outdoors, but not inside his classroom. Vazquez testified 
more credibly, to the contrary, that he had instructed respondent explicitly never to 
light sage on fire on campus. 
ALLOWING UNACCOMPANIED , UNSUPERVISED STUDENTS IN THE CLASSROOM  
53. At mid-day on April 25, 2023, substitute teacher Hernandez locked 
 empty classroom and went to eat lunch. When he returned, numerous 
students were in the classroom. These students told Hernandez that respondent had 
admitted them to the room. Hernandez chased the students out of the classroom, 
locked it again, and went to the school office to say that he would not finish even that 
 
 
6 Respondent testified that he kept these tools in a locked drawer. 18 54. On February 15, 2024, respondent allowed his daughter (who is an EAHS 
Respondent was not present, and he did not leave the students under any other EAHS 
. To his knowledge, they were alone in the classroom. The 
Statement of Charges alleges that respondent did not have a classroom key while 
these students were inside, but the evidence was not conclusive as to this allegation. 
Dishonesty 
55. During the several years preceding his administrative suspension in 
February 2024, respondent repeatedly was dishonest when speaking to EAHS and 
District administrative staff about his classroom practices. He told several 
administrative staff members, for example, that he referred students regularly to the 
EAHS campus wellness center, The Nest, but in truth he did not. Respondent falsely 
told District Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources Hector Galicia that 
Vazquez had authorized him to burn sage in his Ethnic Studies classes. Finally, 
respondent assured administrators that he would stop allowing students who were not 
in his courses to skip their own courses to disrupt his classroom, but he continued this 
practice without interruption. 
56. Respondent characterized himself repeatedly, in testimony as well as in 
his post-hearing briefing, as holding a special, formal School-Wide 
Intervention Coordinator, with responsibility for identifying and assisting students 
who are experiencing mental health challenges. This statement is false. The evidence 
does not establish any such assignment for respondent, or any training in counseling 
or mental health caregiving that might have qualified him for such an assignment. To 
the contrary, the evidence establishes that respondent expressed interest to Redondo 19 in a role as an academic intervention specialist, but that no administrator ever selected 
him for it. 
57. Respondent gave other false testimony at the hearing as well. 
a. He testified that on January 23, 2024, he called for an SSO to come to his 
classroom because he had seen a student vaping, and that Ocampo accompanied the 
SSO. 
Ocampo 
because he had seen students outside the classroom as described in Finding 25. 
Respondent then testified that he had asked Ocampo to meet with him on January 24, 
2024, to discuss student discipline; but Ocampo testified, again more credibly, that he 
had summoned respondent to a meeting because of ongoing concerns about 
 
b. Respondent testified that between the date the District placed him on 
administrative leave (February 21, 2024) and the date he met later with Galicia (April 
response to his report about student vaping on February 15, 2024. He professed not to 
have realized until April 10, 2024, that the investigation for which the District had 
placed him on leave related to his own persistent tolerance for intruding students and 
for drug and alcohol use in his classroom. This testimony is false. 
c. Galicia left his position with the District in summer 2024, and took a 
similar position with a different school district. Respondent posted a series of 
photographs, with captions, on his publicly accessible Instagram page (described 
below in Finding 60), depicting his trip to District headquarters to give Galicia a 
parting gift of sage, bundled as if for use in a purification ritual. He decorated these 20 photographs with various emojis, including one resembling a smiling pile of human 
feces. Respondent testified falsely that he intended this gift as a good faith gesture to 
Galicia, wishing him well in his new position, rather than as a derogatory suggestion 
that the District would need to purify its  
Additional Evidence 
58.  advertised 
On one 
occasion (the evidence did not establish the date), respondent allowed this student to 
give respondent a haircut in his classroom, during a class session. 
59. Respondent kept a coloring book 
 He had torn out one page and displayed it 
 
60. Respondent maintains at least one Instagram account. He testified at the 
hearing that he does not use social media frequently, but that he maintains an 
nuclearfall where he communicates 
information from time to time that is relevant to his ethnic studies class. Examples in 
evidence of posts and photographs from this account include only personal 
information about respondent, however. Respondent also used this Instagram account 
to solicit donations to fund his defense in this matter. Respondent testified that he is 
current students to follow his Instagram account. Two students who testified 
account. 
61. Numerous photographs also are in evidence from another Instagram 21 it, however, all depicting students who appear to be sleeping at school. No evidence 
establishes that any of these students, or their parents, gave respondent permission to 
photograph them and distribute their photographs. To the contrary, respondent 
understood the students in the photos to be unaware (because they were asleep) that 
he was photographing them. 
62. Three students testified to support respondent. 
a. The first student testified that respondent allowed her to confide in him 
about mental health concerns, and shared his own experiences with generalized 
anxiety disorder. This student gave respondent her mobile telephone number, and 
recalls communicating with him by text message several times. This student also 
other classes, and that she saw other students doing likewise. 
b. A second student also testified that respondent encouraged her to 
confide in him. When she and a boyfriend stopped seeing one another, respondent 
counseled her, and also allowed her to come to his classroom to avoid her former 
boyfriend in a class they shared. 
c. A third student considered respondent very emotionally supportive. She 
asked respondent and his wife to serve as godparents for her quinceañera, which they 
did, even though she knew them only because they had been her teachers.7 They gave 
her a ceremonial gift and attended the celebration. This student also testified that 
 
7 
 22 respondent helped her overcome feelings of insecurity, by telling her that she is 
  
63.  
a. First, respondent characterized himself as being more committed than 
welfare. He believes that by allowing students to visit his classroom during any class 
period, and by counseling them about vaping rather than referring them for discipline, 
he supports their welfare rather than undermining their education. The examples 
respondent gave to show his devotion to student success were superficial and routine, 
however; they did not demonstrate greater attention by respondent than by any other 
teacher or EAHS administrator to social justice or student achievement. Furthermore, 
the conduct summarized above in Findings 10 through 49 harmed many students, by 
exposing them to cannabis, alcohol, and secondhand smoke; by communicating 
implicitly that cannabis and alcohol use by teens during school hours is not harmful; 
and by depriving them of the education they deserved from EAHS. 
b. Second, respondent described numerous personal stressors that he 
contends affected his judgment during the 2023 2024 academic year. None of the 
concerns he described, either separately or together, explained his repeated failure to 
abide by clear, obvious directives from school administrators, or to focus his attention 
on teaching his students rather than on cultivating their affection. Further, 
onsumed in his classroom suggests that this 
medication may have impaired his judgment while he was on duty. 23 64.
includes numerous other allegations, in detail. Because the evidence before the 
Commission is inconclusive as to these allegations, and because they are minor in 
nature, the Commission did not consider them in making its decision. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. The District bears the burden in this matter of proving facts and 
A preponderance of the evidence must prove these facts and circumstances. (
 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 
2. The Commission has considered all admissible testimonial and 
findings above. These findings reflect a preponderance of the evidence. 
Causes for Dismissal 
3. The District alleges four 
immoral conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)), dishonesty ( , subd. (a)(4)), evident 
unfitness for service ( , subd. (a)(6)), and persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, 
reasonable regulations prescribed by the Board ( , subd. (a)(8)). 
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
4. Courts have interpreted  to 24 (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 
972.) 
5. Complainant characterizes respondent as having engaged in immoral 
conduct by allowing students to consume cannabis and alcohol in his classroom, by 
failing to refer such students for discipline, and by lying to campus administrators 
about how he handled students who he suspected of using cannabis or alcohol. The 
Commission concurs that such conduct, by a high school teacher, is immoral. The 
Commission concludes further that the matters stated in Findings 31 through 33 and 
38 through 49 establish that respondent did engage in immoral conduct constituting 
cause to dismiss him from employment. 
6. Complainant alleges that respondent acted immorally by permitting 
matters summarized in Findings 34 through 36 show that respondent displayed 
matters summarized in Findings 50 and 51 show that he kept flammable and sharp 
items in the classroom. 
a. Respondent acted immorally by displaying student artwork in his 
classroom that celebrated cannabis and alcohol use. 
b. 
candles and lighter fluid, or of wood carving tools, immoral. 
7. Complainant also characterizes respondent as having engaged in 
immoral conduct by allowing students to use his classroom without supervision, and 
by leaving students in the classroom without taking his key. The matters summarized 25 in Findings 53 and 54 establish that respondent did allow students to be in the 
classroom when respondent was not, although the matters stated in Finding 54 do not 
establish that he left students in the classroom when he did not have the key. The 
Commission does not find this conduct immoral, however. 
DISHONESTY  
8. Complainant accuses respondent of dishonesty in communicating with 
EAHS administrative staff members about referring students for counseling or 
discipline, about calling on campus SSOs for assistance, about tolerating vaping in his 
classroom, and about managing guest students in his classroom. The matters stated in 
Findings 37, 52, and 55 through 57 show respondent to have been dishonest to EAHS 
administrators and to the Commission about these topics. This dishonesty is cause to 
dismiss respondent from employment. 
PERSISTENT REFUSAL TO OBEY REASONABLE REGULATIONS  
9. District Board Policy 4019.21 requires teachers to maintain high ethical 
and professional standards, and specifically to protect students from conditions 
In addition, Board Policy 5000 requires 
teachers to The matters 
summarized in Findings 10 through 49 establish that respondent failed repeatedly to 
follow these policies, and the Commission finds that this failure is cause for his 
dismissal. 
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
10. The Education Code authorizes a school district to dismiss a permanent 26  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 
1429, 1444.) 
to several criteria, including likelihood and degree of adverse impact on students and 
fellow teachers, proximity or remoteness in time of the relevant conduct, extenuating 
or aggrav
motives, and likelihood of recurrence. (  (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214, 229-230.) In addition, the Commission must evaluate whether the conduct 
, 2 
Cal.App.4th at p. 1445.) 
Adverse Impact on Students 
11. Cannabis and alcohol use by adolescents is harmful to their mental and 
physical health. A teacher who tolerates student use of these drugs at school harms 
the students using these drugs and their classmates, both by disrupting their 
education and by communicating approval of these harmful substances. Allowing 
students to skip 
also is harmful to all involved students. As summarized in Findings 10 through 49, 
respondent committed these acts an
conduct caused adverse impacts on students. 
Proximity in Time 
12. The events summarized in Findings 10 through 62 all occurred between 
2021 and 2024. They are recent, not remote. 27 Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 
13. As summarized in Finding 63.b, the Commission does not credit 
evidence regarding extenuating or mitigating circumstances for his 
behavior. Instead, s 18 and 63.a) that 
his conduct helped students rather than harming them is an aggravating circumstance. 
Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of Motive 
14. As summarized in Findings 18 and 63.a, respondent explained his 
would be praiseworthy, but the Commission does not 
the same light. Rather, and as summarized 
in Findings 10, 15, 18, 30, and 58 through 62, reflects his wish to be some 
peer, friend, or trusted confidant, despite the negative effects his behavior had on 
other students and on his faculty colleagues. This motive is blameworthy, not 
praiseworthy. 
Likelihood of Recurrence 
15. As summarized in Findings 12, 17, 55, and 57.a, respondent persisted in 
his misconduct despite numerous attempts by EAHS administrators to redirect him. He 
also, as summarized in Findings 30 and 63.a, testified even to the Commission that he 
this matter establishes to the Commission that respondent would not alter his 
behavior or his student relationships if he returned to EAHS. 28Summary
16. During his last several years at EAHS, respondent managed his classroom 
and related to his students and colleagues in a grossly unprofessional manner. His 
misconduct at EAHS, as well as his emphasis at hearing on excusing his conduct rather 
than on reforming it, justifies his dismissal from employment.
ORDER
Respondent Christopher Brabant should be dismissed from employment with 
the Salinas Union High School District.
DATE:
DATE:
DATE:JULIET E. COX
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
MILTON HAMBLY
Commission Member
LOGAN LOYA
Commission Member
