BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
CARMEL UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
RUSSELL SHUGARS, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024090043 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in 
Carmel-by-the-Sea, California, on February 3 through 6, 2025
members are Joe Jones and Kevin Sparrer, both from the San Jose Unified School 
District, and Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, who presided. 
Attorney Ingrid Meyers represented complainant Craig Chavez, Chief Human 
Resources Officer, Carmel Unified School District. 
Attorney Joseph A. Cisneros represented respondent Russell Shugars, who was 
present throughout the hearing. 
The Commission received oral opening statements, testimonial and documentary 
evidence, and oral closing arguments. The record closed and the matter was submitted 
for decision on February 6, 2025. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS 
1. The Carmel Unified School District operates three elementary schools in 
Monterey County. 
2. Respondent Russell Shugars began serving as an elementary-grade 
physical education teacher in the District in 2007 or 2008.1 Initially, he taught in all 
three District elementary schools. After approximately 2010, and continuing until May 
2024, respondent taught only at Carmel River Elementary School. 
3. On August 14, 2024, acting in his official capacity as 
Human Resources Officer, complainant Craig Chavez filed a Statement of Charges 
Education. On that same date, the 
District Resolution 24-
dismiss respondent from employment based on the Statement of Charges. 
4. Chavez served Resolution 24-15 and the Statement of Charges to 
respondent on August 15, 2024. Respondent timely requested a hearing. 
 
5. with 
a major in kinesiology. 
 
1 Respondent does not recall precisely when he began teaching in the District, 
and no other evidence included this information. 3 6. In 2001, respondent moved to Los Angeles. He taught physical education 
at a private school, to students in kindergarten through second grade. 
7.
make education his career. He attended a one-year teacher credentialing program at 
California State University, Northridge. In June 2004, he obtained a single-subject 
credential from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing authorizing him 
to teach physical education. 
8. Respondent then moved to Monterey County. He taught physical 
education for about three-and-one-half years at Seaside High School before joining 
the District. 
9. Respondent also has served as a wrestling coach for students in middle 
and high schools. He coached high school wrestling when he lived in Los Angeles, and 
at Seaside High School. In the District, he has coached both middle school and high 
school wrestling. 
10. The only disciplinary record in evidence regarding respondent from 
before March 2024 is a conference summary memorandum from March 2022. Former 
Carmel River Elementary School principal Jay Marden testified that he had received 
occasional complaints about respondent from parents and teachers over 
approximately 14 years,2 but that he never deemed any such complaints serious 
Resources staff. 
 
2 Marden retired at the end of the 2022 2023 school year. 4 these complaints, in aggregate, is reasonable with respect either to their frequency or 
their seriousness. 
Allegations of Unprofessional Conduct During March 2024 
11. The Statement of Charges alleges four instances of unprofessional 
conduct by respondent in March 2024, all involving fifth-grade students. As to each of 
these four events, the only non-hearsay evidence about 
them. 
MARCH 1, 2024 
12. On March 1, 2024, respondent held a fifth-grade physical education class 
The class engaged in a jump-rope activity. 
13. One student, CS, dove through the jump rope head-first, rather than 
running or jumping upright. Respondent told CS not to repeat this behavior, because 
[the head-
Respondent testified credibly that he does not recall exactly what he said to CS but 
that he likely did say substantially what complainant alleges. 
14. Complainant alleges that and that 
respondent described CS as seeking often to be the center of attention as if he were 
to describe CS in conversation with other adult District staff members about the 
incident summarized in Finding 13. The evidence does not establish that respondent 5 incident summarized in Finding 13. 
15. Complainant alleges that that CS felt during the incident described in 
Finding 13 No non-hearsay evidence establishes 
statements to CS. 
MARCH 20, 2024 
16. On March 20, 2024, respondent held a fifth-grade physical education 
class outdoors, on a playing field adjacent to the school building. Near the end of the 
activities. The students sat on the ground. Respondent stood in front of the group, 
holding a plastic cone. 
17. he cones respondent 
usually used during physical education classes were blue, and were about 18 inches 
tall with a base about 10 inches across. Respondent testified that he held this type of 
cone on March 20, 2024.3 No 
example cone, or photograph, is in evidence. 
18. One student near respondent, KY, was not paying attention to the class 
discussion. Respondent released the cone from his hand and it fell to the ground near 
 
3 Some witnesses who were not present on March 20, 2024, testified that they 
understood the cone in question to have been a large orange cone with a weighted 
base, of the type that traffic control crews commonly use. This testimony likely reflects 
misunderstanding of the event. 6 KY. . Respondent testified credibly 
that he did not see the cone hit KY but that it came close enough to KY that it could 
have (either on its way to the ground, or after bouncing). 
19.
No 
non-hearsay evidence establishes that respondent threw the cone at KY overhand, or 
forcefully, or that respondent intended to cause the cone to touch 
and that he did so with the intention of causing the cone to come near enough to KY 
to startle KY into paying attention to class. 
20. No evidence establishes that KY suffered any injury on March 20, 2024. 
MARCH 21, 2024 
21. On March 21, 2024, respondent also held a fifth-grade physical education 
class outdoors on the same playing field. Students engaged in several activities 
involving frisbees, including simple throwing and catching, playing ultimate frisbee, 
and playing disc golf. 
22. While respondent was speaking with a student, a frisbee thrown by CS 
suddenly passed CS was in the 
disc golf group, and respondent believes that CS threw out of turn frisbee hit a 
nearby structure, which was not at all near the disc golf target. 
23. Respondent admonished CS that his errant 
CS attempted to argue with respondent. 7 24. Respondent testified that he told CS to go back, and to make a better 
throw when his turn came up again, but that CS ignored respondent and advanced 
along the disc golf course. In an earlier interview with District staff members, however, 
respondent stated (as did CS in an interview) that respondent told CS to sit out the 
rest of the class. 
in light of all evidence than his hearing testimony. Respondent directed CS to sit out 
for the remainder of the class session on March 21, 2024. 
UNKNOWN DATE4 IN EARLY MARCH 2024 
25. In early March 2024, respondent and a different physical education class 
were on or near the playing field. Some fifth-grade students, supervised by their 
classroom teachers, were using the track that surrounds the field. 
26. Fifth-grade student DS and several classmates were walking together on 
the track. Most of these students were walking forwards, but DS was facing the other 
students and talking with them while walking backwards. Respondent noticed this 
group of students when they were relatively close to respondent, but about as far 
away from their teachers on the track as was possible. 
27. Respondent stepped onto the track and stood still, but did not speak. He 
allowed DS to continue walking backwards until DS backed into respondent. 
 
4 Complainant alleges that this event also occurred on March 21, 2024, but the 
evidence shows it to have occurred a week or two earlier, on a date that witnesses 
could not remember with certainty. 8 Respondent then took DS by the shoulders and turned him around, telling DS to face
forward because walking backwards on the track is unsafe. 
28. to involve himself 
because other teachers were supervising DS. The evidence does not 
unsafe, 
risking injury to DS as well as to other students, and that the other adults present were 
either too far away or too inattentive to intervene effectively. 
Notice of Unprofessional Conduct 
29. KY told his parent after school on March 20, 2024, that respondent had 
thrown a cone at KY that day 
20232024 principal, Alberto Ramirez, 
who reported it in turn to District administrators. 
30. Ramirez and District Human Resources Director5 Thérèse Phillips 
 They spoke to several 
students, who described not only the cone incident summarized in Findings 16 
through 20 but also the track incident summarized in Findings 25 through 28. They 
received a report on March 21, 2024, from a teacher to whom CS had complained 
about the frisbee incident summarized above in Findings 21 through 24.6 Finally, 
 
5 Phillips currently is principal of Carmel River Elementary School. 
6 
cone incident to her, but Ramirez and Phillips already knew about this incident. 9 jump rope incident summarized in Findings 12 through 15, although no evidence 
shows what (if anything) Ramirez did to investigate this report before March 21, 2024. 
31. On Friday, March 22, 2024, the District placed respondent on 
administrative leave while Ramirez and Phillips continued their investigation into the 
reports they had received possible misconduct. Although their 
last written reports about these investigations are dated April 8, 2024, respondent 
remained on leave until the end of April 2024. 
32. On April 29 or 30, 2024, complainant delivered a written Notice of 
Unprofessional Conduct (dated April 29) to respondent. This Notice states that District 
employees investigated the incidents summarized in Findings 12 through 28, and 
substantially similar to the terms in the later Statement of Charges. This Notice also 
includes a list of specific directives to respondent, such as not making discriminatory, 
harassing, bullying, derogatory or demeaning 
requests for 
 
 
33. Respondent returned from administrative leave on Wednesday, May 1, 
2024. He did not teach any students on that day, but rather used the day in part to 
complete some training that the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct had directed him 
to complete. 
34. On May 2 and 3, 2024, Ramirez and District Superintendent Sharon Ofek 
received email from several parents expressing 
A parent who 10 also teaches at Carmel High School met with Ramirez on May 3 regarding similar 
employment, not only because of the incidents summarized above in Findings 12 
through 28 but also because they characterized these March 2024 incidents as 
harsh conduct toward students throughout his Carmel 
River Elementary School career.7 
MAY 2, 2024 
35. On May 2, 2024, respondent assisted in after-school pickups (as he had 
done regularly before his administrative leave). His colleague Laurie Garcia, who was 
supervising students waiting for school buses, asked him to take two unruly students 
. She could not accompany the students herself, because she 
needed to wait with the remaining students in the bus line. 
36. Respondent was in a hurry to leave Carmel River Elementary School for 
the day, because he needed to go to Carmel Middle School to coach a wrestling team 
practice. He escorted the two students to the school office, where he encountered 
kids for you. Do you want to speak to them now?
Ramirez told respondent that Ramirez could not speak with the students right then, 
and asked respondent to write up disciplinary referrals. 
37.
 
7 Only one of these parents testified at the hearing, however. Although this 
non-  before March 2024. 11 The evidence establishes that respondent had been outdoors in the warm 
afternoon sun, and that he hurried with the students into the school office (not into 
that respondent intruded on Ramirez in a private room, or that respondent was 
inappropriately angry on this occasion toward either the students or Ramirez. 
38. Respondent later wrote the disciplinary referrals Ramirez requested, 
although they are not in evidence. To write them, he needed to ask the school 
registrar to confirm who were 
-hearsay evidence supports this allegation. 
MAY 3, 2024 
39. Respondent taught the fifth-grade physical education class that included 
KY on May 3, 2024. Garcia attended the class, specifically to keep an eye on KY, whose 
parent had told that KY was apprehensive about seeing respondent again. 
Teaching assistant Laura Cogley also was present, as was Gloria Elber, a special dance 
instructor who was helping the class prepare for an upcoming performance. About 40 
students were present in total. 
40. Elber was primarily responsible on May 3, 2024, for leading the class, 
while respondent and Cogley assisted and observed. Garcia and respondent both 
described the students that day as generally inattentive and resistant to instruction. 
41. While Elber attempted to lead the students in their rehearsal, respondent 
walked around the group in an effort to keep them on task. He also spent time in front 
of the group, simulating an audience for their performance. 12 42. Respondent and Garcia both testified that respondent scolded students 
collectively and individually for their disruptiveness, urging them to pay attention to 
.
Respondent quarreled with this word, but acknowledged in his own testimony that he 
felt and expressed annoyance with the students for conduct that he deemed 
disrespectful to Elber. 
43. At one point during the class, respondent startled Garcia and several 
students by hitting one open palm with his other fist. A few minutes later, respondent 
did several pushups, which Garcia interpreted as an attempt by respondent to calm 
himself. Respondent concurred that he had done a set of pushups as a self-calming 
he described as a technique that he counsels and models 
regularly for students. 
44. Complainant alleges that respondent 
Despite the matters stated in 
Findings 42 and 43, the evidence did not support this extreme characterization. 
45.
respondent walked near KY.8 She did not testify, however, that respondent ever 
appeared to approach KY deliberately or threateningly, or even that respondent paid 
any unusual attention to KY. Respondent, for his part, testified credibly that he was 
careful on May 3 to avoid direct interaction with KY during class, because he 
 
8 
evidence establishes how close respondent came to KY on May 3, 2024, or whether 
three feet would have been unreasonably close under the circumstances. 13 recognized that KY might be uncomfortable around respondent. Respondent also 
noted that he wore sunglasses that day, for the outdoor class, and that he doubted 
that any student could see precisely where he was looking at any time. 
46. later to Ramirez that respondent had given KY 
The non-hearsay evidence does not 
establish that respondent made any such negative or threatening facial expressions 
toward KY at any time on May 3, 2024. 
47.
Elementary School campus on May 3, 2024, to pick up KY, rather than waiting for KY to 
Ramirez 
interact with respondent, and followed the parent to make sure that no conflict arose. 
 Respondent also 
testified that he does not recall seeing KY with any adult9 immediately after school on 
May 3, 2024. 
48.
had encountered respondent after school, where 
during class. No non-hearsay evidence established ; instead, the 
 
 
9 Respondent testified credibly that he does not think he would have 
 without KY. 14 Additional Evidence 
49. Because of the new complaints summarized in Findings 34, 46, and 48, 
the District again placed respondent on administrative leave beginning May 6, 2024. 
He did not return to the classroom during the 2023 2024 academic year. Moreover, 
-15 in August 2024, 
respondent has not returned to teach at Carmel River Elementary School or to coach 
wrestling at Carmel Middle School or Carmel High School for the 2024 2025 year. 
50. The matters summarized in this decision have generated significant 
publicity and division within the District. Some students, teachers, and parents believe 
strongly that respondent is an excellent teacher and coach. Others believe strongly, 
and regardless of his coaching skill, that respondent is too volatile and unkind to serve 
effectively as an elementary school physical education teacher. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. The District bears the burden in this matter of proving facts and 
A preponderance of the evidence must prove these facts and circumstances. (
 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1039.) 
2. As summarized above in Findings 30 and 34, District staff members who 
investigated respondent received first-hand information from people who had seen or 
participated in many events complainant alleges as cause to dismiss respondent from 
employment. Under the Education Code and the Government Code, however, the 
Commission may not base its factual testimony to 
the Commission about these other  accounts, no matter how reasonable or 15 credible that testimony may be. Rather, Education Code section 44944 and 
Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), permit the Commission to consider 
hearsay only for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence  
Because respondent made timely objections, these statutes forbid the Commission to 
make factual findings based solely on hearsay that would be inadmissible in civil 
actions under the Evidence Code. 
3. The Commission has considered all testimonial and documentary 
These findings reflect a preponderance of the admissible evidence. 
Alleged Causes for Dismissal 
4. The District alleges four 
immoral conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)), unprofessional conduct ( , subd. 
(a)(2)), evident unfitness for service ( , subd. (a)(6)), and persistent violation of, or 
refusal to obey, reasonable regulations prescribed by the Board ( , subd. (a)(8)). 
MARCH 1, 2024, JUMP ROPE INCIDENT 
5. The matters summarized in Findings 12 through 15 do not constitute 
immoral conduct or unprofessional conduct, within the meaning of Education Code 
evident unfitness for service under subdivision (a)(6), and they do not involve violation 
of or refusal to obey any reasonable regulation, as prohibited by subdivision (a)(8). 
EARLY MARCH 2024 TRACK INCIDENT 
6. Turning student DS by grasping his shoulders, as summarized in Finding 
27, was a poor choice that involved more force than was reasonably necessary to 16 address the danger DS posed to himself and others by walking backwards on the 
track. Nevertheless, in total, the matters summarized in Findings 25 through 28 do not 
constitute immoral conduct or unprofessional conduct, within the meaning of 
Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) or (a)(2). They do not demonstrate 
6), and they do not 
involve violation of or refusal to obey any reasonable regulation, as prohibited by 
subdivision (a)(8). 
MARCH 20, 2024, CONE INCIDENT 
7. The behavior summarized in Findings 18 and 19 causing a plastic cone 
to land where it might have hit student KY was unwise. Overall, however, the matters 
summarized in Findings 16 through 20 do not constitute immoral conduct or 
unprofessional conduct, within the meaning of Education Code sections 44932, 
for service under subdivision (a)(6), and they do not involve violation of or refusal to 
obey any reasonable regulation, as prohibited by subdivision (a)(8). 
MARCH 21, 2024, FRISBEE INCIDENT 
8. The matters summarized in Findings 21 through 24 do not constitute 
immoral conduct or unprofessional conduct, within the meaning of Education Code 
evident unfitness for service under subdivision (a)(6), and they do not involve violation 
of or refusal to obey any reasonable regulation, as prohibited by subdivision (a)(8). 17 MAY 2, 2024, CONDUCT TOWARD RAMIREZ 
9. The matters summarized in Findings 35 through 38 do not constitute 
immoral conduct or unprofessional conduct, within the meaning of Education Code 
evident unfitness for service under subdivision (a)(6), and they do not involve violation 
of or refusal to obey any reasonable regulation, as prohibited by subdivision (a)(8). 
MAY 3, 2024, ETALIATION  AGAINST KY AND PARENT 
10.
regarding the cone incident. The matters stated in Findings 45 through 48 do not 
establish any such retaliation, however. For this reason, these matters do not 
constitute immoral conduct or unprofessional conduct, within the meaning of 
Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) or (a)(2). They do not demonstrate 
under subdivision (a)(6), and they do not 
involve violation of or refusal to obey any reasonable regulation, as prohibited by 
subdivision (a)(8). 
MAY 3, 2024, AGITATION DURING CLASS SESSION 
11. Although the matters summarized in Findings 39 through 44 establish 
-grade physical education class on May 3, 2024, 
these matters do not constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct, within the 
meaning of Education Code sections 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) or (a)(2). They do not 
6), and 
they do not involve violation of or refusal to obey any reasonable regulation, as 
prohibited by subdivision (a)(8). 18 Summary 
12. The matters summarized in Findings 18, 19, 23, 24, 27, 42, and 43 show 
that respondent at times has displayed a short temper, and has encountered difficulty 
controlling some student -seeking misbehavior. Further, the matters 
stated in Findings 10 and 34 imply that other such incidents have occurred throughout 
The Commission does not discount or ignore concerns raised to it 
service, even though the Commission also recognizes that other staff members, 
teachers, and parents respect and admire respondent. Regardless of these differing 
opinions, however, the Commission did not receive evidence of misconduct that would 
warrant  
 19ORDER
Respondent Russell Shugars should not be dismissed from employment with 
the Carmel Unified School District.
DATE:
DATE:
DATE:JULIET E. COX
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
JOE JONES
Commission Member
KEVIN SPARRER
Commission Member
