BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
MICHAEL COHEN (EN 794808), 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024100323 
DECISION 
This matter was heard by a Commission on Professional Competence, 
(Commission) by videoconference from February 3 through 6, 2025. The Commission 
consisted of Paula Falsetta, John Kohlmeier, and Nana Chin, Administrative Law Judge 
(ALJ) with the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California.
Complainant Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD or District) was 
represented by Leslie J. Chi and Brian Davenport, Assistant General Counsels. 
Respondent Michael Cohen (Respondent) was represented by Jason Wojciechowski, 
Attorney at Law, Bush Gottlieb, A Law Corporation. 
Testimony and documentary evidence were received. The record was held open 
until February 19, 2025, for District to submit briefing on Education Code section 2 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A), and for Respondent to submit a response. The briefs were 
timely submitted and marked respectively as Exhibits 31 and B. 
The Commission considered the matter in executive session. After due 
consideration of the entire record herein, the Commission makes the following factual 
findings, legal conclusions, and order. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Respondent has been employed by LAUSD as a credentialed teacher 
since 2010 and has been assigned to McAlister High School since 2014.
2. On September 11, 2024, the District served Respondent with a Notice of 
the Board of Education’s Intention to Dismiss and Notice of Immediate Unpaid 
Suspension.
3. On August 14, 2024, Francisco J. Serrato, Ed.D., Chief Human Resources 
Officer, filed a Statement of Charges against Respondent, alleging: immoral conduct 
(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1); § 44939); unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, 
subd. (a)(2)); evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)); persistent 
violation of, or refusal to obey, the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed by the State Board of Education or governing board (Ed. Code, § 44932, 
subd. (a)(8)); and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause (Ed. Code, § 44939).
4. The factual allegations in the Statement of Charges (Exh. 1) and 
Accusation (Exh. 6) are summarized as follows:3 A. “During the period commencing in or around September 2021, to the 
period ending in or around October 2022, [Respondent] did the following causing 
student C  H. to feel uncomfortable. [¶] a. Made comments about women's 
buttocks and breasts. [¶] b. On at least one occasion told a student to wear clothes 
that showed less cleavage because it looked gross. [¶] c. Noticed when students' 
bodies changed. [¶] d. Sent her texts on her personal cell phone during the summer. 
[¶] e. Discussed personal issues with students, including talking about colleagues. [¶] f. 
Held a Zoom meeting with students during the summer break. (Exh. 1, pp. A2-A27, p. 
A26-27.) 
B. “During the period commencing in or around September 2021, to the 
period ending in or around October 2022, [Respondent] did the following to student 
C  H. [¶] a. Regularly allowed her to remain in his classroom when she skipped 
other classes; [¶] b. Allowed her to remain in his class when she completed her work; 
[¶] c. Asked her for hugs and held her hand when she had panic attacks causing her to 
feel uncomfortable; [¶] d. Regularly texted her during non-instructional time; [¶] e. 
Regularly called her to check on how she was doing and had conversations that lasted 
less than 30 minutes; [¶] f. Treated her differently than he treated the other students; 
[¶] g. Gave her a new baking tray; [¶] h. Sent her a text on her birthday to ask how she 
was doing; [¶] (i) Gave her his cell number and told her that he was up late if she 
needed to talk; [¶] (j) Texted her a picture of Snoopy and wrote, ‘Thank you for 
thinking of me,’ when she called him to inform him that she was not going to attend a 
Zoom meeting.” (Exh. 1, pp. A2-A3, Exh. 6, p. A27.) 
C. “During the period commencing on or around September 2021, to the 
period ending on or about October 18, 2022, [Respondent] said words to the effect of 
the following to 11th grade student A  P. when she wore a crop top to school 
4 causing her to feel embarrassed and wanting to cry: [¶] a. ‘You should not eat the 
granola bar. Your stomach is sticking out,’ when she mentioned she wanted a granola 
bar. [¶] b. ‘You should talk to someone about losing weight.’” (Exh. 1, p. A3, Exh. 6, p. 
A27.) 
D. “During the period commencing on or around August 2020, to the period 
ending on or around October 2022, [Respondent] did the following: [¶] a. Stated that 
he did not think about how big women's butts or breasts were but that he did notice 
when his students started to fill out their bodies. [¶] b. Regularly contacted students on 
their personal telephone numbers. [¶] c. Spoke negatively about colleagues and 
Principal Nurnisa Kurban. [¶] d. Shared confidential information about students with 
other students. [¶] e. Provided minimal support to students because he was often on 
the computer. [¶] f. Gave students bulk assignments and then retreated to his 
computer. [¶] g. Told his virtual class that pregnant women look like penguins. [¶] h. 
Discussed personal matters with students.” (Exh. 1, p. A3, Exh. 6, pp. A27-A28.) 
E. “When [Respondent] engaged in the above misconduct [as set forth in 
Factual Findings 4A-4D] commencing in or around August 2020, and ending in or 
around October 2022, . . . , [Respondent] willfully refused to perform his regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing District, as evidenced by the following: [¶] a. 
[Respondent’s] failure to follow administrative directives previously given to him, 
including but not limited to, that he: [¶] i. Not put his hands or have physical contact 
with students unless they are in immediate danger to themselves or others. [¶] ii. Use 
good judgment when speaking and working with students. [¶] iii. Refrain from any 
personal comments of a sexual nature with students. [¶] iv. Refrain from any personal 5 comments with students. [¶] v. Adhere to all Board policies and bulletins.” (Exh. 1, p. 
A4, Exh. 6, p. A28.)
F. “When [Respondent] engaged in the above misconduct commencing in 
or around August 2020, and ending in or around October 2022, as described in 
[Factual Findings 4A-4D] individually and/or collectively, [Respondent] willfully refused 
to perform his regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing District, as evidenced by the 
following: [¶] b. [Respondent’s] failure to adhere to all District Policies, specifically, but 
not limited to: [¶] i. LAUSD Code of Conduct with Students [¶] ii. LAUSD Employee 
Code of Ethics [¶] iii. LAUSD Board Rule Reaffirming the Respectful Treatment of all 
Persons [¶] iv. LAUSD Sexual harassment Policy [¶] v. LAUSD Non-Discrimination and 
Anti-harassment (including sexual harassment) Policy and Complaint Procedure [¶] vi. 
California Standards for the Teaching Profession [¶] vii. Teaching and Learning 
Framework.” (Exh. 1, p. A4, Exh. 6, pp. A28-29.)
G. “During the period commencing on or around August 2021, to the period 
ending on about June 2022, on one occasion, [Respondent] became upset and threw 
desks and chairs in the classroom when he learned that Karla Griego, a teacher at 
McAlister High School, left work early.” (Exh. 1, p. A4, Exh. 6, p. A29.)
5. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense and Request for Hearing.
6. On October 30, 2024, Kristen K. Murphy, Ed.D., Associate Superintendent 
Talent & Labor Relations, filed an Accusation, reiterating the charges in the Statement 
of Charges.6 McAlister High School 
7. McAlister High School (McAlister)is an alternative educational institution 
in the LAUSD system for students in seventh through twelfth grade, designed to 
support pregnant and parenting students. During the period alleged in the Statement 
of Charges, it operated on three satellite campuses. 2019-2020 Final Evaluation Report 
8. Respondent's last formal evaluation before his reassignment, signed on 
April 20, 2020, was admitted as Exhibit 10. As part of his evaluation, Respondent 
participated in an Initial Planning Sheet (IPS) conference on October 4, 2019, and 
submitted his IPS to administration on October 16, 2019. A pre-observation 
conference was held on January 30, 2020, followed by a classroom observation on 
February 7, 2020, and a post-observation conference on February 11, 2020. 
9. Respondent was rated effective in all evaluated areas, including 
instructional delivery. Principal Tara Thurston, who conducted the evaluation, wrote 
that Respondent "has met standard performance in all areas of teaching and 
additional responsibilities" and "has demonstrated exceptional compassion for and 
dedication to the students. He is always looking for ways to improve his instruction in 
an effort to improve student achievement." (Exh. 10, p. A48.) 
Investigation 
10. On October 17, 2022, C  H., a student, emailed Principal Nurnisa 
Kurban to report that she no longer felt comfortable around Respondent. She alleged 
that, during a conversation with another student, M , who asked Respondent how 
his perspective had changed with age, Respondent stated that he no longer thought 
7 about “how big a woman’s butt is or how big the breasts are,” and added that he 
notices “when [his] students start to fill in their bodies.” (Exh. 27, p. A319.)
11. C  stated that this was not the first time Respondent had made her 
feel uncomfortable, and that he had previously made other “weird comments” she had 
dismissed. She also reported that Respondent texted her and invited her and M  
to a Zoom meeting on July 26, during which he spoke negatively about Principal 
Kurban, Ms. Griego, and other teachers. C  stated she “would prefer to now be in 
Mr. Furlan’s class and just have [teachers aide] Miriam [Limpahan] bring [her] work 
from his class.” (Ibid.) 
12. The following day, Principal Kurban submitted an Incident System 
Tracking Accountability Report (iSTAR) and contacted the Los Angeles Police 
Department (LAPD) Abused Child Unit. LAPD found no indication of a criminal offense 
and recommended that the matter be handled administratively. Respondent was 
reassigned, and the Student Safety Investigation Team (SSIT) initiated a formal 
investigation. 
13. Investigators Santisteban and Skane-Williams conducted interviews with 
Respondent, students, and staff. Investigator Santisteban prepared an investigative 
report (Report) summarizing those interviews and including C ’s complaint and 
her text messages with Respondent from summer 2022. Although neither investigator 
testified at hearing, the Report was admitted into evidence as administrative hearsay. 
(Exh. 27.) 
14. C  and M  were interviewed in person on November 1, 2022. 
C  stated that Respondent had been her English teacher since September 2021 
and allowed her to stay in his classroom throughout the day if she completed her 
8 work, due to issues with other teachers. Her statement is not fully summarized here, 
except where it materially differed from her hearing testimony. 
15. C  reiterated the incident involving M ’s question about aging. 
She reported that Respondent commented that he no longer focused on women's 
physical features but notices when students “start to fill out their bodies.” (Exh. 27, p. 
A304.) M  later told her the comments made her uncomfortable as well.
16. C  also described an incident involving A  P., during which 
Respondent allegedly told A , “When are you going to lose weight? You’re fat.” 
(Exh. 27, p. A304.) (The Report indicates C  stated A  was on Instagram in 
connection with this comment, but C  did not mention Instagram during her 
testimony, and A  did not mention it during either her interview or her testimony 
and this appears to simply have been an error.) 
17. During her interview, M did not recall Respondent making any 
remarks about women’s bodies. She acknowledged the class had covered curriculum 
related to physical development but denied that Respondent made inappropriate 
comments. She described him as friendly and appropriate with students. M  
believed C  filed the complaint because she felt uncomfortable and wanted a 
teacher who spoke both English and Spanish.
18. A  P. was interviewed on March 13, 2023. She described Respondent 
as helpful and said she never heard him comment on students’ bodies or discuss 
personal topics in class. She also denied hearing other students complain about his 
behavior. 
19. A  did recall one incident when she wore a crop top to school and 
told Respondent she was hungry. He told her not to eat a granola bar because her 
9 stomach was sticking out and suggested she talk to someone about losing weight. 
A  said the comment embarrassed her and made her want to cry. She identified 
C  and M  as present. She stated this was the only such remark he made to 
her, and she never heard him make other inappropriate comments. 
20. Investigators also interviewed E  M., J  D., M  R., and T  
V. All four denied hearing Respondent make inappropriate comments or seeing him 
act unprofessionally. None reported feeling unsafe or uncomfortable. Several students 
said they had Respondent’s phone number for school-related purposes such as Zoom 
links or reporting absences. 
21. E  described him as respectful and attentive. J  said he was 
patient and clear. M  appreciated his willingness to speak Spanish. T , although 
she did not appear to like him personally, described Respondent as demanding but 
generally helpful. 
22. On January 27, 2023, investigators interviewed Ms. Miriam Limpahan, Ms. 
Griego, and Principal Kurban in person. 
23. Ms. Limpahan, a special education aide who had worked with 
Respondent for six years, said she had never witnessed inappropriate behavior or 
received student complaints. She noted that C  frequently sought Respondent out 
privately to discuss personal matters and was the only student who regularly engaged 
in one-on-one conversations with him. However, C  never expressed discomfort. 
24. Ms. Griego’s statement was largely consistent with her hearing testimony. 
She reported occasionally observing Respondent’s classroom and believed he did not 
actively teach, instead assigning independent work while using his computer. She 
10 recalled one occasion when Respondent asked her to speak to a student about 
inappropriate attire, her only known instance of him referencing female anatomy.
25. Ms. Griego also recalled Respondent comparing pregnant women to 
penguins in a virtual setting, which she later clarified occurred in a Zoom meeting 
without students. She described another incident in which Respondent was angry that 
she left campus early and told her he had thrown desks and chairs. According to Ms. 
Griego, Respondent stated that students could tell when he was in a bad mood or off 
his medication and said he had “a lot of mental health issues.” She said these remarks 
made her feel “uncomfortable and unsafe.” (Exh. 27, p. A312.) 
26. Ms. Griego further stated that C  told her she felt uncomfortable 
around Respondent and that M  had expressed similar concerns. C  reported 
receiving a summer text message from Respondent and voiced concern about Zoom 
meetings held without another adult present. Ms. Griego said Respondent sometimes 
spoke about personal matters in class, but she could not recall details. She also heard 
him speak negatively about staff and ultimately filed a complaint because she believed 
he was targeting female staff members. 
27. Principal Kurban stated she became principal in August 2021 but never 
observed Respondent teach, as he was reassigned before her evaluation. She 
confirmed that C  initially disclosed her concerns to Ms. Griego, who relayed them 
to her. Upon receiving C ’s written complaint, Kurban notified Operations 
Coordinator Michelle Gorsuch, and Respondent was reassigned the following day. 
28. Principal Kurban also stated that she feels uncomfortable and unsafe 
around Respondent due to his frequent emails challenging her administrative 
11 decisions and the accusatory tone of his text messages. She said Respondent accused 
her of targeting him, which she denied. 
District Proceedings Against Respondent 
29. On October 6, 2023, a conference was held with Respondent, after which 
he received a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and Notice of a 15-Day Suspension by 
email. These notices were prepared by Principal Kurban, who stated that she based the 
charges on the findings of the Report, but she admitted she disregarded statements 
that contradicted C ’s statements. Principal Kurban also testified that she did not 
understand the charges that were unrelated to C ’s complaint. 
30. On November 28, 2023, an administrative review was held with 
Respondent, his attorney, and Adan Martinez, Staff Relations Field Director, before 
Gilberto Martinez, Administrator of Operations, Region East. 
31. During the meeting, Respondent stated that he had submitted a written 
response to the charges. Administrator Martinez noted that Respondent’s written 
response requested that the charges and accusations be rescinded and argued that 
neither suspension nor dismissal was warranted.
32. In his written response, Respondent stated that C  remained in his 
classroom under an administrative directive and that he was performing his regular 
duties as instructed. He further stated that students were required to have his personal 
phone number for class-related communications and that his communications with 
C  were cordial, professional, and school-related. Respondent also explained that 
his comments to A  P. may have been misunderstood. He acknowledged asking 
Ms. Griego to speak to a female student regarding attire he considered inappropriate 
for school. Respondent denied ever throwing a desk or chairs. 
12 33. Administrator Martinez elected to recommend to the District’s Board of 
Education that Respondent be dismissed from employment. 
Hearing Testimony 
C  H. 
34. C  H. attended McAlister High School’s San Fernando campus from 
fall 2021 until her graduation in December 2022. She transferred from San Fernando 
High School three months after giving birth at age 14 and lived in a group home for 
parenting and pregnant foster youth. At the time, she was experiencing home 
instability and struggling with her mental health. 
35. At a point not established in the record, C  asked not to be placed in 
Mr. Furlan’s class due to his political commentary and remarks about women. She was 
permitted to remain in Respondent’s class.
36. C  testified that she filed a complaint in October 2022 because she 
had grown increasingly uncomfortable with Respondent’s behavior. She believed he 
had become too familiar with her and acted more like a friend than a teacher. She 
stated that he shared personal information, sent her messages outside instructional 
time, gave her a baking tray as a gift, and made comments about female students’ 
bodies that she considered inappropriate. 
37. She acknowledged that during the 2021–2022 school year, she had 
frequently approached Respondent to discuss personal matters and recalled initiating 
at least one private conversation. On another occasion, she expressed concern about a 
medication she was taking, and Respondent advised caution, referencing a friend who 
had experienced negative side effects. Upon cross-examination, she agreed that the 
13 personal information Respondent shared pertained to mental health and was disclosed 
in conversations she had initiated. 
38. C  testified that she experienced a panic attack at school. During the 
episode, she approached Respondent, who took her hands and began speaking to her. 
While she allowed the contact at the time, she later testified that it made her 
uncomfortable. She did not report the incident. This was the only instance of physical 
contact between them.
39. C  stated that baking helped her manage stress. During the school 
year, Respondent permitted her to use the classroom kitchenette, and she often 
shared baked goods with classmates. Respondent later gave her a skull-mold baking 
tray around Halloween. Although she acknowledged that the gift may have been well-
intentioned, she said it made her feel “like a housewife,” particularly because it was 
unrelated to any school assignment. 
40. C  described several text messages from Respondent that made her 
uncomfortable. These included a Facebook link to a video of chihuahuas in Santa hats, 
as well as several messages during summer 2022, including one on her birthday. She 
believed the messages were an inappropriate attempt to foster a closer relationship, 
though she acknowledged Respondent did not invite her to be friends on social media 
and that the birthday message did not reference her birthday.
41. Respondent also proposed a summer meeting with her and M  in 
relation to a mental health club she had started the prior year. They were to decorate 
the classroom and have lunch. C  had concerns about meeting in person and did 
not respond. Respondent eventually changed the meeting to Zoom, which she did not 
object to. 
14 42. C  recounted a comment Respondent made that she found 
inappropriate. He told a student she needed to cover her cleavage, then stated that as 
he got older, he didn’t care about “women’s butts or whatever their bodies,” but 
noticed when students “are developing.” She said this comment, made in front of 
M  G. and others, confused her because it had nothing to do with the topic at 
hand. (M  G. denied hearing the comment during her interview, and the District 
did not call her to testify.) 
43. When asked directly whether she recalled Respondent ever talking to a 
student about their weight gain, she denied it. 
44. When asked whether Respondent talked about other staff members, 
C  agreed. She said she could not recall specific statements but remembered that 
he was not fond of the principal or Ms. Griego. She also recalled Respondent 
mentioning that a new student had special needs, which she believed should have 
remained confidential. 
45. Toward the end of her time at McAlister, C  stated she no longer felt 
safe in Respondent’s classroom. She avoided being alone with him and became 
increasingly concerned about what she perceived as undue attention toward her and 
other female students’ bodies. She reported her concerns to Ms. Griego, who 
suggested that Respondent’s behavior might constitute grooming. C  testified 
that the suggestion alarmed her. 
46. When first asked whether she believed Respondent should return to the 
classroom, C  did not express any safety concerns. Instead, she mentioned that 
Respondent often complained about back pain and stress and that female students 
15 would benefit from a teacher who spoke Spanish. After District counsel asked if C  
no longer felt safe in Respondent’s class, she agreed. 
47. She stated that McAlister’s faculty should be younger and female and 
explained that she felt more comfortable around women due to her history of abuse. 
When asked if Respondent’s actions would have made her uncomfortable had he been 
female, the only conduct she identified was the comment about students’ bodies. A  P. 
48. A  P. testified about her experience with Respondent. She appeared 
nervous during her testimony and became visibly emotional when discussing issues 
related to her weight. 
49. A  recounted that on one occasion, she came to class wearing a 
crop top. Respondent told her that he could see her stomach, which made her feel 
uncomfortable. Although A  acknowledged that the District’s dress code required 
shirts to meet the waistband of pants, she did not believe Respondent’s comment was 
based on the dress code. She noted that other girls wore shorter tops but were not 
similarly addressed. She conceded, however, that she had not spoken with other 
students to determine whether Respondent had addressed dress code violations with 
them. 
50. A  testified that this was the only time Respondent commented on 
her clothing. 
51. When asked whether she believed Respondent was telling her to lose 
weight, A  said yes. She explained that her belief stemmed from two prior 
incidents. 
16 52. First, approximately one week before the crop top incident, Respondent 
asked the class if they wanted a snack. A , who had not eaten breakfast, said she 
would like a granola bar. In response, Respondent allegedly told her not to eat it 
because he could see her belly. A  testified that the comment made her feel upset 
and uncomfortable, as she was already struggling to lose weight and felt insecure 
about her body. 
53. Second, in a separate incident, Respondent mentioned that he was 
planning to sign up with someone to help him lose weight and asked if she wanted 
him to sign her up as well. 
54. Although A  described these as three separate occurrences during 
her testimony, during the investigation she had described all three as occurring on the 
same day. 
55. A  emphasized that she had been dealing with body image concerns 
at the time and perceived Respondent’s comments as judgmental and inappropriate. 
She explained that they were particularly harmful because they were directed at a 
female student.
56. A  stated that girls are judged more harshly than boys based on 
appearance and expressed concern that other female students might feel ashamed or 
unsafe if subjected to similar remarks. 
57. A  concluded her testimony by stating that Respondent should not 
return to the classroom to teach female students. In her view, if he made such 
comments to her, he could make similar remarks to others, causing them to feel 
equally judged or ashamed. 
17 KARLA GRIEGO
58. Ms. Griego was employed by the District as a resource specialist teacher 
and later served as the school coordinator at McAlister during the period of time 
relevant to the Statement of Charges and Accusation. Her testimony focused primarily 
on her interactions with Respondent. Ms. Griego testified that she filed a complaint 
regarding those interactions and received notification in 2024 that her complaint had 
been substantiated. However, the District presented no evidence regarding the 
investigation or its findings. Moreover, the Statement of Charges referenced only one 
interaction involving Ms. Griego. As a result, her testimony concerning her personal 
interactions with Respondent was given limited weight. 
59. Griego described McAlister’s student population as uniquely composed 
of pregnant and parenting students, many of whom had recently immigrated and 
possessed limited English proficiency. She explained that the school’s role extended 
beyond academics to include significant emotional and social support. During the 
2021–2022 school year, she participated in Western Association of Schools and 
Colleges (WASC) focus groups. According to Ms. Griego, students in those groups 
highlighted their non-academic needs, including a desire for social-emotional 
supports and more directed teaching. Following these sessions, a recommendation 
was made in Spring 2022 for more structured instruction. 
60. Ms. Griego testified that her early interactions with Respondent were 
collegial and professional, although she noted that he sometimes made comments she 
considered “different.” She described a turning point in their relationship after an 
incident where she left campus early. She testified that the next day, Respondent 
approached her, said he was upset about being left alone, and told her he had thrown 
desks and chairs in the classroom. He also disclosed that he struggled with anger.18 61. Ms. Griego was not present when Respondent allegedly threw desks and 
chairs, did not observe any damage, and was not told by anyone else that they had 
seen him do so. 
62. Ms. Griego also testified about "community circles" in which students 
shared personal experiences. She explained that students typically did not include 
teachers in these sessions, which often focused on topics such as pregnancy, nursing, 
and bodily changes. She stated that during these circles, students expressed a desire 
for more traditional classroom environments, including directed teaching. Ms. Griego 
raised concerns that Respondent did not provide such instruction and instead 
assigned independent work. However, she did not testify that the WASC 
recommendations or student feedback were ever communicated to Respondent 
before he was removed from the classroom. Nor did she explain how directed 
instruction would be implemented in his class, which she acknowledged included a 
majority of English language learners.
63. Ms. Griego also expressed concern over Respondent’s repeated efforts to 
promote a penguin as the school mascot. She recounted that during a Zoom meeting, 
Respondent made a comparison between penguins and McAlister students, which she 
found inappropriate. She acknowledged that this comment occurred in a meeting not 
attended by students. 
64. According to Ms. Griego, she knew C  H. because C  qualified 
for special education services and had an Individualized Education Program (IEP). In 
fall 2022, while working on C ’s IEP, Ms. Griego congratulated her for no longer 
engaging in avoidant behaviors. C  responded that this was not true and that she 
had been avoiding Respondent’s classroom. C  reported that she had asked 
Respondent how his views on women had changed, and that he stated that as he grew 
19 older, he no longer cared about women’s “butts or breasts,” but noticed when 
students’ bodies began to change. C  said the comment made her feel 
uncomfortable. She also disclosed that she had received text messages from 
Respondent over the summer. 
65. Ms. Griego testified that this was inappropriate for two reasons: (1) staff 
were not supposed to contact students for non-school-related reasons, and (2) staff 
were “discouraged” from using personal cell phones and encouraged to use Google 
Voice. However, she acknowledged that she was not aware of any written policy to 
that effect. 
66. Despite working closely with C , Ms. Griego testified that she had 
not been aware that C  had previously reported feeling uncomfortable around Mr. 
Furlan and had asked not to be placed in his class. Ms. Griego asserted that 
Respondent’s conduct caused “trauma” to students but could not identify specific 
conduct she had observed or clearly describe what trauma she had witnessed. She also 
testified that Respondent’s behavior caused her personal harm. 
67. She was unable to recall many basic facts or timelines, stating repeatedly 
that “this happened two or three years ago.” NURNISA KURBAN 
68. Principal Kurban is the current principal at McAlister High School. During 
her testimony, she became emotional while describing the vulnerable population 
served by the school and emphasized that C  H. had been made to feel 
uncomfortable by Respondent. 
20 69. Principal Kurban acknowledged that she, along with Staff Relations, 
collaborated on the Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts (Notice). However, she had limited 
recollection of the specific actions allegedly taken by Respondent or the policies he 
was purported to have violated. She struggled to answer several questions, appeared 
unfamiliar with the LAUSD Code of Conduct, and at times gave responses that were 
confusing or internally inconsistent. 
70. When asked about the basis for her factual determinations in the Notice, 
Principal Kurban stated that she relied on the Report, specifically C  H.’s 
statement. She did not review statements from other students, staff members, 
Respondent, or any attachments included in the Report before issuing the Notice. 
71. Principal Kurban testified that she became principal in 2021 and spent 
her first year observing the school’s operations. At the time, McAlister had three 
campuses, and she visited the San Fernando campus weekly for between half a day 
and two days. Although she was aware that Respondent had received formal 
evaluations in the past, she did not review them. She also did not conduct a formal 
evaluation of Respondent, noting that there was an agreement with the union not to 
administer evaluations that year. 
72. One of McAlister’s longstanding instructional practices was to provide 
students with work packets, which teachers assisted them in completing. According to 
Principal Kurban, she eventually concluded that instruction should shift to a more 
traditional, directed teaching model and testified that she “advocated” for this change. 
When Respondent did not implement the new approach, she stated that she gave him 
verbal directives, although she could not recall when. She testified both that she did 
not issue written directives and that she could not recall whether any had been 
21 provided regarding changes to his teaching style. Her testimony on this point, like 
several others, was contradictory or lacked clarity.
73. Principal Kurban explained that there were two teachers at the San 
Fernando campus: Respondent, who taught English, Physical Education, and Health, 
and Mr. Furlan, who taught other subjects such as science. C  requested to remain 
in Respondent’s classroom and be permitted to complete her work there instead of 
attending Mr. Furlan’s class because she was uncomfortable with him. The 
administration approved the request. 
74. Principal Kurban did not provide a clear rationale for why she later 
included that arrangement as a ground for suspending Respondent from his teaching 
duties. She merely asserted that once C  became uncomfortable with Respondent, 
he should not have allowed her to remain in his classroom. She acknowledged that 
Respondent did not compel C  to stay and had not been informed that she was 
no longer permitted to do so. 
75. Principal Kurban testified that teachers were not supposed to use their 
personal cell phones to communicate with students and were encouraged to use 
Google Voice. She stated that this was the school’s policy and that the issue had been 
discussed in meetings. However, the only written document she could identify that 
communicated the policy was the LAUSD Code of Conduct found in Exhibit 15. That 
Code of Conduct, however, was not issued until January 2023, several months after 
Respondent had been removed from the classroom. The operative policy during the 
relevant period, Exhibit 29, contains no reference to cell phone communication.
76. Principal Kurban also testified that it was inappropriate for Respondent 
to have held C  H.’s hands during a panic attack. According to her, the appropriate 
22 response would have been for Respondent to leave C  during the episode and 
contact Principal Kurban so that she could notify the District and arrange for support 
services. 
LARRY IGLEHART 
77. Larry Iglehart served as the assistant principal at McAlister High School 
from July 2015 to June 2019. He currently works for the St. John’s County School 
District in Florida.
78. During his time at McAlister, Mr. Iglehart stated that administrators 
issued both verbal and written directives to teachers. If a directive involved a 
schoolwide practice, the directive would be discussed at a staff meeting and then 
documented. If he was giving a directive to a single teacher, he might deliver it 
verbally, depending on its nature. If the teacher failed to implement the directive, he 
would follow up in writing. 
79. Mr. Iglehart explained that teachers were expected to text or call 
students outside of class time, particularly when students were absent. While teachers 
at other school sites typically contacted parents, McAlister’s students were primarily 
independent. As a result, teachers often contacted students directly on their personal 
cell phones to ask why they had missed school or failed to complete assignments. Mr. 
Iglehart stated that he was not aware of any directive requiring teachers to use Google 
Voice instead of their personal phones.
80. As part of his responsibilities, Mr. Iglehart observed Respondent’s 
instruction and classroom management. He testified, “He was definitely a satisfactory 
teacher,” and stated that Respondent’s interactions with students appeared 
appropriate during those observations.
23 81. When asked whether his opinion about Respondent would change if it 
were found that Respondent made comments about students’ bodies, Mr. Iglehart said 
that such conduct did not align with what he had observed of Respondent at school. 
He added that he would not have expected Respondent to make such remarks unless 
they related to the dress code. 
82. Regarding how teachers should respond to a student experiencing a 
panic attack, Mr. Iglehart explained that the appropriate procedure would be to 
contact the school nurse or counselor. If neither was available, the teacher should 
notify the main office. 
83. When asked whether his opinion of Respondent would change if 
Respondent had contacted students during the summer session, Mr. Iglehart said it 
would depend on the purpose of the contact. He considered it appropriate if the 
contact was to confirm enrollment or check on a student’s well-being. He described 
that type of outreach as the kind of personal care “the administration insisted the 
teachers maintain.” He added that if the school had changed its policy, he would have 
expected the administration to issue written notice to all staff. 
84. When asked whether it would change his opinion if Respondent had told 
a student she needed to lose weight or had told a student not to eat a granola bar 
because her stomach was sticking out, Mr. Iglehart responded that it would. He 
confirmed that such comments would have been inappropriate. RESPONDENT  
85. Respondent testified at hearing, and his testimony was consistent with 
his prior statements to the District.24 86. Respondent transferred to McAlister High School during the 2014–2015 
school year at the request of then-Principal Ms. Tara Thurston, who had previously 
worked with him at Santee Educational Complex. Principal Thurston contacted 
Respondent about an opening, and he accepted. He initially worked at the San 
Fernando campus for two years, spent one year at the Chatsworth campus, and 
returned to San Fernando when Chatsworth closed. 
87. At McAlister, Respondent taught multiple subjects, including English 
Language (EL), parenting, health, physical education, psychology, and sociology. He 
held various leadership roles, including technology coordinator and EL coordinator for 
four years. In August 2022, Principal Ms. Nurnisa Kurban announced Respondent 
would take over as psychology coordinator, a role he was expected to assume full time 
in Spring 2023. He also occasionally filled in for counselors, nurses, or administrators 
when needed. 
88. Respondent described McAlister’s 2021–2022 schedule as running from 
8:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., with five periods and a nutrition break. Classes included a 
range of student abilities and language proficiencies, requiring substantial preparation 
and frequent translation of assignments into Spanish for English language learners. 
89. Respondent testified that he began each class by taking attendance while 
students worked on Chromebooks using Edgenuity software. He rotated between 
instruction, grading, and responding to emails. Ms. Limpahan regularly assisted him in 
the classroom. 
90. Respondent described his teaching philosophy as relationship-based and 
likened his role to that of a “dad,” providing support to students, particularly those 
facing emotional and social challenges. He acknowledged treating C  differently 
25 but stated that this was consistent with individualized teaching strategies and 
professional training under California’s Standards for the Teaching Profession, 
“Capturing Kids’ Hearts,” and multicultural inclusion. 
91. During the summer of 2021, a new phone system was installed, but his 
classroom phone did not ring and routed voicemails to email. Despite repeated 
reports, the issue persisted, and he used his personal phone to communicate with 
students and families. Due to staffing shortages and language barriers, students like 
C  often volunteered to translate. 
92. Respondent stated that Ms. Kurban made no changes during her first 
year. During the 2022–2023 school year, expectations were unclear and not formally 
documented. He was removed from the classroom in October 2022.
93. Respondent denied speaking negatively about staff or Principal Kurban 
to students and denied disclosing confidential student information. He noted that 
McAlister’s small classroom setting sometimes made it apparent when a student 
received special education services, such as when students worked with Ms. Griego. As 
a non-native Spanish speaker, he occasionally relied on C  to assist with 
translations.
94. Respondent acknowledged limited personal conversations with students 
in contextually appropriate situations. For example, when C  experienced a panic 
attack after her grandfather’s death, she asked to speak privately. Respondent left Ms. 
Limpahan in charge and spoke with her outside, sharing that his own grandfather had 
also passed. C  often experienced panic attacks and would request short, private 
conversations. Ms. Kurban once observed such an interaction and was informed of the 
situation but gave no directive to discontinue the practice. 
26 95. When C  expressed discomfort with another teacher, Respondent 
informed Assistant Principal Ms. Jenay Walker and Principal Thurston that she was 
spending all five periods in his class. He was never told this arrangement was 
inappropriate. Ms. Walker later advised that no formal documentation was needed. 
The arrangement arose after C  reportedly said she would not attend school if 
placed in Mr. Furlan’s class.
96. Respondent recalled the panic attack C  referenced but described a 
different sequence of events. C  stood up during class and said she could not 
breathe. Ms. Limpahan was present. Respondent used his first aid training to guide her 
through breathing exercises. When she calmed down and declined medical assistance, 
he informed Ms. Walker, who said no record was necessary. 
97. Respondent, Ms. Limpahan, and Mr. Furlan later designated C  and 
M  as student leaders for the 2022–2023 school year to help them develop 
leadership skills. 
98. Respondent admitted to texting students but said it was always school-
related and aligned with school directives. He believed texting was more transparent 
than Google Voice, which masked his number and confused students. It also allowed 
him to identify student and parent calls. 
99. He testified that he informed Ms. Kurban via email and text about a 
planned summer meeting with C  and M . The meeting was initially to be 
held in person, but when Ms. Kurban did not respond, it was changed to a Zoom 
meeting. Respondent believed C  was enrolled in summer school, as he had 
helped her enroll, and both her counselor and Ms. Walker were aware. When C  
27 later said she was not attending, Respondent planned to order lunch while the 
students helped decorate and translate documents. 
100. Regarding the baking pan, Respondent and Ms. Limpahan often brought 
in treats for student events. For an End of the Month Recognition event, they 
purchased a cake pan with six calaveras molds so each student could decorate their 
own cake. C , who found baking therapeutic, agreed to bake the cakes at home 
and bring them in. The pan was given to her for that purpose, and she was told she 
could request supplies or reimbursement. 
101. Respondent denied observing signs that C  felt uncomfortable. She 
attended regularly, arrived early, and spent her day in his classroom. Had he known 
she felt discomfort, he would have reported it to Ms. Walker, who was on her Student 
Success Team. 
102. He acknowledged that topics related to students’ bodies arose in 
parenting, health, and P.E. classes but denied discussing such topics outside the 
curriculum. 
103. Respondent stated that the school’s dress code, introduced at the 
beginning of the school year, prohibited exposed shoulders and midriffs. He typically 
referred violations to female staff, but if none were available, he addressed them 
quietly himself. He did not recall an incident with A  but said that if she wore a 
crop top, he might have said, “your belly can’t show; it has to go to the hem of your 
pants.” He denied making comments meant to embarrass students.
104. Respondent denied ever refusing food to students. Pregnant students 
received granola bars as needed, while others received them during breaks or as 
rewards for positive behavior. He did not recall denying A  a granola bar but may 
29 District’s] side outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, the evidence on the other 
side.” ( (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 325.) 
Cause for Dismissal 
3. The grounds for the dismissal of a teacher in this state are enumerated in 
Education Code section 44932. In this case, the District asserts grounds of immoral 
conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1) and 44939); unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, 
§ 44932, subd. (a)(2)); evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6)); 
persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 
regulations prescribed for the government of public schools by the State Board of 
Education or the governing board of the school district employing him (Ed. Code, § 
44932, subd. (a)(8)); and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing 
district (Ed. Code, § 44939). Analysis 
4. At hearing, it was established that Respondent held C  H.’s hands 
during a panic attack, gave her a baking tray, exchanged text messages with her and 
other students outside instructional hours, told A  P. that her stomach was 
showing when she wore a crop top, and permitted C  H. to remain in his 
classroom. Respondent, however, presented credible evidence that explained the 
context and rationale for these actions. 
5. Other allegations were not supported by the record. The alleged 
comment about women’s buttocks and breasts, which C  H. claimed was made in 
response to a question from M , was not corroborated by M  or any other 
students. No witnesses reported hearing the comment or even hearing rumors about 
30 it. A  P.’s claim that Respondent told her she needed to lose weight was similarly 
unsubstantiated. Respondent credibly denied making such a statement, and his 
testimony on this point was persuasive. 
6. The District presented minimal evidence to support the allegation that 
Respondent failed to provide instruction and instead spent time on his computer. 
Although Ms. Griego and Principal Kurban criticized Respondent’s instructional style, 
the record does not show that Respondent was ever given a formal directive to modify 
his approach prior to reassignment. In contrast, testimony from Ms. Limpahan and 
multiple students described Respondent as a respectful and attentive teacher who 
consistently supported them. Mr. Iglehart, a former assistant principal at McAlister, 
also observed Respondent’s classroom performance and found it satisfactory. 
Respondent’s most recent formal evaluation, completed by the prior principal, rated 
him effective in all evaluated areas. 
7. The District also failed to present any evidence that anyone observed 
Respondent throw furniture. Respondent denied doing so and cited a shoulder injury 
that would have made such conduct physically difficult. 
8. With respect to the remaining allegations, the District did not produce 
any written policy in effect at the time that prohibited the use of personal cell phones 
for communication with students or required the use of Google Voice. Principal 
Kurban was unable to identify any written District policy until District counsel directed 
her to Exhibit 15, the LAUSD Code of Conduct that had been issued on January 2023. 
The operative policy during the relevant period, Exhibit 29, contains no reference to 
cell phone communication. 
31 9. The evidentiary record reflects multiple failures by the administration to 
provide Respondent with clear expectations or meaningful guidance. If the District 
intended for Respondent to refrain from certain practices, it bore the responsibility of 
communicating those expectations unambiguously and in writing. Principal Kurban’s 
testimony revealed a striking lack of familiarity with the factual record and District 
policies. Her testimony also showed that she failed to provide Respondent with any 
clear direction and merely repeated the allegations by complainants when she issued 
the Notices. When asked about the specific allegations in the Notices, she admitted to 
relying solely on C  H.’s statement while disregarding contrary evidence and 
failing to review attachments to the report, and she was unable to articulate the basis 
for several charges. Although she faulted Respondent for allowing C  to remain in 
his classroom, that arrangement had been requested by C  and approved by 
McAlister administration. Principal Kurban was aware of this practice but issued no 
verbal or written directive to discontinue it. Her failure to engage in supervisory 
oversight, provide formal feedback, or ensure clarity around staff expectations 
undermines the credibility and fairness of the District’s actions. 
10. Finally, Principal Kurban’s suggestion that Respondent should have left a 
visibly distressed student to seek an administrator is not only unreasonable but 
contrary to trauma-informed practices. Respondent’s decision to remain with C  
H. during her panic attack and offer immediate support was consistent with the care 
expected of educators serving vulnerable student populations. 
11. The District also sought to introduce disciplinary memoranda from 2013 
and 2014 to establish a pattern of misconduct. Those documents were excluded 
pursuant to Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A), which prohibits the 
use of evidence of acts occurring more than four years before the date of the notice of 
32 intent to dismiss. The District was ordered to submit briefing to justify the admission 
of the documents. In its brief, the District asserted that the memoranda were 
admissible as regularly maintained records under Education Code section 44944, 
subdivision (b)(2)(B), and that they were necessary to prove the charge of persistent 
violation. However, subdivision (b)(2)(B) does not nullify the four-year rule. In fact, it 
reiterates that “no decision relating to the dismissal or suspension of an employee 
shall be made based on charges or evidence of any nature relating to matters 
occurring more than four years before the filing of the notice.” The District’s inability 
to establish its case without relying on barred evidence does not justify disregarding 
the statutory limitation. It simply means the District failed to meet its burden of proof 
under the standards imposed by law. 
12. In evaluating whether Respondent’s conduct renders him unfit to teach, 
the Commission applies the factors identified by the California Supreme Court 
in  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. These include: (1) the 
likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the 
degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the 
conduct; (4) the type of teaching credential held; (5) extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances; (6) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives; (7) the 
likelihood of recurrence; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action may impact the 
constitutional rights of the teacher or other teachers. 
13. Applying these factors here, the conduct proved, which consisted of text 
communications with a student during non-instructional hours, one instance of 
holding a student’s hands during a panic attack, and giving a student a baking tray as 
a gift, did not adversely affect students or staff in a significant or lasting way. The 
conduct was limited, occurred more than two years before the hearing, and often 