BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the DISMISSAL of: 
EFREN CADENA (EN 946466), 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024120209 
DECISION 
This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence, 
(Commission) on May 19 and 20, 2025 in Los Angeles, California. The Commission 
consisted of Ray Alcala, Jim Durham and Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) 
with the Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California.
Brian Davenport, Assistant General Counsel II, appeared on behalf of the Los 
Angeles Unified School District (District) 
Tamra M. Smith and Feiran Wang, Attorneys, appeared on behalf of Efren 
Cadena (Respondent), who was present throughout hearing. 2 Testimonial and documentary evidence was presented during hearing. The 
matter was submitted for decision on May 20, 2025. 
During the Commissions deliberations, it became evident that there was an 
inconsistency between the causes of action contained in the District’s Statement of 
Charges versus the District’s Accusation. To obtain clarification on which causes of 
action the District is alleging against Respondent, on May 22, 2025, the ALJ reopened 
the record ordering the District to file and serve a statement by May 28, 2025, 
clarifying which causes of action are being alleged against Respondent, with any 
response by Respondent to the District’s statement to be filed and served by June 4, 
2025. On May 28, 2025, the District filed and served its statement, which was marked 
as Exhibit 22. Respondent did not file a response to District’s Exhibit 22. The matter 
was re-submitted for decision on June 4, 2025. 
The Commission considered the matter in executive session. After due 
consideration of the entire record including official notice of the pleadings and notices 
on file with OAH, the Commission makes the following factual findings, legal 
conclusions, and order. 
In drafting the Decision, confidential personal information, including the full 
name of students, was redacted from the exhibits to protect privacy rights. SUMMARY 
The District seeks to dismiss Respondent on grounds of immoral conduct; 
unprofessional conduct; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws. 
Respondent admitted he had the cell phone numbers of students on the girls basketball 
team, including that of V  R. and texted student V  R. between March 2, 2023, 
3 through March 14, 2023, during school hours. The text messages were unnecessary 
because 1) they involved non-school related text messages to V  R.’s cell phone 
and; 2) Respondent asked V  R. to get out of class, during instructional time, to 
place DoorDash food orders for Respondent. The texts to a student for non-instructional 
purposes during school time demonstrated bad judgment on Respondent’s part. 
However, the evidence presented by the District failed to establish that Respondent’s 
exchange of cell phone numbers with V  R. and that the text communications 
between Respondent and V  R., were inappropriate and constituted grooming or 
were indicative of a person attempting or intending to groom a minor. Respondent, 
while admitting his bad judgment at hearing, affirmatively established that the sole 
purpose of the text messages was so that V  R. could order food on her cell phone 
application to be delivered to the school for Respondent, who then reimbursed her for 
the cost of the food. The District therefore failed to establish through a preponderance 
of the evidence that Respondent engaged in immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, 
or persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws. FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
1. Respondent was, at all relevant times, a permanent certificated employee 
of the District. He was assigned as a Physical Education (PE) teacher at Bravo Medical 
Magnet High School (Bravo). At times relevant to the Accusation, Respondent’s 
coaching duties included coaching the girls basketball team.
2. On December 5, 2024, the District filed a Statement of Charges against 
Respondent, charging him with immoral conduct (Education Code sections 44939); 
4 unprofessional conduct (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2)); evident 
unfitness for service (Education Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(6)); and persistent 
violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education 
or by the governing board of the school district employing him (Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(8).) 
3. On November 27, 2024, Respondent filed and served a Request for 
Hearing and Notice of Defense. 
4. On January 2, 2025, the District filed an Accusation against Respondent, 
charging him with immoral conduct (Education Code sections 44939); unprofessional 
conduct (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2)); and persistent violation of 
or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for 
the government of the public schools by the State Board of Education or by the 
governing board of the school district employing him (Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8).)
5. The District presented no witness or expert at hearing to support its 
claims against Respondent. The District’s case was based on the text messages 
exchanged between Respondent and V  R. Complainant’s Charging Allegations 
6. The charges pertain to events that are alleged to have occurred during 
the 2022-2023 school year.
5 CHARGE 1 
7. Complainant alleges in Charge 1 that, “[d]uring the 2022-2023 school 
year, Respondent unnecessarily and inappropriately exchanged cell phone numbers 
with student V  R.” (Exhibit 6, p. A64.)
8. V  R., then a 15 year old, 10th grade Bravo student was a member 
of the girls basketball team that Respondent coached during the 2022-2023 school 
year. Respondent had V  R.’s cell phone number as well as the other girls 
basketball team cell phone numbers as part of a group text chain. The use of a team 
group text chain was the customary way coaches at Bravo, like Respondent, 
communicated about team related events, such as games and practices. In addition, 
Respondent and V  R.’s father had a social relationship outside of school and, as 
a result, Respondent also was provided with V  R’s cell phone based on that 
family friend relationship. 
9. The District provided no corroborating evidence to support its claim 
Respondent “unnecessarily and inappropriately” exchanged cell phone numbers with 
V  R. In contrast, Respondent’s hearing testimony that he had a valid justification 
for having V  R.’s cell phone number was corroborated by credible evidence 
including the hearing testimony of fellow Bravo teachers, former Bravo girls basketball 
team student members, and a Bravo teacher whose daughter was a member of the 
girls basketball team. 
10. Charge 1 was therefore not established. CHARGE 2 
11. Complainant alleged in Count 2 that: 
6 Beginning on or about March 2, 2023 and ending on or 
about March 14, 2023, [Respondent] unnecessarily and 
inappropriately communicated with student V  R. via 
cell phone during school hours, including but not limited to 
the following: 
a. On or about March 2, 2023 around 9:23 AM, 
[Respondent] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student V  R. to meet him in the weight room during 
class time.
b. On or about March 6, 2023, around 8:41 AM, 
[Respondent] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student V  R. whether she was at school. 
c. On or about March 7, 2023 around 11:20 AM, 
[Respondent] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student V  R. requesting to borrow her phone to order 
food and implied that she should go to the restroom and 
leave her class during instructional time so that he may 
borrow her phone.
d. On or about March 10, 2023, around 10:02 AM, 
[Respondent] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student V  R., requesting her to order food from Urth 
Café with her Apple Pay, told her she could get one item 
and told her he would pay her back through Zelle. 
7 e. On or about March 14, 2023, around 12:35 PM, 
[Respondent] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student V  R., another student’s address in Riverside 
County and asked how far she lived from the address. 
(Exhibit 6, pp. A64-A65.) 
12. At hearing, Respondent stipulated that he engaged in the following cell 
phone text message exchanges with V  R.: 
13. On March 2, 2023 at 9:21 AM:
Respondent: Come to the weight room
V  R.: i’m not even there
Respondent: Oh ok why 
V  R: idk 
V  R.: im confused but idk i wanna go 
Respondent: Confused?
Respondent: About
V  R: why i didn’t go
Respondent: Lol 
V  R: yea 
(Exhibit 21, p. Z4.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
8 14. On March 6, 2023, at 8:41 AM:
V  R.: r u here yet 
Respondent: Yeah why 
(Exhibit 21, p. Z4.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
15. On March 7, 2023, at 11:20 AM: 
Respondent: Let me borrow your phone to get food
V  R.: tell sam 
Respondent: You can’t go to restroom 
V  R.: she makes u leave ur phone 
Respondent: Oh shit I guess during passing period
V  R.: take me out last 5 
Respondent: I texted her 
V  R.: she jus said no 
V  R.: [crying face emoji] 
Respondent: Omg [raised eyebrow emoji] 
(Exhibit 21, pp. Z4, Z6.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
16. On an unspecified date, at 8:42 AM: 
V  R.: he’s here 
9 V  R.: [a]ndale
Respondent: Ok 
V  R.: did they go get it 
Respondent: I sent a student 
V  R.: u have to come get it
Respondent: Why 
V  R.: just come ima get it trouble
Respondent: Ok
Respondent: I can’t leave my class alone that’s why
Respondent: Who’s in the form
Respondent: Front 
V  R.: well just come real quick 
Respondent: You there? 
V  R.: this one lady 
(Exhibit 21, pp. Z9-Z10.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
17. On March 10, 2023, at 10:02 AM: 
Respondent: Urth café
Panini chicken el diablo 
10 Urth bread pudding breakfast
(cinnamon) 
Chicken and Cheese tamale combo 
Respondent: Order it please 
Respondent: You have Apple Pay 
V  R.: u want a topping on ur bread pudding 
V  R.: nothing 
V  R.: or caramelized bananas 
V  R.: ? 
Respondent: Banana 
V  R.: 2 bucks 
V  R.: or 1 
V  R.: tip 
Respondent: 1 
Respondent: Get what you want 
Respondent: For you one item 
V  R.: it’ll be here around 
V  R.: 11:15 
11 V  R.: [screen shot of order summary from Urth Caffe – 
Downtown for total of $63.34]
Respondent: You have Apple Pay 
V  R.: no i don’t think I have it set up 
Respondent: Ok I’ll Zelle you 
Respondent: You got a double croissant u should have 
gotten food 
(Exhibit 21, p. Z4) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
18. On March 14, 2023, at 12:30 PM: 
Respondent: [address] 
Respondent: How far do you live from there 
V  R.: from which house 
Respondent: Yours 
V  R.: no shit 
V  R.: my mom or my dad 
V  R.: [crying face emoji] 
Respondent: What do you think 
Respondent: Your moms house 
12 Respondent: Duh
Respondent: [picture of map showing distance between two 
addresses] 
(Exhibit 21, p. Z12.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
19. On March 15, 2025, at 10:14 AM: 
Respondent: Where u @ 
V  R.: third floor 
V  R.: why 
Respondent: I’m hungry order me some pizza 
Respondent: Change it to my name not yours 
Respondent: I’m in cafeteria 
V  R.: come at break 
Respondent: What’s J ’s nunber 
Respondent: Number 
Respondent: Come where 
V  R.: come at break to order it 
V  R.: [phone number] 
(Exhibit 21, p. Z14.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
13 20. On March 15, 2023, at 8:02 PM:
V  R.: I [illegible] a large sweater 
V  R.: When u get a chance leave it on my desk 
Respondent: Bet 
(Exhibit 21, p. Z14.) (Original grammar and spelling.) 
21. As a teacher employed by the District, Respondent was subject to the 
District’s January 2023 Code of Conduct with Students. (Exhibit 16.) The Code of 
Conduct policy expects teachers “to use good judgment, maintain professional 
standards and ethical boundaries.” ( ) Teachers are cautioned to avoid, as relevant 
here, communicating with students by phone “for purposes that are not specifically 
school-related.” ( ) 
22. Respondent acknowledges he exhibited poor judgment by sending 
V  R. text messages in March 2023, as set forth in Factual Findings 12 through 20. 
Respondent claims his food delivery phone app was not working and he was too busy 
teaching his classes to arrange for food delivery. Respondent’s justification for 
contacting a student, V  R., especially during her class time, so that she could fill 
his food orders is a weak excuse for his lack of judgment. Respondent could have 
reasonably dealt with his food delivery issues in a manner that did not interfere with a 
student’s school day, such as, for example, packing himself a lunch. Similarly, 
Respondent’s justification for texting V  R. regarding where she lived relative to a 
potential student he wanted to recruit for the basketball team was not satisfactorily 
specifically related to V  R.’s education.
14 23. In March 2023, Respondent failed to follow the Code of Conduct with 
Students policy, as set forth in Factual Finding 21, by texting during school hours for 
V  R. to come to the weight room so that he could borrow her phone to get 
himself food during instructional time; texting V i  R. to lie to her teacher that she 
needed to use the restroom so that she could leave her class, during instructional time, 
to place a food order for him; asking her to place food orders on his behalf on 
multiple occasions; sending V  R. money via Zelle, even though it was to cover 
the cost of food ordered using V  R.’s phone; texting to ask V  R. to meet 
his food delivery at the front office; buying her food on one occasion as part of his 
order; and texting her to ask where she lived relative to another address. Respondent’s 
communications were unnecessary. The evidence, however, does not support a finding 
that the communications were “inappropriate” in the context of the intent to groom 
and grooming allegations against Respondent. 
24. Based on Factual Findings 11 through 23, Charge 2 was established in 
part as to the allegation that Respondent’s communications with V  R. were 
“unnecessary,” and not established as to the part of the allegation that the 
communications were “inappropriate.” CHARGE 3 
25. Charge 3 alleges that “[Respondent’s] conduct alleged in Charges 1 
through 2, inclusive, constituted grooming or was indicative of a person attempting or 
intending to groom a minor.” (Exhibit 6, p. A65.) 
26. The District submitted no witnesses at hearing to support Charge 3. The 
only documentary evidence to support the grooming related allegations besides the 
texts between Respondent and V  R., submitted by the District at hearing is 
15 contained in the District’s Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Requirements March 27, 
2023 Policy Bulletin (the policy). (Exhibit 20.) The policy describes child abuse and 
neglect reporting requirements for District employees. 
27. As relevant to the allegations against Respondent, the policy defines 
“grooming” as “inappropriate or illegal behavior (physical or not) . . . targeted to . . . 
students . . . for the purposes of developing a romantic or sexual relationship with a 
student.” (Exhibit 20, p. A191.) “Inappropriate Conduct,” examples include: “(1) verbal 
conduct . . . by phone, or using electronic means of sexual comments, questions, jokes, 
teasing; (2) physical conduct by kissing, hair stroking, . . . ; and (3) on or off school 
grounds conduct, by meeting behind closed or locked doors, and meeting a student 
away from school grounds.” “Illegal Conduct” examples include: . . . ; (2) exhibitionism; 
and (3) child pornography, . . and other exploitation in an online setting.” () 
28. Perpetrators of grooming focus on keeping “their conduct secret,” 
“coerce” and “groom” students, and as “sexual conduct escalates,” “methodically 
increase the attention and rewards they give to their student . . . targets.” (Exhibit 20, 
p. A191.) In addition, grooming perpetrators “test their target’s silence at each step;” 
“make a [student] target feel “special,” by for example, brandishing gifts and/or 
spending extra time with the target in nonsexual ways or trying to move the 
relationship to a personal level or asking the student to run personal errands.” () 
The purpose of the “special attention” is to “learn whether the target will keep silent.” 
The goal of grooming is to progress to “sexualized behaviors” with the student target. 
() 
29. Based on Factual Findings 7 through 28, Complainant did not establish 
Respondent intended to groom or groomed V  R. None of the text message 
communications between Respondent and V  R. objectively satisfy the policy’s 
16 description of grooming or intent to groom. None of the communications evidence 
any testing of boundaries, progressive sexualized communication, efforts to isolate 
V  R., efforts to be alone or spend extra time with V  R., efforts to move the 
relationship to a personal level to progress to sexualized behaviors, or efforts to have 
V  R. run personal errands to progress to sexualized behaviors. 
30. At hearing, Respondent credibly denied the allegations against him, 
testifying that he did not intend to groom or groom V  R. Respondent admitted 
he was “not smart” and made a mistake he deeply regrets by, essentially, asking 
V  R. to act as his food delivery service because he felt comfortable with asking 
her to do so as a family friend and girls basketball team member. Respondent now 
understands he carelessly failed to consider that his food ordering requests, including 
instructing V  R. to leave her class during instructional time so that she could 
order him food, interfered with V  R.’s primary purpose for being at school, 
getting an education. Respondent testified that in the future, as a teacher and coach, 
he will not text student basketball team members regarding non-basketball related 
matters, however innocuous. 
31. In April 2023, V  R.’s mother contacted Respondent, upset after 
discovering the text messages between him and V  R. During their conversation, 
Respondent apologized for asking V  R. to order food for him and told her it 
would not happen again. 
32. After their conversation, also in April 2023, V  R.’s mother 
complained to Bravo’s school administration regarding Respondent’s texts to V  
R. The allegations against Respondent by V  R.’s mother were that Respondent 1) 
sent “multiple inappropriate non-school related text messages” to V  R.’s phone; 
and 2) asked V  R. to get out of class, during instructional time, to place 
17 DoorDash orders for Respondent. (Exhibit 13, p. A90.) Bravo’s administration 
investigated the allegations. In her written statement to investigators, V  R. 
confirmed Respondent’s communications with her were limited to asking her to order 
him food and, on one occasion, asking her to leave class to go to the restroom to 
place a food order. ( , p. A90.) 
33. Respondent’s claims that his communications with V  R. do not 
constitute an intent to groom or grooming were credibly corroborated by the 
witnesses who testified on behalf of Respondent at hearing. In addition, Respondent’s 
claims of good character and appropriate behavior with students as a teacher and 
coach was corroborated by character reference letters submitted in support of 
Respondent. (Exhibit B.) 
34. Ellen G. Stein, Ph.D., is a forensic clinical psychologist and expert in 
grooming. Dr. Stein has over 30 years of experience in clinical and educational 
diagnostics and treatment related to the allegations against Respondent. (Exhibit E.) 
Dr. Stein provided convincing expert testimony at hearing. In formulating her opinions, 
Dr. Stein reviewed the Accusation, the policy, and the text messages between 
Respondent and V  R. Based on her review, Dr. Stein opined that while, 
admittedly, Respondent did not make a “great decision” in texting V  R. to order 
food for him, it was clear based on the content and context of the text messages that 
Respondent’s only goal was to get lunch, not to groom V  R. Dr. Stein supported 
her opinion by pointing to the fact that Respondent’s text messages were inconsistent 
with an intent to groom or grooming because none of the messages contained any of 
the factors of grooming behavior, such as an intent to get V  R. alone with 
Respondent. Accordingly, Dr. Stein convincingly opined that Respondent’s conduct 
was insufficient to conclude that he intended to groom or did groom V  R. 
18 35. Ignacio Solis, a Bravo employee for the past 10 years, first as a campus 
aide and now as a school climate advocate, credibly testified at hearing. During the 
2022-2023 school year, Mr. Solis was the girls team basketball coach, but was 
transitioning into the school climate advocate position. As a result, Respondent 
assumed additional responsibilities with basketball team coaching, including 
supervising open lunch time basketball practice and play for Bravo students and 
basketball team members, after the basketball season ended in 2023.
36. Mr. Solis testified that he grew up with Respondent and has known him 
for over 15 years. Based on his personal relationship with Respondent and professional 
observations of Respondent with students, including V  R., Respondent always 
acted in an appropriate and coach and mentor focused manner with students. Mr. 
Solis corroborated Respondent’s testimony that he and Respondent had student 
phone numbers, like V  R.’s, as part of a group text chain to communicate about 
team matters, such as games and practices. Mr. Solis testified that he was aware of the 
allegations against Respondent and continued to hold a positive opinion of 
Respondent, believing Respondent had no bad intentions in communicating with 
V  R. Mr. Solis described the “tough impact” losing Respondent as a coach had 
on Bravo’s students, testifying Respondent “created the basketball culture at Bravo.”
37. M  R , a former student at Bravo, testified in support of 
Respondent at hearing. During the 2022 to 2023 school year, Ms. R  was a senior 
and a member of the girls basketball team. Ms. R  testified Mr. Solis was the girls 
basketball coach and Respondent was the assistant coach during that time. 
Respondent was also Ms. R ’s teacher for her weightlifting class. Ms. R  
described Respondent as a “great teacher” and “touch coach,” whose “main goal” was 
to “win championships.” Ms. R  interacted with Respondent almost daily as he 
19 was one of the girls basketball coaches, testifying he helped her become a better 
“shooter” through his coaching. Ms. R  described Respondent’s interactions with 
students as being “the same towards everyone,” “fair,” “cool,” and appropriate. Ms. 
R  testified she knew V  R. because they were teammates and “hung out 
during lunch” every day, since Bravo is a “small school.” In observing Respondent’s 
interactions with V  R., Ms. R  stated there was “nothing out of the 
ordinary,” or “inappropriate,” and that, despite the fact Respondent was friendly with 
V  R.’s father, she observed “no special treatment” of V  R. by Respondent.
38. Ms. R  also confirmed that there was a group text chain between 
Mr. Solis, Respondent, and the student team members, to discuss team related 
business, such as practices and game times. In addition, Ms. R  testified that 
Respondent customarily asked people, including students, to purchase food for him, 
and that students, like herself, offered Respondent food because they rarely saw 
Respondent eating. 
39. Ms. R  described the time after Respondent left school due to the 
allegations against him as “confusing” and a ”rough time” for the Bravo girls basketball 
team members. According to Ms. R , Respondent’s leaving as their basketball 
coach had a “huge impact” because he was the “glue to everything.” After Respondent 
left, Ms. R  reported that the girls basketball players were “lost” and the team 
“broke . . . apart.” 
40. Lucia Avina, a math teacher at Bravo for the past 20 years and 
Respondent’s colleague for the past eight years, testified in support of Respondent at 
hearing. Respondent coached Ms. Avina’s son and daughter; the latter was a member 
of the girls basketball team. Ms. Avina testified that she was present for 99 percent of 
the girls basketball team’s practices and games. Each time she observed Respondent’s 
20 behavior with students she evaluated it as “fair,” “respectful,” and “never 
inappropriate.” Ms. Avina opined Respondent is a “great coach,” who is “dedicated” 
and “knowledgeable.” 
41. Ms. Avina observed Respondent’s interactions with V  R., describing 
them as “professional” and “never inappropriate.” Ms. Avina confirmed that there was 
a group chat about team business which included all the girls basketball players and 
coaches, like Respondent. Ms. Avila, who checks her daughter’s phone regularly, 
testified she never observed anything inappropriate in her daughter’s texts with 
Respondent. Ms. Avila testified that sharing and ordering food was a common practice 
as part of the girls basketball team experience. While Ms. Avila believed Respondent’s 
text to V  R. to leave class to order him food was a violation of school policy, she 
did not believe amounted to an intent to groom or grooming behavior. After 
Respondent left school in 2023 due to the allegations against him, Ms. Avila described 
that the girls basketball team “fell apart.” 
42. J  A., a 12th grade student, testified in support of Respondent at 
hearing. J  A. was a 10th grader at Bravo and a member of the girls basketball 
team during the relevant 2022-2023 school year. J  A. testified that as a member 
of the basketball team, she saw Respondent “every day.” She described Respondent as 
a “good and amazing coach” who “gave students confidence,” and acted in a 
“professional” manner towards her and “never made her uncomfortable.” J  A. has 
known V  R. since they were seven years old; she observed Respondent’s 
interactions with V  R. during the relevant time period, testifying Respondent 
acted in a “respectful” and appropriate manner. J  A. confirmed that Respondent 
asked other coworkers and players to get food and that food was also regularly 
brought in for the team and Respondent by parents. J  A. testified she was 
21 “heartbroken” when Respondent left Bravo; his leaving “shattered” the girls basketball 
program, leading J  A. to transfer schools. 
43. Respondent submitted five character reference letters supporting his 
claims that he does not engage in inappropriate behavior with students from fellow 
teachers and coaches and former students. (Exhibit B.) The letters’ authors all 
described Respondent as a professional and dedicated educator and coach who acted 
respectfully and appropriately with all students. 
CHARGE 4 
44. Charge 4 alleges that Charges 1 through 3, separately, and in any 
combination, support Respondent’s dismissal from the District. (Exhibit 6, p. A65.)
45. Based on Factual Findings 7 through 10 and 25 through 43, Charges 1 
and 3 were not established. Accordingly, Charges 1 and 3 do not support 
Respondent’s dismissal from the District. 
46. Based on Factual Findings 11 through 24, Charge 2’s allegations that 
Respondent inappropriately communicated with V  R. via cell phone during 
school hours was not established. Accordingly, Charge 2’s allegations of inappropriate 
communication do not support Respondent’s dismissal from the District. 
47. As more fully set forth in the Legal Conclusions, based on Factual 
Findings 11 through 24, Charge 2’s allegations that Respondent’s unnecessarily 
communicated with V  R. via cell phone during school hours was established. 
However, based on the totality of the circumstances, the text communications, focused 
on the primary goal of having V  R. order Respondent food, through 
unnecessary, do not support Respondent’s dismissal from the District.
22 Ultimate Factual Findings
48. Respondent is a respected teacher and coach who has worked for the 
District for 17 years. He has been a PE teacher and coach at Bravo since 2016. During 
his tenure at Bravo, Respondent was never accused, charged with, or found guilty of 
any inappropriate behavior. This proceeding is the first and only instance Respondent 
has been accused of intent to groom or grooming. 
49. It is undisputed Respondent made an ill-advised decision by asking 
V  R., on one occasion, to leave class for no other reason than he wanted to buy 
and deliver food for him. However, none of the evidence presented by the District 
supports findings that Respondent acted inappropriately with V  R. in the context 
of the intent to groom and grooming allegations. The only substantiated allegation is 
that in March 2023, Respondent sent V  R. text messages asking her to buy him 
food using her cell phone application, texted her to see where she lived so she could 
possibly carpool with a potential basketball team recruit, and reimbursed V  R. 
for the food purchases. Respondent deeply regrets his conduct, recognizes that he 
exhibited poor judgment by sending the texts, and credibly testified he will not 
engage in similar conduct in the future. It was established the texts were unnecessary, 
a fact Respondent does not dispute.
50. Respondent was disciplined by the District based on his conduct which 
forms the basis for the Statement of Charges and Accusation. On March 18, 2024, the 
District issued both a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts and a Notice of Suspension (15 
Days). 
51. Under the circumstances demonstrated, dismissal is not warranted.
