BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
SAN JACINTO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
JENNAFER BRUNNER, Respondent 
OAH No. 2024101135 
DECISION 
This matter was heard before the Commission on Professional Competence in 
San Jacinto, California on January 13 through 16, 2025. The Commission was 
comprised of the following members: Administrative Law Judge Debra D. Nye-Perkins, 
Troy Liggins, and Arati Clarke. 
Laurie Kamerrer, Attorney at Law, Adams, Silva & McNally, L.L.P., represented 
the San Jacinto Unified School District (district). 
Alejandra Gonzalez-Bedoy, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Carlos Perez, 
represented respondent, Jennafer Brunner. 
On January 27, 2025, the Commission met to deliberate, and the matter was 
submitted. 2 PROTECTIVE ORDER
The names of all minor students referred to in this matter are confidential and 
subject to a protective sealing order. Several witnesses who testified were also minor 
students. The documents received as evidence in this matter that contain the name of 
a student have been redacted to remove the student’s name. No court reporter or 
transcription service shall transcribe the names of the student witnesses or student 
names mentioned in testimony but shall instead refer to each student by their 
corresponding initials. 
CASE SUMMARY 
Ms. Brunner was employed by the district as a special education teacher for the 
2022-23 school year at San Jacinto Leadership Academy (SJLA), which is a high school. 
On May 3, 2024, Ms. Brunner called the classroom of a history teacher, Mr. Gonzalez, 
during his instructional time and asked him to release two eleventh grade students, 
S.C. and V.E., to Ms. Brunner’s classroom. At that time Ms. Brunner had no students in 
her classroom, but her instructional aide, Xitlaly Bueno, was present in Ms. Brunner’s 
classroom. When the two students arrived at her classroom, Ms. Brunner told them she 
wanted to show them two dresses Ms. Brunner was considering wearing to the SJLA 
prom. Ms. Brunner then instructed Ms. Bueno to lock the door. Thereafter, Ms. Brunner 
proceeded to undress and disrobe to her bra and underwear in plain view of both 
students and Ms. Bueno, making them feel very uncomfortable, to try on each of the 
two dresses. Thereafter, while being interviewed by the district as part of its 
investigation into the events of May 3, 2024, Ms. Brunner provided dishonest and 
conflicting versions of the events that happened that day. The Commission found that 3 Ms. Brunner’s actions constituted immoral conduct, dishonesty, and evident unfitness 
for service. Based upon the evidence presented, the Commission concluded that the 
allegations were sustained and warranted Ms. Brunner’s dismissal from the district.
FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Ms. Brunner was employed by the district as a special education teacher 
(grades 7-12), requiring an education specialist instruction credential for 
mild/moderate authorization. She was first hired by the district for the 2021-22 school 
year as a special education teacher at the San Jacinto High School (SJHS). Ms. Brunner 
transferred within the district from SJHS to SJLA about halfway through the 2022-23 
school year. During the time of the alleged incident at issue in this hearing, Ms. 
Brunner worked at SJLA. 
2. On May 6, 2024, Ms. Brunner was placed on administrative leave from her 
position at the district.
3. Sharon Raffiee-Shirazi, Ed.D., the district’s Executive Director of Personnel 
Services, signed the Notice of Immediate Suspension Without Pay; Recommendation 
for Dismissal from Employment; and Statement of Charges on August 1, 2024, in her 
official capacity. The notice sets forth the facts and laws on which the district was 
relying and sought to dismiss Ms. Brunner from employment with the district on the 
grounds of immoral conduct (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1)), 
dishonesty (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(3), and evident unfitness for 
service (Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6)). The notice also sets forth 
the facts and laws on which the district was relying to immediately suspend Ms. 4 Brunner without pay on the grounds of immoral conduct (Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(1)). 
4. In the Charges as set forth in the Notice of Immediate Suspension 
Without Pay; Recommendation for Dismissal from Employment; and Statement of 
Charges the district alleges that during the fall of 2023, Ms. Brunner behaved 
inappropriately with a male student, A.R.1, by obtaining A.R.’s phone number and by 
exchanging text messages with him during class time. Another student noticed the text 
messaging and reported it. As a result, the SJLA Principal, Lloyd Sheppard, directed 
respondent to consider interactions with students and to use only district means to 
communicate with students and families. 
The Charges further set forth that on May 3, 2024, Ms. Brunner called the 
classroom of SJLA history teacher, Mr. Gonzalez, to release two female eleventh grade 
students, S.C. and V.E., to Ms. Brunner’s classroom. S.C. and V.E. were not Ms. Brunner’s 
students, but Ms. Brunner had developed a close personal relationship with them. At 
the time Ms. Brunner called S.C. and V.E. to her classroom, Ms. Brunner had no other 
students in the classroom, but she did have an instructional aide, Ms. Bueno, in the 
room. When S.C. and V.E. arrived at Ms. Brunner’s classroom, Ms. Brunner told them 
that she wanted to show them two dresses Ms. Brunner was considering wearing to 
the SJLA prom. Upon arrival, V.E. asked Ms. Brunner “Is that what you called us in for?” 
 
1 To protect student privacy the student’s initials are used instead of their full 
name. With regard to student V.E., whose initials are actually V.E.G., the initials V.E. will 
be used throughout this decision to refer to that student so as to be consistent with 
the Statement of Charges. 5 In response Ms. Brunner stated, “It was not mandatory for you to come if you didn’t 
want to.” Both students then sat at desks facing Mr. Brunner. Ms. Brunner asked Ms. 
Bueno to “check the door,” at which time Ms. Bueno locked the classroom door.
Ms. Brunner then undressed and stood in front of students S.C. and V.E., and 
Ms. Bueno while wearing only a bra and underwear. Both students and Ms. Bueno 
were uncomfortable. Ms. Brunner then put on one of two dresses and asked S.C. and 
V.E. if they liked the dress. V.E. complimented the dress, and S.C. stated that she did 
not like it. Ms. Brunner then instructed Ms. Bueno to take a photograph of Ms. Brunner 
wearing the first dress, and Ms. Bueno did so. Ms. Brunner again disrobed down to 
only her bra and underwear, and changed into a second dress, all in front of S.C., V.E. 
and Ms. Bueno. After asking the students’ opinion of the second dress, Ms. Brunner 
again disrobed down to her bra and underwear in front of the two students and Ms. 
Bueno and thereafter put on her pants and shirt she had been wearing that day. The 
lunch bell rang, and the two students left Ms. Brunner’s classroom. 
After the two students left Ms. Brunner’s classroom, Ms. Bueno approached Ms. 
Brunner and told her that the two students were uncomfortable, the incident should 
not have occurred, and it was inappropriate. For the first time, Ms. Brunner then 
showed remorse for her conduct. When S.C. and V.E. returned to Ms. Brunner’s 
classroom during lunch to attend Art Club, Ms. Brunner asked to speak to them 
privately. Ms. Brunner apologized to the two students, acknowledged that her 
behavior was improper and stated that it should not have happened. Ms. Brunner 
pushed V.E. for her opinion regarding Ms. Brunner’s conduct.
The Statement of Charges further alleges that on Monday, May 6, 2024, Ms. 
Brunner met with Mr. Sheppard, Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi, and San Jacinto Teachers 
Association President Zoila Carrillo regarding the May 3, 2024, incident. During that 6 meeting, Ms. Brunner admitted to calling S.C. and V.E. out of class and to disrobing to 
try on a dress. However, Ms. Brunner dishonestly claimed that she only removed her 
polo shirt while continuing to wear jeans, and that S.C. and V.E. were far across the
room and mostly disinterested. During that meeting, Ms. Brunner also dishonestly 
claimed to have only tried on one dress and then put her shirt back on, and denied 
that S.C. and V.E. were uncomfortable and attempted to avert their eyes when Ms. 
Brunner was changing clothes. Ms. Brunner admitted to apologizing to S.C. and V.E. 
after Ms. Bueno told her that her behavior was inappropriate. Ms. Brunner’s dishonest 
responses were part of a design to conceal her conduct and avoid responsibility for 
her actions.
Furthermore, the Statement of Charges alleges that Ms. Brunner instructed Ms. 
Bueno to delete the photograph Ms. Brunner requested her to take of Ms. Brunner 
wearing one of the dresses she tried on to conceal Ms. Brunner’s conduct.
5. Ms. Brunner timely appealed the suspension and dismissal action, 
denying that grounds for her suspension and dismissal from employment existed, and 
this hearing followed. 
The District’s Evidence
6. The district called six witnesses at the hearing and provided numerous 
documentary evidence, including witness declarations, email correspondence between 
Ms. Brunner and students, email correspondence between Ms. Brunner and district 
staff, as well as Ms. Brunner’s written response to allegations in this matter. The 
following factual findings are based upon the testimony of the witnesses, as well as 
documentary evidence related to that testimony.7 TESTIMONY OF XITLALY ARELLANO, A.K.A.XITLALY BUENO
7. Xitlaly Arellano was previously known as Xitlaly Bueno.2Ms. Bueno is 
currently employed by AmeriCorps as a reading teacher. Prior to this employment, Ms. 
Bueno worked from February 2024 to June 2024 at the district as an instructional aide 
for Ms. Brunner at SJLA, which provides instruction for students in both middle school 
and high school. While working at SJLA, Ms. Bueno’s title was Instructional Aide for 
Special Education students. Ms. Bueno explained that Ms. Brunner was a special 
education teacher, and as such she simply provided support to special education 
students in their general education classrooms. Ms. Bueno’s duties were to support 
Ms. Brunner’s work as a special education teacher. She further explained that Ms. 
Brunner would do “push in work” meaning that she would go into general education 
classrooms taught by other teachers and would provide support to special education 
students, as well as general education students while in that classroom. Ms. Bueno 
provided support to Ms. Brunner and would frequently be in another classroom than 
Ms. Brunner. However, Ms. Bueno was familiar with Ms. Brunner’s schedule and would 
frequently work in the same classroom with her. Ms. Brunner would direct Ms. Bueno’s 
day-to-day work. 
8. Ms. Bueno stated that each day has six class periods, each lasting about 
50 to 55 minutes. Ms. Brunner had her own classroom with about 25 to 30 student 
desks, but Ms. Brunner did not teach a class in that room. However, students would 
come into Ms. Brunner’s classroom during lunch or during “Lion time” for help with 
assignments. Ms. Bueno explained that “Lion time” is at the end of the day and was a 
 
2 For the purpose of this decision and to be consistent with the Statement of 
Charges in this matter, Ms. Arellano will be referred to as Ms. Bueno.8 preparation time for students, similar to a homeroom time. Both special education and 
general education students typically came into Ms. Brunner’s classroom during lunch 
and Lion time to seek Ms. Brunner’s assistance. The Art Club also met in Ms. Brunner’s 
classroom on Fridays at lunch time. Ms. Bueno testified that she tended to see the 
same students in Ms. Brunner’s classroom during free time, and two of those students 
were S.C. and V.E. Ms. Bueno testified that S.C. and V.E. “were always in Ms. Brunner’s
classroom,” and she knew them as “Ms. Brunner’s girls.” Ms. Bueno stated that S.C. and 
V.E. were in Ms. Brunner’s classroom “whenever they could be” and “before school, 
after school, and at lunch.” Ms. Bueno stated that Ms. Brunner was “very close” to S.C. 
and V.E., neither of whom were special education students.
9. Ms. Bueno testified that it is important for teachers to avoid 
communicating with students outside of school hours, and that Ms. Brunner told Ms. 
Bueno the importance of that rule.
10. Ms. Bueno testified about the events of May 3, 2024, which was a Friday. 
On that day during the “prep period,” which was the fourth period of the day, Ms. 
Bueno and Ms. Brunner left the school to go to a clothing store so that Ms. Brunner 
could find a dress to wear to the school prom, which she was attending as a 
chaperone. Ms. Brunner drove the two of them to the clothing store, which was about 
a 15-minute drive away. Ms. Brunner purchased two dresses at the store. They were at 
the clothing store for about an hour because when they returned to the school, fifth 
period had just begun.
11. After returning to the school from the shopping trip, Ms. Brunner told 
Ms. Bueno that she wanted to “show the two girls [S.C. and V.E.] the dresses.” After 
going into Ms. Brunner’s classroom, Ms. Brunner called Mr. Gonzalez, who is the fifth 
period history teacher for both S.C. and V.E. Ms. Bueno explained that fifth period was 9 instructional time for both S.C. and V.E. in Mr. Gonzalez’s classroom. According to Ms. 
Bueno, Ms. Brunner asked Mr. Gonzalez if he “could send her girls over.” Ms. Bueno 
understood that Ms. Brunner meant S.C. and V.E. by using the phrase “her girls.” Ms. 
Bueno stated that Ms. Brunner used the phrase “my girls” to refer to S.C. and V.E. “all 
the time.” After S.C. and V.E. left Mr. Gonzalez’s classroom and arrived at Ms. Brunner’s 
classroom, Ms. Brunner asked Ms. Bueno to “check the door,” which Ms. Bueno 
understood to mean lock the door. Ms. Bueno did not understand at that time why Ms. 
Brunner wanted her to lock the door, but she did understand that Ms. Brunner wanted 
to show the two dresses to S.C. and V.E. Ms. Brunner told S.C. and V.E. that she wanted 
to show them dresses. 
12. After S.C. and V.E. entered Ms. Brunner’s classroom, they went to sit at 
desks located right next to Ms. Brunner. Ms. Bueno then turned around to see that Ms. 
Brunner had undressed and was wearing only her bra and underwear in front of S.C. 
and V.E., who were located about five feet away from Ms. Brunner. Ms. Bueno stated 
that she was located at the classroom door, which was about ten to fifteen feet away 
from Ms. Brunner, who was wearing only a bra and underwear and had removed both 
her shirt and pants at the same time. Ms. Bueno, as well as both S.C. and V.E., could 
clearly see Ms. Brunner undressed down to her bra and underwear with nothing 
obstructing their view. Ms. Bueno was shocked and walked to her desk. Ms. Brunner 
then put on one of the dresses and asked Ms. Bueno to take a photograph of her 
wearing the dress, which Ms. Bueno did using Ms. Brunner’s phone. 
13. After Ms. Bueno took the single photograph, then Ms. Brunner again 
undressed down to her bra and underwear in full view of Ms. Bueno and S.C. and V.E. 
Ms. Bueno stated that she was still in shock and could not believe what was 
happening. Ms. Bueno testified that when Ms. Brunner called S.C. and V.E. into her 10 classroom to show them the dresses, Ms. Bueno thought that Ms. Brunner would 
simply hold up the dresses to show them but not get undressed to her bra and 
underwear to try them on. Ms. Bueno testified that Ms. Brunner’s actions in undressing 
in front of S.C. and V.E. was shocking and “went against everything she had taught me 
about how important boundaries are with students.” Ms. Bueno viewed Ms. Brunner’s 
actions as a violation of those teacher/student boundaries. After Ms. Brunner tried on 
the second dress, she asked Ms. Bueno to take a photo of Ms. Brunner wearing the 
second dress. 
14. After Ms. Bueno took the second photo of Ms. Brunner wearing the 
second dress, Ms. Brunner again undressed down to her bra and underwear in full view 
of Ms. Bueno and S.C. and V.E. and thereafter put her shirt and pants back on. Ms. 
Bueno stated that during the three times Ms. Brunner got undressed down to her bra 
and underwear, Ms. Bueno could hear S.C. and V.E. both speaking to each other and 
V.E. stated in Spanish to S.C. that she was uncomfortable and wanted to leave. Ms. 
Bueno could see S.C. and V.E. during the times that Ms. Brunner was changing 
clothing, and Ms. Bueno noticed that V.E. was attempting to avoid looking at Ms. 
Brunner, and S.C. was “more relaxed.” 
15. After Ms. Brunner was re-dressed in her shirt and pants, the fifth period 
ended and S.C. and V.E. went out of the classroom to go to lunch. As soon as both S.C. 
and V.E. left the classroom, Ms. Bueno approached Ms. Brunner and told her that “the 
girls were uncomfortable” and that Ms. Brunner “should not have gotten undressed in 
front of the students.” In response to that statement, Ms. Brunner “was shocked” and 
stated, “that should not have happened, and [she] needed to check her boundaries.”11 16. Ms. Bueno also stated that during the fifth period on May 3, 2024, Ms. 
Brunner was scheduled to “push into” other general education classes, but Ms. Brunner 
did not do so and instead was trying on dresses. 
17. During the lunch period on May 3, 2024, Ms. Brunner’s classroom was the 
site of the Art Club meeting, in which both S.C. and V.E. were participants. After having 
lunch both S.C. and V.E. returned to Ms. Brunner’s classroom on May 3, 2024, for the 
Art Club meeting. Ms. Brunner had the other students in Art Club step out of her 
classroom so that she could speak with S.C. and V.E. privately with Ms. Bueno in the 
classroom. Ms. Bueno heard Ms. Brunner tell both S.C. and V.E. that she was sorry, she 
“never meant for it to happen,” and “she could get into trouble.” According to Ms. 
Bueno, S.C. responded by being relaxed and saying, “it is not like we are going to tell 
anyone,” and V.E. responded by saying nothing and appearing visibly uncomfortable. 
Ms. Bueno understood that as a result of that conversation, S.C. and V.E. would keep 
the information private to protect Ms. Brunner. Thereafter, Ms. Brunner let the other 
students back into the classroom for Art Club. 
18. Ms. Bueno stated that during the sixth period on May 3, 2024, both she 
and Ms. Brunner were scheduled to do push-in services in a general education 
classroom. However, neither of them did so. After lunch, Ms. Brunner was very upset 
and quiet. Ms. Bueno could see that Ms. Brunner was very upset, and as a result Ms. 
Bueno asked Ms. Brunner if she wanted to take a walk. During the walk, Ms. Brunner 
kept telling Ms. Bueno that she was in shock and could not believe that she “crossed 
boundaries with the girls like that.” Ms. Bueno characterized Ms. Brunner’s demeanor 
during this walk as “scared and anxious.” Ms. Bueno testified that she was 
disappointed in Ms. Brunner because she had wanted to be a teacher like Ms. Brunner. 
After their walk, Ms. Bueno and Ms. Brunner arrived at the teachers’ lounge where Ms. 12 Brunner got her food out of the refrigerator and stated that she was scared and that 
she could lose everything for which she worked so hard. Ms. Brunner then began to 
cry. At that point, Mr. Sheppard, the principal, walked into the teachers’ lounge and 
asked Ms. Brunner if she was alright, and Ms. Brunner did not respond. Ms. Bueno 
remained in the teachers’ lounge for the remainder of the school day. 
19. After leaving the teachers' lounge, Ms. Bueno got into her car and 
immediately called the district to report the incident. Ms. Bueno left a message with 
the district, and later that same day Dr. Sharon Raffiee-Shirazi called Ms. Bueno 
regarding the incident. Ms. Bueno testified that most of the phone call with Dr. 
Raffiee-Shirazi was her trying to get Ms. Bueno to stop crying. Ms. Bueno did not 
immediately identify herself to Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi because she felt like she was hurting 
Ms. Brunner. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi told Ms. Bueno she was doing the right thing. 
20. Ms. Bueno testified that as a result of the May 3, 2024, incident, she 
almost left the field of education completely because she “did not want to be around 
that.” As a result of the incident, Ms. Bueno “went into a depression because the 
incident almost broke [her].” Ms. Bueno stated that she also lost a friend, Ms. Brunner, 
because of the incident. 
21. On Monday, May 6, 2024, Ms. Bueno met with Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi, Mr. 
Shepphard, and another woman from the teachers’ union. During that meeting Dr. 
Raffiee-Shirazi asked Ms. Bueno questions regarding the incident and Ms. Bueno 
answered truthfully. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi asked Ms. Bueno to provide a written statement 
describing the events on May 3, 2024, and Ms. Bueno did so. That document was 
received into evidence and mirrored Ms. Bueno’s testimony at the hearing except in 
one respect. In her written statement, Ms. Bueno wrote that Ms. Brunner only tried on 
one dress and not two dresses. Ms. Bueno testified that Ms. Brunner did not put a 13 dress on over her clothing on May 3, 2024, but instead Ms. Brunner undressed down 
to her bra and underwear prior to putting on a dress. 
22. Because of the May 3, 2024, incident Ms. Bueno chose not to return to 
SJLA after the 2024-25 school year. The incident impacted Ms. Bueno profoundly, and 
she stressed that she believes Ms. Brunner’s actions on May 3, 2024, were wrong. 
23. Ms. Bueno testified on cross-examination that she never deleted the 
photos she took on Ms. Brunner’s phone of Ms. Brunner wearing the dresses, and 
those photos were never sent to her. Ms. Bueno also testified on cross-examination 
that she was not sure why she did not write in her statement that Ms. Brunner tried on 
two dresses instead of one, but she stressed that Ms. Brunner tried on two dresses and 
each of the dresses were black in color.
TESTIMONY OF STUDENT S.C. 
24. S.C. is 17 years old and currently in the 12th grade at SJLA where she was 
also a student during the 2023-24 school year. S.C. is familiar with Ms. Brunner and 
described her as “one of my teachers.” However, S.C. admitted that Ms. Brunner was 
not assigned as a teacher to her, and S.C. is not a special education student. S.C. 
testified that Ms. Brunner would work with S.C. on her schoolwork for reading, math, 
and English Language (EL) typically in Ms. Brunner’s classroom. S.C. would go to Ms. 
Brunner’s classroom every day, usually during lunch, Lion time, and sometimes during 
times when S.C. was scheduled to be in another classroom. S.C. stated that she went to 
Ms. Brunner’s class “just to relax or socialize and [she] did that almost every day.” S.C. 
testified that some other students did that as well, including V.E. With regard to 
assistance on schoolwork, S.C. stated she did not get help from Ms. Bueno, but only 
from Ms. Brunner.14 25. On May 3, 2024, S.C. was in her fifth period history class with Mr. 
Gonzalez, along with V.E. During that class period, Mr. Gonzalez got a phone call from 
Ms. Brunner after which Mr. Gonzalez asked S.C. and V.E. if they wanted to go to Ms. 
Brunner’s classroom. Both S.C. and V.E. then went to Ms. Brunner’s classroom. After 
arriving at Ms. Brunner’s classroom, Ms. Brunner started talking about prom dresses 
and decided to try on some prom dresses. S.C. then understood that the reason she 
was in Ms. Brunner’s classroom was to look at Ms. Brunner’s dresses and give an 
opinion. S.C. and V.E. sat at student desks directly across from Ms. Brunner’s desk 
where they could see Ms. Brunner clearly. Ms. Brunner asked Ms. Bueno to lock the 
classroom door, which she did. S.C. stated that Ms. Brunner tried on two dresses. Ms. 
Brunner took off her shirt and pants, and S.C. and V.E. were able to see Ms. Brunner in 
her undergarments. S.C. stated that when Ms. Brunner undressed down to her 
underwear, S.C. “looked away to give her privacy.” S.C. stated that during that time V.E. 
told her that she felt uncomfortable. S.C. stated that “we were reading each other’s lips 
that we were both uncomfortable.” After Ms. Brunner tried on the first dress, she asked 
S.C. And V.E. if the dress looked good, S.C. told her it did. Ms. Brunner then took off 
that dress and was wearing only her underwear before trying on the second dress. 
Thereafter, Ms. Brunner took off the second dress in front of S.C. and V.E. before 
putting her pants and shirt back on. After getting dressed back into her regular 
clothing, the period ended and S.C. and V.E. left the classroom to get lunch. 
26. After leaving the classroom to go to lunch, S.C. and V.E. talked to each 
other about the incident that just occurred. Both S.C. and V.E. told each other that they 
were uncomfortable during the time Ms. Brunner got undressed in front of them and 
agreed that “it was not the right choice for her to do that.” Both S.C. and V.E. agreed 
“not to talk about it outside of school” because they felt that “we should keep what 
happened private.” After S.C. and V.E. returned to Ms. Brunner’s classroom with their 15 lunch and in order to attend Art Club, Ms. Brunner apologized to them. Specifically, 
Ms. Brunner told them she was sorry for her actions, and it was not right for her to do 
that. Ms. Brunner told them that if they ever felt uncomfortable again that they should 
let her know. S.C. and V.E. accepted her apology and told her that they would let her 
know if they feel uncomfortable in the future. S.C. testified that she did not tell Ms. 
Brunner that they would keep the incident private, but that “it was not like we were 
going to tell anyone what she did.” S.C. stated that Ms. Bueno was present during the 
apology conversation between Ms. Brunner and S.C. and V.E. S.C. also testified that she 
recalls telling Ms. Brunner that she could get into trouble for what she did. S.C. in 
addition stated that she recalls multiple times when Ms. Brunner referred to S.C. and 
V.E. as “my girls.” 
27. On the following Monday after the May 3, 2024, incident, S.C. was called 
to the principal’s office to tell Mr. Sheppard and Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi what happened on 
May 3, 2024. S.C. was honest and forthright during that meeting regarding the events 
of May 3, 2024. S.C. also wrote a statement on May 6, 2024, about the events of May 3, 
2024, which was received in evidence. The written statement mirrored S.C.’s testimony 
at the hearing. S.C. wrote in her statement that “to me it was not a really big deal after 
the apology,” but S.C. testified that what Ms. Brunner did was not ok. S.C. stated that 
her relationship with Ms. Brunner was nice, and that Ms. Brunner treated her like a 
friend. S.C. stated that she feels protective of Ms. Brunner and “feel[s] loyalty toward 
her.” 
28. S.C. testified that she did not have text communications with Ms. 
Brunner. However, multiple text conversations between S.C. and Ms. Brunner were 
received in evidence. After being shown those text communications, S.C. simply stated 
that she did not remember sending or receiving those text messages. Some of those 16 text messages included photographs of Ms. Brunner, V.E., and S.C. with S.C.’s arm 
obviously holding the phone to take the photo. S.C. stated she took the photos but 
did not recall texting it to either Ms. Brunner or V.E. S.C. stated that she did not take 
photos with other teachers, but she did take photos with Ms. Brunner because she was 
really close with Ms. Brunner. On May 15, 2024, S.C. was with V.E. when V.E. sent a text 
message to Ms. Brunner, which stated in part,” I just want you to know that me and 
[S.C.] miss you so much and we are sorry to hear that you got fired. We wish you the 
best in all things that you do and we are thankful for every memory we made together, 
we appreciate you it you [ ] so much.” S.C. stated that she and V.E. understood that 
Ms. Brunner had been fired because they no longer saw her on school grounds. S.C. 
testified that she understood that a teacher could get into trouble for texting a 
student. 
29. On cross-examination, S.C. stated that she believed Ms. Brunner was a 
teacher’s aide because Ms. Brunner would go into other classrooms to help students. 
On cross-examination, S.C. clarified that when Ms. Brunner tried on the first dress on 
May 3, 2024, she only took off her shirt before putting the dress on and she kept her 
pants on. However, when she tried on the second dress, S.C. and V.E. could see both 
Ms. Brunner’s bra and underwear. When Ms. Brunner took off the second dress, both 
S.C. and V.E. could see Ms. Brunner in her bra and underwear.17 TESTIMONY OF STUDENT V.E.3
30. Student V.E. is 18 years old and currently in the 12th grade at SJLA. V.E. is 
familiar with Ms. Brunner because Ms. Brunner used to help her with her English 
assignments. V.E. was not assigned to Ms. Brunner as a student and is not a special 
education student. V.E. would go to Ms. Brunner’s classroom two to three times per 
week, sometimes during lunch, Lion time, and during first period. V.E would also 
sometimes go to Ms. Brunner’s classroom when she was assigned to be in another 
classroom. V.E. stated that she went to Ms. Brunner’s classroom “just to relax and 
socialize.” V.E. stated that she also went to Ms. Brunner’s classroom to eat lunch about 
three to four times per week “depending on the weather.” 
31. On May 3, 2024, V.E. was in her fifth period history class with Mr. 
Gonzalez when Ms. Brunner called Mr. Gonzalez and asked to send V.E. and S.C. over 
to her classroom. V.E. stated that Mr. Gonzalez did not give them an option but 
instead stated that Ms. Brunner wanted us in her classroom. V.E. stated that when a 
teacher tells me to do something, “I just do it.” 
32. When V.E. arrived in Ms. Brunner’s classroom with S.C., Ms. Brunner told 
them that she had some dresses she wanted to show them. V.E. stated that she was 
mad for being pulled out of her history class because she had been busy with an 
assignment and preparing for a test. Ms. Brunner did not spend any time with V.E. or 
S.C. that day with schoolwork, and Ms. Brunner gave them no information as to why 
she called them to her class other than to show them dresses to get their opinion. Ms. 
 
3 Student V.E. has the initials of V.E.G. However, the student will be referred to in 
this decision as V.E. to be consistent with the Statement of Charges in this matter.18 Brunner told Ms. Bueno to lock the door, which she did. The only people in the room 
were Ms. Brunner, Ms. Bueno, S.C., and V.E. Both V.E. and S.C. were sitting at student 
desks directly in front of Ms. Brunner’s desk. Ms. Brunner then removed her shirt down 
to her bra in full view of S.C. and V.E. and put the first dress on while wearing her 
pants. Then Ms. Brunner removed her pants under the first dress. V.E. stated that Ms. 
Brunner tried on two dresses on May 3, 2024. After putting on the first dress, Ms. 
Brunner asked S.C. and V.E. if they liked the dress, but V.E. was “doing her history 
homework.” V.E. stated that it was awkward and weird when Ms. Brunner got 
undressed in front of V.E. and S.C. Ms. Brunner then removed the first dress and was 
standing in front of the girls in her bra and underwear before she put on the second 
dress. Ms. Brunner then asked V.E. and S.C. their opinion of the second dress, and V.E. 
stated that they were both good. V.E. stated that Ms. Bueno was helping Ms. Brunner 
with the dresses. During the time Ms. Brunner was undressing in front of them, V.E. 
looked at S.C. and expressed that she was very uncomfortable. V.E. was surprised that 
Ms. Brunner got undressed in front of her. Ms. Brunner then took off the second dress, 
was wearing only her bra and underwear, and then put her pants and shirt back on. 
33. After Ms. Brunner got dressed in her regular clothing, V.E. and S.C. left 
Ms. Brunner’s classroom for lunch. V.E. spoke with S.C. after leaving the classroom, and 
both stated that it was very awkward when Ms. Brunner got undressed in front of 
them. Thereafter, V.E. and S.C. returned to Ms. Brunner’s classroom with their lunch to 
attend Art Club. At that time Ms. Brunner took S.C. and V.E. aside to apologize to them 
“about the situation.” Ms. Brunner was very serious during the apology and told them 
she could get in trouble for what she did, and she regretted doing it. Ms. Brunner 
stated that it should not have happened. During the apology, Ms. Bueno was present. 
V.E. and S.C. then stayed in Ms. Brunner’s class for Art Club and thereafter left for sixth 
period. After V.E. and S.C. left Ms. Brunner’s classroom, they talked and agreed that “it 19 was awkward.” V.E. stated, “we did not think it was a serious situation, so we just let it 
go.” V.E. admitted that Ms. Brunner referred to her and S.C. as “my girls.” 
34. On Monday, May 6, 2024, Mr. Sheppard called V.E. to his office. When 
V.E. arrived, she was met by Mr. Sheppard and Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi, who asked her 
questions about the events of May 3, 2024. V.E. was asked to write a statement, which 
she did, about the events. V.E. wrote that statement in Spanish, and it was translated 
to English and received into evidence. V.E.’s statement mirrored her testimony at 
hearing. 
35. V.E. emphasized during her testimony that she was very uncomfortable 
during the time Ms. Brunner was getting undressed to try on dresses in front of V.E. 
and S.C. She stated, “it was weird,” and not something you expect a teacher to do. V.E. 
stressed that what Ms. Brunner did was not ok, and there are no circumstances when a 
teacher should get undressed in front of students. 
36. V.E. characterized her relationship with Ms. Brunner as that of a friend, 
and they “were very close.” V.E. stated that she sometimes spoke with Ms. Brunner on 
the phone when they were not at school, and she sometimes texted with Ms. Brunner 
outside of school time. Many texts and communications between V.E. and Ms. Brunner 
were received in evidence and shown to V.E., who admitted that she had these 
communications with Ms. Brunner. Some of those communications happened at 7:00 
p.m. or 9:30 p.m., and many were unrelated to school. V.E. admitted that she did send 
one text to Ms. Brunner asking her to get her out of a scheduled class with another 
teacher, which Ms. Brunner did. V.E. also admitted to sending photographs to Ms. 
Brunner and also taking photographs with Ms. Brunner and S.C. V.E. stated that she 
never texted other teachers and did not take photographs with other teachers. In one 
text exchange, Ms. Brunner asked V.E. to bring her coffee and oatmeal for that day, 20 which V.E. did. V.E. brought Ms. Brunner coffee from Starbucks on multiple occasions. 
V.E. also admitted to texting Ms. Brunner on weekends and during school holidays. V.E. 
also stated she texted Ms. Brunner on May 15, 2024, because she believed that Ms. 
Brunner had been fired because she was not on school campus. Having received no 
response from Ms. Brunner to that text on May 15, 2024, V.E. texted Ms. Brunner again 
on May 28, 2024, but received no response. V.E. stated that it was unusual for Ms. 
Brunner to not respond to her text messages. 
37. V.E. admitted to being deposed in this matter. She stated that she did 
not bring those text messages to the deposition because she believed she was 
protecting Ms. Brunner. V.E. understood that teachers are not supposed to be texting 
students. V.E. stated that Ms. Brunner never told her not to produce those text 
messages and never told her to not share anything with the district. 
TESTIMONY OF LLOYD SHEPPARD
38. Lloyd Lorin Sheppard is currently employed as the principal of SJLA. He 
has worked for the district for seven years. Prior to his current position he worked as 
the Dean of Students at Monte Vista middle school from 2018 to 2019. From August 
2019 to June 2022, he worked as the Assistant Principal of SJHS. Thereafter, he worked 
as Assistant Principal of SJLA. Since 2023 he has worked as the principal of SJLA. Prior 
to working at the district, Mr. Sheppard worked at two different school districts, 
including the San Bernardino Unified School district, and as a teacher at Rialto High 
School. Mr. Sheppard explained that SJLA covers grades six through twelve. His duties 
as principal include monitoring teachers and giving feedback, and classroom 
management. Mr. Sheppard makes sure that SJLA has a safe and clean campus and 
there is good communication with parents. His job duties also include investigation of 
complaints against staff members. Mr. Sheppard is familiar with Ms. Brunner, who he 21 stated is a former special education teacher at SJLA who provided “push-in” support to 
students in the general education classrooms. 
39. Mr. Sheppard testified that he was responsible for investigating a 
complaint against Ms. Brunner in October 2023. The complaint was from a student 
who asserted that Ms. Brunner was “grooming a student in her class by sending text 
messages during class time and giving the student snacks and incentives.” Mr. 
Sheppard stressed that the complaining student used the word “grooming” in her 
complaint. Mr. Sheppard explained that his understanding of the word grooming is 
when an adult will start to have conversations with students and create a situation 
where students let down their guard to convince them to do things that they may not 
normally do. The written student complaint dated October 18, 2023, was received in 
evidence. 
After receiving the student complaint, Mr. Sheppard interviewed the 
complaining student. Mr. Sheppard was very concerned that Ms. Brunner was giving a 
student gifts and texting a student during class time. Mr. Sheppard met with the 
student alleged to have received the text from Ms. Brunner, who is student A.R., as well 
as with Ms. Brunner. Student A.R. told him that Ms. Brunner had sent him a text asking 
him what juices he likes so that she could get him that item as a reward for bringing 
back his IEP paperwork. Mr. Sheppard’s investigation showed that Ms. Brunner did get 
the student A.R. a juice and did so as an incentive for him to bring back paperwork. 
Mr. Sheppard also found that Ms. Brunner also did text with student A.R. directly. 
Student A.R. told Mr. Sheppard that Ms. Brunner only sent him one text and he 
deleted it and Ms. Brunner’s contact information. Ms. Brunner told Mr. Sheppard that 
she had only sent one text to the student A.R. Mr. Sheppard did not ask to see Ms. 
Brunner’s phone to verify that answer. Mr. Sheppard stressed that teachers are not 22 allowed to text their students, and instead the district has approved communication 
tools for teachers to communicate with students. Specifically, the teachers can use the 
school district email to email the student, or can use Square Messenger, which is a 
mechanism for teachers to communicate with students or parents and is connected to 
the teachers’ rosters. Mr. Sheppard stated that the district can monitor all 
communications on district email and on Square Messenger, which is the reason it is 
district-approved communication. Mr. Sheppard also stated that if a teacher is to 
communicate with a student, the approved topics of discussion include schoolwork, 
discipline, and issues involving the classroom. Teachers should never communicate 
with students during the weekends, or on school breaks. 
Mr. Sheppard concluded his investigation into the October 18, 2023, student 
complaint regarding Ms. Brunner. He concluded that Ms. Brunner should not have 
been communicating with any student by text message. He also concluded that Ms. 
Brunner’s behavior did not constitute grooming, but that it was bad judgment. Mr. 
Sheppard shared these conclusions with Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi in order to get further 
directive from her. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi instructed Mr. Sheppard to advise Ms. Brunner to 
only use district-approved communication with students and not to use text messages, 
and for Mr. Sheppard to put this directive in writing. Mr. Sheppard testified that he did 
not issue a written notice to respondent about her conduct, but he did give her an oral 
directive in person to only communicate with students using school email or other 
school-approved mechanisms and to be mindful of her interactions with students. Mr. 
Sheppard testified that Ms. Brunner understood those directives he gave to her. He 
also stated that it was his own oversight for failing to put that oral directive in writing 
as Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi told him to do. 23 40. After the October 2024 complaint against Ms. Brunner, Mr. Sheppard was 
not made aware of any further allegations of Ms. Brunner texting students. He stated 
that if he was aware of any such further texting, he would have moved forward with 
discipline to Ms. Brunner. 
41. Mr. Sheppard stated that he is aware of an application called Google 
Voice, which is an application on your phone that allows you to have a separate phone 
number than your cell phone number to use for sending text messages or phone calls. 
Mr. Sheppard stressed that Google Voice is not a district-approved form of 
communication between teachers and students. He stressed that the first point of 
contact for communication with students outside of school is the parents. Mr. 
Sheppard testified that Ms. Brunner never asked his permission to use Google Voice to 
text with students, and if he had learned she had been doing so after October 2023, 
that would have been a violation of his oral directive to her. 
42. With regard to the May 3, 2024, incident, Mr. Sheppard first learned of 
the incident from a phone call from Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi he received over the weekend 
and before May 6, 2024. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi told Mr. Sheppard to make sure he was 
available on Monday, May 6, 2024, for a meeting and an investigation of the matter. 
On May 6, 2024, Mr. Sheppard met with Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi regarding the allegations. 
Thereafter, the two of them met with Ms. Bueno, S.C., V.E., and Ms. Brunner.
Mr. Sheppard met with Ms. Bueno with Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi present. During that 
meeting Ms. Bueno gave him information regarding the May 3, 2024, incident 
consistent with her testimony at this hearing. Ms. Bueno was very emotional during 
her meeting with Mr. Sheppard. 24 Mr. Sheppard also met with the two students, S.C. and V.E., and did so 
separately. During those meetings a Spanish language interpreter was present. Mr. 
Sheppard also instructed each of the students to provide a written statement of the 
events of May 3, 2024, which they did. One of the student’s statements was written in 
Spanish and was translated into English by one of Mr. Sheppard’s staff members.
Mr. Sheppard testified that each of the three witnesses, Ms. Bueno, S.C. and V.E., 
provided consistent statements both in person and in writing. 
Mr. Sheppard and Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi met with Ms. Brunner on May 6, 2024, 
along with a teacher’s union representative. During that meeting Ms. Brunner’s 
account of the May 3, 2024, incident differed from the other three witnesses. 
Specifically, Ms. Brunner stated that she tried on only one dress and did so over her 
clothing and did not get undressed. Ms. Brunner also stated that students S.C. and V.E. 
were not present when she tried on the dress, although Mr. Sheppard clarified on 
cross-examination that Ms. Brunner stated that S.C. and V.E. were in the classroom 
when Ms. Brunner tried on the dress but had their backs turned toward her. Mr. 
Sheppard stated that during her interview in his office, Ms. Brunner acted as if “it was 
not a big deal and nothing big had happened.” Although, Mr. Sheppard admitted that 
Ms. Brunner was emotional during the meeting. During the meeting, Ms. Brunner 
admitted to calling S.C. and V.E. out from another classroom for the purpose of 
showing them the dress. 
Mr. Sheppard was very concerned because there is never a circumstance when a 
teacher should be changing clothing in front of students. After Ms. Brunner was 
interviewed by Mr. Sheppard and Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi, she was sent home for the rest of 
the day while the investigation continued. Mr. Sheppard then called the parents of the 
two students to inform them of the investigation. 25 43. Mr. Sheppard also testified that he recalled running into Ms. Brunner on 
May 3, 2024, in the staff lounge late in the day. Mr. Sheppard observed Ms. Bueno and 
Ms. Brunner sitting at a table, and Ms. Brunner was crying. Mr. Sheppard asked if they 
were ok, and he received no answer. Thereafter, Mr. Sheppard left the staff lounge. 
TESTIMONY OF SHARON RAFFIEE-SHIRAZI,ED.D.
44. Dr. Sharon Raffiee-Shirazi is currently employed by the district as the 
Executive Director of Personnel Services, a position she has held since 2016. Prior to 
this position Dr. Raffie-Shirazi worked as the Executive Director of Education Services 
for three years and as a middle school principal for eight years. She has worked for the 
district for 19 years total. Her duties in her current position include oversight of all 
classified and certificated staff in the district, hiring, discipline and training of all staff. 
She also conducts investigations of complaints regarding staff. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi has 
attended many trainings regarding investigations, sexual harassment, diversity and 
other issues.
45. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi is familiar with Ms. Brunner because Ms. Brunner has 
worked for the district as a special education teacher for about three years total. Ms. 
Brunner first worked at SJHS and then transferred to SJLA, where she worked for the 
2023-24 school year. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi explained that SJLA is a magnet school with a 
military overtone, but it is not a military school. SJLA is very structured and has a 
“military flavor.” She stated that SLJA is a flagship school and consists of a full middle 
school and high school covering grades sixth through twelfth. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi 
explained that at SJLA Ms. Brunner worked as a special education teacher for 
mild/moderate push-in students, who are special education students attending 
general education classes. Ms. Brunner had her own classroom, but she did not have 
her own classes. Instead, Ms. Brunner had a caseload of special education students.26 46. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi first became aware of the October 2023 student 
complaint against Ms. Brunner when Mr. Sheppard sent her an email attaching the 
written student complaint wherein the student accused Ms. Brunner of grooming 
student A.R. Mr. Sheppard sent her the email asking her to help him with regard to the 
investigation. The allegations concerned Dr. Raffie-Shirazi, and she stated it was 
unusual for a student to use the word grooming in a complaint. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi also 
stated that teachers should not be giving students gifts, food, or juice, and doing so is 
discouraged. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that Mr. Sheppard was responsible for 
investigating this October 2023 complaint, and she was giving him guidance on his 
investigation. 
Dr. Raffie-Shirazi followed up with Mr. Sheppard about his investigation of the 
October 2023 complaint. Mr. Sheppard told her that there was not grooming, but that 
Ms. Brunner had texted a student and given food to a student. Mr. Sheppard indicated 
to Dr. Raffie-Shirazi that he should direct Ms. Brunner to have appropriate 
communication and professionalism with students. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi advised Mr. 
Sheppard that he needed to communicate this to Ms. Brunner and needed to follow 
that communication with the same direction in writing, which could be an email. Dr. 
Raffie-Shirazi stated that she thought that writing had been sent by Mr. Sheppard to 
Ms. Brunner but only learned over the last few months that he did not send the 
writing. Mr. Sheppard did tell Dr. Raffie-Shirazi that he gave an oral directive to Ms. 
Brunner telling her she must use only district-approved modalities to communicate 
with students and to be careful of her role as a teacher and what kinds of 
communication she had with students. He specifically advised Ms. Brunner that texting 
students was not allowed. 27 47. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that on May 3, 2024, she received an 
anonymous phone call from an instructional aide who was upset about a teacher 
undressing in front of students. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi called the person back at the phone 
number they left for her and learned that Ms. Bueno is the person who called to 
complain. Ms. Bueno told her that something inappropriate had happened in the 
classroom that Dr. Raffie-Shirazi should know about. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that 
during the phone call Ms. Bueno was extremely upset and crying. Ms. Bueno was 
conflicted and had respect for Ms. Brunner, but this was something she had to report. 
Ms. Bueno stated that Ms. Brunner’s actions broke every rule that Ms. Brunner had 
taught her. Ms. Bueno told Dr. Raffie-Shirazi that Ms. Brunner disrobed and tried on 
dresses in front of two students, who were specifically called into Ms. Brunner’s 
classroom for that purpose. She further told Dr. Raffie-Shirazi that the two students 
were very uncomfortable and told each other that as they left the classroom. Dr. 
Raffie-Shirazi reassured Ms. Bueno that she was doing the right thing and that Dr. 
Raffie-Shirazi would be coming to SJLA on Monday, May 6, 2024, as part of the 
investigation.
48. After the telephone call with Ms. Bueno, Dr. Raffie-Shirazi called Mr. 
Sheppard and informed him that she would be at SJLA on Monday morning for the 
investigation regarding the incident described by Ms. Bueno and that Ms. Brunner 
would likely be placed on leave while the investigation continued.
49. On May 6, 2024, Dr. Raffie-Shirazi went to SJLA and spoke with four 
people involved in the May 3, 2024, incident, along with Mr. Sheppard, and in the case 
of Ms. Brunner’s interview a union representative from the San Jacinto Teacher’s 
Association (union) was present. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that Ms. Bueno described to 
her the events as set forth above from her testimony at this hearing. She stated that 28 Ms. Bueno told her that Ms. Brunner tried on two dresses on May 3, 2024, in front of 
the two students and Ms. Bueno. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stressed that Ms. Bueno never told 
her that Ms. Brunner put the dresses on over her clothing, and instead Ms. Bueno told 
her that Ms. Brunner disrobed down to her bra and underwear before putting on each 
dress and before getting dressed back into her pants and shirt. Ms. Bueno also told Dr. 
Raffie-Shirazi that after Ms. Bueno told respondent that the two students were 
uncomfortable during the incident, Ms. Brunner asked Ms. Bueno if she should 
apologize to the two students. According to Ms. Bueno, when Ms. Brunner approached 
the two students to apologize, both students and Ms. Bueno were very uncomfortable, 
one student stated, “it is over,” and the other student was silent. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi 
stated that Ms. Bueno was very emotional in the interview and did not want to see Ms. 
Brunner again. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi asked Ms. Bueno to provide a written statement of the 
events, which she did on May 6, 2024. 
Dr. Raffie-Shirazi then met with each of the two students, S.C. and V.E., 
separately. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that each of the two students told her that Ms. 
Brunner tried on two dresses in front of them and disrobed down to her underwear to 
do so. Each of the two students stated they were uncomfortable and considered 
themselves to be good friends with Ms. Brunner. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi clarified with each 
student regarding what they saw, which was consistent with their testimony at this 
hearing and in their written statements, which Dr. Raffie-Shirazi asked them to provide. 
Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that each of the two students told her that they could see 
Ms. Brunner when she took off her clothing down to her underwear and bra, and each 
student tried to look away and was uncomfortable. Each student stated that Ms. 
Brunner tried on two dresses that day and did not put the dresses on over her 
clothing. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that the statements, both written and oral, provided 
by each of the two students was consistent with information provided by Ms. Bueno. 29 Dr. Raffie-Shirazi also met with Ms. Brunner, along with Mr. Sheppard and the 
union representative. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi asked Ms. Brunner to explain what happened 
and Ms. Brunner was very emotional and crying at points during the conversation. Ms. 
Brunner expressed that she knew what she did was wrong. Ms. Brunner told Dr. Raffie-
Shirazi that she had two students come to her classroom because she was looking at 
what dress to wear to the prom and wanted to try the dress on. Ms. Brunner stated 
that she only tried on one dress. Initially, Ms. Brunner told Dr. Raffie-Shirazi that she 
put the dress over her clothing, and at another time in the interview Ms. Brunner told 
her that she only took off her shirt to try on the dress. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that Ms. 
Brunner told her that during the time Ms. Brunner was trying on the dress, the two 
students “were in the far end of the room, on their phones, talking, and disengaged 
with what [Ms. Brunner] was doing.” Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that Ms. Brunner had no 
other reason for calling the two students into her classroom other than to try on the 
dress. After the two students went to lunch, Ms. Bueno approached Ms. Brunner to tell 
her what she did was not appropriate. After the two students returned to Ms. 
Brunner’s classroom, Ms. Brunner apologized to them. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi asked Ms. 
Brunner to provide a written statement of the events of May 3, 2024, and Ms. Brunner 
declined to do so. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi placed Ms. Brunner on paid administrative leave 
until the investigation was finished. 
50. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stressed that there is no degree of familiarity between a 
teacher and student that would allow a teacher to change their clothing in front of a 
student. Based on her review of information obtained in the investigation, Dr. Raffie-
Shirazi concluded that Ms. Bueno and the two students provided consistent 
information of the events of May 3, 2024, but Ms. Brunner provided inconsistent 
information that conflicted with the other three witnesses. Some of the inconsistencies 
were: Ms. Brunner stated she tried on only one dress, when the other three witnesses 30 stated there were two; Ms. Brunner first denied taking off any clothing to try on the 
dress, then admitted to only taking off her shirt, which was inconsistent with the other 
three witnesses stating she disrobed down to her bra and underwear; and Ms. Brunner 
stated that the two students were across the room and disengaged, when the other 
three witnesses stated the two students were directly in front of respondent and were 
not disengaged. 
51. On May 8, 2024, Dr. Raffie-Shirazi met in person with Ms. Brunner again, 
along with the union’s president and union regional representative, at Dr. Raffie-
Shirazi’s office at the district. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi advised Ms. Brunner that after her 
review of the information provided in the investigation, the conduct of Ms. Brunner on 
May 3, 2024, was too egregious for the district to put her back in a classroom, and the 
district would move forward with recommendations for separation from her 
employment. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi offered Ms. Brunner the opportunity to resign if she 
chose to do so, and Ms. Brunner was non-responsive and stoic. Thereafter, Dr. Raffie-
Shirazi signed the Statement of Charges in this matter. 
52. After Ms. Brunner was served with the Statement of Charges and related 
documents in this matter, there was a Skelly hearing4scheduled for August 7, 2024. Dr. 
 
4 In  (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194, 215, the California 
Supreme Court held that in order to satisfy due process, an agency considering 
disciplinary action against a public employee must accord the employee certain “pre-
removal safeguards,” including “notice of the proposed action, the reasons therefor, a 
copy of the charges and materials upon which the action is based, and the right to 
respond, either orally or in writing, to the authority initially imposing discipline.” The 
Supreme Court’s directive gave rise to an administrative procedure known as a 31 Raffie-Shirazi explained that the objective third party who was assigned to serve as the 
Skelly officer in this matter was Seth Heeren, who knew nothing about this matter 
prior to serving as the Skelly officer. Mr. Heeren was provided with a copy of the 
charges in this matter. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi noted that the August 7, 2024, Skelly hearing 
did not take place because Ms. Brunner chose to provide a written statement, which 
was received in evidence, to Mr. Heeren in lieu of appearing in person. After review of 
the information provide, Mr. Heeren made the decision that the charges against Ms. 
Brunner should move forward. Thereafter, the matter came before the district’s school 
board, and the board agreed unanimously to move forward with dismissal of Ms. 
Brunner. 
53. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that only one month prior to this hearing, and 
well after the Statement of Charges had been served on Ms. Brunner, she first became 
aware of a series of emails sent between Ms. Brunner and students S.C. and V.E. Dr. 
Raffie-Shirazi stated that she was shocked to see these email communications, which 
she described as being “way outside of the domain of what we expect,” and as 
“inappropriate boundary breaking.” She stated that the familiarity between Ms. 
Brunner and the two students was deeply concerning. 
54. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that at the time of hire of Ms. Brunner by the 
district, Ms. Brunner acknowledged and signed multiple district policies at issue in this 
matter, as shown in Ms. Brunner’s personnel file and received in evidence. Specifically, 
Ms. Brunner signed and acknowledged the district’s sexual harassment policy and 
dress and grooming policy. Furthermore, Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that other district 
 
hearing, in which an employee has the opportunity to respond to the charges upon 
which the proposed discipline is based. 32 policies, administrative regulations, and code of ethics for teachers as adopted by the 
district were violated by Ms. Brunner, including: the district’s sexual harassment policy, 
dress and grooming policy, policy on professional standards and code of ethics, policy 
on maintaining appropriate adult-student interactions, policy for absences and 
excuses, policy regarding conduct, policy regarding mobile communication devices, 
policy regarding a positive school climate, and the policy regarding classroom 
interruptions. 
Dr. Raffie-Shirazi explained that Ms. Brunner’s actions on May 3, 2024, by calling 
two students out of their classrooms during instructional time for inappropriate 
reasons not related to school and only for personal reasons, as well as undressing in 
front of students, Ms. Brunner violated emotional safety boundaries for those students, 
used mobile phones to text students instead of district-approved communication 
devices, left campus during work time to shop for dresses, and referred to S.C. and V.E. 
as “my girls” and sent them on Starbucks runs for her, thereby having inappropriate 
familiarity with them, all violated these district policies and regulations. Dr. Raffie-
Shirazi stated that while Ms. Brunner was not alleged to have committed sexual 
harassment, her conduct had characteristics consistent with sexual harassment. 
55. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi testified that Ms. Brunner seriously breached 
boundaries with students S.C. and V.E. in many ways, including undressing in front of 
them. As a result, the district cannot trust respondent with student interactions again. 
56. On cross-examination, Dr. Raffie-Shirazi admitted that Ms. Brunner 
remained on paid administrative leave from May 6, 2024, until August 2024, when she 
was placed on unpaid administrative leave. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stated that on August 20, 
2024, Ms. Brunner was brought back to do clerical work for the special education 
department and did not do so at a school site. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi acknowledged she 33 sent an email to Ms. Brunner on August 19, 2024, calling her in to do work while she 
was on paid administrative leave. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi stressed that Ms. Brunner was only 
doing clerical administrative work with no students present, and that the district would 
not put her in a classroom. 
TESTIMONY OF SETH HEEREN
57. Seth Heeren is currently employed by the district as an Assistant 
Superintendent of Business Services, a position he has held since 2015. He has worked 
for the district for 18 years, since 2007. Other positions he has held at the district 
include Technology Systems Manager, Director of Technology, Director of Fiscal 
Services, and Executive Director of Business Services. Mr. Heeren served as the Skelly 
officer in this matter. Before doing so he did not know who Ms. Brunner was. He had 
never served as a Skelly officer prior to this matter. Dr. Raffie-Shirazi contacted him to 
ask him to serve as the Skelly officer. 
58. Mr. Heeren testified that he understood his role as the Skelly officer to be 
as a neutral and to represent the interests of the community and students. He 
understood his assignment to be to read the charges, Ms. Brunner’s response, and to 
make a determination on whether discipline should move forward. If he felt that the 
facts did not justify dismissal of Ms. Brunner, then he would have communicated so to 
the district. Mr. Heeren read the Statement of Charges, reviewed all related exhibits, 
including Ms. Brunner’s written statement she submitted in lieu of personal 
appearance. Mr. Heeren did not interview any person in connection with this matter. 
Mr. Heeren read the entire written statement from Ms. Brunner and had no questions 
after that.34 59. Based on the information he reviewed, Mr. Heeren determined that the 
charges for dismissal of Ms. Brunner should go forward. Mr. Heeren stated that the 
statement of Ms. Brunner that she changed clothing in front of students was egregious 
conduct and her actions were unprofessional and violated numerous district polices 
and regulations warranting dismissal. Mr. Heeren stated that he was concerned about 
the “grooming” situation, which he clarified stemmed from the October 2023 student 
complaint mentioned in the charges. He was also concerned about putting students in 
a precarious situation by changing clothes in front of them, making them feel 
uncomfortable. He stated he was also concerned because Ms. Brunner felt like the 
students were her friends. 
60. Mr. Heeren also testified that he did not find Ms. Brunner’s written 
statement to be credible because she wrote that she tried on more than one dress, but 
she left her clothes on. He questioned how she could try on a second dress without 
disrobing. Mr. Heeren stressed that this description made no sense. Mr. Heeren also 
stated that he believes Ms. Brunner’s conduct of getting undressed in front of students 
constitutes immoral conduct. He also believes Ms. Brunner was dishonest because her 
version of events was not consistent with that of the other witnesses, and also did not 
make sense. He feels that Ms. Brunner’s statements were an effort to “downplay the 
situation.” Mr. Heeren never spoke to respondent during his role as Skelly officer. 
Ms. Brunner’s Evidence 
61. Ms. Brunner presented testimony from five witnesses at the hearing. 
Those witnesses included herself, two other teachers in the district as character 
witnesses, Patricia Salas, who is Ms. Brunner’s union representative from the California 
Teachers Association regarding the May 3, 2024, incident, and David Vollmar, who is 
Ms. Brunner’s union representative from the California Teachers Association regarding 35 the October 2023 investigation. The following factual findings are based on the 
testimony of those witnesses and supporting documents received in evidence. 
TESTIMONY OF MS. BRUNNER
62. Jennifer Brunner received her bachelor's degree in English from National 
University. Thereafter, she received her master’s degree in special education with dual 
credentials of special education mild/moderate and multiple subject. Ms. Brunner has 
been teaching for seven years. She was first hired by the district in the 2021-22 school 
year as a special education teacher at SJHS. During that time her caseload had 
students in grades 9 through 12. For the 2022-23 school year at SJHS she taught 
special education math and also “pushed in” to general education classes for students 
in her caseload. At the end of the first semester of the 2022-23 school year, Ms. 
Brunner transferred to SJLA where she worked as a special education teacher 
supporting students in general education classrooms. Her duties were to ensure 
special education students were getting the required supports in the general 
education classrooms. Ms. Brunner did not teach her own classes at SJLA, unlike her 
work at SJHS. 
At SJLA Ms. Brunner supported students in grades 9 to 12 and provided push-in 
services, which Ms. Brunner explained as making sure the special education students in 
the general education classrooms could understand their content and express their 
knowledge. SJLA has a total of six periods in a day, and Ms. Brunner provided push-in 
services for five of those periods with one period being a preparation period. Ms. 
Brunner stated that there was flexibility on when she could do her preparation period. 
Ms. Brunner provided push-in services on Monday through Thursday, and on Friday 
she had a scheduled administrative day, where she had flexibility to do push-in 
services, but also to do other tasks like working on Individual Educational Programs 36 (IEPs), testing students, monitoring progress, and collaborating with teachers and 
parents. During the 2022-23 school year, Ms. Brunner had about 22 to 25 students on 
her caseload. At SJLA Ms. Brunner has her own classroom, which is a traditional 
classroom, but she does not teach a class. 
63. Ms. Brunner explained that Lion time is like homeroom and happens at 
the beginning of the day, “unless there is some sort of odd schedule.” Lion time 
typically is shorter than the length of a regular period, which is about 50 minutes. 
Preparation time is time to prepare and do work that you can’t do when you are with 
students, including paperwork. She explained that passing period is the five to seven 
minutes that students have to get from one class to another. Ms. Brunner typically has 
students in her classroom during lunch time. On any given day other than Friday there 
were from three to five students in her classroom for lunch time, but on Fridays she 
had Art Club and typically had about 12 to 15 students in her classroom at lunch as a 
result. Other teachers at SJLA had students in their classrooms at lunch time. Ms. 
Brunner also explained that there is a morning ceremony at SJLA called “Reveille,” 
which lasts for about 10 minutes, and the entire school and all students are involved in 
that ceremony. Reveille marks the beginning of the school day. 
64. Ms. Brunner testified that she first met V.E. in the 2022-23 school year 
when Ms. Brunner was providing push-in services in V.E.’s English class. Ms. Brunner 
provided assistance to V.E. while in that class, as Ms. Brunner did with other general 
education students in the class. Ms. Brunner explained that although V.E. is not a 
special education student, Ms. Brunner would occasionally provide support to general 
education students not in her caseload. A special education teacher is not supposed to 
“single out” special education students and in order to avoid that she provides support 
services to all students in the classroom. Ms. Brunner never introduced herself to 37 students as a special education teacher, and if students asked, she introduced herself 
as a support teacher. 
65. Ms. Brunner stated that she also met S.C. in the 2022-23 school year 
when Ms. Brunner provided push-in services to S.C.’s English classroom. Ms. Brunner 
provided S.C. help during that class on occasion. 
66. Ms. Brunner testified that V.E. would visit Ms. Brunner’s classroom 
“mostly during Lion time.” Ms. Brunner explained that V.E. was a very motivated 
student, and she would use the Lion time to get assistance from Ms. Brunner on 
assignments. Sometimes V.E. would ask her teacher if she could come to Ms. Brunner’s 
classroom if she had extra time. S.C. also visited Ms. Brunner’s classroom, but when 
she did so she was always with V.E. and never alone. In contrast V.E. would frequently 
visit Ms. Brunner’s classroom alone. Initially, Ms. Brunner would assist V.E. with English 
and would assist her a lot as V.E. is an English language learner. Ms. Brunner stated 
that some of her work with V.E. “was more detailed.” Ms. Brunner stated that there 
were other non-special education students who came to her classroom for assistance. 
67. Ms. Brunner has known Ms. Bueno since she started working at SJLA in 
February or March of 2023. At that time Ms. Brunner was the only special education 
teacher at SJLA working with high school students. Having Ms. Bueno work with Ms. 
Brunner as her instructional aide allowed Ms. Brunner to “fill in the gaps” when Ms. 
Brunner could not push in to two classes at the same time. 
68. On May 3, 2024, during Reveille, Ms. Brunner was outside the school with 
other teachers as the ceremony was happening. Ms. Brunner and two of those teachers 
were scheduled to be chaperones at the school prom, which was coming up soon. 
They were excited about the prom and were discussing what they would wear. During 38 the Reveille ceremony one of the other teachers gave some dresses to Ms. Brunner to 
try on to see if one would work for the prom. After Reveille, Ms. Brunner went to Lion 
time in her classroom. She stated that she had an administrative day on May 3, 2024, 
because it was a Friday, and she was not scheduled to push in to any classes that day. 
During Lion time on May 3, 2024, in Ms. Brunner’s classroom, the only students 
present were V.E. and S.C. Ms. Brunner stated that V.E. needed assistance with her 
English assignment that day. After Lion time, first period classes started. Ms. Brunner 
stated that because it was an administrative day, she stayed in her classroom during 
first through fourth periods. 
During fifth period on May 3, 2024, Ms. Brunner and Ms. Bueno left the school 
to go shopping for dresses at a store named DeeDee’s. Ms. Brunner explained that she 
had looked at the dresses given to her by the other teacher that day and decided that 
only one of those dresses may work, but it needed some costume jewelry to “dress it 
up.” She wanted to go to DeeDee’s, a local store, which is located 10 minutes away 
from the school and had been recommended by Ms. Bueno, to find that costume 
jewelry. Ms. Brunner admitted that fifth period was not scheduled to be her free time 
that day, and she was expected to be in school during that fifth period. Ms. Brunner 
estimated that she and Ms. Bueno were away from school on that shopping trip for 
about 35 minutes total. While at the store, she purchased a pair of earrings, a necklace, 
and another dress that she thought may work for prom. 
Ms. Brunner and Ms. Bueno returned to SJLA after the shopping trip at the end 
of the fifth period. When Ms. Brunner returned to school, she immediately called Mr. 
Gonzalez’s classroom to have V.E. and S.C. come to her classroom, “so that [she] could 
make sure that [she] got schoolwork notes back to” V.E. before the Art Club began. 
Ms. Brunner stated that she asked Mr. Gonzalez what the students in his classroom 39 were doing, and he responded that they were “working independently at their desks.” 
Ms. Brunner stated that she asked him to send V.E. and S.C. to her classroom, and he 
did. When V.E. and S.C. arrived at Ms. Brunner’s classroom, Ms. Brunner asked V.E. 
what she had been doing in Mr. Gonzalez’s classroom, and V.E. responded that she 
was working on an assignment. Ms. Brunner stated that she told V.E. that she could go 
back to class, but V.E. stated she would just work in Ms. Brunner’s classroom. 
Ms. Brunner had the dress she purchased, as well as the dresses given to her by 
the other teacher, on her desk. Ms. Brunner talked to V.E. and S.C. about prom and 
dresses. Ms. Brunner testified that she did try on two dresses during the end of fifth 
period with V.E., S.C., and Ms. Bueno in her classroom.
The following is a description given by Ms. Brunner during her testimony at 
hearing about how she tried on those two dresses in front of V.E., S.C., and Ms. Bueno. 
Ms. Brunner tried on the first dress by “taking my arms out of the polo shirt I 
was wearing, the polo shirt was then bunched around my neck, and I slid the dress on 
with my arms, and as I was pulling the dress on, I pulled off the polo shirt.” Ms. 
Brunner stated that she left her pants on while she tried on the first dress. Ms. Brunner 
claimed that Ms. Bueno was at her desk during this time, and V.E. and S.C. were in the 
classroom among student desks “talking amongst themselves.” 
In order to try on the second dress Ms. Brunner stated that she “took my arms 
out of the first dress and it was around my neck and put my hands in the second dress, 
and I had to remove my pants.” She stated that because the dress was form-fitting, 
“the dress got stuck on my head and [Ms. Bueno] helped pull the dress from my head.” 
She then, “pulled it down and then removed my jeans.” Notably, if the dress was form-40 fitting to the point it was stuck on her head, it is unclear how she could have put it on 
over her jeans and thereafter taken off her jeans. 
In order to get dressed back into her normal clothing, Ms. Brunner stated that 
while wearing the second dress, she put her pants back on first, then “did the same 
process to take off the second dress to put my polo back on.” 
69. Ms. Brunner stated that after trying on the two dresses and re-dressing in 
her normal clothing, the bell rang ending fifth period, and V.E. and S.C. left the 
classroom to get their lunch. After they left, Ms. Bueno approached Ms. Brunner and 
told her that she overheard V.E. and S.C. talking to each other in Spanish and saying 
that they were uncomfortable to each other. Ms. Brunner testified that after hearing 
this, “my heart sank because I recognized that I had just changed my clothes in front 
of students and my aide, and one of my students was uncomfortable . . . I was sick 
about it.” Ms. Brunner stated, “I was shocked because I was surprised that it did not 
occur to me . . . I was in the moment at the time I decided to try on the dresses, and it 
did not occur to me, and it 100 percent should have.” Ms. Brunner recalled telling Ms. 
Bueno that she had never been in this situation and would never do anything to 
jeopardize her career. She felt bad if she made the students feel uncomfortable. Ms. 
Brunner told Ms. Bueno that she wanted to address the issue with V.E. and S.C. right 
away when they returned from lunch for Art Class, and that she wanted to keep all 
other students out of the classroom while she spoke with V.E. and S.C. 
After V.E. and S.C. came back to Ms. Brunner’s classroom after getting lunch, 
Ms. Brunner took them to her desk with no other students present and told them that 
she had reflected on her decision to try on the dresses in front of them and realized 
that should not have happened. Ms. Brunner told them that she apologized if she 
made them uncomfortable and told them she crossed a boundary, was lost in the 41 moment, and was sorry. Ms. Brunner testified, “I made it clear to them that what I did 
was wrong, and I was sorry if they felt weird.” Ms. Brunner stated that V.E. was just 
quiet, listened, and said nothing. S.C. told Ms. Brunner, “it was not a big deal.” 
Thereafter, Ms. Brunner let the other students into her classroom and Art Club 
proceeded during fifth period. 
70. After the bell rang to end fifth period, all of the students left Ms. 
Brunner’s classroom. Ms. Brunner stated that she “was trying to keep it together,” and 
was still “very upset.” Ms. Bueno told Ms. Brunner that maybe she should get 
something to eat, and Ms. Bueno and Ms. Brunner then walked together to the staff 
lounge to get lunch. While in the staff lounge, Ms. Brunner got her lunch from the 
refrigerator and was crying, and Mr. Sheppard walked into the staff lounge. Mr. 
Sheppard saw Ms. Brunner crying and asked her if she was ok, and Ms. Brunner simply 
smiled and shook her head. Mr. Sheppard then quickly walked out of the staff lounge. 
Ms. Brunner took her lunch with her, and she and Ms. Bueno then walked back to Ms. 
Brunner’s classroom. During that walk, Ms. Brunner expressed to Ms. Bueno that she 
felt sick about what she had done and wanted to talk to her other teacher friends 
about what she had done to get advice about what to do. Ms. Bueno told her not to 
discuss this with other teachers because those teachers are mandated reporters. 
71. Ms. Brunner went back to her classroom at the end of sixth period to 
gather her things and “do the end of the day ceremony called ‘Retreat’.” Ms. Brunner 
stated that V.E. and S.C. came back to her classroom right before the Retreat ceremony 
that day to just say goodbye. When the bell rang, Ms. Brunner went out to the Retreat 
ceremony and V.E. and S.C. left, and Ms. Bueno left. Ms. Brunner did not discuss the 
incident with any other teachers. 42 72. On Monday, May 6, 2024, right before the bell rang to go to the morning 
Reveille ceremony, Ms. Brunner received a phone call wherein she was told that Mr. 
Sheppard wanted to meet with her. Ms. Brunner then went to Mr. Sheppard’s office. 
When she arrived, she saw Mr. Sheppard, Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi, and the teacher’s union 
president. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi informed Ms. Brunner that she wanted to ask questions 
regarding the May 3, 2024, incident regarding the prom dress. Ms. Brunner knew 
immediately what Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi was talking about. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi asked her 
what happened, and Ms. Brunner stated that she provided the same information she 
did at this hearing regarding the incident. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi asked clarifying 
questions, and afterwards she informed Ms. Brunner that she needed to investigate 
further, and that she was sending Ms. Brunner home paid for the day and would follow 
up the next day. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi told her it would be more comfortable for Ms. 
Brunner to go home. Ms. Brunner testified that she apologized during this meeting 
and acknowledged that what she did was wrong. She felt humiliated, embarrassed, 
sad, and remorseful. 
73. On May 8, 2024, Ms. Brunner again met with Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi, who 
informed her that her investigation revealed that Ms. Brunner’s actions on May 3, 
2024, were egregious, the district could not trust Ms. Brunner to be around students 
and could not put her back in a classroom. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi informed Ms. Brunner 
that the district would move forward with dismissing Ms. Brunner from employment. 
Ms. Brunner’s union representative, Patricia Salas, was present during this meeting. Dr. 
Raffiee-Shirazi gave Ms. Brunner the option to resign in lieu of the district’s pursuit of 
dismissal. Dr. Raffiee-Shirazi gave Ms. Brunner a notice of paid administrative leave, as 
well as written statements of the students. Ms. Brunner was placed on paid 
administrative leave on May 8, 2024. 43 74. After being placed on paid administrative leave, Ms. Brunner was called 
back by the district to work for SJLA by compiling information for a new special 
education teacher’s training manual, to compile a PowerPoint presentation in 
conjunction with that training manual, and other clerical work. Ms. Brunner did this 
work for about two weeks. 
75. At some point later, Ms. Brunner was served with a 30-day Notice of 
Dismissal and was placed on unpaid leave. 
76. With regard to the October 2023 incident regarding the investigation of 
the student complaint against Ms. Brunner, Ms. Brunner testified that Mr. Sheppard 
told her he was investigating an allegation made against her. He told her he was 
investigating and would meet with Ms. Brunner at the end of the day, which he did. 
During that meeting Mr. Sheppard informed her that there was an allegation that Ms. 
Brunner exchanged text messages with a student during class. Ms. Brunner told him 
that she used the Google Voice application, and she did text student A.R., but not 
during class. She told Mr. Sheppard that she texted A.R. about returning his IEP 
paperwork. Ms. Brunner showed Mr. Sheppard the text, and he confirmed the receipt 
of that text. Mr. Sheppard also asked her if she had given any student money, to which 
she replied, “no.” He then asked Ms. Brunner if she had given a student juice. In 
response, Ms. Brunner told him that when students do academic testing with her, she 
gives them a reward. For student A.R. she wanted to give him a reward of juice 
because at the beginning of the year she asks all her students if they have a favorite 
food or drink, and this student had a favorite juice. Ms. Brunner used the juice as an 
incentive, and doing so is not a prohibited practice. Ms. Brunner stated that Mr. 
Sheppard did not advise her to not give juice as an incentive. 44 77. Sometime after the October 2023 investigation by Mr. Sheppard, Ms. 
Brunner exchanged an email with Mr. Sheppard about student A.R. Specifically, 
student A.R. did not want to take juice as an incentive because after the October 2023 
investigation he thought he would get in trouble for doing so. Ms. Brunner brought 
this to the attention of Mr. Sheppard, and Mr. Sheppard responded by email that he 
would talk to student A.R. to let him know it is ok to take the juice. 
78. Ms. Brunner stated that at the end of the day after Mr. Sheppard’s 
investigation of the October 2023 complaint, he met with her and told her that his 
investigation found that the student complaint was not substantiated. Ms. Brunner 
testified that Mr. Sheppard did not give her any verbal or written directives regarding 
any issue as a result of that October 2023 investigation. Ms. Brunner stated that Mr. 
Sheppard never told her to consider her interactions with students during that 
meeting, and he did not tell her to only use district-approved methods of 
communication with students. Ms. Brunner denied that Mr. Sheppard ever gave her a 
verbal warning about anything. 
79. Ms. Brunner testified that she had previously had a communication with 
Mr. Sheppard with a union representative present, wherein she asked him if using the 
Google Voice application to communicate with students was ok, and his response was 
yes it was, and she could do so moving forward. Ms. Brunner stated that she was told 
that there was no district policy about using the Google Voice application, but she was 
aware that the “Parent Square” online platform is the preferred method of 
communication with students. Ms. Brunner claims she told Mr. Sheppard that Parent 
Square would not work for her because she has no students on her roster. Ms. Brunner 
testified that she started using Google Voice when she worked at SJHS where it was 45 used extensively by all teachers, and that the administration of SJHS was aware that 
teachers used Google Voice to communicate with students. 
80. Ms. Brunner testified that she was offered a Skelly meeting, but she 
provided a written statement in lieu of that meeting, which she believed was 
acceptable. She stated that her written response, which was received in evidence, is 
accurate and truthful. 
81. With regard to the series of text exchanges between Ms. Brunner and 
students V.E. and S.C., which were received in evidence, Ms. Brunner admitted she was 
a party to those text exchanges and the related photographs of her with V.E. and S.C. 
Ms. Brunner stated that at the time she exchanged those text messages, she believed 
them to be ok. However, upon further reflection, she now believes that those text 
messages were inappropriate and “too familiar,” and led to a series of decisions that 
“broke boundaries.” 
82. Ms. Brunner also admitted that she did have student V.E. bring her coffee 
from Starbucks, but she stated this happened only one time. 
83. Ms. Brunner testified that she has never treated students unequally on 
the basis of their sex. She has never intentionally embarrassed any student, and she 
never singled out students for attention. She denied ever sexually harassing any 
student or ever grooming any student. Ms. Brunner stated her intention has always 
been to support students. Ms. Brunner stated that the events underlying this matter 
weigh heavily on her, and she never had any malicious intent. Ms. Brunner admitted to 
breaking the trust of Ms. Bueno and to crossing boundaries with V.E. and S.C. and 
breaking their trust. She stated she has learned so much from these events and hopes 
to be given the opportunity to teach again because it is all she has ever wanted to do. 46 Ms. Brunner admitted that she “is wrong here,” but she will make better decisions 
moving forward. 
TESTIMONY OF PATRICIA SALAS
84. Patricia Salas is currently employed by the California Teachers 
Association (CTA) as staff assigned to the district to represent certificated employees 
of the district, to do negotiations, and deal with other employment issues. Ms. Salas 
was the union representative for Ms. Brunner regarding the May 3, 2024, incident. 
85. Ms. Salas was present during the May 8, 2024, meeting between Dr. 
Raffiee-Shirazi, Ms. Brunner, and the union president when Ms. Brunner was placed on 
paid administrative leave and informed that the district would move forward with her 
dismissal. Ms. Salas stated that the meeting lasted 10 minutes, and Ms. Brunner was 
crying and embarrassed. 
86. In her capacity as a union representative, Ms. Salas is familiar with the 
contracts between the district and the San Jacinto Teachers Association. The contract 
provides for progressive discipline to teachers. Ms. Salas testified that it is her 
understanding that if a teacher is given a verbal warning, that the verbal warning is 
followed up by a written warning, which is important for documenting violations and 
how to cure deficiencies. Ms. Salas stated that it is her understanding that a written 
summary is expected when a verbal directive is given after an investigation. If nothing 
is put in writing, then it is her understanding that nothing was found in the 
investigation. 
87. On cross-examination, Ms. Salas admitted that a school site administrator 
can always give a verbal directive regarding an issue that is not egregious. However, if 47 there has been a complaint and related investigation, the union expects that any 
verbal directive be followed up in writing. 
TESTIMONY OF DAVID VOLLMAR
88. David Vollmar is currently employed by SJLA as a teacher, as well as the 
union representative for SJLA and lead negotiator for the teacher’s union. Mr. Vollmar 
represented Ms. Brunner in his capacity as union representative in the fall of 2023 
during the October 2023 investigation. Mr. Vollmar was present during the October 
2023 meeting between Mr. Sheppard and Ms. Brunner regarding Mr. Sheppard’s 
investigation of the student complaint. Mr. Vollmar testified that the meeting lasted 
about 10 to 15 minutes, and he recalled that Mr. Sheppard did not indicate there 
would be any discipline against Ms. Brunner in that meeting. Mr. Vollmar also testified 
that he recalled that Mr. Sheppard did instruct Ms. Brunner to not use a personal cell 
phone to call or text with a student. He recalled that Ms. Brunner brought up the use 
of the Google Voice application to contact students, and Mr. Sheppard stated that this 
was ok. Mr. Vollmar testified that he did not recall Mr. Sheppard giving Ms. Brunner 
any directives in that meeting. 
89. On cross-examination, Mr. Vollmar stated that he did not recall Mr. 
Sheppard ever giving Ms. Brunner permission to text students, even using the Google 
Voice application. Mr. Vollmar testified that it is not appropriate for a teacher to text 
students under any circumstances.
TESTIMONY OF CHERI VEILLEUX
90. Cheri Veilleux is currently employed at SJLA as an English teacher for 
high school students. She has worked at SJLA for the past three years. Prior to that 
position she worked for eight years at Manning High School. Prior to that she worked 48 as a teacher at a charter school. Ms. Veilleux worked with Ms. Brunner at SJLA during 
the 2023-24 school year. Ms. Veilleux first met Ms. Brunner when Ms. Brunner first 
came to work at SJLA in 2023. Ms. Brunner was Ms. Veilleux’s co-teacher for a few class 
periods, meaning that Ms. Brunner would come into Ms. Veilleux’s classroom during 
class to make sure that students on Ms. Brunner’s caseload were receiving their special 
education services. Ms. Veilleux stated that Ms. Brunner provided push-in services for 
several of Ms. Veilleux's classes, which were all English classes. Ms. Veilleux stated that 
Ms. Brunner provided support for her special education students, but also for other 
students in the class so as to not single out the special education students. 
91. Ms. Veilleux testified that Ms. Brunner cared about all students, is a 
dedicated teacher and a good employee. Ms. Veilleux stated that Ms. Brunner takes 
her job as a teacher seriously and puts in her full effort. 
92. Ms. Veilleux stated that if it is true that Ms. Brunner disrobed down to her 
undergarments in front of students, it would not change her opinion regarding Ms. 
Brunner. However, Ms. Veilleux admitted that undressing in front of students is not an 
acceptable practice. 
TESTIMONY OF MARIA ELENA BAZALDUA
93. Maria Elena Bazaldua is currently employed as a Spanish teacher at SJLA 
for high school students. Ms. Bazaldua is familiar with Ms. Brunner because they 
worked together, even though Ms. Brunner never provided push-in services for Ms. 
Bazaldua’s classes because Ms. Brunner does not speak Spanish. Ms. Bazaldua and Ms. 
Brunner are social friends, and they are both social friends with Ms. Veilleux. The three 
of them would “hang out” outside of school grounds about once a month, but they 
have not done so since November 2024. Ms. Bazaldua is familiar with Ms. Brunner in 49 both a professional and social setting. Ms. Bazaldua and Ms. Brunner were never in the 
same classroom during the workday, but they did share students at times. Both 
students V.E. and S.C. were in Ms. Bazaldua’s class. 
94. Ms. Bazaldua is familiar with the allegations in this matter, and she 
learned of the allegations from student V.E. Ms. Bazaldua stated that she understands 
the allegations to be that Ms. Brunner “made a huge mistake by confiding in students 
and overstepping boundaries,” and that Ms. Brunner “forgot that they were students 
and not her friends and she tried on a dress in front of them.” Ms. Bazaldua learned 
this information from V.E. at the school prom. Ms. Bazaldua was the teacher who 
loaned Ms. Brunner some dresses for the prom. While at the prom, V.E. and S.C. 
approached Ms. Bazaldua to ask her if Ms. Brunner was there because they knew that 
Ms. Bazaldua was a friend of Ms. Brunner. Ms. Bazaldua told V.E. and S.C. that Ms. 
Brunner was not feeling well, and that is when V.E. and S.C. told Ms. Bazaldua of the 
incident on May 3, 2024, when Ms. Brunner tried on the dresses in front of them. 
95. Ms. Bazaldua did not reach out to Ms. Brunner after learning of the 
information about Ms. Brunner from V.E. and S.C. Ms. Bazaldua did speak to Ms. 
Veilleux about the information, and they decided to wait for Ms. Brunner to come to 
them. At some point Ms. Bazaldua, Ms. Veilleux, and Ms. Brunner talked about the 
matter after school time, and Ms. Brunner expressed embarrassment about the 
situation. At some point thereafter, Ms. Bazaldua spoke with V.E. and S.C. about how 
the situation made them feel because Ms. Bazaldua was worried about them. Both V.E. 
and S.C. told her they were scared Ms. Brunner would get fired and they did not want 
to get her in trouble. V.E. was very close to Ms. Brunner and told Ms. Bazaldua how 
much she missed Ms. Brunner. V.E. told Ms. Bazaldua that she wanted to talk to Ms. 
Brunner, but Ms. Bazaldua told her she could not do that. 50 96. Ms. Bazaldua stated that she thinks what Ms. Brunner did was a stupid 
mistake. Ms. Bazaldua testified that Ms. Brunner was always professional. However, Ms. 
Bazaldua stated that she knows that what Ms. Brunner did “was not the right thing to 
do,” and it was not intentional. She said that Ms. Brunner has a big heart and always 
wanted to be a teacher her entire life. To have her career be over because of a mistake 
broke Ms. Bazaldua’s heart. 
97. Ms. Bazaldua admitted that Ms. Brunner inappropriately overstepped 
boundaries with students V.E. and S.C. She stated that it is important to be a role 
model for students. Ms. Bazaldua also admitted that it is not appropriate for a teacher 
to be texting students, and doing so consistently about matters not related to 
schoolwork is overstepping of boundaries. 
98. Ms. Bazaldua admitted that Ms. Brunner had a friendship with V.E. and 
S.C. and would call them “my girls.” Ms. Bazaldua stated that S.C. and V.E. are no 
longer friends, but that V.E. will still ask Ms. Bazaldua how Ms. Brunner is doing. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, to convince the 
trier of fact that the existence of a fact sought to be proved is more probable than its 
nonexistence. (  (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 
1128.) The district has the burden of proof to establish cause to dismiss its employee. 
2. The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a 
preponderance of the evidence. (51 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) A preponderance of the evidence means that 
the evidence on one side of an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than, 
the evidence on the other side of the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or 
quantity, but in the convincing effect the evidence has on those to whom it is 
addressed. In other words, the term refers to evidence that has more convincing force 
than that opposed to it. ( (2009) 171 
Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 
Applicable Code Sections Regarding Dismissal Actions
3. A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 
hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44934 and 44944.) 
4. Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 
permanent employee. Subdivision (a)(1) authorizes dismissal for immoral conduct.
Subdivision (a)(3) authorizes dismissal for dishonesty. Subdivision (a)(6) authorizes 
dismissal for evident unfitness for service. 
5. Education Code section 44939 provides the grounds for suspension of a 
permanent employee. 
6. Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the 
process for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and 
sets forth the Commissions’ authority regarding its final decision.
7. Education Code section 44938 outlines the procedures the governing 
board must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent 
employee.52 Board Policies and Additional Statutes Alleged to Be Applicable
8. District Board Policy (BP) 4119.21 sets out ethical standards of educators 
as adopted by the district. BP 4119.12 defines “inappropriate conduct” to include the 
following:
1. Engaging in conduct that endangers students, staff, or 
others . . .
2. Engaging in harassing or discriminatory behavior towards 
students, [or] staff . . . 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
4. Engaging in inappropriate socialization or fraternization 
with a student or soliciting, encouraging, or maintaining an 
inappropriate written, verbal, or physical relationship with a 
student. 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
9. Being dishonest with students, parents/guardians, staff, 
or members of the public, including, but not limited to, 
falsifying information in employment records or other 
school records. 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
14. Wearing inappropriate attire. 53 9. BP 4119.21 further provides that an educator “shall make reasonable 
effort to protect the student from conditions harmful to learning or health or safety,” 
as well as “shall not intentionally expose the student to embarrassment or 
disparagement,” and “shall not use professional relationships with students for private 
advantage.” 
10. BP 4119.11, as adopted by the board, prohibits sexual harassment 
against district employees, and defines “sexual harassment” to include “harassment 
based on the sex, gender, or sexual orientation of the victim.” District Administrative 
Regulation (AR) 4119.11 defines “sexual harassment” to include “unwelcome sexual 
advances . . . or other unwanted verbal, visual, or physical conduct of a sexual nature, 
regardless of whether or not the conduct has the purpose or effect of . . . creating an 
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment.” Examples set forth in AR 4119.11 
include “[u]nwelcome visual conduct such as . . . displaying sexually suggestive objects 
. . . “ 
11. BP 4119.24, as adopted by the board, sets forth standards for 
maintaining appropriate adult-student interactions. As noted in BP 4119.24, the district 
expects all adults with whom students may interact “shall not engage in unlawful or 
inappropriate interactions with students and shall avoid boundary-blurring behaviors 
that undermine trust in the adult-student relationship and lead to the appearance of 
impropriety.” BP 4119.24 further provides: 
Employees shall remain vigilant of their position of 
authority and not abuse it when relating with students. 
Examples of employee conduct that can undermine 
professional adult-student interactions or create the 
appearance of impropriety include, but are not limited to:54 [¶] . . . [¶]
2. Being alone with a student outside of the view of others. 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
4. Maintaining personal contact with a student that has no 
legitimate educational purpose, by phone, letter, electronic 
communications, or other means, without including the 
student’s parent/guardian or the principal. 
When communicating electronically with students, 
employees shall use district equipment or technological 
resources when available. Employees shall not communicate 
with students through any medium that is designed to 
eliminate records of the communications. . . 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
7. Singling out a particular student for personal attention 
and friendship, including giving gifts and/or nicknames to 
individual students. 
8. Addressing a student in an overly familiar manner, such 
as by using terms of endearment. 
9. Socializing or spending time with students outside of 
school-sponsored events, except as participants in 
community activities. 55 10. Sending or accompanying students on personal errands 
unrelated to any legitimate educational purpose.
[¶] . . . [¶]
13. Disclosing personal, family, or other private matters to 
students or sharing personal secrets with students.
12. BP 4119.22, as adopted by the district, sets out standards for dress and 
grooming for employees, and provides: 
The Board of Trustees believes that appropriate dress and 
grooming by district employees contribute to a productive 
learning environment and model positive behavior. During 
school hours and at school activities, employees shall 
maintain professional standards of dress and grooming that 
demonstrate their high regard for education, present an 
image consistent with their job responsibilities and 
assignment, and not endanger the health and safety of 
employees or students. . . .
13. BP 6116, as adopted by the district, sets standards regarding classroom 
interruptions and states, “[i]n order to allow students to take full advantage of learning 
opportunities while in the classroom, school staff shall ensure that interruptions are 
kept to a minimum.”
14. BP 5137, as adopted by the district, sets standards for district staff’s 
responsibility to create a positive interpersonal relationship among students and 
between students and staff, and states in part: 56 All staff are expected to serve as role models for students 
by demonstrating positive, professional attitudes and 
respect toward each student and other staff members. 
Teachers shall use effective classroom management 
techniques based on clear expectations for student 
behavior. 
[¶] . . . [¶] 
Staff shall consistently enforce Board policies and 
regulations which establish rules for appropriate student 
conduct . . . . 
15. The district has adopted the following BPs and ARs, among others, 
regarding student conduct, which respondent is required pursuant to BP5137, to be 
modeling and enforcing. 
16. AR 5132 sets forth student dress code requirements and prohibits 
clothing that is “vulgar, lewd, obscene, profane, or sexually suggestive” and requires 
that clothing be “sufficient to conceal undergarments.” 
17. BP 5113 sets forth standards regarding student absences and excuses, 
and provides that absence from school and class participation shall only be excused 
for health reasons, family emergencies or justifiable personal reasons. 
18. BP 5131 sets forth prohibited conduct for students, including sexual 
harassment, conduct that disrupts the orderly classroom or school environment, 
obscene acts, use of a cell phone or other mobile communication device during 
instructional time, wearing of any attire that violates district or school dress codes, and 57 tardiness or unexcused absence from school. BP 5131 further provides employees of 
the district “are expected to enforce standards of conduct.” 
Relevant Judicial Authority 
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
19. The seminal case for teacher dismissals is 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. There the Supreme Court held that where charges of 
immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, or evidence unfitness for service are raised 
in teacher dismissal cases, the applicable standard is whether the person is fit to teach. 
The factors outlined in must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, 
whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service. ( . at p. 229.) 
20. Immoral conduct has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and 
dissoluteness. It can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing 
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (
 (19 60) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
DISHONESTY  
21. Not every falsehood constitutes “dishonesty” within the meaning of the 
Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a). For that reason, dishonesty must also 
be evaluated in light of the criteria. (
(1998) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn. 12).58 EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE
22. The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher dismissal cases 
is whether the person is fit to teach. “Fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact. 
(  (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 
555, 560-561.) 
23. “Evident” is defined as “clear to the vision and understanding.” “Unfit” is 
defined as “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; incapable; incompetent; and 
physically or mentally unsound” and “unsuitable, incompetent and not adapted for a 
particular use or service.” (
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.)
24. In 
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, the court noted the two parallel, yet 
contradictory, lines of cases regarding “unfit for service.” One line of cases equated 
that term with “unprofessional conduct” and the other line of cases distinguished the 
two definitions. In deciding that the latter line of cases was the correct way to evaluate 
“unfit to serve,” the court complied with the rules of statutory construction. 
The  court concluded that “unprofessional conduct” and “evident unfitness 
for service” do not mean precisely the same thing. Although conduct constituting 
“evident unfitness for service” will often constitute “unprofessional conduct,” the 
converse is not always true. Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for 
service be attributable to defect in temperament, which is not necessary for a finding 
of unprofessional conduct. Nevertheless, lower courts may not disregard the criteria 
for unfitness set out in  where that court concluded that “unprofessional 
conduct” meant conduct showing a teacher was unfit to teach. These criteria must be 
analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the conduct indicates unfitness 59 for service. If it does, the next step is to determine whether the “unfitness” is “evident”; 
i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. ( at 
pp.1442-1445.) A finding of “unfit to serve” can be made if the evidence, taken in the 
aggregate, shows that retaining the employee would pose a significant danger of 
psychological harm to students and fellow teachers. ( . at p.1456.) 
25. An employee can be dismissed from the teaching profession only upon a 
showing that his or her retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm 
to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions 
as a teacher. The inquiry is whether any adverse inferences can be drawn from the 
teacher’s conduct as to his teaching ability, or as to the possibility that publicity 
surrounding the past conduct may in and of itself substantially impair his function as a 
teacher. (  at p235.)
26. To establish a teacher is unfit to teach,  requires a nexus 
between government employment and alleged employee misconduct stemming from 
the principle that “[n]o person can be denied government employment because of 
factors unconnected with the responsibilities of that employment.” (
(2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th1454, 1463.)
27. “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes 
a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 
one’s conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing school district.” (
(2013) 214 
Cal.App.4th 1120, 1142-43.) 60 28. An employee’s actions on a given day may suggest a lack of judgment 
and discretion or may be an isolated act precipitated by an unusual accumulation of 
pressure and stress. An absence of any other incidents in the employee’s teaching 
career suggestive of lack of judgment or discretion can further distinguish the aberrant 
character of the act at issue. In such a case, a fact finder could reasonably conclude 
that the isolated incident of poor judgment was outweighed by years of demonstrated 
teaching competence, and that on balance the employee possessed the qualities of 
character necessary for teaching fitness. (  (1977) 19 Cal. 
3d 691, 696-701.) 
29. In determining whether the teacher’s conduct indicated unfitness to 
teach, such matters as (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 
students or fellow teachers, (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated, (3) the 
proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, (4) the extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, (5) the likelihood of the recurrence of 
the questioned conduct, and (6) the notoriety and publicity accorded the teacher’s 
conduct may be considered. ( at p.702, fn. 5.)
30. The nexus between an employee’s conduct and his or her fitness to teach 
is established when the conduct is detrimental to the mission and functions of the 
employer. Factors to consider are whether the acts demonstrate a serious lapse in 
good judgment, the teacher fails to recognize the seriousness of his misconduct, the 
teacher attempts to shift blame to parents and students, the principal has lost 
confidence in the teacher’s ability to serve as a role model based upon his or her 
actions, or, most noteworthy, the teacher’s testimony that he or she does not think his 
or her actions would have any impact on his ability to teach students if any of them 
had viewed the actions as immoral. The conduct itself, together with the teacher’s 61 failure to accept responsibility or recognize the seriousness of it, given his or her 
position as a teacher and role model, demonstrates evident unfitness to teach. (
 (2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th 1454, 1465-66.)
31. One act does not alone demonstrate the unfitness of the teacher but is 
simply one of the factors to be considered. (
(1980) 102 Cal. App.3d 555, 561-62.)
32. There must be a nexus between the teacher’s conduct and his or her 
usefulness to the school district and only when so construed can grounds to dismiss 
for immoral conduct or unfitness to serve be constitutionally applied. (
 (1975) 50 Cal. App. 3d 920, 929.) 
 Factors 
33. In , the Supreme Court suggested seven factors to 
consider when evaluating whether the school employee should be dismissed: (1) the 
likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the 
degree of such adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) 
the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the existence of extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the 
likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7) the extent that the 
discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 
the teacher.
34. The factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate. 
When a camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load 62 to see which one could have done the deed. A trier of fact is entitled to consider the 
totality of the offensive conduct. (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456-1457.) 
35. Only the pertinent factors need to be analyzed. (
 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.)
Other Disciplinary Considerations 
36. An administrator’s loss of confidence in the educator and doubt 
regarding the educator’s ability to serve as a role model for students are factors that 
may be considered. (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.)
37. The Commission is vested with discretion not to dismiss an employee 
even if grounds for discipline exist. ( (1988) 
45 Cal.3d 209.) 
Evaluation of Charges 
38. The evidence established and Ms. Brunner admitted that she 
inappropriately crossed teacher/student boundaries on numerous occasions, including 
text communications to S.C. and V.E., and particularly on May 3, 2024, when she 
undressed in front of two students and an instructional aide. Ms. Brunner did not deny 
that she undressed in front of two students and an instructional aide, but she provided 
a version of events regarding the incident that differed in many respects from the 
consistent version provided by the two students and Ms. Bueno. Ms. Brunner’s version 
of those events minimized her conduct and conflicted directly with consistent versions 
provided by the two students and Ms. Bueno. Specifically, Ms. Brunner’s statements 63 regarding how she got undressed to try on two dresses by keeping her pants on and 
then putting on the dress while at the same time taking off her shirt to minimize her 
exposure was simply not credible and directly conflicted with the credible and 
consistent testimony of the two students and Ms. Bueno. Additionally, Ms. Brunner 
testified that the two students were not near her when she was undressing and were 
not paying attention, which directly contradicted the testimony of the two students 
and Ms. Bueno, who all testified the students were at desks directly in front of Ms. 
Brunner. 
Furthermore, Ms. Brunner admitted, and the evidence established that she 
crossed student/teacher boundaries by inappropriately texting the two students 
outside of school time and for topics not related to schoolwork. Ms. Brunner even 
admitted that doing so essentially dissolved the necessary boundaries between 
student and teacher leading up to the May 3, 2024, incident. Student V.E. testified that 
Ms. Brunner was her friend, further demonstrating the erosion of necessary 
boundaries. The text messages received into evidence further demonstrate the 
inappropriate nature of those text communications between Ms. Brunner and the two 
students. Notably, most of those text communications occurred after the October 2023 
investigation related to a student complaint against Ms. Brunner’s use of text 
messages with a student in class. 
The evidence established that Mr. Sheppard investigated that October 2023 
student complaint and concluded that no discipline was warranted against Ms. 
Brunner. However, Mr. Sheppard credibly testified that he gave a verbal directive to 
Ms. Brunner at the end of his investigation to not use text messages to communicate 
with students and instead to use district-approved methods of communication only, as 
well as to be mindful of her interactions with students. While Mr. Sheppard did not 64 provide that verbal directive to Ms. Brunner in writing, he credibly testified that he 
gave her that directive verbally, and he simply neglected to put it in writing. Despite 
this verbal directive, Ms. Brunner continued to have inappropriate text communication 
with students V.E. and S.C. after the date of that verbal directive. 
Ms. Brunner is obligated to abide by the district policies and regulations that 
she refrains from engaging in conduct that undermines a positive school climate, that 
she maintains appropriate adult student interactions, and that she acts as a role model 
to students. The Commission finds that Ms. Brunner failed to abide by these district 
policies and regulations. 
39. A preponderance of the evidence established that students S.C. and V.E., 
as well as Ms. Bueno, experienced emotional, social and psychological harm due to Ms. 
Brunner’s actions of undressing in front of them on May 3, 2024. Ms. Bueno credibly 
testified that the incident had such a negative impact on her that she almost quit the 
teaching profession entirely. Both S.C. and V.E. testified that they were uncomfortable 
because of Ms. Brunner’s actions. Accordingly, the Commission finds that the 
factors of the likelihood Ms. Brunner’s conduct caused an adverse effect to students 
was established and that likelihood of adverse effects on students and fellow teachers 
was very high, and the degree of those adverse effects was very high.
40. Ms. Brunner’s actions on May 3, 2024, were very recent in time, only less 
than one year ago. Furthermore, Ms. Brunner’s teaching credential as a special 
education teacher puts her in a position of authority over particularly vulnerable 
students, who are disadvantaged in many ways. Accordingly, the Commission finds 
that consideration of these  factors demonstrates that her actions of 
disregarding appropriate teacher/student boundaries are particularly concerning.65 41. Furthermore, Ms. Brunner’s actions on May 3, 2024, of undressing in 
front of two students and an instructional aide were for the sole purpose of trying on a 
prom dress, and not for any legitimate educational purpose. Ms. Brunner testified that 
she brought S.C. and V.E. over from another classroom for an assignment, however 
that testimony directly contradicts the credible testimony of both the students and Ms. 
Bueno, who all consistently testified that the reason Ms. Brunner pulled the two 
students out of class was to try on the prom dresses. Accordingly, the Commission 
finds that Ms. Brunner’s motivation for her action was not praiseworthy but was 
instead blameworthy. The Commission also finds that Ms. Brunner’s actions in 
engaging in inappropriate text communications with students S.C. and V.E. for many 
months prior to the May 3, 2024, incident thereby eroding the teacher/student 
boundary constitutes further aggravating circumstances for her actions. 
42. With regard to the  factor of likelihood the conduct will reoccur, 
the Commission finds that there is a high likelihood that Ms. Brunner will engage in 
such conduct in the future. Specifically, a preponderance of the evidence shows that 
Ms. Brunner has consistently crossed the teacher/student boundary on many 
occasions and for many months with her inappropriate text communication with 
students. Despite having a previous warning from Mr. Sheppard about appropriate 
interactions with students, Ms. Brunner continued her behavior. Furthermore, it was 
not until Ms. Bueno confronted Ms. Brunner that she finally realized that her action of 
undressing in front of students was wrong. After the district investigated the May 3, 
2024, incident Ms. Brunner provided dishonest information regarding the events of 
May 3, 2024, in an attempt to minimize her actions. These factors demonstrate that 
Ms. Brunner is unable or unwilling to recognize when she crosses the teacher/student 
boundary, calling into question her ability to stop doing so.66 43. Accordingly, the Commission finds that Ms. Brunner violated district 
policies and regulations, and her conduct constitutes immoral conduct, as set forth 
above. Additionally, the Commission finds that, as set forth above, Ms. Brunner is 
evidently unfit for service as a teacher based upon her fixed character trait of crossing 
teacher/student boundaries that is not remediable on receipt of notice that her 
conduct was wrong. 
44. Finally, the Commission finds that Ms. Brunner engaged in dishonesty 
with the district during its investigation of the May 3, 2024, incident. Specifically, Ms. 
Brunner’s version of events on May 3, 2024, was less credible than that of the three 
witnesses, V.E., S.C., and Ms. Bueno, who each provided consistent and credible 
testimony regarding how Ms. Brunner got undressed on that day. Ms. Bueno’s 
testimony was particularly striking because she was so emotionally distraught and 
conflicted about reporting Ms. Brunner’s behavior. Ms. Bueno’s testimony regarding 
the events was heartfelt and credible, and she had no motivation to provide untruthful 
testimony. By comparison, Ms. Brunner’s testimony regarding why she pulled V.E. and 
S.C. out of Mr. Gonzalez’s classroom, how she got undressed, and where the students 
were sitting in the classroom, all lacked credibility and tended to minimize Ms. 
Brunner’s actions. On balance, a preponderance of the evidence established that Ms. 
Brunner was dishonest during the district’s investigation. 
Cause Exists to Dismiss Ms. Brunner 
45. Cause exists to dismiss Ms. Brunner pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(1), because the evidence established that Ms. Brunner engaged 
in immoral conduct. 6746. Cause exists to dismiss Ms. Brunner pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(3), because the evidence established that Ms. Brunner was 
dishonest during the investigation of the matter involving students V.E. and S.C. 
47. Cause exists to dismiss Ms. Brunner pursuant to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(6), because the evidence established that Ms. Brunner is
evidently unfit for service.
ORDER
Ms. Brunner’s appeal of her immediate suspension and dismissal from 
employment with the San Jacinto Unified School District is denied. The district’s 
request to suspend and dismiss Ms. Brunner is granted. Ms. Brunner shall be dismissed 
from the district.
DATE: 
TROY LIGGINS
Commission Member
DATE: 
ARATI CLARKE
Commission Member
DATE: 
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
