BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
LES OBIE (EN 1061363), 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024060386 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter in 
Los Angeles, California, in-person on October 14 through 16, 2024, and by 
videoconference on October 17 and 18, 2024. The Commission members were Ray 
Alcala; Jim Durham; and Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Chantal M. Sampogna, Office 
of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, who presided. 
Brian Davenport, Attorney, represented the Los Angeles Unified School District 
(District).
Joshua Adams, Attorney, Gilbert and Sackman, a Law Corporation, represented 
respondent Les Obie. 2 Testimony and documents were received in evidence. The record closed and the 
matter was submitted for decision on October 18, 2024.
SUMMARY 
District seeks to dismiss Respondent, a secondary physical education (PE) 
teacher, based on his immoral, unprofessional, and dishonest conduct, and based on 
his persistent violation of required policies, willful refusal to perform his regular
assignment, and his evident unfitness to teach. Between November 2021 and October 
2023, Respondent worked first at a middle school and then at a high school as a PE 
teacher. In this capacity he engaged in repeated acts which violated multiple District 
policies, such as leaving school in the middle of a class without notifying the 
administration, calling African American students “monkeys,” repeatedly making 
statements to students about his belief in the superiority of Christianity, and making 
multiple explicit sexual statements to his previous assistant principal during a phone 
call. 
Respondent denied District’s allegations but for his speaking of Christianity with 
students, which he promised he would not do in the future. Respondent’s denials were 
not persuasive and generally demonstrated his inability to adhere to District policies 
and standards. Further, respondent’s conduct during hearing included violence, non-
responsiveness, and a disregard for the hearing procedures, demonstrating his present
inability to comport himself to behaviors necessary to uphold required decorum and 
the safety of others.3 District established cause to dismiss respondent from District, including his 
evident unfitness to teach. The majority of the Commission concludes dismissal is the 
appropriate discipline. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdiction 
1. Respondent obtained his 30-day substitute teaching permit in May 2014 
and obtained his clear teaching credential in June 2018. His credential is scheduled to 
expire on July 1, 2028. 
2. District hired Respondent as a probationary teacher in 2016. He became 
a permanent certificated employee in 2018 as a secondary teacher of PE. 
3. On April 17, 2024, Francisco J. Serrato, Ed.D., acting in his official capacity 
as Chief Human Resources Officer of District, executed the Statement of Charges (SOC)
against Respondent. 
4. On May 8, 2024, Dr. Serrato issued a Notice of Board of Education 
Intention to Dismiss and Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension against 
Respondent.
5. On June 2, 2024, Respondent timely submitted a Request for Hearing.
6. On June 21, 2024, Dr. Serrato, acting in his official capacity, filed an 
Accusation against Respondent.4 Audubon Middle School
7. Respondent worked as a PE teacher at Audubon Middle School (AMS) 
during the fall of 2018 through the spring of 2022. The fall of the 2021 to 2022 
academic year was the first semester teachers and students returned to in-person 
instruction after the Covid 19 pandemic statewide orders for virtual learning were 
lifted. Deanna Hardemion, Principal of AMS during the period in question, and Laura 
Blanco, an AMS PE teacher during the period in question, credibly testified at hearing 
in support of District’s charges against Respondent regarding his conduct at AMS.
NOVEMBER 4,2021I NCIDENT
8. On November 4, 2021, during their third period PE class, Respondent and 
his two fellow PE teachers, Ms. Blanco and Jovannie Mabrie, discussed the use of PE 
equipment. Respondent, the lead of the AMS PE Department, directed Ms. Blanco and 
Mr. Mabrie to not use PE equipment that day due to Covid restrictions and directed 
them to have their students walk the field as their PE activity.
9. While the students and the AMS PE teachers were on the PE field, and 
approximately 20 minutes before the end of third period, Respondent left the field, 
leaving his students unsupervised. Respondent did not notify the other PE teachers or 
AMS administration of his leaving. (Charge 1; Exh. 1, p. A3.) Ms. Blanco reported the 
incident to the AMS administration as she and Mr. Mabrie needed coverage for 
Respondent’s students during the remainder of the period. 
10. Respondent did not return to AMS for the remainder of the school day, 
failing to report to his fifth and seventh period classes. As a result, AMS administration 
had to locate emergency substitute coverage for his classes. Respondent did not notify 
or receive permission from AMS administration for his absence on November 4, 2021, 5 and did not adhere to sign-in/sign out procedures to reflect his absence from 
approximately 11:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. (Charge 2; Exh. 1, p. A3.) 
11. District did not present evidence of Respondent’s timecard or pay 
received for November 4, 2021. District failed to establish Respondent failed to 
truthfully and accurately report his absence on his timecard or that he received pay for 
hours not worked. (Charge 2c; Exh. 1, p. A3.)
NOVEMBER 15, 2021 INCIDENT
12. District alleges Respondent engaged in the following conduct on 
November 15, 2021, at AMS: 
3. [I]n the presence of students, [Respondent] said the 
following to [PE] Teacher Jovannie Mabrie, when 
[Respondent] advised him to supervise the locker room:
a. Yelled words to the effect of, “I’m not down with 
homosexuality.”
b. Yelled, “I’m a quarterback. I tell people what to do all the 
time.”
c. Stood in close proximity to [Mabrie’s] face while yelling.
(Exh. 1, p. A3, lines 23-28.)
13. Ms. Blanco testified in support of these allegations. Ms. Blanco explained 
Mr. Mabrie told her Respondent had made these statements to him as described in 
Charge 3 of the SOC, but she did not witness Respondent making these statements to 6 Mr. Mabrie. District did not present direct evidence in support of Charge 3 and failed 
to establish the allegations contained therein. 
14. Ms. Blanco recalled generally during her work with Respondent he made 
statements against homosexuality and in support of Christianity. For example, she 
recalled him making statements to students to the effect of ‘homosexuality is not 
right’ and ‘look for God and Jesus Christ.’ As a member of the LGBTQ community, 
Respondent’s comments about homosexuality made Ms. Blanco feel unsafe at work.
Ms. Blanco also recalled Respondent yelling at students, in a military type of voice, and 
stating he was the best quarterback. AMS CONFERENCES AND NOTICE OF UNSATISFACTORY ACT AND NOTICE OF 
SUSPENSION  
August 2020 Conference 
15. On August 27, 2020, Principal Hardemion, Respondent, and a United 
Teachers of Los Angeles (UTLA) representative met for a conference (August 2020 
conference). The issues discussed at the conference were redacted from the Summary 
of Conference memo (Exh. 22). However, the assistance and guidance section, which 
was not redacted, showed that during the August 2020 conference, Principal 
Hardemion reviewed with Respondent District’s Employee Code of Ethics and the 
District’s Ethics Policy Statement and directed Respondent to refrain from engaging in 
conduct that negatively impacts the District or his position as a teacher. Generally, the 
assistance and guidance sections of District’s communications with Respondent 
denotes District policies and standards reviewed with, and provided to, Respondent.7 December 7, 2021 Conference
16. On December 7, 2021, Principal Hardemion, AMS Assistant Principal (AP) 
Tasha Bell-McAllister (currently a Principal for District), Respondent, and a UTLA 
representative met for a conference to discuss Respondent’s November 2021 conduct. 
(December 2021 conference.) The December 2021 conference was memorialized in the 
December 8, 2021 Summary of Conference of December 7, 2021 (December 2021 
Conference Memo). (Exh. 12.) Respondent did not provide a verbal or written response 
to District’s allegations regarding his November 2021 conduct. 
17. During the December 2021 conference, Principal Hardemion reviewed 
the UTLA Contract’s sign-in and sign out requirements and District’s Attendance 
Policy. Specifically, the UTLA Contract, Article IX, Section 2.0, requires teachers to, upon 
each arrival to and departure from their assigned location, enter their initials on
District’s sign-in and sign-out form. (Exh. 12, p. A174.) Principal Hardemion also 
reviewed with Respondent District’s Code of Conduct with Students, which prohibits 
teachers from making statements or comments in the presence of students which are 
not age-appropriate, professional, or may be considered sexual in nature, harassing, or 
demeaning. (See Exh. 24.)
18. During the December 2021 conference, Principal Hardemion also 
provided Respondent a detailed review of the following District policies and attached 
them to the December 2021 Conference Memo: Employee Code of Ethics; Board 
Resolution Reaffirming the Respectful Treatment of All Persons; Sexual Harassment 
Policy; Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment (Including Sexual Harassment) Policy 
and Complaint Procedure (Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy); California 
Standards for the Teaching Profession (CSTP); and the Teaching and Learning 8 Framework Standard 4, addressing a teacher’s professional responsibilities. (Exh. 12, p. 
A175.) 
19. During the December 2021 conference, and as memorialized in the 
December 2021 Conference Memo, Principal Hardemion directed Respondent to read, 
review, and adhere to the identified policies and standards at all times. Among other 
directives, she directed Respondent to follow the following assistance and guidance: 
11. . . . treat students, parents, and staff with courtesy and 
sensitivity. 
12. . . . be professional and respectful in all your interactions 
with students, parents and staff, and refrain from taking any 
actions or making any statements that may be considered 
harassing or discriminatory.
13. . . . [set] a safe, respectful classroom and school 
environment and that we serve as models for student 
behavior. 
14. [¶] . . . [¶] a. [Refrain from] making statements or 
comments, either directly or in the presence of student(s) 
which are not age-appropriate, professional or which may 
be considered sexual in nature, harassing, or demeaning. [¶] 
. . . [¶] 
18. [¶]. . . [¶] [Referencing District’s Non-Discrimination and 
Anti-Harassment (Including Sexual Harassment) Policy] 9 a. "Protected Category(ies) shall refer to gender/sex 
(including gender identity, gender expression, . . . race, 
actual or perceived sexual orientation . . . " 
b. "References to any of the Protected Categories are 
normally not job-related and, thus, there is no valid reason 
to make such references in most business situations." 
[¶] . . . [¶] c. Prohibited discriminatory or harassing acts or 
behaviors include . . . suggestive, insulting, or derogatory 
comments, epithets, innuendos, sounds, whistling, jokes, 
teasing, or slurs . . . based on any protected category. 
April 2022 Notice of Unsatisfactory Act 
20. On April 19, 2022, District, through Principal Hardemion, issued 
respondent a Notice of Unsatisfactory Acts (NOUA) and a Notice of Suspension (NOS). 
The NOUA informed Respondent District considered Respondent’s November 4 and 
15, 2021, conduct to be unprofessional and a persistent violation of and or refusal to 
obey applicable laws and policies (the policies identified in the December 2021 
Conference Memo). The NOS recommended Respondent be suspended for four days, 
but no evidence was submitted showing Respondent served the suspension.
PRINCIPAL HARDEMION ’S TESTIMONY
21. At hearing, Principal Hardemion explained District teachers are required 
to undergo annual trainings on multiple topics including District’s attendance, sexual 
harassment, and non-discrimination policies, and she personally provided these 
trainings to AMS teachers when Respondent worked at AMS. Regarding attendance, 10 Principal Hardemion reiterated District’s Attendance Policy which requires teachers to 
work every hour they are assigned and requires teachers to be at their assigned work 
location on time every working day. (Exh. 23.) She added that AMS was generally 
understaffed, and administrators, teachers, and staff would share personal cell phone 
numbers to timely communicate absences and ensure coverage of classes. However, 
Respondent did not contact her on November 4, 2021, regarding any absence and did 
not notify her he had left the AMS campus for any period of time that day. 
22. Principal Hardemion did not have complaints regarding Respondent’s 
teaching of PE. She recalled Respondent took on leadership roles as a PE teacher, 
working at lunch coaching students during the lunchtime sports program and with 
AMS’s intramural football program. Principal Hardemion recalled Respondent was 
awarded a 2021 and a 2022 Coach of the Year award for these efforts. Mervyn Dymally High School 
23. Respondent worked at Mervyn Dymally High School (MDHS) from 
August through October 2022 as a PE and Health teacher and as a quarterback coach 
for the MDHS football team. Effective October 4, 2022, Respondent was housed by 
District and placed on paid administrative leave.
AUGUST 25, 2022INCIDENTS
24. On August 25, 2022, Respondent told 10th grade student A  V., “Zip 
up your sweater. I don’t want to look at your boobs. You shouldn’t have them out like 
that,” or words to that effect. (Charge 11; Exh. 1, p. A4.)
25. On August 25, 2022, S  R., a 10th grade student whose 
grandmother had recently passed away, was looking at her phone, and Respondent 
11 told her, “You’ll get a lot of time to text your grandma in heaven.” (Charge 13; Exh. 1, 
p. A5.) 
26. On August 25, 2022, while in the gymnasium with his students, 
Respondent became upset because some students were not listening or complying 
with class rules. In response, Respondent directed his students to leave the 
gymnasium, walk outside, and sit on the hot concrete. He required them to sit there 
approximately 15 to 20 minutes for their misbehavior. (Charge 14; Exh. 1, p. A5.)
SEPTEMBER 2022INCIDENTS
27. In September 2022, Respondent called A  T., a 10th grade African 
American student, a “monkey.” (Charge 7; Exh. 1, p. A4.) 
28. On September 8, 2022, Respondent told K  M., a 9th grade African 
American student, “If you care about football, you need to stop acting like a monkey,” 
or words to that effect. (Charge 8; Exh. 1, p. A4.) 
AUGUST THROUGH OCTOBER 2022INCIDENTS
29. Between August 22, 2022, and September 2022, Respondent called 
members of the DMHS football team “fat uglies.” (Charge 4a; Exh. 1, p. A4.) 
30. Between August 22, 2022, and September 2022, Respondent said to his 
third period class, “This is America. You need to know how to speak English,” or words 
to that effect. (Charge 9; Exh. 1, p. A4.) 
31. Between August 22, 2022, and September 2022, Respondent questioned 
the transgender status of a 10th grade student, E  (legal name K  M.) by 
doing the following: (a) refusing to call them by their preferred name of E  at all 
12 times; (b) refusing to use E ’s preferred pronouns while addressing them; and (c) 
telling E  they were lying about being a boy. (Charge 10; Exh. 1, p. A4.) 
32. Between August 22, 2022, and October 2022, Respondent made the 
following religious comments to his class during instructional times (Charge 12; Exh. 1, 
pp. A4 & A5): 
a. Talked about Jesus and the Bible. 
b. Told them he was Christian and could bring up the devil. 
c. Started pacing back and forth speaking of demons. 
d. Yelled and talked about God. 
e. Claimed he was Christian and Catholic. 
f. Randomly shouted things about the devil while taking 
roll. 
g. Told students, “You need to take the stairway to heaven 
and wait at the pearly gates,” or words to that effect. 
h. Told students they will burn in hell, if they don’t hurry up 
running, or words to that effect. 
i. Cited random religious verses. 
j. Told a student her belief in Buddha was fake. 
13 TESTIMONY OF MDHSP RINCIPAL,STAFF,AND STUDENTS
33. MDHS Campus Aide and Defensive Line Coach London Ricks, MDHS 
Principal Darvina Bradley, and three MDHS students, E  M., K  M., and S  G., 
provided credible testimony on behalf of District. During his time working with 
Respondent, Mr. Ricks often heard Respondent state he was a quarterback when he 
told people what to do, heard Respondent call African American students “monkeys,” 
and heard him talk about Jesus and the Bible in the classroom, making statements that 
Jesus and God are the only religion. Mr. Ricks also heard Respondent tell students “this 
is America” and they need to know how to speak English. 
34. On September 8, 2022, Mr. Ricks was walking the campus to gather and 
redirect any students who were late to or ditching class. Mr. Ricks walked into the gym 
during Respondent’s PE class to direct a student to the office. Respondent told the 
student Mr. Ricks could not do anything because he was only an aide. Later that day 
Mr. Ricks entered the gym during fifth period to redirect a student to his proper 
classroom, and Respondent stated to the fifth period student, “He can’t save you, he’s 
just an aide.” During this fifth period class, Mr. Ricks also observed K  M. and 
Respondent engage in a verbal altercation. Mr. Ricks heard Respondent call K  M. 
a “monkey” and had to remove K  M. to prevent him from getting physical with 
Respondent. 
35. Principal Bradley was principal of MDHS during Respondent’s 
employment. Principal Bradley hired Respondent and remembered him to be 
professional during the interview. Principal Bradley was unaware of any disciplinary 
history for Respondent upon his hire. Principal Bradley is familiar with District’s policies 
and standards provided to Respondent during his NOUA with AMS. She trained the 
MDHS teachers on these same policies at the beginning of each academic year. 
14 36. Principal Bradley was involved in the investigation of the complaints 
made against Respondent by MDHS students and staff and subsequent disciplinary 
conferences and actions. MDHS students first made complaints to the administration 
on August 25, 2022. AP Johnnie Ausbon consulted with Principal Bradley regarding 
these early complaints and a subsequent disciplinary conference he held with 
Respondent the following day. Principal Bradley directed and supervised the 
investigation of the subsequent complaints made against Respondent through 
September 2022. The MDHS administrators interviewed over 25 of Respondent’s 
students at random, and the majority of the students independently corroborated the 
allegations. 
37. E  M., a senior at MDHS, testified at hearing. During the fall 2022 
semester E  M. was a 10th grade student in Respondent’s morning combined PE 
and Health class. On August 24, 2022, there was a fire drill during the PE class. 
Respondent told the students to line up, but some students were messing around. 
Respondent started “tripping out” and telling the students they would burn in hell if 
they did not listen to him. E  M. also recalled that Respondent would often talk 
about Christianity, recited Christian verses during class, told M  R., a ninth grader, that 
Jesus Christ is the savior and Christianity is superior, and told one of her friends that 
her belief in Buddhism was false. E  M. also recalled hearing Respondent call 
K  M. a “monkey.” Finally, E  M. recalled observing A  C. and another 
female student holding hands, and she heard Respondent tell A  C. that being in a 
relationship with a girl is not right. 
38. R  (legal name K  M.), a senior at MDHS, testified at hearing. 
During the fall 2022 semester, R  was a 10th grade student in Respondent’s 
morning combined PE and Health class. During the fall 2022 semester, R ’s 
15 preferred names were E  and W , and they identified as a boy. During their 
testimony, R  described Respondent as a passionate teacher who involved a lot of 
Christianity in his teaching. R  had informed Respondent of their preferred name 
and gender identification. Sometimes it seemed that Respondent was respecting their 
choices, but other times he did not. R  recalled one day when they needed to put 
away their belongings before PE, and Respondent asked them if they identified as a 
boy, and they answered “yes.” Respondent then told R  they needed to use the 
boys’ locker room but when they tried, it was locked. Respondent then directed R  
to go to the school office to ask what R  should do. R  later asked Respondent 
if it was his religion that made him not use their preferred name, and Respondent 
answered “no.” During this part of their testimony R  became tearful and 
explained they were confused why Respondent would treat them that way. 
39. S  G., a senior at MDHS, testified at hearing. During the fall 2022 
semester S  G. was a 10th grade student in Respondent’s seventh period PE class. 
S  G. explained that on August 25, 2022, Respondent made his students walk outside 
of the gym and sit down on the hot asphalt because students had been messing 
around during class. On a different occasion, she heard Respondent say to her friend 
A  C. to cover herself up because he did not want to see those things, while at the 
same time moving his cupped hands in front of his chest, referencing A  C’s 
breasts. S  G. also heard Respondent call African American students “monkeys,” and 
heard him often speak of religion, stating Christianity is superior. Finally, S  G. 
recalled hearing Respondent state he was Mexican and could speak Spanish, and when 
he said this, he used a high-pitched mocking tone. S  G. explained that she, herself, 
is Mexican, and she has experienced people speak Spanish in a high-pitched tone to 
mock people from Mexico. 
16 MDHSS TUDENT INCIDENT REPORTS
40. District submitted 15 additional Incident Reports written between August 
26 and October 12, 2022, by students of Respondent. These statements supplement 
and explain the testimony of the student witnesses regarding the allegations in the 
SOC. The students were contacted by MDHS administrators at random. 
41. Nine students affirmed Respondent required the students to sit on the 
hot concrete as a consequence of some students talking during class. (See Exhs. 42, 43, 
and 46-49.) Three students, including A  V., heard Respondent tell A  V. to 
zip up her sweater because he did not want to look at her boobs, and that this 
comment was made in front of the whole class. (See Exhs. 42, 62, & 63.) Four students, 
including S  R., heard Respondent make the comment to S  R. 
regarding texting her grandmother in heaven. (See Exhs. 46-48 & 63.) Three students 
saw Respondent pace back and forth and heard him speak of the devil and demons. 
(See Exhs. 49, 51, & 64.)
42. Four students, including K  M., heard Respondent tell K  M. to 
stop acting like a monkey. (See Exhs. 42, 53, 54, & 56.) One student heard Respondent 
call A  T. a “monkey.” (See Exh. 56.) One student heard Respondent call members of 
the football team “fat uglies.” (See Exh. 57.) 
43. Two students heard Respondent tell Spanish speaking students they 
need to speak English. (See Exhs. 58 & 59.) One student heard Respondent tell R  
he did not believe their pronouns and would not use their preferred name. (See Exh. 
59.) 
17 ADDITIONAL ALLEGATIONS REGARDING RESPONDENT ’S CONDUCT AT MDHS
44. District also alleged Respondent called members of the football team 
“Gorillas” (Charge 4b), told T  P., a 10th grade African American student, to not 
“hop over the fence like a monkey” (Charge 5), and called Z  C., a 10th grade 
African American student, a “hood monkey” (Charge 6). (Exh. 1, p. A4.) However, 
District failed to present direct evidence in support of these allegations. Accordingly, 
Charges 4b, 5, and 6, were not established. 
MISCONDUCT WHILE ON PAID ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
45. On July 15, 2023, at 1:51 a.m., while Respondent was on paid 
administrative leave, respondent called AP Bell-McAllister, and told her the following:
a. “I want to see you and go out with you and get a glass of 
wine.”
b. “I have always wanted to fuck on you.”
c. “I am also chilling some Patron and would love to pour it 
all over you pussy and fuck you right now.
d. “I love seeing your big ass walk across the yard.”
e. “I know when you use to pull the boys in your office, I bet 
you would fuck on them.”
f. “Do you like fucking on boys with that nice pussy. I bet it 
is nice.”
g. “I want to fuck you so bad.”
18 h. “How was it going over at LA high, did you get some 
while there.” 
(Charge 16; Exh. 1, pp. A6-A7; Exh. 21, pp. A224-A225.) 
46. AP Bell-McAllister hung up on respondent. Respondent called AP Bell-
McAllister back and left her a voicemail message where he continued to ask for a date. 
(Charge 17; Exh. 65.) On the voicemail message, respondent made the following 
statements to AP Bell-McAllister: 
Hey Ms. McAllister, not Mrs. I guess you’re eligible so . . . I 
just want to take you up on that. I know it’s kind of late, but 
you did kinda grab me a couple times at school . . . on my 
jacket . . . grab my arm . . . out of nowhere and to me that’s 
a sexual attempt, when you grab someone’s arm when they 
not expecting it . . . that’s fornication. Did it actually 
happen? It felt like it. You touched me in a way that I wasn’t 
expecting you to touch me. Just like Ms. Lewis touched my 
ass a couple of times at Audubon. And don’t be running off 
with no students, when your wig came off. That’s what 
Mabrie told me. You run off and your wig comes off with 
students. And that’s the bottom line. . . . So, yeah, if a man 
wants to ask a woman, take ‘em up on an offer, why not? 
We are both grown people, you’re an adult, I’m an adult . . . 
eligible people . . . I’m not trying to take anyone’s life. You 
forgot that I prayed for you . . . in . . . the meeting . . . we 
held hands together and I said I hope you go back to your 
husband. 19 47. At the time of Respondent’s voicemail message, Respondent had not 
worked with AP Bell-McAllister for over a year. Despite AP Bell-McAllister terminating 
the phone call, he pursued the communication. In Respondent’s voicemail message to 
AP Bell-McAllister, he accused her of touching him sexually and propositioning him for 
a date, implied she had had inappropriate and sexual contact with a student, and 
disparagingly referenced her physical appearance. 
48. Within an hour of his calls to AP Bell-McAllister, respondent called three 
other AMS female employees: Principal Hardemion, Ms. Collins (first name not 
provided), AMS’s Special Education Coordinator, and Ms. Blanco, but they did not 
answer his calls. Respondent also texted Ms. Blanco and asked her what her favorite 
drink is. 
49. AP Bell-McAllister credibly testified at hearing. Initially, she affirmed 
Principal Hardemion’s testimony regarding the multitude of trainings District requires 
teachers to complete annually, including sexual harassment trainings. When asked if 
she had received any inappropriate communications from Respondent, she described 
his statements as contained in Charge 16.
50. A few days after the phone call and voicemail message, on July 18, 2024, 
AP Bell-McAllister reported the incident to District’s Equal Opportunity Section (EOS) 
and submitted a complaint in which she reported the statements contained in Charge 
16, a contemporaneous statement. EOS Investigator Robbie Biggs investigated the 
matter and asked Respondent to schedule an interview to respond to the allegations 
but Respondent did not respond. On September 19, 2023, the EOS issued a 
Disposition Closure Letter finding AP Bell-McAllister’s allegations to be true and 
finding Respondent demonstrated a pattern of inappropriate and not business-related 20 behavior in which perceived “sexual overtones” were found in the comments reported. 
(Exh. 21.) Respondent did not appeal the EOS findings. 
51. AP Bell-McAllister explained her well-being is still impacted by 
Respondent’s conduct, and she became tearful during this portion of her testimony. 
AP Bell-McAllister explained that based on Respondent’s July 2023 conduct she has a 
security plan established with her current school, and she is walked to her car daily.
52. Ms. Blanco also testified regarding Respondent’s July 15, 2023, conduct. 
Ms. Blanco explained that in the summer of 2023, at approximately 2:00 a.m., she 
received a text from Respondent asking her what her favorite drink is.
MDHS  CONFERENCES AND NOTICE OF UNSATISFACTORY ACT 
53. On August 26, 2022, AP Ausbon met with Respondent regarding recent 
allegations against him. AP Ausbon reviewed allegations made by students regarding 
Respondent’s discussions of religion and the devil, and regarding statements made to 
a female student regarding her PE attire. AP Ausbon counseled Respondent against 
such conduct and provided him District’s Code of Conduct with Students and its 
Bulletin 5479.2 – Guidelines for Teaching About Religion in School. AP Ausbon 
documented this conversation in an August 26, 2022 Inter-Office Correspondence
(August 2022 Memo) (Exh. 15) and reported to Principal Bradley regarding the 
discussion and the August 2022 Memo.
54. On October 20, 2022, Principal Bradley, Staff Relations Field Director 
Damian Lenon, Respondent, and a UTLA representative met for a conference (October 
2022 Conference). During the October 2022 Conference, they discussed the allegations 
made by MDHS students against Respondent, including those appearing in the SOC, 
Charges 4 through 14. As documented in the October 25, 2022 Inter-Office 21 Correspondence (October 2022 Conference Memo) (Exh. 16), Principal Bradley 
provided Respondent assistance and guidance as to the individual violations and 
directed him to not repeat said conduct. In addition to providing Respondent with 
copies of District’s policies and standards previously provided to him by Principal 
Hardemion and AP Ausbon, Principal Bradley also provided Respondent with District’s 
Abolition of Corporal Punishment Policy and Bullying and Hazing Policy. 
55. Sometime after the October 2022 Conference, Respondent submitted a 
response to the allegations contained therein. (Exh. 17.) Respondent denied all the 
allegations but for those related to speaking of Christianity. Respondent denied using 
racist terms with anyone and stated he would stop using religious terms. 
56. Based on the information contained in the October 2022 Conference 
Memo, on February 7, 2023, District issued respondent a NOUA (2023 NOUA) and a 
Notice of Suspension (2023 NOS) suspending Respondent for 15 days. 
57. On September 27, 2023, District Region South Operations Coordinator 
Sergio Corral met with Respondent (September 2023 Conference) regarding his July 
15, 2023, conduct and documented the meeting in an October 3, 2023, Interoffice 
Correspondence. (Exh. 20.) On October 4, 2023, District issued Respondent an NOUA 
(October 2023 NOUA) and NOS (October 2023 NOS), with the October 2023 NOS 
calling for a 15-day suspension. (Exhs. 18 & 19.) In the October 2023 NOUA, District 
cited its policies and standards provided and explained to Respondent at the previous 
conferences and in the previously issued NOUAs. 22 Respondent’s Violations of District Policies and Standards
DISTRICT’S POLICIES AND STANDARDS
58. During the noted meetings with District administrators, Respondent was 
provided with assistance and guidance in the form of verbal direction and the review 
of District policies and standards which respondent was required to follow and uphold. 
In addition to the specific assistance and guidance provided by the administrators, the 
policies and standards clearly communicated to Respondent the requirements of his 
position as secondary teacher, as summarized below. Employee Code of Ethics 
59. District’s Code of Ethics is intended to help District achieve success by 
setting common expectations and increasing trust, commitment and teamwork within 
the District, and between the District and the community, and it applies to all District 
personnel. (Exh. 25, p. A234.) The Code of Ethics provides that District does not 
tolerate discriminatory or harassing behavior of students or colleagues and that
violations of the Code of Ethics may result in administrative or disciplinary action. (. 
at pp. A234 & A235.) 
Attendance Policy 
60. District employees must work every hour they are assigned and must 
comply with legal restrictions, District policy and procedures, and the respective 
collective bargaining rules regarding reporting of absence and providing appropriate 
documentation. (Exh. 23.) 23 Code of Conduct with Students
61. Item 3 of District’s Code of Conduct with Students provides “employees 
and all individuals who work with or have contact with students are expected to use 
good judgment and are cautioned to avoid situations including . . . [¶] . . . [¶] 
[e]ngaging in any behaviors, either directly or indirectly with a student(s) or in the 
presence of a student(s), that are unprofessional, unethical, illegal, immoral, or 
exploitative.” (Exh. 24, p. A232.) 
Board of Education Resolution To Enforce the Respectful 
Treatment of all Persons 
62. District’s Board of Education Resolution To Enforce the Respectful 
Treatment of all Persons reaffirms District’s policy that “students and adults in both 
schools and offices should treat all persons equally and respectfully and refrain from 
the willful or negligent use of slurs against any person on the basis or [ ] race, 
language spoken, color, sex, religion, handicap, national origin, immigration status, 
age, sexual orientation, or political belief . . . . “ (Exh. 26, p. A239.) 
Sexual Harassment Policy
63. District’s Sexual Harassment policy defines sexual harassment “as 
unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal, visual, or 
physical conduct of a sexual nature made by someone from or in the work or 
educational setting [when] the conduct has the purpose or effect of having a negative 
impact upon the individual's work or academic performance, or of creating an 
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work or educational environment.” (Exh. 27, p. A242.) 
Examples of verbal sexual harassment include the use of suggestive, derogatory, or 24 vulgar comments; the use of sexual innuendos or slurs; or making unwanted sexual 
advances, invitations, or comments. ( . at p. A244.) 
Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy 
64. District’s Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy prohibits 
workplace discrimination or harassment based upon, among other bases, an 
individual's race, gender or sex (including gender identity), actual or perceived sexual 
orientation, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, physical or mental disability, or 
medical condition. (Exhs. 28 & 32.) California Standards for the Teaching Profession 
65. CSTP were developed to support teachers to be responsive to “the varied 
socio-cultural, racial, religious, ethnic, linguistic, and economic backgrounds of all 
students” and to consider “how learning differences and abilities, gender and gender 
identity, family structure, sexual orientation, and other aspects of humankind influence 
learning and teaching.” (Exh. 33, p. A352.)
66. Standard 2.1 requires teachers to promote social development and 
responsibility within a caring community where each student is treated fairly and 
respectfully. It further requires teachers to model and promote fairness, equity, and 
respect in a classroom atmosphere that values all individuals and cultures, and accepts 
and respects diversity in terms of cultural, religious, linguistic, and economic 
backgrounds; learning differences and ability; gender and gender identity; family 
structure and sexual orientation; and other aspects of humankind. (Exh. 33, p. A357.) 
Standard 2.3 requires teachers to establish and maintain learning environments that 
are physically, intellectually, and emotionally safe. (.) Standard 6.7 requires teachers 25 to demonstrate professional responsibility, integrity, and ethical conduct in the 
classroom. (Exh. 33, p. A367.) 
District’s Teaching and Learning Framework 
67. Standard 4, Component 4c, of District’s Teaching and Learning 
Framework (Standard 4c), addresses a teacher’s duty to demonstrate professionalism. 
Standard 4c provides a teacher must demonstrate ethical conduct and compliance 
with school, District, State, and Federal regulations. (Exh. 34, p. A370.) District Secondary Teacher Class Description
68. A District secondary teacher must establish a classroom environment that 
is safe and supportive, where students feel free to contribute their ideas, and where 
teacher and student interactions are respectful and polite to promote a positive 
learning environment for all students. A District secondary teacher must be able to 
work effectively with all racial, ethnic, linguistic, disability, and socioeconomic groups. 
(Exh. 35, pp. A372-A373.)
Guidelines for Teaching about Religions 
69. In accordance with the Frist Amendment of the Constitution’s prohibition 
against the promotion of religion by the government, District’s Guidelines for Teaching 
about Religions prohibits school personnel from promoting any one religion. In the 
context of instruction, teachers may prepare lessons about religion to help students 
develop a basic understanding and appreciation of the role of religion in cultures. (Exh. 
29.) 26 Anti-Bullying Policy (Student-to-Student and Student-to-
Adult) 
70. District policy requires all schools and all personnel to promote mutual 
respect, tolerance, and acceptance among students and staff. (Exh. 31, p. A292.) Verbal 
and non-verbal bullying include name-calling and hurtful teasing. Bullying includes 
any deliberate and unwanted severe or pervasive physical or verbal act that has the 
intention of, or can be reasonably predicted to have the effect of, one or more of the 
following: 
1. Reasonable fear of harm to person or property. 
2. Substantially detrimental effect on physical or mental 
health. 
3. Substantial interference with academic performance. 
4. Substantial interference with the ability to participate in 
or benefit from school services, activities, or privilege. 
(Exh. 31, p. A293.) Abolition of Corporal Punishment 
71. District’s Abolition of Corporal Punishment policy prohibits the use of 
corporal punishment as a disciplinary option at any grade level and with any student 
“The Superintendent encourages the use of positive approaches to discipline and 
classroom management to ensure that students conform to proper standards of 
behavior permitting them to derive greater benefits from the educational program.” 
(Exh. 30.) 27 RESPONDENT ’S VIOLATIONS
72. When Respondent engaged in the misconduct at MDHS identified in 
Factual Findings 24 through 43 and 45 through 52, Respondent willfully refused to 
perform his regular assignment without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the 
reasonable rules and regulations of District. Respondent failed to follow administrative 
directives and assistance and guidance previously given to him at the December 2021
Conference and in the December 2021 Conference Memo (see Factual Findings 16 
through 19) thereby failing to adhere to the requirements of his assignment as a 
secondary teacher. (Charge 15 and 15a, Exh. 1, pp. A5 & A6.) Respondent’s conduct 
violated District’s policies as described in Factual Findings 59, 61 through 67, and 70. 
(Charge 15b, Exh. 1, p. A6.) 
73. When Respondent engaged in the misconduct identified in Factual 
Findings 45 and 52, respondent willfully refused to perform his regular assignments 
without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of 
District. Respondent failed to follow administrative directives and assistance and 
guidance previously given to him in the December 2021 Conference Memo, including 
but not limited to, that he, as a secondary teacher for District, be professional and 
respectful in his interactions with staff, and refrain from taking any actions or making 
any statements that may be considered harassing or discriminatory; that he comply 
with District policy that prohibits discriminatory or harassing acts or behaviors; that he 
maintain appropriate and professional relationships with staff; and that he not exhibit 
inappropriate conduct. (Charge 18a, Exh. 1, p. A7.) When Respondent engaged in the 
July 15, 2023, conduct, he also violated the District policies previously provided to him. 
(See Factual Findings 15-20 & 53-57). (Charge 18b, Exh. 1, p. A8.) 28 Commissioner Dissent
74. Commissioner Durham did not find District’s evidence credible as to the 
following Charges: Charge 4a, alleging Respondent called members of the MDHS 
football team “fat uglies,” Charge 8, alleging Respondent called K  M. a 
“monkey,” and Charge 16 b through 16h, alleging the sexual communications 
Respondent made to AP Bell-McAllister during the July 15, 2023, phone call. 
Respondent’s Evidence 
75. Respondent obtained his bachelor's degree in kinesiology from the 
University of Nevada Las Vegas and Long Beach State University. He enjoys teaching 
PE and coaching football. As a PE teacher, he created challenging curriculum that 
taught students how to warm up for and participate in various PE activities, and he 
emphasized the importance of health and exercise. Respondent denied any 
wrongdoing and asserted his teaching has been inclusive of all his students and his 
goal was to be safe, respectful, and responsible in his teaching.
RESPONDENT ’S PERFORMANCE AS A TEACHER 
76. Respondent established his teaching performance before November 
2021 was positive, and throughout his teaching, he provided effective PE instruction to 
his students and was an active participant in the PE departments in which he was 
involved. 
77. Respondent submitted his 2016-2017 Probationary Teacher Evaluation 
and 2017-2018 Probationary 2 Teacher Evaluation, completed by Cyril Baird, Principal 
of Westside Global Awareness Magnet. (Exhs. 9 & A.) Principal Baird provided positive 
comments about Respondent’s teaching performance and growth as a PE teacher. For 
29 example, Principal Baird commented that Respondent had thoroughly addressed 
instructional growth objectives and implemented them effectively, that he found 
Respondent to be a valuable teacher who was dedicated to students and the school 
community, and that Respondent’s teaching had a positive impact on student 
performance. (Exh. 9, p. A160.) 
78. Respondent submitted photos of his Coach of the Year awards provided 
to him by AMS in 2021 and 2022, demonstrating AMS found Respondent to be a 
valuable coach during these years. (Exhs. B & C.) In addition, Respondent submitted 
two of his lesson plans for September 2020, while teaching online PE at AMS, and the 
AMS syllabus for the 2021-2022 academic year. These documents showed 
Respondent’s comprehensive PE curriculum and that he translated the information 
into Spanish for Spanish speaking students. Finally, Respondent submitted three 
Incident Reports written by students E  H., B  A., and H  P., who were in 
Respondent’s Health class at MDHS and who found Respondent to be a good teacher 
and had not heard him say anything inappropriate. (Exhs. I-K.) RESPONSE TO SOC 
Conduct at AMS 
79. Regarding his conduct on November 4, 2021, Respondent claimed he left 
campus that day out of fear he was going to be attacked. He explained that earlier in 
the semester a “black” and “special ed” student had threatened to shoot him and kill 
him and that that student was suspended. He claimed that on November 4, 2021, he 
was on the field and another “black” and “special ed” student approached him and 
entered his personal space; Respondent feared for his life and left the school. He 
acknowledged he did not tell anyone he was leaving but he determined it was 
30 sufficient to look at Ms. Atkinson, the attendance clerk, while he was leaving campus, 
and he was certain she understood why he was leaving. 
80. Respondent acknowledged he also missed his fifth and seventh period 
classes on November 4, 2021, but explained that during this time he purchased Kelly 
green tablecloths for an award ceremony happening that afternoon afterschool. 
Respondent returned to AMS after the school day ended to attend the award 
ceremony. 
81. Respondent’s explanation of his November 4, 2021, conduct is 
unsubstantiated, self-serving, and phantastic, and is not believed. Respondent did not 
submit evidence substantiating his explanation as to why he left the AMS campus, 
such as witness testimony or the filing of an incident report to AMS. Further, 
Respondent did not raise this explanation to Principal Hardemion or other AMS staff
during the investigation or during the subsequent December 2021 or April 2022 
conferences. Respondent explained he had not provided this explanation previously 
because when he met with administrators about his November 2021 conduct, he was 
at ease and no longer fearing for his life. Conduct at MDHS
82. Respondent denied being racist or making racist comments. He admitted 
to speaking of religion at the MDHS’s Fellowship of Christian Athletes meeting when 
they discussed the Bible. He also acknowledged using a Bible verse from Matthew 
during a class but asserted it was to encourage students to attend college. He denied 
the other allegations regarding speaking of religion during his classes, including 
pacing or speaking of demons, stating students would burn in hell, or speaking against 
Buddhism. Respondent agreed to not speak of religion in the future while teaching. 31 83. Respondent recalled that on September 7, 2022, many students, 
including K  M., were using their cell phones and using profanity toward him. He 
directed K  M. to remove his hood and put away his cell phone, and K  M. 
began cussing at Respondent. Respondent submitted his own Incident Report 
documenting his experience of this incident. (Exh. 39.) Although credited, 
Respondent’s statement on this topic does not disprove, nor is it mutually exclusive of, 
the conduct established in Factual Finding 28. 
84. Respondent did not recall making a statement referencing a student’s 
boobs, and did not recall directing students to sit on hot asphalt, although he claimed 
all the students had a yoga mat. Respondent did not recall interactions with R  
about a bathroom, but stated he called them by their name on the class roster. R  
was Respondent’s first transgendered student. Conduct While on Paid Administrative Leave 
85. Respondent admitted Charge 16a, the statement to Ms. Bell-McAllister 
regarding getting a glass of wine, and admitted Charge 17, that he left the voice
message as contained in Exhibit 65. Respondent denied Charges 16b through 16h and 
believes it would not be appropriate to say the things alleged. Respondent explained 
he called AP Bell-McAllister back after she hung up on him because he had not said all 
he wanted to say to her and he believes leaving the voicemail message was 
appropriate. Respondent admitted he had consumed a few alcoholic beverages the 
evening of July 15, 2023.
86. Respondent affirmed his statement in the voicemail message that he 
considers it fornication to grab someone’s arm if they are not expecting it. He also 
32 claimed Principal Bradley stripped naked in front of him on a staircase at school on the
first day of the Rams 2022-2023 professional football season. 
87. Respondent explained he believes it was acceptable to contact his former 
colleagues on July 15, 2023, between 1:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m., because it was a summer 
night, and he was feeling the vibe. Respondent acknowledged Ms. Bell-McAllister was 
emotional during her testimony about his phone call and voicemail message, but he 
believed that was because he had called her so late. Respondent also believes it was 
okay to call Ms. Collins because they were prayer buddies. Respondent denied texting 
Ms. Blanco but believed it was also okay to call her because it was summertime, and 
they are both Mexican. ASSISTANCE AND GUIDANCE
88. Respondent acknowledged receiving the annual trainings and the 
assistance and guidance provided to him, including review of District’s policies and 
standards, as presented by District. Respondent recalled attending a sensitivity training 
which addressed how to be socially responsive to cultures and that race was discussed 
at the training. Respondent did not request any additional assistance from District with 
understanding or complying with District policies or standards, and he has not 
personally sought counseling or other assistance. 
Respondent’s Conduct During Hearing 
89. During the in-person days of the hearing, October 14 through 16, 2024, 
respondent acted erratically and violently and demonstrated an inability to 
consistently comply with the decorum required in a professional setting. 33 90. During the first three days of hearing, which were held in-person, 
Respondent wore a neck gaiter bandana (bandana), decorated in the American flag, 
around his face, covering his nose and mouth. Respondent claimed the bandana was 
medically necessary but removed the bandana during his testimony. The bandana 
prevented others from discerning Respondent’s complete facial expressions during 
hearing. Nonetheless, Respondent’s disruptive behavior, including interruptive facial 
expressions, were apparent during hearing. On each occasion, the ALJ admonished 
Respondent for his behavior and directed him to the conduct required of all 
participants for the hearing to proceed.
91. During District’s opening statement, Respondent turned to his left, faced 
the wall, and with pointed fingers moved his hands back and forth, as if in a 
conversation with someone, mumbled to himself, and interrupted District’s opening 
statement with denials of the allegations being described. Later in the day, when AP 
Bell-McAllister testified and was asked whether she had ever received any 
inappropriate communications from Respondent, Respondent began making sounds. 
92. On the second day of hearing, when Ms. Blanco testified regarding the 
text she had received from Respondent, Respondent looked at her and popped his 
eyes open wide, displaying a look of mocking shock, and he began making facial 
gestures, partially hidden by the bandana, and laughing. Respondent’s conduct was 
disruptive and intimidating, and the ALJ cleared the hearing room. Next, when Mr. 
Ricks testified, Respondent pulled the bandana up over his eyes, to the point it was 
covering his whole face, and looked up toward the ceiling. The ALJ directed him to 
wear the bandana only over his nose and mouth, and Respondent complied. The ALJ 
asked if he understood going forward that was the expectation regarding the 
bandana, Respondent did not respond verbally but wrote on a piece of paper, “Yes.”34 93. At the beginning of the third day of hearing, Respondent’s counsel asked 
to discuss matters before resuming with testimony. Respondent’s counsel explained he 
was obligated to report that minutes before entering the hearing room, while checking 
in through security downstairs, Respondent began screaming and making threatening 
statements and threw a water bottle against a wall. Building security had informed 
counsel they were concerned for their own safety and the safety of others. The hearing 
did not resume until building security could be present in the hearing room. When the 
ALJ cleared the hearing room to wait for security, Respondent walked past his 
counsel’s chair and punched the back of the chair in the direction of District’s counsel 
who was standing less than two feet away from the chair and Respondent.
94. During his own testimony later that day, Respondent continued to be 
disruptive and frequently non-responsive to questions. Multiple times during his 
testimony he returned to talking about a Jim Thorpe t-shirt he received because he 
had started the Pete Brown Tennis program at AMS, his football accolades, how James 
Hardy and Nipsey Hussle had attended either AMS or MDHS, and that his mother was 
Mexican and his father was a member of the Yurok tribe. At one point during his 
testimony, Respondent looked over at the commissioners and said the commissioners 
were making fun of him.
95. During his testimony, Respondent also made gender and racial 
stereotype comments such as that Mr. Mabrie “opened the door like a woman” and 
that “women can’t run schools.” Respondent explained what he meant by his 
statement that “women can’t run schools” is that in the Bible women are weaker than 
men and men are supposed to be the leader. Respondent became angry at this point 
in his testimony and the ALJ cleared the hearing room. During this portion of the 
testimony, Respondent mumbled an answer, and the court reporter asked him to 35 restate his answer. Respondent answered “Si” (Spanish for “yes”) and later in his 
testimony explained he did so because the court reporter was Mexican. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Jurisdiction 
1. Upon a written statement of charges formulated by the governing board 
of the school district, charging there exists cause, as specified in Education Code 
section 44932 or 44933, for the dismissal of a permanent employee of the school 
district, the governing board of the school district may, upon majority vote, give notice 
to the permanent employee of its intention to dismiss him or her at the expiration of 
30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless the employee demands a hearing 
as provided in the Education Code. (Ed. Code, § 44934, subd. (b).) (Undesignated 
statutory references are to the Education Code.)
2. Similarly, the governing board of the school district charging a 
permanent employee of the school district with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district, may, if it deems that action necessary, 
immediately suspend the employee from his or her duties and give notice to him or 
her of his or her suspension, and that 30 days after service of the notice of dismissal, 
he or she will be dismissed, unless he or she demands a hearing. (§ 44949, subd. (b).)
3. Such notice of the governing board of the school district to an employee 
of its intention to dismiss, together with a written statement of charges, is sufficient to 
initiate a hearing under section 11503 of the Government Code. (§ 44934, subd. (e).)37 (B) That the employee should be suspended for a specific 
period of time without pay. 
(C) That the employee should not be dismissed or 
suspended. 
(2) The decision of the [Commission] that the employee 
should not be dismissed or suspended shall not be based 
on nonsubstantive procedural errors committed by the 
school district or governing board of the school district 
unless the errors are prejudicial errors. 
(3) The Commission on Professional Competence shall not 
have the power to dispose of the charge of dismissal by 
imposing probation or other alternative sanctions. The 
imposition of suspension pursuant to subparagraph (B) of 
paragraph (1) shall be available only in a suspension 
proceeding authorized pursuant to subdivision (b) of 
Section 44932 or Section 44933. [¶] . . . [¶] Causes for Dismissal
8. Section 44932, subdivision (a), provides a permanent employee must not 
be dismissed except for one or more of the following causes:
(1) Immoral conduct . . . . 
(2) Unprofessional conduct. [¶] . . . [¶] 
(4) Dishonesty. [¶] . . . [¶] 38 (6) Evident unfitness for service. [¶] . . . [¶] 
(8) Persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws 
of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 
government of the public schools by the state board or by 
the governing board of the school district employing him or 
her. 
9. Immoral conduct and unprofessional conduct cannot be the basis for 
removal of a teacher unless that conduct indicates the teacher is unfit to teach. 
( (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 ( ).) 
10. Section 44949, subdivision (b), provides a permanent employee is subject 
to immediate suspension and to dismissal if he or she willfully refuses to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district. (§ 44939, subd. (b).)
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
11. The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 
the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not 
been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and 
the public welfare.’” (  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
12. When considering whether a teacher has engaged in immoral conduct, 
the Commission must also consider “the unique position of public school teachers, 41 and contrary to District policies and standards, including the requirement that teachers 
promote respect in a classroom atmosphere that values all individuals and cultures, 
and accepts and respects diversity in terms of cultural, religious, and linguistic 
backgrounds. (Factual Findings 24-43 & 45-52.) 
20. Respondent’s November 4, 2021, conduct at AMS was also 
unprofessional. Respondent abandoned his middle school students, without 
communication with his colleagues or administrators. Respondent’s conduct required 
his colleagues and administrators to find coverage for Respondent’s responsibilities 
without cause. Respondent’s conduct was a direct violation of the trust District placed 
in Respondent to maintain the safety and custody of the students placed in his care. 
(Factual Findings 8-11.) DISHONESTY  
21. Cause exists under section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), to dismiss 
Respondent from District. District established by a preponderance of the evidence 
Respondent engaged in dishonesty. Respondent’s conduct at AMS, when he left the 
AMS campus without notice, and in violation of District’s Attendance Policy and sign-
in/sign-out procedures to reflect his absence, was dishonest. (Factual Findings 8-11.)
PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF OR REFUSAL TO OBEY SCHOOL LAWS AND 
REGULATIONS
22. Cause exists under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), to dismiss 
Respondent from District. District established by a preponderance of the evidence 
Respondent persistently violated and refused to obey District’s policies and standards, 
which are prescribed for the government of District’s schools. 42 23. Respondent received annual training on District’s policies and standards 
raised in the SOC. In addition, in August 2020, respondent received assistance and 
guidance regarding District’s Code of Ethics. Despite this review, Respondent violated 
District’s Code of Conduct on November 4, 2021, at AMS. (Factual Findings 8-11, 15.)
24. In December 2021 and April 2022, respondent received assistance and 
guidance regarding the following District policies and standards: Attendance Policy; 
Code of Conduct; Employee Code of Ethics; Board Resolution Reaffirming the 
Respectful Treatment of All Persons; Sexual Harassment Policy, Non-Discrimination 
and Anti-Harassment Policy; the CSTP; and Teaching and Learning Framework 
Standard 4. Despite this review, Respondent violated all but the Attendance Policy 
while working at MDHS between August 25 and October 4, 2022. (Factual Findings 16-
20, 24-43.)
25. On August 26, 2022, respondent received assistance and guidance 
regarding District’s Guidelines about Teaching Religion. Despite this review, 
Respondent continued to violate these guidelines during September 2022. (Factual 
Findings 24-43, 53.) 
26. In October 2022 and February 2023, Respondent received assistance and 
guidance regarding all District’s policies and standards raised in the SOC. Despite this 
review, respondent continued to violate these policies and procedures on July 15, 
2023. (Factual Findings 45-52, 54-57.)43 WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENT WITHOUT 
REASONABLE CAUSE
27. Cause exists under section 44949, subdivision (b), to dismiss Respondent 
from District. District established by a preponderance of the evidence Respondent
willfully refused to perform his regular assignments without reasonable cause. 
28. Although Respondent established his ability to teach PE and coach 
football well and, at least between 2016 and 2018, meet standard performance, the 
actual teaching of PE is not the totality of his assignment as a secondary teacher. 
Rather, as was repeatedly told to him between August 2020 and October 2023, 
Respondent’s regular assignment as a secondary teacher requires him to comply with 
District’s policies and standards. The applicable policies and standards were provided 
to Respondent annually, and then again, on multiple occasions, in response to his 
misconduct. Respondent affirmed at hearing he received District’s policies and 
standards and did not request assistance with understanding or complying with them. 
Nonetheless, Respondent repeatedly failed to perform his regular assignment in 
accordance with District’s policies and standards without reasonable cause. (Factual 
Findings 8-11, 15-43, 45-95.) EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
29. Evident unfitness for service under section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), has 
been defined as a fixed character trait “presumably not remediable merely on receipt 
of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 
district,” which demonstrates the teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 46 36. The evidence did not establish extenuating circumstances surrounding 
Respondent’s conduct. The aggravating circumstances surrounding Respondent’s 
conduct were that it was unprovoked and erratic. Although on a few occasions 
students were misbehaving in his classes at MDHS, such conduct can be expected, and 
teachers are expected to manage such disruptions without violating District policies 
and standards. The majority of Respondent’s conduct arose from his own internal 
beliefs or thought processes, were not fitting of the situation, and he was unable to 
filter or control his behavior to comport to District policies and standards. (Factual 
Findings 8-11, 24-43, 45-52.) 
37. The likelihood of the recurrence of Respondent’s conduct is significant. 
Respondent did not acknowledge wrongdoing or express remorse for his conduct. 
Further, Respondent’s conduct during the hearing demonstrated Respondent 
continues to have repeated and consistent struggles comporting to basic decorum 
required in professional settings and that is considerate toward good order and the 
public welfare. Further, Respondent continues to experience the behaviors of others as 
invitations to his misconduct. (Factual Findings 79-95.) 
38. The evidence did not establish praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of 
the motives resulting in Respondent’s conduct. The evidence did not establish that 
disciplinary action against Respondent may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect 
upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. 
39. Respondent’s conduct between November 4, 2021, and July 15, 2023, 
demonstrates an unfitness to teach. Respondent’s persistent violations despite 
multiple warnings and assistance and guidance demonstrate Respondent’s unfitness is 
based on a fixed character trait by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. 
Respondent’s lack of accountability or remorse for his conduct, and his attribution of 47 responsibility to others for his conduct, compounds this unfitness as it demonstrates a 
present affirmation that he would not act to prevent such conduct in the future. 
Finally, Respondent’s testimony and conduct at hearing demonstrated a persistent 
inability to control his conduct, including his disruptive, intimidating, and violent 
outbursts, or to stay mentally present for an extended period of time without 
engaging in such conduct. In total, Respondent presented with a fixed character trait, 
not remediable on receipt of notice that his conduct fails to meet District’s 
expectations, and which demonstrates he is not fit to teach by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies. (Factual Findings 8-11, 15-43, 45-95.) Disposition 
40. District established by a preponderance of the evidence cause to dismiss 
Respondent from District based on immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, 
dishonesty, persistent violations of or refusal to obey District policies and standards, 
willful refusal to perform his regular assignment, and his evident unfitness to teach.
The majority of the Commission concludes dismissal is the appropriate discipline. Dissent 
41. Commissioner Durham concluded District did not establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence that Respondent committed immoral or 
unprofessional conduct, or that Respondent is unfit for service. Further, Commissioner 
Durham concluded Respondent’s acts did not warrant dismissal from District. 