BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
GARDEN GROVE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of: 
ANTHONY MAYTORENA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024100875 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence for the Garden Grove Unified 
School District (Commission) heard this matter on March 24 through 26, 2025, in 
Garden Grove, California. The Commission consisted of Sandra Fink; Brandon Futagaki; 
and Harden Sooper, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California. 
Jacquelyn T. Morenz and Anthony P. De Marco, Attorneys at Law, represented 
the Garden Grove Unified School District (District). 
Shawn E. Cowles, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Anthony Maytorena, 
who was present at the hearing. 2 The Commission received testimony and documentary evidence. The record 
closed and the matter was submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing.
The Commission considered the matter in executive session. After due 
consideration of the entire record, the Commission makes the following factual 
findings, legal conclusions, and order. 
To protect their privacy, students mentioned in this Decision are identified by 
their initials. 
On June 19, 2025, on his own motion, the ALJ issued a protective order sealing 
Exhibits 7, H, I, J, N, U, and V because they contain confidential material. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
1. At all relevant times, respondent was a permanent certificated employee 
of the District, assigned as a physical education (PE) teacher at McGarvin Intermediate 
School (McGarvin).
2. On July 17, 2024, Jason Bevacqua, in his official capacity as the District’s 
Assistant Superintendent for Personnel Services, filed a Statement of Charges against 
respondent.
3. In a Notice of Intent to Suspend dated September 26, 2024, the District 
notified respondent it intended to suspend him without pay for 30 days based upon 
the allegations within the Statement of Charges.3 4. Respondent timely filed a Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense, 
dated October 15, 2024. 
Background and Investigation 
5. On March 1, 2024, McGarvin Principal William Gates received an 
anonymous complaint filed through an online system called StopIt. The complaint 
alleged respondent engaged in inappropriate behavior involving student K.N. during a 
PE class on February 29, 2024. 
6. The same day, Principal Gates initiated an investigation regarding the 
allegations against respondent. He interviewed K.N. and four or five other student 
witnesses. He also directed the interviewed students to prepare written statements 
about the incident. 
7. Principal Gates reviewed video surveillance footage depicting an incident 
during the February 29, 2024 PE class involving K.N. He directed McGarvin Information 
Technology personnel to download and preserve the footage and he forwarded the 
footage to Mr. Bevacqua, the District’s Assistant Superintendent for Personnel Services. 
8. Mr. Bevacqua notified Jesus Vazquez, the District’s Director of Personnel, 
who initiated his own investigation. Mr. Vazquez reviewed the video surveillance 
footage, interviewed respondent, and interviewed student witnesses. He also reported 
the incident to both Child Protective Services and the Westminster Police Department. 
Westminster Police Officer Gabriela Mora, a School Resource Officer assigned to 
McGarvin, investigated and concluded no crime occurred. 4 February 29, 2024 Swatting Incident
9. During PE class on February 29, 2024, respondent asked student K.N. to 
come to the front of the class to demonstrate “swatting.” There were between 50 and 
60 eighth grade students in the class. While her classmates remained seated on the 
blacktop, K.N. stood in front of the class and as instructed by respondent, placed her 
hands on the rim of a wheeled trash bin filled with lacrosse sticks. K.N. testified 
respondent instructed her to “push forward” on the trash bin. Not understanding the 
direction, K.N. both pushed her hands forward and walked forward simultaneously. 
Respondent further instructed K.N. to keep her feet still while pushing the bin forward. 
K.N. complied with respondent’s instruction, describing her body’s position as “like a 
90-degree angle.” She was facing away from respondent and could not see what 
happened while respondent was behind her. K.N. remained in the position for a few 
seconds before respondent told her to return to her seat on the blacktop. As she did 
so, K.N. heard a few classmates giggling but did not understand why. Once other 
students told K.N. respondent “did a hitting gesture to [her] butt,” she felt “disgusted 
and uncomfortable.” K.N. testified she subsequently felt afraid of respondent because 
she “didn’t know that teachers had the power to do such an inappropriate act.” 
10. K.N.’s testimony was consistent with her written statement dated March 
1, 2024, and with her interview with Mr. Vazquez conducted on March 4, 2024. In her 
written statement, K.N. stated respondent requested a volunteer from the class to 
demonstrate swatting. Among other questions, respondent asked the class whether 
the volunteer should be male or female, or Asian or non-Asian. K.N. told Mr. Vazquez 
respondent asked her to participate in the demonstration after no student volunteered 
to participate, and that she felt humiliated once another student told her the 
demonstration looked like respondent was spanking her. According to Mr. Vazquez, 5 K.N. stated the lacrosse stick touched her foot at some point during the incident but 
she could not remember which foot. In her testimony at the hearing, K.N. stated she 
did not remember telling Mr. Vazquez the stick ever touched her. After describing the 
incident and how she felt, K.N. sobbed for about 15 minutes before Mr. Vazquez 
decided to end the interview. 
11. K.N.’s testimony was consistent with the testimony of two additional 
student witnesses, D.T. and I.C. Both D.T. and I.C. testified that during their February 
29, 2024 PE class, respondent discussed swatting as a form of discipline used in the 
past. Respondent chose K.N. to demonstrate swatting in front of the class. D.T. and I.C. 
stated respondent made the motion of “swatting” a lacrosse stick toward K.N. while 
she was bent over on the trash bin, but did not make contact with K.N.’s body. D.T. 
testified he felt “weirded out” by respondent describing a form of discipline no longer 
allowed and picking a student to demonstrate it.
12. All three witnesses’ testimony was consistent with video surveillance 
footage of the incident. The video footage depicts K.N. walking to the front of the 
class and placing her hands on a trash bin filled with lacrosse sticks. K.N. first walked 
forward while pushing the trash bin. K.N. then repositioned herself such that she held 
the rim of the trash bin with her back facing respondent. She pushed the bin forward 
while keeping her feet still, such that she was bent over at the torso with her upper 
body facing the ground. It is unclear from the video whether K.N.’s body was at a full 
90-degree angle. K.N. remained in the same position for several seconds and 
respondent swung the lacrosse stick once toward K.N.’s bottom without striking K.N. 
Respondent patted K.N. on the shoulder and she returned to her seat on the blacktop 
while other students applauded her. Once K.N. sat down, respondent swung the 6 lacrosse stick once at the trash bin, striking the bin. The footage does not include any 
audio. 
Respondent’s Statements 
13. Mr. Vazquez testified that when he interviewed respondent on March 1, 
2024, respondent admitted demonstrating swatting with a female student in his PE 
class, but denied swinging a lacrosse stick toward the student. He asserted he held the 
lacrosse stick by his shoulder during the entire incident. He also denied asking K.N. to 
bend over the trash bin and denied touching K.N. During the interview, respondent 
demonstrated how the student was positioned over the trash bin by placing his hands 
on a wall and bending over slightly. Based upon the March 1, 2024 interview, Mr. 
Vazquez concluded respondent did not show any remorse for his actions. 
14. In his testimony at the hearing, respondent described the swatting 
incident. He explained he knew K.N. because she worked as an assistant in the 
McGarvin front office and he viewed her as a leader in the class and one of the top 
students. He denied choosing her because she was female and Asian; he explained 85 
or 90 percent of students at McGarvin were Asian. Respondent asserted he did not 
force K.N. to participate in the demonstration, but conceded “any student will say yes 
if [a teacher] ask[s].” He further claimed he asked K.N. to reposition herself to avoid 
having her backside facing the class; he did not want to embarrass her and was instead 
attempting to protect her. He denied asking K.N. to bend over the trash bin, stating he 
could not have asked K.N. to bend over the bin because lacrosse sticks were 
protruding from the bin. He explained he moved the lacrosse stick toward K.N. but 
kept the stick 12 to 18 inches away from K.N. to avoid her accidentally backing into the 
stick. He testified he was just “joking around” and “had no idea” K.N. would be 7 embarrassed by the incident. In retrospect, he regrets K.N. was embarrassed and he 
lamented that he never had an opportunity to explain himself and apologize to K.N. 
15. Respondent asserted he was “100 percent honest” in his March 1, 2024 
interview with Mr. Vazquez. He knew the incident was captured on video surveillance 
footage, noting he is “not an idiot.” He disputed Mr. Vazquez’s conclusion he was not 
remorseful. He asserted at the time of the interview, he did not know K.N. felt 
embarrassed by the demonstration. Respondent emphasized his own stress and 
anxiety over the District investigation, the police investigation, and being unable to 
work for 11 months while on paid administrative leave. 
16. When asked on cross-examination about whether he told Mr. Vazquez he
held the lacrosse stick by his shoulder during the entire incident, respondent testified 
he did not remember holding the lacrosse stick by his shoulder, nor did he remember 
telling Mr. Vazquez he did so. He admitted telling Mr. Vazquez he did not swing the 
lacrosse stick. He asserted he was instead “lining up” the lacrosse stick akin to lining 
up a golf club to a golf ball on a tee, preparing to swing. He testified he believed a 
swing “is what you do to a ball when you hit it.” He denied touching K.N. with the 
lacrosse stick. 
17. Also present during the March 1, 2024 interview with Mr. Vazquez was 
Bridget Holdermann, then-president of the Garden Grove Education Association, the 
union representing teachers at the District. Ms. Holdermann is also respondent’s high 
school classmate, friend of over 40 years, and teaching colleague for over 30 years. Ms. 
Holdermann’s testimony about the March 1, 2024 interview was consistent with 
respondent’s testimony. She did not recall respondent stating he held the lacrosse 
stick by his shoulder, but she did recall respondent stated he did not swing the 
lacrosse stick during the incident. Using the same analogy as respondent, Ms. 8 Holdermann asserted respondent made a motion akin to a golfer lining up their shot; 
in her opinion, a swing requires an intent to hit something. Even a practice swing 
requires an “intent for follow through.” Mr. Vazquez testified Ms. Holdermann told him 
in a private conversation during the hearing but outside the Commission’s presence 
that she was loyal to the District but also loyal to her friend, meaning respondent. 
Rehabilitation and Mitigation Evidence 
18. Respondent first became a teacher at the District in 1995 and was a PE 
teacher at McGarvin for over 20 years. He taught over 10,000 students during his years 
at McGarvin. In February 2025, respondent returned to teach for the District at Bell 
Intermediate School. 
19. Respondent submitted seven performance evaluations from his time at 
McGarvin, dated between 2003 and 2019. Respondent received satisfactory 
performance ratings on each evaluation. Respondent has no prior discipline imposed 
by the District. 
20. In her testimony, Ms. Holdermann vouched for respondent’s character 
and teaching skill. Ms. Holdermann has never witnessed respondent disrespecting or 
embarrassing a student. She would trust respondent with her own child. Ms. 
Holdermann noted respondent often uses humor as a tool to engage with students. 
Ms. Holdermann was aware of the allegations against respondent, given she was 
present for his interview with Mr. Vazquez and watched the video footage of the 
incident.
21. Mark Foster, who taught PE with respondent at McGarvin for 20 years, 
testified and vouched for respondent’s character and teaching skill. Mr. Foster 
described numerous positive interactions he had observed between respondent and 9 his students. Mr. Foster had never observed respondent embarrass a student. Mr. 
Foster was familiar with the allegations against respondent but believed respondent 
would not engage in the alleged behavior. Mr. Foster testified that during his own 
teaching career, he would not have demonstrated swatting in front of a PE class, nor 
called a student to the front of the class and ask them to bend over.
22. Melanie Whitney, respondent’s former student who is currently a college 
professor, testified and vouched for respondent’s character and teaching skill. Ms. 
Whitney cited respondent’s dedication to his family and students; she acknowledged 
respondent used humor to connect with students but never saw him embarrass or 
disrespect a student. Ms. Whitney was aware of the allegations against respondent and 
believed the allegations stemmed from a joke taken out of context.
23. Janet Fettig, who taught PE at McGarvin for 31 years, including 20 years 
alongside respondent, testified and vouched for respondent’s character and teaching 
skill. She described his dedication to the PE program, his students, and his family. 
Respondent ran afterschool programs and lunchtime programs outside his normal 
working hours. Ms. Fettig was aware of the allegations against respondent; she 
testified she never demonstrated corporal punishment as a PE teacher. On cross-
examination, when shown the video footage of the February 29, 2024 incident, Ms. 
Fettig testified she would describe respondent’s actions as “swinging a lacrosse stick at 
[K.N.’s] back.” 
24. Respondent submitted two character letters: one from Brian Greene, a 
lifelong friend; and one from Susan Duquesnel, a longtime colleague. Both authors 
vouched for respondent’s character. Ms. Duquesnel also vouched for respondent’s 
teaching skill. The evidence did not disclose whether either author was aware of the 
allegations against respondent. 10 25. Respondent also submitted a letter of gratitude from a former student, 
G.N. Respondent testified G.N. was his student about 10 years ago. He explained he 
formed a bond with G.N. and he felt he could have a “real conversation with girls at 
this age,” meaning middle school, because they are more mature than boys. He felt a 
special connection with middle school-aged girls, but in a “weird, father way” rather 
than a “creepy” way. Respondent gave G.N. a gift card as a middle school graduation 
gift. He explained G.N. had a difficult relationship with her mother and at one point, 
asked if respondent would adopt her. 
Analysis 
26. The evidence proved respondent demonstrated swatting with K.N. in 
front of his PE class on February 29, 2024. Respondent admitted he did so and the 
incident was captured on video surveillance footage. Respondent asked K.N. to come 
to the front of the class and instructed her to position herself such that her torso was 
almost parallel or parallel to the ground while she held onto a trash bin. Respondent 
stood behind K.N. and used a lacrosse stick to make a spanking gesture toward K.N.’s 
bottom without contacting K.N. K.N.’s testimony she felt embarrassed, afraid, and 
humiliated was credible.
27. The evidence proved respondent was dishonest during his March 1, 2024 
interview with Mr. Vazquez. Mr. Vazquez, respondent, and Ms. Holdermann all testified 
respondent told Mr. Vazquez he did not swing the lacrosse stick toward K.N. The video 
surveillance footage depicts respondent doing so, and respondent’s explanation that 
he did not consider the motion a “swing” was not credible. One can swing an object 
without any intent to strike something. Once K.N. sat down after the demonstration, 
respondent made the same swinging motion toward the trash bin, striking the bin. 
Both motions were swings; respondent simply stopped before striking K.N. 11 Respondent’s own character witness, Ms. Fettig, described the motion toward K.N. as a 
“swing.” Moreover, respondent told Mr. Vazquez he held the lacrosse stick by his 
shoulder throughout the incident, which was untrue. Respondent’s denial he asked 
K.N. to lean over the trash bin was likewise untrue. Whether described as “leaning” or 
“bending” over, respondent directed K.N. to place her hands on the trash bin and 
position herself such that her bottom was facing respondent and her torso was parallel 
or almost parallel to the ground. Respondent’s assertion he interpreted the question 
to mean whether he asked K.N. to position her body on top of the trash can, over the 
lacrosse sticks, was not credible. 
28. The evidence did not prove respondent was dishonest when he stated to 
Mr. Vazquez he did not touch K.N. He did not contact K.N. with the lacrosse stick 
during the swatting demonstration. To the extent there was incidental contact 
between the lacrosse stick and K.N.’s foot, it is reasonable to conclude respondent was 
unaware of such contact and/or did not interpret Mr. Vazquez’s question as including 
such incidental contact. Although respondent did touch K.N.’s shoulder after the 
demonstration, it was likewise reasonable for respondent to assume Mr. Vazquez was 
asking about physical contact during the demonstration, not patting K.N.’s shoulder 
afterward. The exact context of Mr. Vazquez’s questions is unknown because he did 
not record the interview. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. The District has the burden of proving cause for discipline by a 
preponderance of the evidence. (  (1985) 164 12 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1040.) Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has 
more convincing force than that opposed to it. (
 (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 
Applicable Law
2. The District may suspend a permanent employee for immoral conduct, 
dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, or persistent violation of or refusal to obey 
school laws or District regulations. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds. (a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(6), (a)(8).) 
Cause for Suspension
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
3. “Immoral conduct” is that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Immoral conduct is 
sometimes considered synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. 
Or, it can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (
(1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811.) 
4. Immoral conduct also “must be considered in conjunction with the 
unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities 
and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.’” 
(  (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 
1454, 1466.) “Thus, the term must be ‘considered in the context in which the 
Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 13 public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 
school community.’” (  (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 
327, 337, quoting (1969) ( ) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
224.) 
5. Complainant proved by a preponderance of the evidence respondent’s 
swatting demonstration with K.N. constituted immoral conduct. Respondent’s 
misconduct was indecent; indicative of an inconsiderate attitude toward good order 
and the public welfare, specifically the welfare of the school community; and was 
hostile to the welfare of the McGarvin school community. At best, respondent chose to 
disregard K.N.’s dignity for the sake of making a joke. He acknowledged that a 
student, when asked by a teacher to perform a task, will feel obligated to comply. He 
further acknowledged that the demonstration was potentially embarrassing for K.N., 
testifying he repositioned K.N. such that her bottom was not directly facing the class 
to avoid embarrassing her. Respondent conducted the demonstration despite knowing 
K.N. would feel obligated to comply and despite knowing that the demonstration 
could cause K.N. embarrassment. 
DISHONESTY
6. Complainant proved by a preponderance of the evidence respondent 
was dishonest during his March 1, 2024 interview with Mr. Vazquez, as set forth in 
Factual Finding 27. 
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
7. “Evident unfitness for service” means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 
inadequacies. . . . [The term] connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 14 remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” (
 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 
8. Complainant did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
respondent’s misconduct demonstrated an evident unfitness for service. Although 
respondent’s misconduct involving K.N. was serious, complainant offered no evidence 
of prior discipline for other, similar misconduct. The evidence did not prove 
respondent is clearly not fit to teach by reason of a fixed character trait. Cause 
therefore does not exist to suspend respondent for evident unfitness for service, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 
PERSISTENT VIOLATION OF OR REFUSAL TO OBEY SCHOOL LAWS OR DISTRICT 
REGULATIONS
9. To suspend a teacher under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(8), for violations of law or school rules, the violations must be either “persistent” or 
“motivated by an attitude of continuous insubordination.” (
(1972) ( ) 28 Cal.App.3d 77, 81.) The word 
“persistent” has been interpreted tomean “stubborn” or “continuing or constant.” (
(1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 
1176, 1183; , 28 Cal.App.3d at p. 82) Additionally, a single violation of a school 
board’s rules is insufficient cause for discipline; it is the persistent disregard of school 
rules that the law is designed to regulate. ( . at p. 84.) 
10. Complainant did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
respondent engaged in persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or District 
regulations. The swatting demonstration appeared to be an isolated incident. 15 Respondent’s subsequent dishonesty with Mr. Vazquez, although a separate violation, 
was related to the same swatting demonstration. Respondent’s misconduct was not 
continuing or constant. Cause therefore does not exist to suspend respondent for 
persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws or District regulations, pursuant 
to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 
Fitness to Teach 
11. In order to suspend a teacher for immoral conduct or dishonesty, the 
teacher’s conduct must indicate the teacher is unfit to teach. ( 1 Cal.3d 
214 [immoral conduct must indicate an unfitness to teach]; 
 (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn. 12 [dishonesty must also indicate a 
teacher’s unfitness to teach].)
12. The Commission has broad discretion to determine what constitutes 
unfitness to teach. (  (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) 
13. As set forth in , a teacher’s conduct cannot be abstractly 
characterized as “immoral,” thus warranting discipline, “unless that conduct indicates 
that [respondent] is unfit to teach.” ( 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 
enumerates eight criteria for analysis of whether a teacher is unfit to teach. Not all 
 factors must be met for the test to be satisfied. (
(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369.) It is sufficient when the most pertinent  
factors have been considered. (
 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) Moreover, the analysis need 
not be conducted on each individual fact established, but rather can be applied to the 
accumulated facts established collectively. ( 2 
Cal.App.4th at p. 1457.) 16 14. The factors apply to respondent’s case as discussed below.
THE LIKELIHOOD THAT THE CONDUCT MAY HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED 
STUDENTS ,FELLOW TEACHERS ,OR THE EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITY ,AND THE 
DEGREE OF SUCH ADVERSITY ANTICIPATED
15. Respondent’s misconduct adversely affected K.N., causing her to feel 
uncomfortable, afraid, and humiliated. A student witness, D.T., also stated he was 
“weirded out,” or uncomfortable, because of respondent’s misconduct. K.N. 
experienced significant adversity, such that she sobbed for about 15 minutes when 
interviewed by Mr. Vazquez several days later.
THE PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT  
16. Respondent’s misconduct involving K.N. occurred recently, approximately 
15 months ago, during the 2023–2024 school year. 
THE TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD BY THE PERSON INVOLVED
17. Respondent’s credential authorizes him to teach students in grades 12 
and below, which encompasses an impressionable population of students. In 
 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, the court found 
“[G]iven the impressionable nature of elementary school students, and their need for 
appropriate adult role models, this factor weighs in favor of finding of unfitness to 
teach.” (  184 Cal.App.4th at p. 477.) Although respondent was not 
teaching elementary school students at the time of his misconduct, his credential 
allows him to do so. 17 THE EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE 
CONDUCT
18. Extenuating circumstances surrounding respondent’s misconduct include 
that there was no evidence of a pattern of similar misconduct. Aggravating 
circumstances include that respondent’s misconduct occurred in front of a class of 
between 50 and 60 students and caused K.N. significant discomfort and 
embarrassment. Moreover, according to respondent’s own testimony, he was aware 
the demonstration could cause K.N. embarrassment. 
THE PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES RESULTING 
IN THE CONDUCT
19. Respondent asserted he did not intend to embarrass K.N. and elected to 
demonstrate swatting because he uses humor to connect with his students. However, 
even if true, an attempt at humor at the expense of a student is not acceptable 
conduct by a teacher. There was no reason for respondent to discuss swatting during 
his PE class, let alone use a student to demonstrate it in front of the class. When later 
interviewed by Mr. Vazquez, respondent had a motive to be dishonest to avoid 
accountability for his misconduct involving K.N.
THE LIKELIHOOD OF THE RECURRENCE OF THE QUESTIONED CONDUCT
20. Respondent expressed regret that K.N. felt embarrassed by the swatting 
demonstration, but he did not express a full understanding of the inappropriateness of 
his misconduct. He maintained that he was simply “joking around.” As such, there is 
some likelihood of recurrence of similar misconduct. However, there was no evidence 18 respondent engaged in a pattern of misconduct during his lengthy career at the 
District. 
THE EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT AN ADVERSE 
IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT UPON THE CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF THE 
PERSON INVOLVED ,OR OTHER CERTIFIED PERSONS
21. The outcome of this case will have no chilling effect on credentialed 
teachers exercising their constitutional rights. 
THE PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO THE CONDUCT  
22. An important element of this factor is whether notoriety from 
misconduct would impair future on-campus relationships. (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463.) In February 
2025, the District permitted respondent to teach at another middle school in the 
District. There is no evidence his misconduct negatively affected others at his current 
assignment. 
OVERALL CONCLUSION  
23. Respondent’s misconduct is related to his fitness and ability to effectively 
teach.
Disposition 
24. Respondent engaged in immoral and dishonest conduct related to his 
fitness and ability to effectively teach. Cause therefore exists to suspend respondent, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1) and (a)(4). Respondent 
presented some mitigation evidence, such as character witnesses, his history of 19satisfactory performance evaluations at McGarvin, and his lack of prior discipline. 
However, the District’s proposed 30-day unpaid suspension is nonetheless warranted 
by the severity of respondent’s misconduct.
ORDER
Respondent shall serve a 30-day unpaid suspension beginning on a date 
designated by the District.
DATE:
DATE:
DATE:SANDRA FINK
Commission Member
Commission on Professional Competence
BRANDON FUTAGAKI
Commission Member
Commission on Professional Competence
HARDEN SOOPER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
