BEFORE A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
ALAMEDA COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
MATTHEW CAMPBELL, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024060174 
DECISION 
A Commission on Professional Competence (Commission) heard this matter by 
videoconference on November 5 through 8 and November 12 through 14, 2024. The 
Alayna Carter, Kelly Cooper, and Administrative Law 
Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of Administrative Hearings, who 
presided. 
Attorneys Sarah E. Fama, Erin M. Hamor, and Aysha Pal represented 
complainant Cynthia Jenkins, Chief of Human Resources for the Alameda County 
Office of Education (ACOE). 
Attorney Clarissa M. Romero represented respondent Matthew Campbell, who 
was present at hearing. 2 The Commission received oral opening statements and testimonial and 
documentary evidence. The record was held open at the conclusion of the hearing to 
permit the parties to conduct additional discovery, offer additional documents, and 
submit closing briefs. Following a status conference with counsel, the parties offered 
documents, which were admitted into evidence as Exhibits 45, 46, 47, 48, P, Q, R, S, T, 
and U, as set forth in the Order issued on January 10, 2025. Each party then submitted 
a timely closing brief and reply brief, which were marked for identification as Exhibit 49 
 with attached hearing transcripts), Exhibit 
 
The record closed and the matter was submitted on February 25, 2025. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Procedural History 
1. Respondent Matthew Campbell has been a permanent certificated 
employee of ACOE since 2008. Respondent was most recently assigned to teach 
Physical Education (PE) to incarcerated youth at the Juvenile Justice Center (JJC), 
sometimes referred to as Juvenile Hall. 
2. On April 12, 2024, complainant Cynthia Jenkins, acting in her official 
capacity as Chief of Human Resources for ACOE, signed and filed with ACOE a 
proposed Notice of Intent to Dismiss, Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension, 
and Proposed Statement of Charges against respondent. Jenkins caused respondent to 
be served with the Proposed Statement of Charges, and notice of a pre-disciplinary 
meeting with Allan Garde, Associate Superintendent for Business Services. 
provided a written response on April 19, 2024, in lieu of a 3 meeting. On April 22, 2024, Garde issued a letter in his capacity as the officer, 
upholding  
3. On April 23, 2024, Jenkins signed and caused respondent to be served 
with the final Notice of Intent to Dismiss, Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension, 
and Statement of Charges. Respondent timely requested a hearing, and this hearing 
before the Commission followed. 
4. During the hearing in this matter, ACOE requested and received leave to 
amend the Statement of Charges to conform to the evidence received at hearing. The 
amendments did not change the nature of the allegations against respondent or the 
grounds for dismissal, but included an expanded time frame for his alleged conduct. 
5. On November 14, 2024, complainant filed the operative First Amended 
Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension Pending 
Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings; and Statement of Charges (Amended Statement 
of Charges). The Amended Statement of Charges specifies the following grounds for 
dismissal: immoral conduct, including but not limited to egregious misconduct 
(Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1)); and evident unfitness for service ( ., subd. (a)(6)). 
6. The Amended Statement of Charges contains allegations relating to two 
female students who were taught by respondent when they were detained at the JJC. 
In summary, the allegations are: on one or more occasions since S.B.1 was 12 years old, 
respondent approached S.B. on International Boulevard in Oakland and/or contacted 
her to solicit sex from her; on one or more occasions during that time period, 
respondent engaged in sexual intercourse and/or oral sex with S.B. and paid her for 
 
1 Students are referred to by their initials to protect their privacy. 4 engaging in such sexual conduct; respondent solicited S.B. and M.H. for sex on 
International Boulevard in or around June or July 2022 (when both girls were age 16), 
an offer that M.H. declined but that S.B. accepted, engaging in sexual activity with 
respondent at San Antonio Park in exchange for money; and respondent paid S.B. 
additional money not to tell anyone about their sexual activity. 
Factors for Evaluation of Witness Credibility 
7. Resolution of the issues in this matter depends on witness credibility. The 
Commission evaluated credibility pursuant to Evidence Code section 780, which 
provides that the trier of fact may consider in determining the credibility of a witness 
any matter that has any tendency in reason to prove or disprove the truthfulness of 
 testimony, including but not limited to: demeanor while testifying and 
the manner in which the witness testifies; character of the testimony; extent of the 
pacity to perceive, recollect, or communicate the matter being testified to; 
for honesty and veracity or their opposites; existence or nonexistence of a bias, 
interest, or other motive; previous consistent statements; previous inconsistent 
statements; existence or nonexistence of any fact testified to by the witness; attitude 
toward the action in which the witness testifies or toward the giving of testimony; and 
admission of untruthfulness. 
8. 
disbelieve other parts of it. (  (1996) 43 Cal.App.4th 1525, 1537.) 
contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences 
from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected 
 (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67-68.) 5 impeaching evidence in the nature of contradictions or otherwise has been received, it 
is still the right as well as the duty of the jury to determine to what extent they believe 
or disbelieve the testimony. [Citations.] They may likewise give credence to a 
witness . . . 
 (1946) 28 Cal.2d 154, 184.) Moreover, t
(1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) 
, Employment History, and Coaching 
9. Respondent is 62 years old. He has been married to his wife for more 
than 33 years and they have three adult sons together. 
10. Respondent graduated from Nampa Christian High School in Nampa, 
Idaho in 1982. He graduated from college at Mid-America Nazarene College in 1990. 
He later took classes at Boise State University and University of Phoenix in connection 
with obtaining his teaching credential. Respondent taught and coached football at 
Nampa Christian High School for 14 years. 
11. Respondent also has experience working in construction, with a business 
 
12. In 2005, respondent moved from Idaho to California.  Since moving to 
California, respondent lived first in Antioch (11 years), then in Concord (four years), 
and now lives in Pittsburg (the past four years). 
13. Respondent was head football coach and a PE teacher at Berean Christian 
High School in Walnut Creek from 2005 to 2007. He taught at Alliance High School, a 
continuation high school in the Mt. Diablo Unified School District, from 2007 to 2008. 6 14. Since 2008, respondent has been employed by ACOE as a teacher, at 
several school sites (locations are described in Factual Findings 20 and 21), as follows: 
Camp Sweeney (PE and history), September 2008 to February 2010; 
JJC ( -on-one), February to August 2010; 
Camp Sweeney (English, history, and PE), August 2010 to September 2014; 
JJC (floater and substitute teacher), September 2014 to August 2017; 
Bridge Academy (English, social science, math, science), August 2017 to 
March 2018; 
Thunder Road (English, social science, math, science), March to July 2018; 
JJC and Camp Sweeney (PE and floater), July 2018; and 
JJC (PE), 2019 to the present. 
15. Respondent also taught summer school at the JJC and/or Camp Sweeney 
each summer between 2009 and 2023. 
16. Respondent received the ACOE Teacher of the Year award in 2022. 
17. From April 2021 to August 2022, while respondent was assigned to teach 
at the JJC in San Leandro, he was required to participate in weekly COVID testing. 
From April 13 to June 8, 2021, respondent went to 
central office on Winton Avenue in Hayward, at various times in the afternoons (2:30, 
1:45, 3:15, 12:45 p.m.).  COVID testing 
location at that time. The shortest driving route to the ACOE office on Winton Avenue 
from the JJC in San Leandro is 5.9 miles. 7 Starting in August 2021, ACOE offered COVID testing at Winton Avenue and 
also at Bridge Academy in Oakland, and employees could choose either location. 
Respondent went to the testing location at Bridge Academy weekly at lunchtime from 
August 24, 2021, through August 30, 2022 (approximately 40 times). The shortest 
driving route to Bridge Academy in Oakland from the JJC in San Leandro is 12 miles. 
18. While working as a teacher for ACOE, respondent also coached sports for 
multiple schools. Respondent coached football at Acalanes High School in Lafayette in 
20082009; at Valley Christian High School in Dublin in 2009 2010 and about 2014 or 
2015; and at Northgate High School in Walnut Creek in 2016 to 2020. 
At Northgate High School, respondent coached freshman football for two years 
and junior varsity football for two years. During football season (fall), practices were 
from 3:30 to 5:30 or 6:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, with freshman games on 
Thursday nights, and junior varsity/varsity games on Friday nights. He had weekend 
practice  
Respondent coached track at Northgate High School in spring 2018, with 
practices from 3:30 to 5:00 or 5:30 p.m. on weekday afternoons, and track meets on 
Saturdays. Respondent assisted his oldest son in coaching basketball at Walnut Creek 
Christian Academy in 2017 2018. 
Background Information Relevant to this Matter 
ACOE SCHOOLS AND STUDENTS 
19. Alameda County Superintendent of Schools Alysse Castro testified 
credibly at hearing and described ACOE and the students it serves. Castro has 27 years 
of experience in the educational field and is an expert on alternative education and 8 underserved youth. ACOE acts as a small school district directly providing education to 
students who are not served by their regular districts because they have been expelled, 
are incarcerated, or require an alternative school setting for other reasons. ACOE also 
provides support to 18 school districts across Alameda County to help those districts 
serve their enrolled students. 
20. The school sites directly operated by ACOE include court schools for 
incarcerated youth at Butler Academic Center in the JJC and at Camp Sweeney. The JJC 
and Camp Sweeney facilities are run by the Alameda County Probation Department, 
and are located adjacent to each other on Fairmont Drive in San Leandro. Students 
come and go frequently from these schools based on their detention status. 
There are several housing units at the JJC that house boys, and one (Unit 6) that 
houses girls. Students in Unit 6 are taught by one teacher for most subjects, in a 
classroom on the unit. They attend PE class with a different teacher. PE classes take 
place in the gym or outside on the blacktop. Juvenile Institutional Officers (JIO who 
work for the Probation Department provide institutional security and supervision of 
youth housed in the JJC, and escort students to and from their classes and activities. 
21. ACOE also runs community-based schools. Thunder Road Community 
School was formerly an academic program for high-school aged students, located in a 
residential substance abuse treatment center on 40th Street in Oakland. 
Bridge Academy is located at 750 International Boulevard, on the corner of 
International Boulevard (also known as E. 14th Street) and 8th Avenue in Oakland. 
Bridge Academy houses small-group or independent study education programs for 
youth who have been expelled or referred by probation or child welfare authorities, 
and other services such as a family resource center and behavioral health services. 9 22. The students who are directly served by ACOE are a very vulnerable 
population, including youth who are homeless, in foster care, or in the juvenile justice 
system. Almost all of  students are of low socioeconomic status, and almost all 
of them are non-white. About half of the students have special education needs. ACOE 
works with a significant number of youth who have been or are being trafficked and 
exploited for commercial sex. 
23. Castro described ACOE  approaching education through a 
trauma-informed lens, because students cannot learn effectively when they are scared. 
Castro noted that despite the traumatic experience of arrest and detention, for many 
students, the JJC is a stable and safe place, where they may perform better in school 
while removed from the influence of their traffickers. 
INTERNATIONAL BOULEVARD AREA AND COMMERCIAL SEX TRAFFICKING  
24. A stretch of International Boulevard in the San Antonio area of Oakland is 
known for sex trafficking and the commercial sexual exploitation of minors on the 
street, and it has several nicknames: the Blade, the Strand, or the Strip. A number of 
youth detained at the JJC have been sexually trafficked in that area (and elsewhere). 
 
25. Bridge Academy is located on the stretch of International Boulevard in 
the San Antonio neighborhood where sex trafficking on the street is common. Multiple 
witnesses credibly testified at hearing that anyone who visits Bridge Academy or that 
portion of International Boulevard could be expected to see sex workers in plain sight. 
Castro makes frequent site visits to Bridge Academy, most commonly at about 
9:00 a.m., but she has visited at all times of the work day. Castro described this 
location as having markedly visible commercial sex trafficking, with numerous young 10 women standing on street corners or walking from one corner to the next, wearing 
extremely skimpy clothing such as a G-string and a mesh tank top or a dress shorter 
than the underwear line, and very high heels or, occasionally, bedroom slippers. Castro 
also described seeing drivers stopping on the street and these young women getting 
into the cars and leaving with the drivers, and she described sometimes seeing a 
young man come out of a doorway and direct one of the young women to step closer 
to the street. Castro made a video recording at approximately 9:00 a.m. on October 10, 
2024 (a Thursday), starting on 12th Avenue, driving down International Boulevard for 
four blocks, and ending at Bridge Academy at the corner of 8th Avenue. The video 
reflects that in this short drive there were four young women visible on the street and 
corners wearing this type of skimpy clothing. Castro testified credibly that this is 
consistent with her other visits to the area, stating that she has never been to Bridge 
Academy without seeing visible sex trafficking activity. Castro has also heard such 
activity frequently discussed by staff at Bridge Academy. 
The testimony of Jenkins about this location was consistent with that of Castro. 
Jenkins has visited Bridge Academy three or four times in the mornings or lunchtime, 
and has seen commercial sex workers on the street each time. 
Multiple other ACOE and JJC staff described their awareness of the commercial 
sex trafficking on International Boulevard in their testimony at hearing and in 
interviews during the investigation of this matter. 
ACOE BOARD POLICIES, REGULATIONS , AND TEACHER TRAINING 
26. Education Code section 212.5 prohibits sexual harassment in school 
environments, as do ACOE Office Regulation 4119.11 and County Board Policy 5145.7. 11 27. County Board Policy 5142 (Safety) discusses the importance of providing 
a safe school environment conducive to learning that promotes student well-being. 
28. County Board Policy 1313 (Civility) recognizes the impact that civility has 
on the effective operation of ACOE and creation of a safe and positive school climate; 
defines civil behavior as including observance of laws and rules; and provides that staff 
shall not communicate or behave in a manner that disrupts, hinders, or threatens the 
orderly conduct of ACOE operations or the educational program. 
29. County Board Policy 4319.24 (Maintaining Appropriate Adult-Student 
Interactions) requires all adults with whom students may interact at school to maintain 
the highest professional and ethical standards in their interactions with students both 
within and outside the educational setting. These adults may not engage in unlawful 
or inappropriate interactions with students and must avoid boundary-blurring 
behaviors that undermine trust in the adult-student relationship. ACOE employees are 
prohibited from entering into or attempting to form a sexual relationship with any 
student or other conduct of a sexual nature. 
30. ACOE teachers are mandated reporters, and must report any suspected 
child abuse or neglect. Respondent completed required trainings about sexual 
harassment and mandated reporting of child abuse and neglect. 
STUDENTS S.B. AND M.H. 
31. S.B. was born in May 2006. She grew up in Oakland in the foster care 
system, and lived in more than 10 foster homes over the years. She experienced 
violence as a child. S.B. used to run away from her foster homes and go with pimps. 
S.B. had been trafficked for sex since she was 12 years old, at locations including 
International Boulevard, the area near the Oakland airport, Stockton, and Los Angeles. 12 S.B. was detained in and released from the JJC multiple times, and she was 
enrolled in school at Butler Academic Center in the JJC during the periods that she was 
detained. S.B. was first enrolled in school at the JJC on March 18, 2020 (at age 13), and 
her last date of enrollment was June 10, 2024 (shortly after she turned 18). 
32. M.H. was born in December 2005. She was also in and out of detention at 
the JJC on multiple occasions, and was enrolled in school at Butler Academic Center 
when she was detained. M.H. was first enrolled in school at the JJC on June 21, 2022 
(at age 16), and her last date of enrollment was May 9, 2024 (at age 18). 
Soliciting and Paying Minor Students for Sex 
ALLEGATIONS RAISED AT S IEP MEETING 
33. On September 19, 2023, M.H. had an IEP (Individualized Education 
Program) meeting in a classroom in Unit 6 at the JJC. In attendance at the IEP meeting 
were M.H.; school psychologist John S. Moore III, Ph.D.; resource specialist teacher 
David Noack; general education teacher Kate Edwards; and 
social worker Sascha Atkins-Loria, L.C.S.W.; by 
speakerphone. Dr. Moore, Noack, Edwards, and Atkins-Loria each testified at hearing 
about the IEP meeting and the disclosures made by M.H. that day, consistently with 
each other and with previous investigative interviews. 
34. 
her progress toward graduation. M.H. had credit deficiencies across multiple subjects, 
including PE. She appeared eligible for a reduced credit diploma under AB 2306, in 
which a student may receive a diploma without elective requirements and fewer 
overall credits, upon the consent of a parent, guardian, or educational rights holder. 
M.H. was advised during the IEP meeting that she needed to participate in PE class. 13 35. After the formal IEP meeting had concluded and the grandparent had 
disconnected from the phone, 
participation in PE class. M.H. said that she did not like PE class and did not like the 
teacher (respondent). M.H. stated that respondent required students to do stretches 
and exercises that were sexually suggestive and made students uncomfortable. 
36. At some point, M.H. asked to speak to Atkins-Loria privately. Atkins-Loria 
and M.H. moved to another part of the room to speak together, and M.H. disclosed 
that respondent had been engaging in commercial sexual activity with another girl on 
the unit since that girl was much younger. Atkins-Loria asked M.H. if she wanted to 
share this information with the IEP team. M.H. agreed, and they rejoined the group. 
37. M.H. another girl housed in 
the unit, while they were out of custody. M.H. also described an incident that had 
occurred during their PE class several days previously (September 15, 2023). The 
students were outside on the blacktop and respondent was getting upset because 
they were not participating in PE class. S.B. made a verbal outburst along the lines of, 
buying pearl,  
is a slang term for female genitalia.) 
shut down class for the day and sent the girls back to the unit. M.H. also stated that 
other students had seen respondent on International Boulevard. 
38. Dr. Moore determined he needed to make a mandated report. Noack left 
to find the principal. Dr. Moore, M.H., and Atkins-Loria moved to an interview room on 
the unit to discuss the matter further. M.H. stated that she had been with S.B. out on 
the Strand  and respondent had solicited them both. M.H. turned respondent down, 
with respondent. M.H. said this had occurred in 14 about June 2022. M.H. also stated that she was advocating for S.B. because S.B. was 
scared. M.H. identified D.S. as another student who saw respondent on International 
Boulevard. 
Dr. Moore had S.B. and D.S. join them in the interview room. 
D.S. spoke with Dr. Moore and Atkins-Loria briefly and confirmed she had seen 
respondent on International Boulevard. 
S.B. confirmed that she had been with M.H. on the Strand and respondent had 
solicited them  
S.B. also stated that respondent paid her extra money to keep quiet. S.B. stated that 
she had seen respondent handing out wellness kits (sandwich bags with items such as 
masks, hand sanitizer, and condoms) to people on the Strand two or three years prior. 
39. Dr. Moore left the interview room to make telephone calls, which took 
some time. Atkins-Loria remained in the interview room with M.H. and S.B. 
40. Dr. Moore 
information disclosed by M.H. and S.B. Dispatch staff consulted with a sergeant who 
instructed them to refer the call to the Oakland Police Department, since the reported 
activity occurred in Oakland. 
41. Eventually, an Oakland Police Department dispatcher called Dr. Moore 
back to obtain more information, and spoke to Dr. Moore, S.B., and M.H. on 
speakerphone. The audio recording and a transcript of the call were admitted into 
evidence in this matter. The dispatcher attempted to determine where the reported 
solicitation and sexual activity had occurred, noting that International Boulevard 
stretches across a large portion of Oakland. S.B. reported she was standing on one of 15 the cross streets in the area of the Strand when respondent picked her up, and they 
went to a park area. Dr. Moore pulled up Google Maps on his computer screen, and 
S.B. and M.H. looked at maps to narrow down the location while speaking to the 
dispatcher. S.B. and M.H. stated that respondent got their attention on E. 19th Street. 
M.H. did not date him, but S.B. agreed and went with respondent to an area near the 
track at San Antonio Park2 to have sex. The dispatcher arranged for an officer to come 
to the JJC to take a report. As reflected in the audio recording of the call, the 
demeanor of S.B. and M.H. sounded genuine and straightforward, not exaggerated. 
42. S.B. and M.H. each made similar disclosures to JIO Robert King the same 
day. At hearing, King explained that when he entered the unit that day, S.B. and M.H. 
. Later, S.B. approached King in the 
dayroom and asked to speak with him privately. S.B. told King that she had had a 
. Within a few minutes 
before or after in the dayroom, and told 
him th
approached him first.) King contacted his supervisor to start the mandated report 
process and made an incident report about these disclosures. 
 
2 Maps in evidence reflect that San Antonio Park is a large square area with 
open spaces and sports facilities, bordered by E. 19th Street on the northeast side, 
Foothill Boulevard on the southeast side, 16th Avenue on the west side and 18th 
Avenue on the east side. The soccer field and track are near the portion of the park 
bordered by 16th Avenue. 16 INVESTIGATION OF ALLEGATIONS  
43. Jenkins testified credibly at hearing about her role in the investigation of 
respondent, as the Chief of Human Resources for ACOE. Jenkins was on vacation on 
, but a human resources manager 
contacted her by telephone about the allegations against respondent. Jenkins directed 
the manager to immediately verbally place respondent on paid administrative leave. 
44. On September 20, 2023, Jenkins met with Castro, and interviewed 
Dr. Moore, Noack, and Edwards about the disclosures made by M.H. and S.B. the 
previous day. Dr. Moore described those events consistently in his interview with 
Jenkins, his subsequent investigative interview, and at hearing. Noack similarly 
described the portion of the conversation for which he was present, before he left to 
look for the principal. Edwards told Jenkins what M.H. had stated at the IEP meeting, 
and stated she did not believe  Jenkins took notes during her staff 
interviews. 
45. On September 21, 2023, Jenkins issued a letter formally placing 
respondent on paid administrative leave pending an investigation. 
46. On September 25 and 26, 2023, JJC Principal Earl Crawford interviewed 
six female JJC students about respondent. Crawford took notes during the interviews.3 
M.H. and D.S. each described the incident in PE class, reporting that when respondent 
was trying to get students to participate, S.B. stated that respondent was buying sex 
on International Boulevard, and respondent got red in the face, ended class, and 
 
3 Crawford died in February 2024 and thus he did not testify at hearing. His 
interview notes are in evidence. 17 slammed the door. S.B. declined to be interviewed by Crawford about respondent 
without the presence of her lawyer. Interviews with two other students confirmed that 
students were not participating in PE and respondent got mad and ended the class. 
D.S. told Crawford that respondent had been going to the Blade for three or four years 
to hand out pepper spray and condoms, had started dating, and that respondent 
had not done anything with D.S. but that he had with S.B. 
47. Castro directed Jenkins to retain an outside investigator, due to the 
serious nature of the allegations. At hearing, Castro noted that she had never 
previously received such an allegation against a staff member. 
Testimony of Elizabeth DeChellis 
48. Elizabeth DeChellis was retained to conduct an independent investigation 
of the allegations against respondent. She had no prior relationship with ACOE. 
DeChellis is an attorney and a partner of the law firm Van Dermyden Makus. DeChellis 
testified credibly at hearing about her training, investigation, and findings, and her 
investigative report dated February 15, 2024. 
49. DeChellis has more than nine years of experience conducting workplace 
and Title IX investigations. DeChellis has completed more than 500 investigations, 
most of which involved sexual harassment or sexual assault. She also trains others on 
how to conduct such investigations. 
DeChellis has received extensive training on conducting investigations, 
including a week-long certification course from the Association of Workplace 
Investigators (AWI), and trainings about Title IX and sexual harassment in educational 
environments. She has attended the week-long AWI training twice as a student and at 
least six times as a faculty member. DeChellis has also completed a multi-day training 18 from the Advanced Forensic Interview Institute on interviewing minors about sexual 
assault, including how to ask questions to get accurate information without planting 
memories or asking leading questions, and how to ask age-appropriate questions. 
DeChellis has completed Forensic Experiential Trauma Interview training about 
trauma-informed interview techniques. 
50. DeChellis uses a trauma-informed approach in all investigative interviews. 
She understands that for all people involved in an investigation, talking with an 
investigator is stressful. She gives interviewees an opportunity to provide a narrative, 
as well as asking questions. She is mindful about how she phrases questions, using 
language that is designed not to make the interviewee defensive. She also considers 
differences in relaying information accurately in high-stress situations. 
51. Through her training, DeChellis has learned that trauma affects how the 
brain encodes and accesses memory. She explained that it is not uncommon for a 
sexual assault interviewee to remember some details and not others, or to remember 
more details later. Memories may be recalled non-sequentially. As DeChellis described, 
A person may have difficulty 
recalling specifics of dates and times, but remember how they felt during the events. 
Based upon her training and experience, DeChellis would expect that trauma may 
affect the ability of a person to recall and describe past events. 
52. DeChellis has been trained on factors used to assess credibility. These 
include: corroboration, consistency, plausibility, motives to misrepresent, past record 
or reputation for honesty, and demeanor. At least 90 percent of the sexual harassment 
eyewitness. DeChellis explained that she does not usually rely heavily on character 19 evidence, because even if a person is a pillar of the community, she is looking at their 
behavior in one moment. 
53. DeChellis was retained by Jenkins to investigate two allegations: that 
respondent made students engage in sexually suggestive stretches and exercises 
during PE class; and that respondent solicited and paid S.B. for sex. She used a 
preponderance of the evidence standard in reaching her factual findings. 
54. DeChellis reviewed the notes from the interviews conducted by Jenkins 
and Crawford in September 2023. DeChellis interviewed S.B. in October 2023 and 
interviewed respondent in November 2023. She interviewed D.S. in October 2023, but 
was not able to interview M.H., who had been released from JJC custody. DeChellis 
also interviewed Dr. Moore, teachers Noack and Edwards Robert King, 
Christopher Chatman, and Beatriz Somoza. 
55. DeChellis did not sustain the first allegation, finding that respondent did 
not make students engage in stretches and exercises that were objectively sexually 
suggestive, although students may have felt uncomfortable for other reasons. 
56. After completing her investigation, as described below, DeChellis 
sustained the second allegation, finding by a preponderance of the evidence that 
respondent solicited and paid S.B. for sex on at least one occasion. 
57. In her interview with DeChellis, S.B. stated that respondent approached 
her for sex on International Boulevard, they negotiated a price, and they went to San 
Antonio Park to have sex. S.B. estimated that this occurred about five times in June or 
July 2022. S.B. stated that respondent paid her 
on one occasion he paid her $500 not to tell anyone. S.B. stated that respondent tried 
to have anal sex with her, but that she said no. S.B. reported that she had seen 20 respondent on International Boulevard at other times, and saw him with at least one 
other student, but would not provide that  
S.B. stated that during PE class on September 15, 2023, S.B. said to respondent, 
what you doing on International. He slammed the door and left. 
S.B. stated to DeChellis, 
and that the JJC was supposed to be a  S.B. 
told DeChellis that S.B. did not make the initial report about respondent because she 
did not think she would be believed, and it would be a waste of her time and energy. 
58. In  interview with DeChellis, respondent denied the 
allegations made by S.B. and M.H. Respondent denied paying S.B. to engage in sex 
with him, and denied having sex with S.B. or any other student. Respondent denied 
ever being on International Boulevard apart from his school duties at Bridge Academy, 
and denied seeing any JJC students there. Respondent told DeChellis he had no 
sex trafficking. Respondent 
denied that any student confronted him in PE class and accused him of soliciting sex 
from students. proffered explanation for why M.H. and S.B. might make 
such allegations against him was that both students were failing his PE class. 
59. DeChellis interviewed D.S., who confirmed 
confrontation with respondent in PE class. S.B. was lying on the ground and D.S. was 
walking around because she did not want to jog. Respondent told them to jog. S.B. 
; and respondent got mad and slammed the 
door. D.S. reported that S.B. had told her about having sex with respondent for money. 
D.S.21 International Boulevard and then started exchanging money for sex. D.S. had been 
aware of this since coming to the JJC three years prior. 
60. Dr. Moore described to DeChellis his conversations with M.H. and S.B., 
consistently with his statement to Jenkins and his testimony at hearing. What 
Dr. Moore said was consistent with what S.B. said she had told him, apart from one 
point about whether respondent paid her $200 or $500 to not tell anyone. DeChellis 
did not find this inconsistency negatively  
Dr. Moore told DeChellis he was aware of prostitution occurring on 
International Boulevard. He noted there was an ACOE school site on the Strand, and 
there were many sex workers on the street on the drive to that site. Dr. Moore believed 
that ACOE teachers were aware of sex trafficking on International Boulevard. Dr. 
Moore noted that respondent had been an ACOE teacher for a long time, stating: It 
 Dr. Moore also said the majority 
of the girls detained at the JJC were there because of sex work. 
61. Edwards consistently described to DeChellis the conversations with M.H. 
for which she was present. Edwards said it was common knowledge among teachers at 
the JJC that girls were sexually trafficked on International Boulevard, and many girls in 
the facility had been arrested for sex work there. Edwards did not believe the 
allegations
war  Edwards described respondent as a Christian man, but told 
DeChellis that she did not know him personally. Edwards suggested that respondent 
may have been on International Boulevard volunteering with his church. 
62. Noack consistently described to DeChellis the conversations with M.H. 
for which he was present. Noack said he did not know M.H. very well, but all of their 22 interactions had been positive. Noack reported that S.B. suffered from emotional 
dysregulation and was prone to getting upset, but that he had not seen it as much 
from S.B. during her most recent stay at the JJC. Noack praised respondent as being 
kind, thoughtful, having integrity, and trying to instill a good work ethic in students. In 
student  reports of seeing respondent on International Boulevard could 
be a case of mistaken identity for another white man. 
63. JIO King and JIO Somoza confirmed in their interviews with DeChellis that 
it was common knowledge that sex trafficking occurred on International Boulevard. 
King stated he would 
engaged in prostitution there. King noted that he had heard boys and girls talk about 
International Boulevard a lot. King described S.B. and M.H. as having troubled pasts 
and displaying behavior issues at times, but also stated that for the most part they 
listened and followed directions. 
64. DeChellis found S.B. credible in her allegations, and found respondent 
not credible in his denials, for reasons that DeChellis discussed at some length in her 
report and testimony. 
65. DeChellis found 
remained consistent over time in her interviews by multiple different people. While 
there were some inconsistencies, the main details remained the same. DeChellis noted 
that allegations were corroborated by M.H., who relayed to multiple people that 
respondent solicited M.H. and S.B., and that S.B. had accepted; and were corroborated 
by D.S., who had seen respondent on International Boulevard. DeChellis considered 
whether S.B. had a motive to make false allegations against respondent and concluded 
that she did not. It was M.H., not S.B., who initiated a report to adults. If S.B. were 
making a false allegation against respondent to retaliate for a poor grade in PE, she 23 would have been the one to bring forward the complaint. Instead, it was M.H. who 
shared it with adults in a moment of annoyance. This did not seem to DeChellis like a 
calculated plan. In addition, both S.B. and M.H. were set to leave the JJC soon after the 
allegations were made, undermining any motive related to future PE grades from 
respondent. DeChellis also considered the power imbalance between incarcerated 
students and an adult teacher, when evaluating the delay in reporting and the manner 
in which the allegations surfaced, and found these plausible and not undermining to 
 
66. DeChellis found  DeChellis 
gave significant weight to denial of any knowledge of sex trafficking on 
International Boulevard, which she found not credible and implausible, given 
statements from multiple ACOE and JJC staff that such activity was common 
knowledge. DeChellis also gave weight to 
from S.B. during PE class, noting that the reports of the students were all consistent. 
67. DeChellis 
character, but found those not to be probative of whether respondent had engaged in 
the alleged conduct. DeChellis noted that none of the adults described any negative 
interactions with or animus toward respondent, and she thus gave greater weight to 
the information they did provide about the reputation of International Boulevard. 
DeChellis considered the mistaken identity theory offered by Noack and 
PE grades theory for supposedly false allegations, but did not find these persuasive. 
S TESTIMONY AT HEARING 
68. S.B. stated that she first encountered respondent on the Blade when she 
was about age 12, although she was not sure about the exact timing. S.B. was standing 24 near D.S. in the back streets one afternoon near the Foothill Missionary Baptist Church, 
and saw respondent handing out wellness kits. S.B. went to get a bag, and respondent 
asked her about her prices and services. Respondent and S.B. recognized each other 
from the JJC. At hearing, S.B. explained that she knew respondent recognized her, 
because he called her by her nickname. 
and she agreed.  truck and he drove them a short distance, 
to an area near the soccer field at San Antonio Park. (At hearing, S.B. referred to a map 
and indicated this was in an alley or dead-end street near the soccer field.) 
Respondent parked the truck and put up something to cover the windshield, and they 
got into the backseat. S.B. performed oral sex on respondent, and they had vaginal 
sex. Respondent brought his own condom. Respondent tried to have anal sex with S.B. 
but she refused. Respondent paid S.B. $500, more than her usual price, because she 
knew respondent from the JJC and he paid her extra to stay quiet. 
69. S.B. testified that this was not the only time she 
respondent, estimating she had sex with respondent for money between five and 10 
times, usually on weekend afternoons. 
70. S.B. described one occasion when she was with M.H. on the Blade. 
Respondent approached S.B. and M.H. and solicited them both, with M.H. also 
recognizing him from the JJC. S.B. agreed to the date, respondent again parked near 
San Antonio Park, and they had sex. (At hearing, S.B. referred to the map and 
identified an area farther along the street that borders the park.) S.B. explained that 
she often took her dates to locations near the park because there were people nearby 
if she needed to call for help. 
71. S.B. provided other details from her 
occasions, respondent texted S.B. to arrange a meeting. On one occasion, respondent 25 was driving S.B. back to her usual location and S.B. plugged her phone into his vehicle 
to play music that she preferred instead of the rock music he had been playing. On 
one occasion, respondent showed S.B. a photograph of his wife, who has dark skin. 
S.B. stated that respondent used more than one different car during their encounters. 
72. At hearing, S.B. stated respondent usually paid her $500, more than her 
usual price, although once he paid $200 for a short visit. Respondent always paid cash. 
73. S.B. . 
She had a daily quota of $1,000 imposed by her pimp, who beat her if she did not 
meet it. Violence was something S.B. experienced often while being trafficked. 
74. S.B. discussed in her testimony how it felt to see respondent in PE class at 
 
.However, S.B. did not initiate a report about respondent. S.B. was upset 
that M.H. had made a disclosure to adults on her behalf, stating: 
I felt worthless. I feel like nasty, disgusted. I feel scared. I 
feel like who do I come to to talk about this. And I came to 
my friend. And she just told on me that I did  I really felt 
embarrass[ed] after that, because that hurts my heart, you 
know. Like it makes me feel disgusted. I have to go to 
therapy everyday for this. 
S.B. stated that respondent had paid her not to tell anyone, and she was scared. She 
conceded, however, that respondent had not threatened her. S.B. denied that she was 
gaining anything by testifying about her experiences with respondent. When asked 
how it felt to testify, she replied that it felt . 26 75. S.B. described an incident in PE class, when the students were outside on 
the blacktop. Respondent got mad because the students were not participating in PE 
activities. S.B. , you mess with little girls 
 Respondent turned red, stopped class, and walked out. 
76.  during her testimony was sincere and candid. She was 
emotional at times, but was neither evasive or reluctant, nor overly enthusiastic. 
TESTIMONY OF OTHER ACOE WITNESSES AT HEARING 
Dr. Moore 
77. Dr. Moore is a school psychologist employed by ACOE. He has 
 counsels 
and advises educators, conducts special education testing and assessments, 
participates in IEP meetings, and provides group therapy to students. 
78. Dr. Moore works at multiple ACOE sites, including the JJC and Bridge 
Academy. Dr. Moore described his awareness that sex trafficking occurs on 
International Boulevard, with sex workers visible in the neighborhood of Bridge 
Academy, and his awareness that many youth at the JJC have been trafficked there. 
79. Dr. Moore described M.H. as a sweet, kind girl willing to support friends 
and family, but stated that her meekness is often mistaken as a sign of weakness. M.H. 
drug abuse, and the grandparents 
told Dr. Moore that M.H. engaged in illegal activity to please her mother. 
80. Dr. Moore described S.B. as having been a victim of sexual assault in a 
group home, and being trafficked for sex. S.B. had a hard time trusting strangers, and 
had behavioral issues that interfered with her ability to access education. 27 81.
consistently with his prior statements. It is not unusual for students to have personality 
conflicts with teachers. But, this is the first report of suspected child abuse by an ACOE 
employee that he has encountered. Dr. Moore stated that S.B. was upset to discuss the 
allegations and had not had the courage to volunteer the information previously, and 
that M.H. did it on her behalf. 
82. Dr. Moore stated that students at the JJC typically have problems earning 
a high school diploma in a timely manner, and most of their students age 16 or older 
who are enrolled in court schools end up becoming eligible for AB 2306, which allows 
graduation with reduced credit requirements. Both M.H. and S.B. were eligible. Dr. 
Moore noted that students eligible for AB 2306 have credit deficiencies across multiple 
subjects, and it would not be just one subject holding them back from graduating. 
(Noack also confirmed in his testimony that, upon a review of their transcripts, PE was 
not the only course that would hold M.H. or S.B. back from graduating.) 
83. Dr. Moore testified credibly about the psychological effect of trauma, 
based on his education, training and experience as a psychologist. Dr. Moore 
explained that a subtype of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) involves dissociation 
as a response to stress and trauma, including lapses in memory or disorientation. 
Dr. Moore opined that it would be reasonable for S.B. or M.H. to have gaps or 
inconsistencies in their memories, based on his understanding of their backgrounds. 
Atkins-Loria 
84. Atkins-Loria is a social worker employed by the Alameda County Public 
worker for a couple of years while M.H. was in and out of the JJC. Atkins-Loria 28 provided support while M.H. was in custody, including checking in with M.H., talking to 
her family, and attending meetings such as IEP meetings. 
85. Atkins-Loria described the events on the day of 
consistently with Dr. Moore. M.H. was criticized for not participating in PE. M.H. asked 
to speak to Atkins-Loria privately, and stated she had issues with the PE teacher 
involving another youth on the unit. Eventually M.H. disclosed that respondent had 
been engaging in commercial sexual activity with another girl on the unit from the 
time that girl was much younger. Atkins- conversation with 
M.H., S.B., and Dr. Moore was consistent, paid sexual encounters with 
respondent on the Blade occurred over a period of time, since S.B. was much younger. 
86. Atkins-Loria remained to offer support to M.H. after Dr. Moore stepped 
out to make telephone calls and report the disclosures. Atkins-Loria described M.H. as 
being upset and uncomfortable in the way that you might expect when disclosing 
information like that.  
JIO King 
87. JIO King has worked with detained youth at the JJC and Camp Sweeney 
since 2007. King did not observe any inappropriate behavior from respondent during 
PE classes, and had not heard any prior specific complaints against respondent from 
students, apart from students saying they did not want to exercise. 
88. In his testimony, King described the disclosures made to him by M.H. and 
S.B. on the day of the IEP meeting (see Factual Finding 42). 
89. King is aware that International Boulevard is an area where female youth 
are sexually trafficked, and that it is called the Blade. He has been aware of this for 29 some time from working with detained youth, noting that it is part of his job to know 
the language used by youth in the facilities. 
Jenkins 
90. Jenkins confirmed that S.B., M.H., and D.S. had never submitted any other 
complaints about other ACOE staff members. 
91. Jenkins also confirmed that respondent had no prior discipline as an 
ACOE employee, and no prior complaints lodged against him. 
RESPONDENT S TESTIMONY AT HEARING ABOUT THE ALLEGATIONS  
92. Respondent denied soliciting S.B. or M.H. for sex. Respondent denied 
having sex with S.B. or any other student, and denied ever paying any person for sex. 
He denied seeing M.H. or D.S. outside of the JJC, and denied any contact with S.B. 
outside the JJC including by telephone or text. Respondent agrees it is unacceptable 
for an adult teacher to pay a minor student for sex. 
93. Respondent testified that he has always behaved professionally and 
appropriately with students. 
94. Respondent denied 
reputation for prostitution or commercial sex prior to being asked about it during the 
investigation. Respondent denied ever handing out wellness kits on International 
Boulevard, and stated he has never been to San Antonio Park. He denied ever seeing 
S.B. or M.H. at either location. Respondent stated he had never heard the area referred 
to as the Blade, the Strip, or the Strand, and said he never heard any students at the 
JJC or Camp Sweeney talk about those terms. Respondent was aware of the term 
 Sweeney use it. While 30 working at the JJC, respondent had heard that some students had engaged in 
commercial sex when not in custody, but he did not know which students. 
95. Respondent denied that any student in PE class ever accused him of 
 or paying for sex. Respondent denied that there was ever any verbal 
altercation with a student during PE class. 
96. Respondent described his schedule and commute when he worked at 
Bridge Academy in 2017 and 2018. Respondent said he did not drive on International 
Boulevard to reach the Bridge Academy school site. He would exit the freeway, drive 
past Laney College parallel to the (I-880) freeway, turn left onto 8th Avenue, and drive 
on that street until reaching the parking lot at Bridge Academy. Respondent usually 
arrived at 6:30 a.m. and stayed on campus all day until leaving at 3:15 p.m. 
97. Respondent provided two short videos of the street near Bridge 
Academy, which he stated were taken by his private investigator at 6:45 a.m. and 
2:00 p.m. on November 8, 2024. The videos were taken by a person walking on foot for 
half a block on 8th Avenue approaching the intersection of International Boulevard. 
There are no scantily clad young women visible in the videos. Respondent stated this is 
what the area looked like when he drove to work at Bridge Academy. 
98. Respondent also discussed his visits to Bridge Academy in 2021 and 2022 
for COVID testing. Respondent stated that when he first started testing at the Winton 
Avenue site, the lines were lengthy and he had to wait 30 minutes, making him late for 
his 1:00 p.m. class. Respondent said this was why he changed to the Bridge Academy 
testing location (which is twice as far away from the JJC as Winton Avenue is). 
Respondent drove to Bridge Academy from the JJC weekly for testing at 
lunchtime. He stated that he would drive there by taking the I-580 freeway, exiting and 31 driving on 14th Avenue to Foothill Boulevard (which is one-way), and turning left on 
8th Avenue to approach Bridge Academy. Sometimes respondent would park at the 
Baptist Church located at 8th Avenue and E. 15th Street. Respondent stated that on his 
return to the JJC, he would drive back toward the freeway on E. 15th Street because it 
was one-way. Respondent stated he only drove down International Boulevard toward 
the freeway once, because he found that the previously described route was faster. 
99. Respondent acknowledged having driven on International Boulevard a 
couple of times from Bridge Academy to go to the Salvation Army store downtown. 
100. Respondent stated that S.B. was his student in summer 2021 during her 
sophomore year, and again at times in the 2022 and 2023 school years. Respondent 
and got 
passing grades at first, but the last time before coming back in 2023, she got a D. She 
was not participating in PE class in the fall of 2023, with respondent stating S.B. had 
gotten all zeros up to the mid-term grade. 
101. Respondent stated that M.H. was his student in 2022, and again in 2023. 
Respondent described M.H. as not -aggressive. M.H. was not 
participating in PE class starting in August 2023. 
102. Respondent told S.B. and M.H. in September 2023 that they had to 
participate in PE class and that they had not gotten any points yet. He described each 
girl as making a face and walking off, but not saying anything to him. 
103. Respondent has not been arrested or charged with a crime. Respondent 
stated that he was contacted by an Oakland Police Department detective and that he 
agreed to attend an interview, but that he did not actually do so on advice of counsel. 32  
104. On April 2, 2024, Jenkins issued a notice of investigation findings to 
respondent, summarizing the factual findings of the investigation conducted by 
DeChellis, and stating the allegation of soliciting and paying for sex was sustained. 
Jenkins went on to list the sections of the Education Code, Penal Code, and board 
policies that Jenkins concluded respondent had violated. 
105. Based on the results of the investigation, Jenkins determined that ACOE 
needed to pursue dismissal of respondent, and recommended that action to Castro. In 
of dismissal. Jenkins found that respondent violated board policies about a safe and 
positive school climate, sexual harassment, and inappropriate adult-student 
interactions. Educators must maintain professional and ethical standards with students 
inside and outside the classroom, and not engage in romance or sex with a student. 
good morals, jeopardized 
student safety and trust, and violated a teacher  responsibility to ensure a safe 
learning environment. She also stated that such conduct undermines the teaching 
profession and public trust in teachers. She believes respondent is unfit to teach. 
Jenkins is concerned for student well-being if respondent were returned to the 
classroom, noting that ACOE serves a vulnerable student population, and sometimes 
school is only safe space. 
106. Castro testified about 
its students, and her conclusion that respondent must be dismissed. Castro 
persuasively described the impact on students with prior trauma history, who cannot 
learn if they do not feel safe, and who are incarcerated and compelled to attend class. 
Castro 33 allegations raised by M.H. and S.B., and that students are watching to see if a student 
bringing forth such an allegation is believed. 
107. Castro also explained that, although in her experience many student 
complaints turn out to have no basis, in this case it seems extraordinarily implausible  
to her that S.B. and M.H. would make false allegations against respondent. Castro 
noted these students have deep history of victimization
whom they could make legitimate accusations, but she emphasized: 
these are young people who are steeped in the culture of 
silence. And they don't talk about things that they should 
talk about all the time because they deeply mistrust 
authority figures and they deeply mistrust that the entities 
to whom they report are going to believe them. [¶] So, like, 
there's no  there's nothing in it for them to make a false 
accusation. They have nothing to gain and everything to 
lose from bringing an allegation like this. 
108. Castro stated that if she were required to return respondent to the 
classroom, she would have to ensure that another ACOE staff member was present at 
all times, and even so there would be an adverse impact on student trust. 
Castro also described the negative impact of returning respondent to the 
classroom public agency and community partners. 
When serving detained students in court schools, ACOE is working in facilities run by 
the Probation Department, and its staff and leaders must trust ACOE with the youth 
for whom they share responsibility. She also noted that there are additional legal 
obligations to protect incarcerated youth from abuse. ACOE also must maintain the 34 trust of community partners and other public agencies in serving its student 
population. 
 
109. Respondent and his wife described  hobbies and activities 
when he is not teaching or coaching. After work or on weekends, if respondent is not 
coaching sports, he works on home improvement projects or shops at thrift stores, 
antique shops, or construction salvage stores. He watches television in the evenings. 
Respondent and his wife attend church together on Sunday mornings. They do not 
perform church volunteer work at any off-site locations. 
110. Respondent stated that he is 
never gone for more than two hours outside of work or coaching. She acknowledged 
that she is not with him at all times. 
111. Respondent and his wife testified that controls their 
household finances, and she frequently monitors the status of their shared bank 
accounts. Respondent and his wife provided bank, credit card, and Venmo statements. 
R  or withdrawals that she did not 
recognize. They stated they do not keep much cash on hand, paying only a few service 
providers in cash. Both respondent and his wife acknowledged that cash may be 
withdrawn from point-of-sale terminals at various stores where they regularly shop. 
112. Respondent provided his teaching evaluation from the 2015-2016 school 
year, when he worked at the JJC as a floater and substitute teacher. He received a 
, with positive comments from the evaluator. 35 CHARACTER WITNESSES AND LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION  
113. Noack testified that he worked with respondent at the JJC, found him to 
be of good character, and had not witnessed any inappropriate interactions with 
students. 
114. Edwards has been a teacher at ACOE for more than 20 years, and she 
teaches all subjects except PE to girls at the JJC. She has heard girls on the unit talk 
about the Strip and is aware that some girls are involved in commercial sex. Edwards 
stated she has caught students being dishonest many times, providing as an example 
a student saying that someone had taken off  which had not happened. 
Edwards described M.H. as affable and nice, and stated that if M.H. says 
something and you question her, she will retract it if it was not true. Edwards described 
S.B. as . 
Edwards did not believe the allegations made by M.H. and S.B. She believes that 
the students did not like respondent because he was a white teacher and made them 
work hard for their grades, and she has told students not to be prejudiced and that 
respondent has a black wife. Edwards confirmed that neither M.H. nor S.B. had made 
complaints against any other teachers or JJC staff. 
Edwards has known respondent for more than 10 years. She has observed his PE 
class and has not seen anything unprofessional. Edwards offered detailed testimony 
about how she and respondent would hang out  and talk together while working at 
the JJC, discussing church and their shared religion and beliefs, and how respondent 
shared his life story with some students. She described respondent as a godly person. 
This testimony is in conflict with what Edwards told DeChellis, that respondent was a 36 Christian man but she did not know him personally, and this inconsistency diminishes 
her credibility. 
115. Respondent called several additional ACOE or Probation Department 
employees as character witnesses. 
(a) George Hoss has been a teacher at ACOE for 29 years; he now teaches 
boys at the JJC. Hoss has known students to lie, offering as an example a student 
copying off another  Hoss worked with respondent for 15 or 16 years. 
During the COVID pandemic shelter-in-place, respondent picked 
work weekly and brought house for grading. Once respondent repaired 
Hoss described respondent as a good role model for students. Hoss is 
aware that International Boulevard is known for commercial sex, and has heard 
students call it the Blade. 
(b) Robert Butler recently retired after 24 years as an ACOE paraeducator, 
including working at Camp Sweeney and the JJC. Butler stated that students are 
dishonest every day, offering examples such as students lying about having prohibited 
items in the classroom. He had many conversations with respondent at work. Butler 
has not witnessed any inappropriate behavior by respondent. Some students 
complained about respondent because they did not like doing PE exercises. Butler 
 
(c) Arthur Hogenauer is an ACOE teacher who has taught boys at the JJC for 
the last two to three years. He stated students in his class lie daily, such as lying about 
their progress on class assignments or hacking the computer system to change grades. 
He 
Hogenauer and respondent became friends and often had wide-ranging conversations 37 in the JJC parking lot after work. Hogenauer stated that he was unaware of prostitution 
on International Boulevard prior to the allegations being made against respondent, 
although he did see such activity last year. 
(d) Lucy Arevalo has worked as an ACOE office assistant at the 
JJC since 2012, and interacted with respondent daily. She described respondent as a 
responsible employee and a polite and respectful coworker. Arevalo was not very 
familiar with International Boulevard, but heard from teachers who work in the area 
that they saw prostitutes on the street while walking from the BART station to school. 
(e) Veronica Olivares works for ACOE as a student information systems 
analyst, and has known respondent from the JJC for 10 years. Olivares described 
respondent as a professional and respectful coworker. 
(f) Donald John Young has worked for the Probation Department for over 
40 years. He is currently an Institutional Supervisor at Camp Sweeney and formerly 
worked at the JJC. Young was the liaison between the Probation Department and 
ACOE when respondent taught at Camp Sweeney. He last worked with respondent 
eight to 10 years ago, including coaching a football team at Camp Sweeney. Young 
occasionally saw respondent outside of work at high school football games in 
Oakland. r as good, caring, and firm but fair. 
Young wrote respondent a letter of recommendation in 2014 and stands by it. 
(g) Irven Lamar Hill worked for over 20 years as a JIO at the JJC and Camp 
Sweeney. Hill stated that he has known students to lie, for example, students saying 
that contraband in their room was not theirs. Hill has known respondent since 2010 or 
2012, and they worked together at Camp Sweeney and the JJC. Respondent 38 occasionally Hill praised 
respondent as professional, caring, and encouraging to youth. 
116. Respondent also offered several other character witnesses. 
(a) Josue Valdez more than 
10 years ago. Valdez kept in touch with Camp Sweeney teachers who supported his 
pursuit of education. He matters such as 
enrolling in school. Valdez spoke to 
while Valdez was in school to become an emergency medical technician. Respondent 
described respondent as patient, not quick to anger, and offering good advice. 
(b) Benjamin Ballard is the athletic director and head football coach at 
Northgate High School, and knows respondent from coaching at Northgate. Ballard 
saw no inappropriate behavior from respondent. He described respondent as 
responsible, and a leader who talked with students about moral accountability. Ballard 
 
Ballard wrote respondent a letter of recommendation some years ago. 
(c) Michael McClellan recently retired after teaching for 42 years at Walnut 
Creek Christian Academy . Respondent 
McClellan respects respondent as a professional. 
(d) Cheryl Schierman 
taught together in Idaho from 1996 to 2005. Cheryl and her husband 
Schierman  They have seen 
respondent for visits on a few occasions after respondent moved to California in 2005. 39 Cheryl described respondent as deeply religious and invested in troubled kids. Butch 
described respondent as an honorable person who tries to align his life to biblical 
standards; he trusts respondent implicitly. 
(e) Alan Williams and Bette Williams know respondent from teaching and 
coaching in Idaho. Alan and respondent taught and coached together at Nampa 
Christian, and they remained in touch after respondent moved to California, primarily 
by telephone and text messages. Alan described respondent as professional and of 
impeccable character. Bette is a nurse who volunteered to provide health education, 
. She described 
respondent as being a man of integrity, kind, and effective with kids. 
117. character witnesses generally expressed disbelief that he 
could commit the acts he was accused of, but agreed that if the allegations against 
him were true, that respondent should not be employed as a teacher. 
118. Former JJC Principal Crawford wrote an undated letter of 
recommendation for respondent
resilience. 
119. Dan Hawkins, head football coach at Boise State University, wrote a letter 
of recommendation for respondent in 2002. He described respondent as a person of 
moral fiber who cares about his students and athletes. 
Credibility Findings and Ultimate Factual Findings 
120. Weighing all of the factors relevant to the credibility of S.B. and of 
that of respondent as to the key allegations in this matter. 40 121. reports to multiple people 
and over time remained consistent in their main details: respondent solicited her for 
sex in the area of International Boulevard, respondent knew her from the JJC, 
respondent had sex with her for money, and he paid her extra to keep quiet. There 
about the timeframe for these encounters, 
the number of times they occurred, and amounts paid, but the Commission did not 
find these to 
sexual encounters with respondent, dating back several years before the allegations 
surfaced, was part of her reports from the beginning, as confirmed by the testimony of 
Atkins-Loria and Dr. Moore. Moreover, the testimony of Dr. Moore and DeChellis was 
persuasive as to the effect of trauma on memory, offering a reasonable explanation for 
some gaps or inconsistencies. 
The testimony of S.B. was corroborated in several respects by M.H. and D.S., 
who did not testify at hearing but whose hearsay statements may be considered 
pursuant to Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d). M.H. corroborated that 
respondent solicited her and S.B. in the area of International Boulevard and that S.B. 
went on a date with respondent. D.S. saw respondent on International Boulevard, and 
corroborated that S.B. said she had sex with respondent. M.H. and D.S. corroborated 
that S.B. had verbally accused respondent in PE class of buying sex. 
the call with police dispatch was consistent with that of a witness telling the truth, 
rather than a witness who was fabricating. 
The evidence did not establish a motive for either S.B. or M.H. to fabricate their 
allegations against respondent. S.B. was not the one who first brought the allegations 
forward. In fact, S.B. was upset that her friend M.H. had betrayed her confidence by 41 making the disclosure to adults at the IEP meeting. If S.B. were making up a false story 
for purposes of gain or retaliation against respondent, it is reasonable to assume that 
she would have raised it herself. osure 
suggest that it was not planned in advance. This also argues against fabrication. 
Respondent suggests that S.B. and M.H. made up false allegations because they were 
failing his PE class. However, both S.B. and M.H. were set to leave the JJC soon after 
making the allegations against respondent this undermines any suggested motive 
about wanting to affect their PE grades. Moreover, PE was not the only class holding 
back either student from graduation. Lastly, neither student made any complaints 
against other teachers, despite credit deficiencies in other subjects, or against JJC staff. 
These factors support truthfulness, rather than a tendency to lodge false allegations. 
Contrary to the lack of a plausible motive to lie, S.B. had strong disincentives to 
make allegations against respondent and to maintain them consistently for more than 
a year, long after she left the custody of the JJC. As compellingly explained by Castro, 
detained youth at the JJC are steeped in a culture of silence. S.B. did not make an 
initial report because she did not think she would be believed, and as she explained at 
hearing, she was scared to come forward
nothing to gain by her testimony. 
122. Multiple factors rendered respondent less credible. 
of any knowledge that International Boulevard was known for sex trafficking was not 
plausible, given the abundant evidence (even from his own witnesses) that this was 
common knowledge. This seriously undermined his credibility. 
to explain why he had no idea about this plainly visible sex trafficking activity, despite 
his months working at Bridge Academy, and his approximately 40 lunchtime visits to 
that location for COVID testing, are strained and not persuasive. 42 also not credible, given the corroboration of  
lying, 
either in retaliation for getting bad PE grades or in an attempt to improve them, is not 
plausible, for the reasons explained above. Moreover, the examples of other JJC 
 (apparently to support an 
argument that the students in this case must also be lying), were typical examples of 
petty, impulsive teenage untruths, rather than significant and ongoing fabrications. 
whereabouts, and his finances has little probative value. The character evidence 
is given little weight, and has no probative value as 
to whether respondent engaged in misconduct that by its nature would be kept secret. 
123. A preponderance of the evidence established that respondent repeatedly 
solicited S.B., a minor who was his student when she was detained at the JJC, for 
commercial sex; repeatedly engaged in sex with S.B. and paid her for such sexual 
activity; and on one occasion solicited S.B. along with M.H., another minor JJC student. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. ACOE has the burden of proof in this matter, and the standard of proof in 
a teacher dismissal hearing is a preponderance of the evidence. (
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1038-1040.) The 
 
 (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1387-1388), or that the evidence has more 
convincing force than that opposed to it (see BAJI No. 2.60). 43 Statutory Grounds for Dismissal 
2. Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a), provides that a permanent 
employee shall not be dismissed except for one or more of the causes set forth in that 
subdivision. The causes alleged in this matter are immoral conduct, including but not 
limited to egregious misconduct ( , subd. (a)(1)), and evident unfitness for service ( , 
subd. (a)(6).) 
3. In a proceeding  dismissal for cause, a Commission 
on Professional Competence may only vote for or against the dismissal; the 
Commission may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or 
an alternative sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subd. (d)(1) & (3).
(, subd. (d)(4).) The Commission has broad discretion in determining what 
constitutes unfitness to teach, and whether dismissal is the appropriate sanction. 
(  (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343-344; 
 (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220-222.) 
IMMORAL CONDUCT, INCLUDING EGREGIOUS MISCONDUCT  
4. ACOE seeks to dismiss respondent for immoral conduct, including but 
not limited to, egregious misconduct, pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1). The statute defines egregious misconduct as 
is the basis for an offense described in Section 44010 [a list of enumerated sex 
offenses] or 44011 [controlled substance offenses] of this code, or in Sections 11165.2 
Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1).) 
includes Penal Code section 261.5 (unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor). 44 5. Immoral conduct has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immoral conduct is not 
confined to sexual matters. It includes conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and conduct showing an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (
 (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 811.) The 
definition of immoral conduct 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed responsibilities and 
 (2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466 [quotation marks and citation omitted].) 
 of 
 (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327. It includes conduct that is hostile 
to the welfare of the school community; 
44932 when it negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the 
teacher is unfit to teach. (  at p. 337, citing  
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224.) 
6. As set forth in Factual Finding 123, a preponderance of the evidence 
established that respondent solicited minor students for commercial sex, and 
repeatedly engaged in commercial sex with a minor student. These are plainly acts 
constituting immoral conduct. R , which included sexual 
intercourse with a minor, also meets the statutory definition of egregious misconduct. 
Cause exists to dismiss respondent for immoral conduct and for egregious misconduct 
under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). 45 EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
7. Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), provides that a 
permanent employee may be dismissed for evident unfitness for service. Evident 
unfitness for service means clearly not fit or suitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason 
of a temperamental defect or inadequacy. (
 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term 
connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 
ctations of the employing school 
() 
8. A preponderance of the evidence established that respondent repeatedly 
solicited and engaged in sex with a minor (Factual Finding 123), and this repeated 
misconduct established that respondent is evidently unfit for service. Cause exists to 
dismiss respondent under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 
Analysis of the  Factors 
9. The ultimate question in this case is whether respondent is unfit to teach 
under the factors established by the California Supreme Court in 
 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230. The factors are: (1) the 
likelihood that the conduct in question may have adversely affected students or fellow 
teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 
in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (6) the 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the 
likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (8) the extent to which 
disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 46 constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. Only the pertinent 
factors must be addressed. (
 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) The factors may be applied to all of the 
proven conduct in the aggregate. (  2 
Cal.App.4th at pp. 1456-1457.) 
10. Application of the pertinent  factors in this matter demonstrates 
that respondent is unfit to teach. The conduct in question adversely affected ACOE 
, 
and adversely affects the ACOE community at large, as persuasively explained by 
Castro. The degree of such adversity is severe. The conduct occurred over a period of 
time and recently. There are no extenuating circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
which is aggravated by its very serious (and illegal) nature. 
blameworthy. These factors all weigh heavily in favor of a determination that 
 
Disposition 
11. Although the Commission has found cause to dismiss respondent, the 
Commission has discretion to decline to dismiss him. (
 (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 222.) 
Respondent does have positive qualities as an educator, as evidenced by a 
positive performance review and a teaching award, the testimony of a former student 
and some colleagues, and a lack of prior discipline. These factors, however, do not 
. 
The Commission determined that  appropriate 
disposition in this matter. 4712. The Commission determined that cause exists to dismiss respondent 
based on immoral conduct, including egregious misconduct, and evident unfitness for 
service. Each ground for dismissal provides a separate and independent basis for 
dismissal. The Commission reached this decision on a unanimous vote.
ORDER
Respondent Matthew Campbell is hereby dismissed from his position as a 
permanent certificated employee of the Alameda County Office of Education.
DATE:
ALAYNA CARTER
Commission Member
DATE:
KELLY COOPER
Commission Member
DATE:
HOLLY M. BALDWIN
Commission Chair
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
 