BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
DONALD LOPERENA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2024110033 
DECISION 
This matter was heard by videoconference on March 17 through 20, 2025, 
before a Commission on Professional Competence for the Los Angeles Unified School 
District (Commission). The Commission consisted of Ray Alcala, Mark Hanke, and Julie 
Cabos Owen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California. The Los Angeles Unified School District (District)
was represented by Brian Davenport, Assistant General Counsel II, with the Office of 
the General Counsel for the District. Donald Loperena (Respondent) appeared and was 
represented by Jason Wojciechowski, Attorney at Law with Bush Gottlieb.
Pursuant to a Protective Order, dated March 18, 2025, Exhibit K was placed 
under seal to protect confidential information. 2 Testimony and documentary evidence was received. The matter was submitted 
for decision on March 20, 2025. 
The Commission on Professional Competence considered the matter in 
executive session. After due consideration of the entire record, the Commission makes 
the following factual findings, legal conclusions, and order.
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Parties and Jurisdiction 
1. At all relevant times, Respondent was a permanent certificated employee 
of the District, assigned as a physical education (PE) teacher at John F. Kennedy High 
School (JFKHS). 
2. On January 12, 2024, Respondent received a Notice of Unsatisfactory 
Acts and Notice of Suspension. 
3. On August 28, 2024, Francisco J. Serrato, Ed.D., in his official capacity as 
Chief Human Resources Officer for the District, filed the Statement of Charges (SOC) 
against Respondent.
4. On September 12, 2024, Respondent was served with the following 
documents: a Notice of Board of Education Intention to Dismiss and Placement on 
Immediate Unpaid Suspension (Notice of Intent to Dismiss), dated September 11, 
2024; a copy of the SOC; a blank Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense; and 
copies of the relevant Education Code and Government Code sections. The Notice of 
Intention to Dismiss informed Respondent the District’s Board of Education intended 
to dismiss him in 30 days unless he requested a hearing. 3 5. On about September 25, 2024, Respondent filed and served a Notice of
Defense requesting a hearing. 
District Policies and Training 
6. Respondent has been trained on and is familiar with the substance of
District policies including the following: Resolution to Enforce the Respectful 
Treatment of all Persons (Exhibit 19); Code of Conduct with Students (Exhibit 20); 
Employee Code of Ethics (Exhibit 21); Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting 
Requirements (Exhibit 22); Non-Discrimination And Anti-Harassment (Including Sexual 
Harassment) Policy And Complaint Procedure (Exhibit 23); Abolition of Corporal 
Punishment (Exhibit 24); Discipline Foundation Policy: Multi-Tiered Systems of Support 
for Behavior and Social-Emotional Well-Being using Positive Behavior Interventions 
and Supports/Restorative Practices (Exhibit 25); Bullying and Hazing Policy (Exhibit 26); 
and Teaching and Learning Framework (Exhibit 28). 
7. Respondent is also familiar with the California Standards for the Teaching
Profession published by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. (Exhibit 
27.) 
8. Respondent acknowledged he must comply with District polices and
California standards. He affirmed he strives to do so. Witnesses at Hearing 
9. The SOC alleges Respondent engaged in misconduct witnessed by
several JFKHS female students: K  A., M  A., N  M., D  A., K  A., 
M  A., and L  S. (The students are identified by first names and last initials to 
protect their privacy.) (N  M. is misidentified as “N  M.” in the SOC.)
4 10. K  A., D  A., K  A., and M  A. did not testify at the 
hearing. 
11. M  A. and N  M. testified at the hearing. For reasons set forth 
below, their testimony was occasionally vague or inconsistent with other evidence. 
Additionally, their original written statements (discussed below) were tainted by their 
potential motivation to preempt negative consequences of cheating in Respondent’s 
running class. Consequently, M  A.’s and N  M.’s credibility as witnesses was 
diminished. 
12. L  S. testified at the hearing. As set forth below, her testimony was 
vague and inconsistent. Consequently, L  S.’s credibility was diminished. 
13. E  M. testified at the hearing. She was not one of the students 
identified in the SOC. However, she was friends with N  M. and K  A., who 
were in Respondent’s Period 1 PE class with her, as well as D  A. and K  A. 
Although E  M. presented as a more candid witness (admitting she and other 
students cheated in Respondent’s running class), her responses were often vague and 
somewhat inconsistent. Additionally, her original written statement was tainted by her 
potential motivation to preempt negative consequences of cheating in Respondent’s 
running class. Consequently, E  M.’s credibility was somewhat lessened. 
14. Respondent testified at the administrative hearing in an earnest and 
forthright manner. While Respondent was motivated to preserve his job, his testimony 
was not discredited. Rather, his testimony on certain counts was corroborated by 
fellow JFKHS PE department faculty members, Kevin Kanemura, Christian Carbajal, and 
Leslie Thompson. Thus, Respondent presented as a generally credible witness. 
5 District’s Investigation
15. On May 3, 2023, K  A., M  A., N  M., and E  M. went to 
JFKHS Assistant Principal (AP) Natalie Petrossian’s office to collectively report 
Respondent had touched female students in a way that made them feel 
uncomfortable. AP Petrossian had the girls provide separate written statements about 
their complaints. 
16. In their May 3, 2023 written statements, E  M. and K  A. reported 
Respondent touched K ’s upper arm while she was using the pull-down machine 
in the weight room (Exhibits 30 and 36); M  A. and N  M. reported Respondent 
touched M  A.’s waist for a moment while they were playing volleyball so he “could 
move himself” (Exhibits 33 and 34); N  M. reported Respondent “position[ed]” her 
while she played goalie during soccer by “grabbing [her] lower shoulder [and] 
standing really close to [her] from behind [and] his hands would slide up [and] down 
[her] arms”(Exhibit 34); and N  M. also reported Respondent calls his female 
students “my girls.” (.)
17. In the weeks following May 3, 2023, AP Petrossian interviewed many
additional students regarding Respondent’s behavior in class. AP Petrossian did not
interview Respondent or any other faculty members about the allegations.
18. In the interim, at 8:15 a.m., on May 4, 2023, Principal Oscar Vazquez and 
AP Sim Kim met with Respondent. During that meeting, Principal Vazquez informed 
Respondent that a female student, K  A., reported Respondent inappropriately 
touched her. Principal Vazquez reminded Respondent not to interfere with the 
investigation and to maintain appropriate behavior. 
6 19. Respondent was shocked and crushed by the allegation he had 
inappropriately touched a female student. As he was walking back to his office, 
Respondent recalled that he had caught several students cheating in class the day 
before. 
20. At 11:08 a.m., on May 4, 2023, Respondent sent Principal Vazquez an 
email discussing the allegation just leveled against him about touching a female 
student. Respondent’s email stated, in pertinent part:
[A]s you can imagine, I was fuming inside. I pride myself 
on my ethics and professional prudence to avoid any such 
embarrassing accusation, however, we live in a broken 
world. I am sorry you have to deal with this as well but 
please know I have no hard feelings for you "doing your 
job". It didn't come to mind this morning but K  and a 
number of other students were caught cheating on the 
jog/walk yesterday and all were given zeros. I am 
wondering if this accusation is a retaliation in hopes of 
preventing a call home or just due to the frustration of 
being caught. Just food for thought. 
Either way, I am in full support and of course will fully
cooperate in this investigation. . . . 
(Exhibit 13, p. A153.) 
7 21. Meanwhile, AP Petrossian continued to obtain written statements from
students. Two students in Respondent’s Period 3 class reported Respondent told 
students they had slutty mouths. On May 4, 2023, V  P. wrote, “[Respondent] 
called a group of girls sluty [ ] mouths because they were say[ing] bad words” 
(Exhibit 40). On May 11, 2023, M  A. wrote, “[Respondent] said I had a ‘slutty 
mouth’ when he heard me curse this one time.” (Exhibit 45.) (M  A.’s statement 
was redacted to show only her first name and middle initial. Consequently, Exhibit 45 
is mis-identified as “M  L.’s” statement.)
22. On May 8, 2023, AP Petrossian took written statements from five
students, male and female. On May 12, 2023, she took written statements from three 
female students. The eight students reported Respondent is respectful, and they never 
heard him say anything inappropriate or saw him touch anyone inappropriately. 
(Exhibits B through I.) 
23. On May 9, 2023, AP Petrossian sent an email to Principal Vazquez
informing him that she had concluded her investigation. She noted the original 
allegations regarding Respondent’s touching K  A. in the weight room, N  M. 
on the shoulders during soccer, and M  A. on her waist during volleyball. She also 
reported additional allegations that Respondent told a group of female students they 
had slutty mouths when they used bad language. (Exhibit 14.)
24. On May 11, 2023, Respondent received a Notice of Reason for
Preliminary Reassignment Pending Investigation (May 11 Notice). The May 11 Notice 
documented a conference that day between Dr. Debra Bryant, Administrator of 
Operations/Division Head and Respondent as follows:
8 During the conference, I informed you that the temporary 
removal from your worksite is due to an allegation of 
misconduct involving physical/non-physical contact with a 
student that is not age-appropriate or within the scope of 
the employee's responsibilities or duties. There is an 
ongoing investigation concerning this allegation. 
In accordance with Board resolution, the District will make 
every attempt to complete all full investigations within 120 
working days of the date the administrative case is cleared 
by law enforcement and opened. . . .  
You will be notified of the results of the investigation and 
any impact on your reassigned status within 15 workdays 
following the completion of the investigation. 
(Exhibit 15.) 
25. At the May 11, 2023 conference, Respondent was not informed of the
specific allegations against him. 
26. AP Petrossian continued gathering statements from students about 
Respondent’s behavior. 
27. On May 12, 2023, AP Petrossian took additional written statements 
including the following: P  S. reported Respondent “[would] sit with his legs very 
wide open” but “nothing was shown” when he sits that way. (Exhibit 46); and L  S. 
(from Respondent’s Period 3 class) reported Respondent “[would] tell us we have 
‘slutty mouths’ if we say bad words.” (Exhibit 47.) L  S. also reported Respondent 
9 “told my friend to run laps so she could get a ‘summer body’” and “one time when I 
asked a question, he made a weird joke and said "don't have to ask daddy.“ ( .) 
28. On May 12, 2023, S  R. wrote, “I do find it a little bit weird that he 
touches people on the shoulder or lower back but it is very rare, and I don't think that 
it comes out in that kind of way.” (Exhibit 48.) S  R. provide specifics about the 
touching (date, student involved), and she did not indicate whether she personally 
witnessed the touching or whether she learned about it through other students. 
29. On May 18, 2023, K  A., N  M., and E  M., returned to AP 
Petrossian’s office and provided additional statements reporting that Respondent held 
his iPad near his crotch when requiring female students click on their assigned 
numbers to record the number of laps they were running. (Exhibits 32, 35, and 37.) AP 
Petrossian could not recall how she was first informed of the iPad allegations, whether 
from the three students or another source.
30. On October 30 and November 2, 2023, AP Petrossian met with 
Respondent, his representative, and other District administrators. This conference was 
the first time Respondent was informed of the specific allegations against him. The 
conference discussion was memorialized in a November 2, 2023 memorandum.
31. Respondent denied touching students, making inappropriate comments 
to students, sitting with his legs wide open, and holding his iPad on his crotch area 
while requiring students to touch the iPad. Respondent reiterated the concern he 
voiced on May 4, 2023, that on the prior day, K  A. and other students were 
caught cheating and were told that they would be getting calls home the following 
evening. 
10 Respondent’s Alleged Misconduct
METHOD OF HOLDING IPAD
32. Respondent’s PE classes incorporated running/jogging/walking laps (lap 
runs), typically once per week. This was a department-wide activity for all PE classes, so 
several PE classes shared the running track on the same day. Most teachers chose 
Wednesday as their lap run day because that day afforded the most teacher 
supervision to prevent students from eloping through the field’s gates. 
33. Kevin Kanemura has taught PE at JFKHS for 26 years, and he has been the 
PE Department Chair for eight years. He frequently observed Respondent teaching his 
classes. 
34. Christian Carbajal has coached at JFKHS for 10 years, and she taught PE 
there for eight years. 
35. Leslie Thompson has taught PE at JFKHS since 2015. 
36. Mr. Kanemura, Ms. Carbajal, and Mr. Thomson testified credibly. They all 
confirmed the PE classes frequently shared the football field, the running track, and 
the gymnasium, and they are often right next to each other while engaged in PE 
activities including lap runs. 
37. Respondent typically jogged on the track with the students. From this 
position, he monitored the track for the other teachers who remained stationed at the 
gates. Sometimes he monitored one of the gates or remained sitting due to injury. 
38. Respondent liked jogging on the track with students, rather than 
remaining in one place to checkmark students’ handheld cards as they went by. 11 Consequently, Respondent had his friend create an iPad app that allowed students tap 
as they completed each lap. Respondent typically kept his iPad hanging on the fence 
using a protective case, harness, and clip. 
39. On the iPad app, each time a student completed a lap, they would tap 
their assigned rollcall number. All students’ numbers were visible on the screen. The 
app would not allow a student to tap their number again until 40 seconds had lapsed. 
At the end of the running session, the app showed each student’s average lap time.
40. Respondent discovered students attempting to cheat the app. Students 
first tried sneaking outside the field gate and periodically popping back in to tap the 
iPad, but Respondent quickly stopped that. The more prevalent method students used 
to cheat involved arranging for their friends to complete laps in staggered manner. 
The complicit students would tap both their number and their friend’s number at the 
same time so the app would register two laps for every lap the students completed. 
Respondent warned his students to be honest because he knew how long it took them 
to complete their laps. Respondent recalled cheating was rare. When he discovered 
students attempting to cheat, he would sit and hold the iPad to confirm students were 
accurately recording their laps. 
41. The SOC alleges, “While seated as the students ran laps on an outdoor 
track, Respondent had female students lean-over him to scroll through a list of names 
to log each lap on an iPad he kept between his legs resting against his crotch.” (Exhibit 
1, p. A2.) Respondent denies this allegation. 
42. Respondent testified he typically held the iPad by resting his elbows on 
his knees, leaning a bit forward, and presenting the iPad with his hands outstretched. 
Respondent’s hands grasped both sides of the iPad, holding it in portrait orientation 12 (vertical, not horizontal), with the screen facing upward. Students came by to tap their 
numbers on the screen. During lulls, Respondent rotated the iPad (screen downward) 
to prevent the sun from overheating it. 
43. Respondent denied ever resting the iPad on his lap or anywhere else on 
his body while students were tapping their numbers. Respondent denied that female 
students were treated differently when tapping the iPad. He maintained that he held 
the iPad in the same position for everyone. Respondent also noted that no student or 
fellow teacher had ever expressed discomfort or told him he should hold his iPad 
differently. Respondent further noted that, in his Period 1 class, one of his students 
had a 1-1 aid who was typically right next to Respondent when he was holding the 
iPad, and the aid never expressed any concerns. 
44. Respondent recalled that, on May 3, 2023, the day K  A., M  A., 
N  M., and E  M. went to AP Petrossian’s office, he had caught them and 
other Period 1 students cheating during the lap run. That day, Respondent ran on the 
track with the students, and his iPad was hanging on the fence. When he viewed the 
statistics on his iPad at the end of the run, he noticed students who had been going 
very slowly or intermittently sitting on the benches had logged as many laps as 
Respondent. Respondent asked if anyone wanted to admit to cheating, and nobody 
came forward. Respondent noted the names of the students who had cheated in his 
roll book, and he told his Period 1 students he would be calling the parents of the 
cheating students the next day. 
45. At hearing, N  M., E  M., and M  A. testified about 
Respondent’s method of holding his iPad. 
13 46. N  M. confirmed that Respondent typically had his iPad hanging on 
the gate and would run on the track with students. She also confirmed that, after 
Respondent caught students cheating, he would sit with his iPad. N  M. recalled 
Respondent caught students cheating in the Spring semester, and he mentioned that 
he would call the parents of students he found cheating. 
47. N  M. testified that Respondent would sit with the iPad on his lap, 
sometimes with it resting higher up on his thigh. She recalled she had to reach over to 
the iPad and click on her number and “had to get close to him to do it.” She confirmed 
her May 3, 2023 written statement was accurate in alleging Respondent kept the iPad 
“directly on his crotch area and his body was very open and spread,” and “when there 
was boys around, . . . his body wasn’t as open compared to when it was only girls 
pressing their numbers on the iPad.” (Exhibit 35.) 
48. N  M. did not include the iPad accusation in her original May 3, 2023 
written statement. She testified she does not recall what prompted her and her friends 
to go to AP Petrossian’s office on May 3, 2023. She could not recall if that was the day 
Respondent said he would call students’ parents. She also could not recall what 
prompted her to provide the iPad information in a second written statement on May 
18, 2023, or why she did not include that information in her May 3, 2023 statement. 
49. At hearing, E  M. corroborated the testimony of Respondent, Mr. 
Kanemura, and Ms. Carbajal that, when Respondent’s class was on the track running 
laps, there were other classes and multiple teachers there. However, E  M. testified 
contrary to the collective recollections of Respondent, N  M., Mr. Kanemura, and 
Ms. Carbajal that Respondent typically ran laps with the students and only occasionally 
sat with his iPad. Instead, E  M. recalled Respondent typically sat down during lap 
runs and only occasionally had his iPad hanging on the gate to run on the track with 
14 students. Nevertheless, she confirmed that, “when a lot of cheating was going on, he 
would stay by the iPad, and other times he would run with [the students].” 
50. E  M. testified that Respondent would sit with the iPad resting 
between his spread legs at his crotch, “right up against his body, flat.” She later 
clarified Respondent’s legs were spread but the iPad was resting on his legs. E  M. 
initially stated Respondent was not holding the iPad, but then clarified he was “maybe 
holding it partially but not holding it up.” She later testified, “Sometimes he would 
hold it on the sides.” E  M. recalled all students had to reach over and touch their 
number. 
51. E  M. recalled students would click on each other’s numbers to cheat 
on lap runs. She admitted she did so with her friends once. She recalled that during 
the Spring semester, Respondent told the class he would call the parents of the 
students he caught cheating. 
52. M  A. did not include any iPad accusation in her May 3, 2023 written 
statement, nor was she one of the students to provide a written statement about it on 
May 18, 2023. She explained it was “not the first thing that [she] could think of that 
really made [her] feel uncomfortable.”
53. M  A. confirmed Respondent sometimes ran with the class, while the 
iPad hung on the fence, and sometimes sat with the iPad. E  M. testified that 
Respondent would sit with the iPad “balanced to stay on his lap.” According to M  
A., Respondent was not holding the iPad, but it was “directly on his lap,” and “on his 
stomach.” She recalled the whole class had to touch their numbers on the iPad as it 
rested on his lap. 
15 54. N  M., E  M., and M  A.’s descriptions of where Respondent 
held his iPad was vague, ranging from between his legs, on his crotch, on his lap, on 
his thighs, and on his stomach. Additionally, their written statements and subsequent 
testimony are tainted by their potential motivation to preempt negative consequences 
of cheating in Respondent’s running class. Consequently, N  M., E  M., and 
M  A.’s testimony was less credible than Respondent’s regarding how he held his 
iPad. 
55. Given the forgoing, the allegation in the SOC that “had female students 
lean-over him to scroll through a list of names to log each lap on an iPad he kept 
between his legs resting against his crotch” was not proven by a preponderance of the 
evidence. SITTING DURING STUDENTS’PUSH-UPS
56. Every year, the PE department classes undergo state-required physical 
fitness testing. One of the tested areas is push-ups. 
57. The SOC alleges, “While female students did push-ups, Respondent sat 
directly in front of them with his legs splayed open where each student's head was in
close proximity to his crotch.” (Exhibit 1, p. A2.) Respondent denies this allegation.
58. Mr. Kanemura and Ms. Carbajal corroborated Respondent’s testimony 
that the PE teachers share facilities for fitness testing, and they often combine classes 
to get fitness testing done. Ms. Carbajal confirmed that a PE teacher is usually not 
alone with students during fitness testing. 
59. Respondent testified that, when he performed push up testing, mats 
were laid out in the gymnasium for the students to lie on, and he would be on an 
17 63. N  M. did not provide any written statement about Respondent’s 
sitting during push-ups. She testified that she does not recall Respondent’s behavior 
during push-ups. She only recalled Respondent “sitting in his chair in front of 
[students]” mats during trunk lifts. During trunk lifts, Respondent would sit with his 
legs spread and “kind of open” and take notes about how far the students’ “necks 
would reach.” N  M. did not include any allegation about Respondent’s behavior 
during trunk lifts in her written statements, and she does not recall why she omitted 
this information. 
64. E  M. did not provide any written statement about Respondent’s 
sitting during push-ups, and she did not testify about Respondent’s behavior during 
push-ups. E  M. only recalled trunk lifts, not pushups. She recalls that, during trunk 
lifts, Respondent sat in front of the student with his “legs spread,” and the student 
“had to lift [their] head from there.” She recalled Respondent was about three to five 
feet away from the student. She did not mention trunk lifts in her written statements 
because it was not her “main concern about what was bothering” her. 
65. M  A. testified that, during push-ups, Respondent was seated in front 
of the students, but she could not recall if his legs were together or open. She did not 
include any information about Respondent’s behavior during push-ups in her written 
statement because it did “not make [her] feel uncomfortable.” She did not recall 
Respondent sitting in front of her for trunk lifts.
66. L  S. did not provide any written statement about Respondent’s 
sitting during push-ups. She recalls having to do push-ups in front of Respondent, and 
he was sometimes seated and sometimes standing. L  S. recalled Respondent’s 
legs were open when he was seated about six inches away from her face, but she 
could not recall if they were open a lot or a little. 
18 67. N  M. and E  M. could not recall Respondent’s behavior during 
push-ups, and M  A.’s and L  S.’s testimony was vague. While M  A. 
recalled Respondent sitting during push-ups, she could not confirm that his legs were 
spread, but his positioning did not make her feel uncomfortable. L  S. recalled 
Respondent sometimes sitting during push-ups but could not recall if his legs were 
spread open a lot. Consequently, N  M., E  M., M  A.’s, and L  S.’s 
testimony, supplemented by J  P.’s written statement, were less credible than 
Respondent’s in establishing how he was positioned during push-up testing. 
68. Given the foregoing, the allegation in the SOC that, “While female 
students did push-ups, Respondent sat directly in front of them with his legs splayed 
open where each student's head was in close proximity to his crotch” was not proven 
by a preponderance of the evidence. COMMENTS TO STUDENTS 
69. The SOC alleges Respondent made the comment in class, "Run so you 
have a summer body." (Exhibit 1, p. A3, line 4.) Respondent denies making this specific 
comment, although he does recall making a similar type of comment that he asserts 
was taken out of context.
70. In her May 12, 2023 written statement, L  S. alleged Respondent 
“told my friend to run laps so she could get a ‘summer body.’" (Exhibit 47.)
71. At hearing, L  S. testified that, while running laps, Respondent told 
L  S.’s friend to “run to get a summer body.” L  S. believed Respondent was 
talking about her friend’s figure and losing weight to “get a nice body,” and L  S. 
felt uncomfortable. L  S. did not believe Respondent was talking about himself. 
L  S. initially testified she was running behind Respondent and her friend when 
19 Respondent made the comment. She later stated she was “right next to him,” but not 
part of his conversation with her friend, J . 
72. There is no evidence that J  complained about Respondent’s comment 
or provided any statement corroborating L  S.’s assertion. 
73. Respondent denies telling any student to “run to get a summer body.” 
He insisted the jokes he told in class were about himself, and the summer body 
comment was aimed at himself. He recalls being injured for six weeks and putting on 
extra weight, and when starting a run, he would call, “Let’s go! We gotta get those 
summer bodies!” Respondent insisted it was a general motivational statement not 
directed at any student. 
74. L  S.’s testimony was vague and less credible than Respondent’s 
recollection and explanation. Consequently, the allegation in the SOC that Respondent 
told a student to “run so you have a summer body" was not proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence.
75. The SOC alleges Respondent made the comment, "You don't have to ask 
daddy," in reference to himself. (Exhibit 1, p. A4, line 12.) Respondent denies this 
allegation.
76. In her May 12, 2023 written statement, L  S. alleged, “One time when 
I asked him a question he made a weird joke and said, ‘don't have to ask daddy.’” 
(Exhibit 47.) 
77. At hearing, L  S. testified that one time she asked Respondent to get 
water during a lap run, and he said, “You don’t have to ask daddy or mommy.” This 
testimony differed from her May 12, 2023 written statement, wherein she only noted 
20 the “ask daddy” portion of Respondent’s purported comment. L  S. testified she 
excluded the words “or mommy” from her written statement because Respondent 
“separated” that part of his statement and waited “quite a bit” before he said, “or 
mommy.” 
78. Respondent does not recall ever telling a student “You don’t have to ask 
daddy.” Respondent maintained that he did not allow students to get water by 
themselves or they would “disappear.” Instead, they would all go to the water 
fountains together. 
79. L  S.’s elimination of the phrase “or mommy” from her written 
statement calls into question the reliability of the information she has provided. 
Additionally, her testimony in other areas was found to be vague and to have 
characterized Respondent’s comments out of their intended context. Consequently, 
L  S.’s recollection of Respondent’s alleged comment lacks credibility. 
80. Given the foregoing, the allegation in the SOC that Respondent made the 
comment “you don’t have to ask daddy” was not proven by a preponderance of the 
evidence. 
81. The SOC alleges, Respondent called students “my girls.” (Exhibit 1, p. A3, 
line 9.) Respondent admits he may have used that phrase, but it was “absolutely 
misinterpreted.” 
82. In her May 3, 2023 written statement, N  M. alleged Respondent 
“calls his female students ‘my girls’." (Exhibit 34.) At hearing, N  M. testified that, 
once when she and another female student were walking instead of running laps, 
Respondent said, “Start running. I don’t want anyone catching my girls.” N  M. 
thought that comment was “not normal.” 
21 83. Respondent recalls using the phrase “my girls” once, when Ms. Carbajal’s 
class was next to his on the track. Respondent saw some of his female students 
chatting with students from Ms. Carbajal’s class, and the students have a limited time 
to complete their laps. Respondent believes he called, “My girls! Let’s go!” He does not 
recall saying, “I don’t want anyone catching my girls.” 
84. N  M.’s written statement and testimony regarding Respondent 
saying, “my girls” and the context in which it was made are viewed with skepticism. 
N  M.’s written statements and subsequent testimony are tainted by her potential 
motivation to preempt negative consequences of cheating in Respondent’s running 
class. Consequently, N  M.’s testimony is less credible than Respondent’s
explanation of the context in which he used the phrase “my girls.”
85. While the allegation in the SOC that Respondent called students “my 
girls” was proven by a preponderance of the evidence, Respondent credibly 
established the contextual propriety of the comment. 
86. The SOC alleges Respondent called students “Slutty mouths." (Exhibit 1, 
p. A3, line 8.) The SOC also alleges Respondent “told 12th grade student M  A. 
that she had a ‘slutty mouth’ when she cursed in class.” (Exhibit 1, p. A4, lines 6-7.) The 
SOC further alleges Respondent told L  S. “she had a ‘slutty mouth.’” (Exhibit 1, p. 
A4, line 11.) Although alleged separately, all the allegations pertain to one occurrence, 
and the comment was directed at a group of students. 
87. In her March 12, 2023 written statement, L  S. alleged Respondent 
would “tell us we have ‘slutty mouths’ if we say bad words.” (Exhibit 47.) She did not 
explain it was just a single occurrence. 
22 88. In her testimony at hearing, L  S. first testified she “had friends who 
would say bad words sometimes, and he said we have slutty mouths.” However, she 
later clarified Respondent said that to her and her friends “once” when Respondent 
overheard a conversation among them. 
89. Written statements submitted by V  P. on May 4, 2023, and by 
M  A. on May 11, 2023, confirmed Respondent used the phrase just once. (Exhibits 
40, 45.) Additionally, V  P.’s statement noted Respondent’s comment did not 
single out a specific student or students, but that Respondent “called a group of girls 
slut[t]y mouths because they were say[ing] bad words.” (Exhibit 40.) 
90. Respondent admitted using the phrase once, directed toward a group of 
students, and he acknowledged it was inappropriate language. However, Respondent 
credibly explained the circumstances prompting his choice of words. 
91. Respondent recalled his class was on the softball field, with most of his 
students sitting in front of him, and a group of six students off to the side talking 
loudly. Respondent was giving his class instructions when he heard one of the side-
group students loudly use “the F-bomb and the C-bomb.” (Respondent’s euphemisms 
to avoid using the actual words in testimony.) Respondent tells his students not to use 
profanity in his class because it might make other students uncomfortable. 
92. Upon hearing the loud profanity, Respondent could not determine which 
student used it, so he said, “Whoever said that, please apologize to the class. You are 
not in trouble, but it may be offensive to some people.” The side-group students 
looked at each other and giggled. Respondent said, “Let me say again. You are not in 
trouble, but that language is offensive for some people including me, so apologize.” 
Once again, there were giggles and then silence. Respondent felt the tension on the 
23 softball field, and he believed if he were unable to gain control of his class, the effect 
could be long-lasting, so he made the decision to try to trigger a discussion or 
admission. He said, “Whoever has the slutty mouth, please knock it off. It is offensive.” 
93. Respondent admits his decision to use the provocative phrase “wasn’t 
the greatest.” At that point, the side-group students protested, saying “You can’t say 
that! You can’t say she has a slutty mouth! That is wrong!” Respondent told them he 
did not know who used the profanity, and then he asked them if they were more 
offended by his use of the word “slutty” than they were by the profanity the student 
used. He was baffled that the students weren’t offended by the “higher level vulgarity” 
from their friend but were offended by the adjective from their teacher who was trying 
to keep control of the class. Respondent apologized if anyone was offended, and he 
was able to resume control of the class. 
94. The allegation in the SOC that Respondent used the words “slutty 
mouth" was proven by a preponderance of the evidence. However, Respondent 
credibly established the contextual propriety of the comment, which was limited to 
one occurrence, directed at a group of students, and intended to chastise an unknown 
speaker’s use of profanity. 
95. The SOC alleges that Respondent made the following additional 
comments: "Over-weight people can't run;" "You look Mexican," after the student told 
him she didn't speak Spanish; "The way they walk will get them kidnapped one day;" 
complained about Mexicans coming into this country, taking jobs, and that they 
should go back to their own country, and how he liked Donald Trump; said to ninth 
grade student D  A. that she should "go back to the kitchen," she's "not worth 
coming to P.E.," and he only wanted the best for her, he loved her, and she's smart; 
and he told D  A., "I love you." (Exhibit 1, pp. A3, lines 1-3, 5-6, 24-28; A4, lines 1-
24 3.) No evidence was produced to prove these allegations. Consequently, these 
allegations were not proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
ALLEGED TOUCHING OF STUDENTS
96. The SOC alleges that Respondent “repeatedly poked ninth grade student 
D  A. in the stomach while speaking to her” and he once put his hands on her 
shoulders. (Exhibit 1, pp. A3, lines 21-23, A4, lines 3-4.) No evidence was produced to 
prove these allegations. Consequently, these allegations were not proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence.
97. The SOC alleges Respondent inappropriately touched three female 
students: K  A., M  A., and N  M. Respondent denied inappropriately 
touching any student. 
98. The SOC alleges, while in class, Respondent “stood leaning over ninth 
grade student K  A. and held her arms while she was using the exercise 
equipment.” (Exhibit 1, p. A3, lines 10-12.) Respondent denies this allegation. 
99. K  A. did not testify at the hearing. Other Period 1 students, E  
M., N  M., and M  A., testified at the hearing, but they did not specify how 
Respondent touched K  A. E  M.’s written statement (Exhibit 30), alleging 
Respondent touched K  A.’s “upper hand/arm” while she was using the “pull down 
machine” in the weight room was admitted only as administrative hearsay to 
supplement or explain other admissible evidence. (See footnote 1.) However, no other 
direct evidence to establish that fact was admitted, and E  M.’s written statement 
was not considered. 
25 100. Respondent does not recall ever touching K  A. while she was using 
the weight equipment. 
101. For the weight room unit of his PE class, Respondent personally 
demonstrated the exercises, and he tried to avoid exercises that required spotting. For 
the exercises that required spotting, Respondent demonstrated the proper way to 
spot. During the weight sessions, Respondent sat at his desk and answered questions 
if students approached him. Respondent never spotted students. However, if he saw a 
student performing an exercise in an unsafe manner, he would approach them and 
provide verbal instructions on how to correct their form. At most he would touch 
someone’s elbow to correct their form during an improper triceps press, where the 
student’s elbows should be tight by their sides. However, Respondent rarely had to 
correct their technique. 
102. Given the foregoing, the allegation in the SOC that Respondent “stood 
leaning over ninth grade student K  A. and held her arms while she was using the 
exercise equipment” was not proven by a preponderance of the evidence.
103. The SOC alleges Respondent “placed his hands on the waist of ninth 
grade student M  A. to position her during a volleyball lesson in class.” (Exhibit 1, 
p. A3, lines 13-15.) Respondent denies this allegation. 
104. In her May 3, 2023 statement, M  A. alleged, “We were playing 
volleyball and Mr. Loperena put his hands on my waist for a moment so he could more 
himself.” (Exhibit 33.) 
105. In her testimony, M  A. explained Respondent on her team, and he 
was standing behind her during a volleyball game, when he “grabbed” her waist for 
“maybe a second,” and moved her “to the side a little bit.” According to M  A., 
26 Respondent said, “Good job.” M  A. believed Respondent was congratulating her 
for hitting the ball over the net. M  A. testified she did not report this before May 
3, 2023, because she did “not think it was that big a deal,” or that anything would be 
done about it. 
106. At hearing, Respondent insisted he would never put his hands on a 
female student’s waist. Respondent typically does not play volleyball with his students. 
He recalls playing volleyball with the students once during the 2022-2023 school year, 
when two adaptive PE students were on his team. However, Respondent insisted that, 
during that volleyball game, he did not touch any of the students. 
107. M  A.’s written statement and subsequent testimony are tainted by 
her potential motivation to preempt negative consequences of cheating in 
Respondent’s running class. Consequently, M  A.’s testimony was less credible than 
Respondent’s regarding whether Respondent touched her waist during a volleyball 
game. 
108. Given the foregoing, the allegation in the SOC that Respondent “placed 
his hands on the waist of ninth grade student M  A. to position her during a 
volleyball lesson in class” was not proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
109. However, if the touching somehow occurred during the volleyball game 
while Respondent was moving around the court, the totality of the evidence indicates 
it was likely inadvertent. 
110. The SOC alleges Respondent “did the following to ninth grade student 
N  M. during a soccer lesson in class: touched her shoulder and lower back, and 
moved his hand down her arms.“ (Exhibit 1, p. A3, lines 16-20.) (The SOC incorrectly 
identifies N  M. as “N  M.”) Respondent denies this allegation. 
27 111. In her May 3, 2023 written statement, N M. alleged, “once while 
playing soccer [and] I was the goalie, he was ‘positioning’ me and it felt very 
uncomfortable. . . . Positioning - He was grabbing my lower shoulder [and] standing 
really close to me from behind [and] his hands would slide up [and] down my arms 
[and] close to the middle of my back.” (Exhibit 34.) 
112. At hearing, N  M. testified that, while playing soccer, she was 
positioned as goalie in front of a small pop-up goal, but “not taking the game serious.” 
Respondent came from behind her and “grabbed” both of her shoulders and upper 
arm “no longer than 10 seconds.” He “barely moved her” to change her positioning. In 
her testimony, N  M. did not assert Respondent touched her lower back or that he 
slid his hands down her arms. 
113. S  R.’s May 12, 2023 written statement was admitted as 
administrative hearsay. (See footnote 1.) S  R. did not testify at the hearing.) In 
her statement, S  R. opined, “I do find it a little bit weird that he touches people 
on the shoulder or lower back but it is very rare, and I don't think that it comes out in 
that kind of way.” (Exhibit 48.) S  R.’s statement did not provide specifics about 
the touching (dates, students involved, or their gender), and she did not indicate 
whether she personally witnessed the touching or whether she learned about it 
through other students. Moreover, S  R. was in Respondent’s Period 4 class, not 
in Period 1 with N  M, and it is unlikely she witnessed the event N  M. asserts 
occurred during the soccer session. Consequently, S  R.’s written statement was 
given no weight.
114. Respondent denied touching N  M. during any soccer session. He 
was typically off the field supervising and telling students to get moving when they 
were standing around talking. He denied positioning students during soccer. His goal 
28 was to keep the students moving and playing rather than getting tied up in proper 
positioning. 
115. N  M.’s written statement and subsequent testimony are tainted by 
her potential motivation to preempt negative consequences of cheating in 
Respondent’s running class. Consequently, N  M.’s testimony was less credible 
than Respondent’s regarding whether Respondent grabbed her shoulders to 
reposition her during a soccer session. 
116. Given the foregoing, the allegations in the SOC that Respondent touched 
N  M.’s “shoulder and lower back, and moved his hand down her arms,“ was not 
proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
Respondent’s Additional Evidence 
117. Respondent has no record of prior discipline with the District.
118. Respondent agrees with District policies about the appropriate and 
respectful treatment of students, and he insists he followed the policies. 
119. Respondent believes the JFKHS PE department is “extremely prudent,” 
and “if one teacher did anything stupid, none of [them] is shy about saying what [they 
are] thinking.” Respondent has not seen any JFKHS PE teacher engage in an 
inappropriate behavior, and he insists, “nobody has seen it from [him].”
120. Respondent has the support of his PE Department Chair, Mr. Kanemura,
and his colleagues, Ms. Carbajal and Mr. Thomson. They all confirmed they have never 
seen Respondent put his hands on a student, make inappropriate comments in front 
of students, or sitting inappropriately in front of students.
38 use of the terms “my girls” or “slutty mouths” occurred during the 2022-2023 school 
year, about two years ago. 
35. The third factor enumerated by is “the type of credential held 
by the person involved.” ( , 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) Respondent holds a 
credential authorizing him to teach PE to grades 9 through 12. 
36. The fourth factor enumerated by is “the extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct.” ( , 1 Cal.3d at p. 
229.) In this case, Respondent explained the circumstances for his comments.
37. The fifth factor enumerated by is “the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct.” ( , 1 Cal.3d at 
p. 229.) There is nothing praiseworthy or blameworthy about Respondent’s conduct.
38. The sixth factor enumerated by is “the likelihood of the 
reoccurrence of the questioned conduct.” ( , 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) In this 
case, Respondent recognizes the potential impropriety of the phrase he used (i.e., 
“slutty mouths”). Consequently, there is a low likelihood of recurrence. 
39. The seventh factor enumerated by is “the extent to which 
disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 
constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.” ( , 1 
Cal.3d at p. 229.) In this case, there is no evidence that disciplinary action would inflict 
an adverse impact or chilling effect on Respondent’s or other teachers’ constitutional 
rights. 
40. The last factor enumerated by is “the publicity or notoriety 
given to the conduct.” ( , 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) As noted by the Court in 