BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND THE 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR THE 
COACHELLA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
In the Matter of the Proceeding to Dismiss: 
ULISES SANCHEZ-JIMENEZ, Respondent 
OAH No. 2025030216 
DECISION 
This matter came on regularly for hearing before the Commission on 
Professional Competence (Commission) on May 1, 2, 5, 6, 2025, in Thermal, California. 
The Commission was comprised of the following members: Administrative Law Judge 
Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Kate Keener, and Amar Samet. 
Victor King and Denise Wong, Attorneys at Law, Olivarez Maduga Law 
Organization LLP, represented complainant, Sumer Martinez, Director of Certificated 
Human Resources, Coachella Valley Unified School District (district). 
Jon Vanderpool, Attorney at Law, Vanderpool Griffith LLP, represented 
respondent, Ulises Sanchez-Jimenez, who was present.
On May 6, 2024, the Commission met to deliberate. On May 7, 2025, the record 
was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision. 2 CASE SUMMARY
Respondent’s interactions with a female high school student enrolled in his 
mathematics class during the 2023-2024 school year formed the bases of the 
allegations. This student testified in this hearing. The district also alleged inappropriate 
conduct involving other students, but none of them testified, and their written 
statements and summaries of their interviews were hearsay, not supplemented or 
explained by other evidence, so no findings regarding those students can be made. As 
such, only the allegations regarding the one female student and respondent’s 
statements to the district about her were considered by the Commission. 
Having considered the admissible evidence, two Commission members 
determined respondent engaged in immoral conduct and was evidently unfit for 
service. The Commission did not find respondent was dishonest. Two Commission 
members voted to dismiss respondent from service in the district; one voted against 
dismissal. As these matters are determined by majority vote, the district’s decision to 
dismiss respondent shall be granted and respondent’s appeal is denied. 
PROTECTIVE ORDERS 
A protective order has been issued sealing the exhibit identified in that order. It 
is not practical to redact that document. This sealing order governs the release of the 
document to the public. A reviewing court, parties to this matter, their attorneys, the 
California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, its attorneys, or designee, and a 
government agency decision maker or designee under Government Code section 
11517, may review the document subject to this order, provided that such document is 
protected from release to the public.3 In lieu of the students’ names, initials will be used in this decision and will be 
used in any transcript of the hearing if one is prepared.
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. Respondent was employed by the district as a mathematics teacher. 
During the time of the alleged incidents, he was teaching at Desert Mirage High 
School. 
2. On February 20, 2024, G.C., a student in respondent’s third period 
mathematics class, notified a teacher and then administration, of what she considered 
to be inappropriate behavior by respondent that occurred on February 16, 2024, and 
again on February 20, 2024. 
3. On February 20, 2024, Maria McLeod, Interim Assistant Superintendent of 
Human Resources, advised respondent the district was placing him on paid 
administrative leave so it could conduct a preliminary investigation into allegations of 
misconduct. 
4. Following that investigation, Monica Makiewicz, Ph.D., the district’s 
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, notified respondent via letter on 
December 18, 2024, of the district’s intent to dismiss him from employment. She 4 notified him of his right to a 1meeting before the district moved forward with 
the proposed discipline. Dr. Makiewicz enclosed the Statement of Charges and a 
Request for a meeting form.
5. On January 13, 2025, respondent provided the district with his “Response 
to Draft Charges” in which he responded to the charges “in lieu” of attending a 
meeting. The next day respondent sent a Revised Response to Draft Charges adding 
additional information. Respondent testified he wanted to provide a written response 
rather than attend the  meeting because the district’s charges were very detailed 
and he wanted to provide details in response. He wrote a revised response to correct 
his bell schedule and add more facts about what took place on February 16, 2024. 
6. On January 29, 2025, Robert Nichols, who served as the  officer, 
issued his Decision finding the district had “reasonable grounds to proceed with 
the proposed discipline of dismissal.” 
 
1In  (1975) 15 Cal.3d 194, 215, the California 
Supreme Court held that in order to satisfy due process, an agency considering 
disciplinary action against a public employee must accord the employee certain 
“preremoval safeguards,” including “notice of the proposed action, the reasons 
therefor, a copy of the charges and materials upon which the action is based, and the 
right to respond, either orally or in writing, to the authority initially imposing 
discipline.” The Supreme Court’s directive gave rise to an administrative procedure 
known as a hearing, in which an employee has the opportunity to respond to 
the charges upon which the proposed discipline is based. In its documents, the district 
referred to it as a  meeting, so that is what it will be called in this decision. 5 7. On January 31, 2025, Ms. Martinez sent respondent a final notice of the 
district’s intent to recommend to the Board of Education (board) that he be dismissed. 
The notice referenced the applicable laws and district policies respondent was alleged 
to have violated, and attached the Final Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges). 
The charges referenced a 2019 incident which resulted in the district issuing a directive 
to respondent. The charges further alleged respondent was being dismissed pursuant 
to Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), immoral conduct, (a)(4), 
dishonesty, and (a)(6), evident unfitness for service. The charges stemmed from 
allegations respondent engaged in inappropriate behavior with students, and was 
dishonest when interviewed about it. 
8. On that same date, Ms. Martinez also sent respondent a letter providing 
him with Brown Act Notice advising of the date, time, and location, of the board 
meeting where the board would consider the charges against him and his dismissal. 
9. On February 6, 2025, the board in closed session voted to dismiss 
respondent and directed the Superintendent or designee to send out the appropriate 
legal notices. 
10. On February 7, 2025, respondent requested a hearing, and this hearing 
followed. 
Respondent’s Education and Background 
11. Respondent was born in Mexico and came to United States in 2001 with 
his family. His parents worked in the agricultural fields, where he worked as well, 
including during holidays and summers. He began attending Coachella Valley High 
School in 2004 as a tenth grader. He did not speak English but successfully graduated 
in three years. He graduated from College of the Desert with an associate degree in 6 liberal arts, working part time to pay for school. He then attended University of 
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), graduating in two years with a Bachelor of Science in 
applied mathematics. 
12. After graduating UCLA, respondent pursued a teaching career because 
he wanted to motivate students and “encourage them that with hard work and 
education their dreams could come true.” He testified it is something he strongly 
believes and wanted to instill in students. He had many teachers who mentored and 
motivated him to continue his education and he wanted to do the same. He got his 
teaching credential from California State University, San Bernardino. He has a single 
subject credential with an emphasis in mathematics. He applied to several school 
districts, and received numerous offers, but accepted an offer with this district because 
he wanted to teach in this community. He was first employed with the district at a 
middle school during the 2011-2012 school year. He became a permanent teacher 
during his third year with the district. He worked at the middle school for 11 years, 
where he received good performance evaluations. 
13. Respondent testified that each year he is trying to improve as an 
educator and feels he is doing better every year. His evaluations are in the meets or 
exceeds standards ranges. He has taught approximately 2,500 students in his career. 
14. During the 2023-2024 school year, as in prior years, some of the high 
school mathematics classes he taught were for students who needed to repeat the 
course, which was a course required for graduation. The third period class he was 
teaching where the alleged incident with G.C. occurred was one such repeat course. 
15. Respondent asserted that he is fit to resume teaching. He considers 
himself a hard-working, dedicated teacher, and his evaluations prove it. He has had 7 good evaluations and good communications with his many principals and students. He 
is “committed to inspire the students of my community, this community, to inspire my 
students to continue with their education so they can reach their goals.” 
MIRS Motion
16. Effective February 7, 2025, the district placed respondent on unpaid 
leave. In response thereto, on March 3, 2025, respondent filed a Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension (MIRS Motion) at the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). 
OAH issued an Order setting the matter for oral argument on March 28, 2025, and 
establishing a briefing schedule. The district opposed the motion, and respondent filed 
a reply to the district’s opposition. 
17. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), permits a school district 
to immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 
charged with immoral conduct. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 
permits the employee to file a MIRS motion. The administrative law judge’s review of 
the suspended employee’s motion is “limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under this section.”
18. On April 4, 2025, after considering the pleadings, the written 
submissions, and oral argument, and having researched the issues, the administrative 
law judge hearing the MIRS motion determined the district had alleged facts which, if 
true, were sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), and denied the motion.
19. Complainant repeatedly referenced that Order at hearing, but that
finding is not controlling here. In a MIRS proceeding, unlike in this hearing, the 8 underlying evidence on which the district relies is not presented nor considered; the 
Order issued following a MIRS motion is based solely on the pleadings. This is unlike in 
the hearing where the Commission considers the evidence at issue. Thus, the ruling on 
a MIRS motion is irrelevant for deciding discipline and is not binding on the 
Commission, although it can be used for determining back pay should the Commission 
vote to reinstate the employee. 
Motion in Limine re: 2019 Directive 
20. Respondent opposed the introduction of any evidence regarding the 
2019 directive because it violated the four year rule regarding the introduction of 
evidence in these matters. (Ed. Code section § 44944, subd. (b)(2)(A).) That motion was 
denied in part because regularly kept records of the district may be introduced, 
although no findings can be based thereon (Ed. Code section § 44944, subd. (b)(2)(B).)
Additionally, the evidence was allowed to the extent it placed respondent on notice 
regarding applicable board policies with which he must comply. 
Evidence Introduced at Hearing
21. Several witnesses testified and numerous documents were introduced. 
The factual findings reached herein are based on that evidence.
DISTRICT’S INVESTIGATION  
22. Conflicting testimony regarding the district’s investigation was offered. 
Principal Elizabeth Sotelo and Assistant Principal Aven Magana each testified they 
interviewed G.C. on February 20, 2024, with Assistant Principal Magana taking notes. 
Both administrators claimed they did no further investigation and passed the matter 
on to the district’s human resources department given the nature of the allegations. 9 Both denied interviewing students at Desert Mirage High School and claimed Ms. 
McLeod performed the investigation. 
23. However, Ms. McLeod testified she did not conduct an investigation into 
the allegations. Although Dr. Makiewicz also testified Ms. McLeod performed the 
investigation, Ms. McLeod testified she did not, and claimed she sent the matter to 
district counsel. Dr. Makiewicz further testified the students’ statements were written 
on Desert Mirage High School forms indicating the administrators at the high school 
interviewed the students, but those two administrators, Principal Sotelo and Assistant 
Principal Magana, denied doing any of the investigation. 
24. As such, it was never established who performed the investigation.
25. G.C. was interviewed on May 23, 2024, and again on October 15, 2024, 
and gave statements consistent with her testimony summarized below. 
ALLEGATIONS THAT CANNOT BE SUSTAINED
26. Four of the district’s ten allegations (Nos. 3, 4, 5, and 8), and parts of 
three other allegations (Nos. 6, 7, and 9) involved statements made by other students, 
none of whom testified. Their statements did not overcome any hearsay exceptions, 
did not supplement or explain other admissible evidence, and as a result, cannot be 
considered. Thus, the charges pertaining to those students were not established and 
are dismissed.
27. The only admissible evidence presented pertained to student G.C. and 
only those allegations can be considered. (Nos. 1, 2, and parts of 6, 7, and 9.) 
Allegation No. 10, regarding statements respondent allegedly made during his district 
interview, will also be evaluated in this decision.10 2019INCIDENT
28. A student and parent reported that on March 28, 2019, respondent
grabbed the student by the ear to turn his head to face forward. Witness statements 
corroborated the student’s claim. District representatives met with respondent who 
stated the student was off task and after multiple warnings, respondent tapped the 
student on the shoulder. As the student turned to face respondent, respondent may 
have touched him on the ear. 
29. The district concluded that respondent’s actions violated Board Policy
4119.21, “Professional Standards.” That policy requires all employee’s “to maintain the 
highest ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, follow district policies and 
regulations, and abide by state and federal laws.” In 2019, in addition to violating 
professional standards, the district advised respondent that his behavior also created a 
hostile environment for students and made the reporting student feel uncomfortable 
and threatened. 
30. The district issued the following directive to respondent: “When 
correcting student behavior, do not make adverse contact with the student. Do not 
pull any student’s hair or lay hand’s [ ] on students in anger or in a disciplinary 
manner.” Respondent was advised that failure to comply with this directive “would 
result in further progressive disciplinary consequences.” Respondent was also advised 
to refer to the board policy found on the district website. 
31. Accordingly, in 2019 respondent was specifically placed on notice about 
Board Policy 4119.21. The Statement of Charges at issue in this matter, in addition to
alleging other violations, also alleged that respondent’s behavior violated Board Policy 
4119.21. Although no findings will be made regarding the 2019 incident, it was 11 considered solely for the fact that respondent was specifically placed on notice of the 
existence of Board Policy 4119.21, and the professional standards the district expected 
of its employees. 
EVIDENCE RE:ALLEGATION NO.1(FEBRUARY 16,2024,I NCIDENT) 
32. The district alleged that on February 16, 2024, respondent instructed G.C. 
to stay after class to make up a missed exam, although several other students also 
needed to make up the exam. Despite G.C. telling respondent she had to go to her 
next class, respondent closed the door and insisted she stay to retake the exam. 
Respondent made her sit next to his desk and stared at her, making her feel 
uncomfortable. At one point he took her phone without permission and began 
scrolling through it. He left the classroom and when he returned, G.C. had her head 
down on the desk, and respondent began to stroke and play with her hair. Respondent 
leaned over G.C., put his left arm around her, grabbing her hand, and rubbed his arm 
against her breast. At some point, G.C. texted a friend about respondent making her 
uncomfortable. 
G.C.’s Testimony 
33. G.C. testified that during the 2023-2024 school year, respondent was very 
physical towards her, casually touching her shoulder, and touching her belongings 
without her permission. He made unwanted comments towards her. In that year, G.C. 
was on Bell Schedule B, which meant she had respondent for third period math that 
ended at 9:50 a.m. and then had her fourth period class before going to lunch. 
34. On February 16, 2024, there were several students who had not 
completed the exam, but respondent told only G.C. to stay after class to complete it. 
She told him she had a friend waiting to meet her after class but he would not let her 12 leave. She told him several times that she had to go but he made her stay. Respondent 
told her, “You’re staying,” and got up and closed the door and told her to sit next to 
him by his desk. G.C. had a fourth period class she had to get to, and told respondent 
about the class and meeting her friend, but he would not let her leave. 
35. G.C. testified it was “strange to be in a room alone with a male teacher.” 
G.C. sat down next to respondent as instructed and he put the paper next to her and 
sat down at the desk. He continued to stare at G.C. the entire time. She took out her 
cell phone to text her friend that she could not meet him and that respondent was 
making her uncomfortable. 
36. G.C.’s February 16, 2024, text message at 9:50 a.m. with the friend she 
was supposed to meet after respondent’s class documented the following exchange: 
Friend: where u at 
G.C.: teacher made me stay after class 
G.C.: [redacted] creeping me out 
Friend: omg 
Friend: i’m here 
G.C.: Here where 
Friend: [sent a photo of his location] 
G.C.: I’m so sorry I was telling him about a had to go 
G.C.: he doesn’t want me to 13 Friend: it’s ok dw [two emoji crying faces]
G.C.: It’s js me n him alone I’m getting creeped out [three 
emoji skulls] 
Friend: ohm (acronym not explained) 
37. G.C. described how while she was in the classroom, respondent kept 
staring at her in a “very intense, very intimidating” manner. After she texted her friend, 
respondent stood up and grabbed her phone and started scrolling through it for “a 
long time” but did not explain why he was doing so. He put Google classroom on her
phone, told her, “Use this,” and put her phone on the desk. G.C. never told respondent 
she needed help or could not find the Google classroom on her phone. 
38. G.C. started texting her then boyfriend that respondent was being weird, 
touching her stuff, and she was getting “a very weird vibe from him.” Her boyfriend 
texted back for her get out of the classroom or talk to security. G.C. no longer has 
those text messages because she and her boyfriend later broke up, and she deleted 
their texts. 
39. At one point while she was there, respondent went outside the classroom 
to tell students who were making noise to quiet down. He came back to the classroom 
and again closed the door. He came towards G.C., squatted down next to her and put 
his left arm under her right armpit. With his right arm he grabbed her right hand that 
was holding her pencil and acted as though he was writing. With his left 
elbow/shoulder, respondent began rubbing the right side of G.C.’s right breast. She 
was very nervous, but said nothing because she was “in shock.” After respondent stood 
up from his squatting position, G.C. put her head down. Respondent stroked her hair, 14 patting her head. She believes he said, “Don’t go to sleep on me” while he was 
stroking her hair. Respondent then “got bored,” and told her she could leave. 
Respondent’s Testimony 
40. Respondent denied that the incident took place. Further, he denied 
keeping G.C. after class. He testified she came to his class after school to make up her 
exam. It was the end of the day, he was done with classes, and she showed up and told 
him she was there to make up the test. Respondent had noticed during class she
understood the concepts so had asked her about making up her missed exam, and she 
did so at the end of the day. He acknowledged that during the 2024-2024 school year, 
he had Bell Schedule A, so had lunch after his third period class.
41. Respondent has no explanation for the 9:50 a.m. text message but 
denied that G.C. was in his class during that time. He did not know if that text refers to 
him but those text messages were not sent from his classroom because he did not 
have G.C. stay after her third period class. She left when class ended at 9:50 a.m., and 
did not return to make up the test until the end of the day. 
42. Respondent further testified that when G.C. arrived at his class at the end 
of the day, his door was open. She told him she was there to “retake the quiz.” He was 
at his desk and she went to her desk. He stood up and went to her desk to give her the 
paper quiz which had five problems on it. He handed her the paper and told her she 
could use her Google classroom notes. She had her iPad but it was not charged so she 
was going to use her phone. Respondent returned to his desk and was working on his 
computer. 
43. Students started making noise outside the classroom and G.C. told him 
she was going to close the door because she could not concentrate as it was too 15 noisy, and she closed the door. He then stood up and went to check and see what was 
going on outside. When he opened the door he found a female student leaning on the 
classroom wall and he asked if she wanted anything. That student said she was waiting 
for G.C. and he asked if she wanted to come inside to wait. She said she had 
somewhere to go and she left. His classroom door closed behind him when he went to 
speak with that student. When he returned to the classroom, he went back to his desk. 
44. The door was shut which he was okay with because he was concerned 
that it was too noisy outside for G.C. to concentrate on the test. Respondent does not 
recall ever being alone with a student in his classroom. He has had students return to 
take tests when it is not their class period. 
45. Respondent observed G.C. scrolling through her phone. He assumed she 
needed some assistance so he stood up and went to her desk. He saw that she was not 
in Google notes, which he had told her to use. He asked G.C. to let him help her find 
the notes and “I believe I got the phone.” He clicked on Google classroom, and found 
the notes he wanted her to use which he showed her. 
46. Respondent admitted saying, “Let me help you” and that he did not wait 
for an answer, but instead picked up G.C.’s phone and scrolled to Google classroom. 
He denied scrolling through G.C.’s phone for several minutes. After showing her the 
Google notes, he returned to his desk while she continued working on the test. 
47. At some point, he observed G.C. was texting so he stood up and went to 
her desk but by the time he got there she was in the Google notes again. He told her 
to please make sure to use those notes and not get distracted. He was concerned she 
was cheating. 16 48. Respondent denied staring at G.C. He admitted that “every once in a 
while” he would turn around and supervise what she was doing. The last time he went 
to her desk was when he noticed she had her head down. Her hair was covering part 
of the desk. Respondent called her name as he walked towards her. He asked if she 
was okay several times, but did not get a response. He tapped on the desk and asked 
if she was okay. He did not get a response. He tapped G.C. on the shoulder and asked 
if she was okay. He did not get a response. One more time he asked if she was okay 
and again, got no response. “All of a sudden she lifted her head up with a look of 
surprise” on her face. She looked “in shock.” 
49. Respondent asked if she was okay because he was afraid something had 
happened to G.C. She said she was asleep. She told him she needed to go, but he told 
her that she was almost done with the test so why not just finish it. He didn’t 
understand why she wanted to leave when she was almost done with the test. She said 
she really needed to go and he told her that was fine just to study and then do the last 
question another time. G.C. left his classroom, he took her test and put it in his pile of 
uncompleted tests that he maintains for his students. 
50. Respondent denied squatting down next to G.C., claiming he does not 
squat down next to students when checking their work. However, later when his 
attorney asked him to demonstrate how he checks students’ work, respondent 
squatted down, testifying he sometimes squats down next to a student’s desk. 
51. Respondent acknowledged he may have touched G.C.’s hair when he was 
tapping on the desk because her hair was covering the desk. He denied stroking her 
hair. He denied putting his arm around her. He denied touching her hand. He denied 
staring at her breasts. Respondent said “none [of that] happened at all.” 17 52. Respondent testified that the “most notable mistake” he made was being 
alone in his classroom with G.C., and he apologized for that. He described G.C. as a 
poor student who was absent a lot. He had sent an email to her and her parents 
advising that her “D” grade put her in danger of failing the course so she needed to 
put more effort into it. He did not get a reply to his email. 
53. February 16, 2024, was a Friday. Monday, February 19, 2024, was a school 
holiday. School resumed on Tuesday, February 20, 2024, which was when G.C. next 
encountered respondent. 
EVIDENCE RE:ALLEGATION NO.2(FEBRUARY 20, 2024, INCIDENT) 
54. The district alleged that on February 20, 2024, as G.C. was entering 
respondent’s class, he screamed and tried to scare her, making her visibly upset. 
Respondent stared at her chest, and continued to make her feel uncomfortable during 
class. After class, she reported his behavior to her fourth period teacher, who sent her 
to the principal’s office. 
G.C.’s Testimony 
55. G.C. testified that as she was entering respondent’s classroom, he acted 
like he was going to physically hit her or jump on her, and yelled “Ahh!” She screamed, 
“Don’t do it.” Respondent was laughing but “I was so scared of him,” which G.C. told 
him. During the entire class, respondent was attentive towards G.C., repeatedly asking 
if she was okay. G.C. was on the “brink of tears” the entire time she was in class. 
Respondent’s Testimony 
56. Respondent admitted he will say “Woo” to students with his arms up 
because “I am being silly, I admit it.” Students will laugh when he does it, “the idea is 18 humor.” As a result of this matter, respondent regrets doing this and making jokes in 
his classroom because some students perceive jokes differently than others so “I need 
to be more careful with that.” 
57. On February 20, 2024, G.C. was late to class and respondent’s door was 
already closed and locked per district safety protocols. Respondent had to go to the 
door to let G.C. into class. He opened the door and said, “Woo.” G.C. got scared and 
said, “Oh my God,” and “rocked back.” Before that, respondent was laughing and he 
was expecting G.C. to laugh. He did not expect her to get scared. He told her he was 
sorry, that it was not his intention to really scare her, he was just being silly. 
58. As G.C. was walking to her desk, there was no reaction from other 
students because they were working on the warm-up problems which he puts on the 
board for students to do at the start of class. Respondent then continued teaching his 
lesson. 
59. During the class, respondent remembered “something unusual as I was 
checking for [student] understanding.” Respondent had a problem on the board and 
was walking around checking for student understanding of the problem/concept and 
by the time he got to G.C. to check her understanding, “she goes to her blouse and 
brings the sleeves of the blouse down, [first] one, and then the other and then was 
smiling.” G.C. moved the sleeves of her blouse down below her shoulders. Respondent 
was surprised but did not say anything. He felt G.C. was “provoking me, I felt very 
uncomfortable.” 
60. Respondent testified that this was the first time a student had ever acted 
this way towards him and it was a “shocking event.” He does not know why he did not 19 report it or disclose it to Ms. MacLeod when interviewed. However, he did not 
associate that incident with the reason he was being interviewed by Ms. McLeod. 
Tyler Sampson’s Testimony 
61. After respondent’s third period mathematics class, G.C. went to her next 
class, a music class with Tyler Sampson. When she got there, she started crying and 
asked Mr. Sampson if she could “talk to him in private about something important.” 
She then reported to Mr. Sampson that respondent was acting very weird, being 
physical, and was scaring her. Mr. Sampson got up immediately, called the principal’s 
office, and told G.C. to report there. 
62. Mr. Sampson wrote a statement on February 20, 2024, during his lunch 
break, which was consistent with his testimony. He wrote, as written in original: 
Around 10:00 am on Tuesday February 20, 2024, [G.C.] came 
to me and asked to see a counselor. Upon returning she 
came to me crying and told me a teacher at desert mirage 
was making her uncomfortable by asking her to stay after 
class. Upon asking her why, she told me he would stare at 
her chest and inappropriately touch her, including playing 
with her hair and make her uncomfortable overall. When 
asked what teacher. She hesitated, stating she was worried 
about retaliation if it came out that she talked. I reassured 
her that wouldn’t happen. She then told me it was
[respondent] in room H2-128. At which point I tried to 
make contact with multiple parties that she might talk to, 
ultimately sending her to talk with Principal Sotelo, of 20 Desert Mirage High School. Which she left to go talk to her 
around 10:15-10:20 am.
Afterwards, I went to contact the thermal [sic] Sheriff’s 
Department but decided it best to wait until the end of the 
period so I didn’t have to risk prying ears hearing the 
conversation. Discretion for the student in question. I 
contacted them successfully around 10:47 am and followed 
the procedure with them.
63. Mr. Sampson taught guitar during the 2023-2024 school year. He has 
had sexual harassment prevention and mandated reporter training as part of his 
professional trainings. His impression of G.C. was that she was quiet, reserved, not a 
perfect or ideal student, she missed a lot of class, and did not do a lot of the work, but 
she was not disruptive and never caused any issues. 
64. On February 20, 2024, G.C. came to class “a little quieter than normal.” 
While Mr. Sampson was behind his desk, G.C. came up to him and wanted to have a 
discussion. He noticed she was in “visual distress” so he pulled her aside and asked 
what she wanted to talk about. She reported a teacher was acting inappropriately with 
her, had asked her to stay after class, and would do inappropriate things to her 
including touching her hair and making “sweet talk” to her. G.C. seemed “shaken, kind 
of closed off, had her hand on her arm, was often looking down, and had a shaky voice 
while talking” to Mr. Sampson. She was “visibly distressed.” 
65. After speaking with G.C. and sending her to the office, Mr. Sampson 
made sure that he recorded the encounter and notified police because he is a 
mandated reporter. He was “very paranoid about messing it up,” so took steps to 21 make sure he reported all to the proper authorities. He had a follow-up interview with 
police at the principal’s office and a district interview. 
66. Mr. Sampson could not recall whether G.C. missed his class on February 
16, 2024, but G.C. missing classes was “not unusual.” Of note, no school attendance 
records were offered by the district.
67. Mr. Sampson testified that this incident brought negative publicity to the 
school and impaired student/teacher relationships. It also disrupted his instructional 
day as he had to take time to address and report it.
G.C.’s Additional Testimony 
68. On her way to the office, G.C. ran into a friend in the hall. G.C. was crying 
and told her friend everything and why she was going to the office. Her friend told her 
to tell the principal everything and “hopefully they could do something about it.”
69. G.C. told Principal Sotelo what was going on and after speaking with the 
principal, G.C. was asked to write all of it down. The principal and the counselor both 
watched G.C. write her statement. G.C. told the principal that respondent touched her 
breast, which he did, even though she wrote in her statement that he “almost” touched 
it. In fact, while speaking with the principal, G.C. demonstrated how respondent 
rubbed the side of her breast.
Administrators’ Testimony 
70. Principal Sotelo received Mr. Sampson’s call because she happened to be 
in her office when he called, often she is out on campus. Mr. Sampson reported that 
he had a student who was crying that the principal needed to see and disclosed what 
she had told him which made Principal Sotelo “very concerned about [G.C.].” 22 71. When G.C. arrived at her office, she was crying. She reported that 
respondent made her stay after class when she was supposed to go to Mr. Sampson’s 
class but he “forced her to stay” and make up a test. She reported this happened the 
prior Friday [February 16, 2024]. Other students also missed the test but she was the 
only one he told to stay. Respondent had initially asked her several times to stay after 
school and she told him she could not, so he told her to stay after class. G.C. felt 
forced, she felt she had to stay, and she was missing Mr. Sampson’s class. 
72. Respondent closed both classroom doors which made her 
uncomfortable. G.C. was crying as she told Principal Sotelo what took place. Principal 
Sotelo then asked Assistant Principal Magana to join them so that the assistant 
principal could write notes and the principal could focus on what G.C. was saying. 
73. G.C. said at one point respondent stepped out of the class and G.C. put 
her head on the desk. When he came back to the classroom, respondent began 
touching her hair. He said, “Do not be sleeping on me.” G.C. said she had not fallen 
asleep, she was taking her test. G.C. then described how respondent squatted next to 
her, put his left hand next to her chest which made her really uncomfortable and 
grabbed her right hand with his right hand to start writing on her test. The whole time 
he was looking at her chest and his hand was touching the right side of her breast. 
74. Principal Sotelo asked G.C. to demonstrate how respondent touched her 
because G.C. was “crying and I could not understand her.” G.C. then demonstrated 
what respondent had done. G.C. reported that respondent moved his hand up the 
right side of her breast and touched her. He was also staring at her chest when he was 
holding her right hand. He continued to stare at her chest even when he returned to 
his desk. G.C. also described other occasions in class when respondent came close to 
her and was looking at her chest. 23 75. G.C. also reported that she had pulled her phone out to access Google, 
which she was allowed to do for the test, but respondent took her phone which 
“shocked” her. He started scrolling through it to a point he wanted G.C. to see on the 
Google notes. Respondent was also staring at her, making her very uncomfortable. She 
continued to tell him she needed to go to her next class. She did not want to be there. 
Eventually he told her she could go because he had “to go to the restroom anyway.”
76. G.C. next described the incident that took place on February 20, 2024. 
Respondent tried to scare her which made her shaken. He then said, “You are afraid of 
me.” That behavior is what “triggered her to say something.”
77. Principal Sotelo described G.C.’s misdemeanor as being very emotional 
and looking shocked. She was crying, shaking, “crying a lot,” and Principal Sotelo was 
“having a hard time trying to put the story together which is why I brought Assistant 
Principal Magana in so I could focus” on what G.C. was saying. 
78. G.C. reported feeling very uncomfortable in respondent’s class, and she 
did not want to be in it anymore. She felt targeted. She reported he would come close 
to her during class, he would look at her chest, and now that he had touched her hair 
and her chest, and grabbed her hand, she was very upset. G.C. “looked really shocked.” 
79. Assistant Principal Magana received a call to come take notes at the 
principal’s office. The principal and G.C. were sitting at the table, G.C. looked “very 
upset” and was crying, but Assistant Principal Magana did not know why. She sat down 
and began taking notes. Assistant Principal Magana’s testimony about what G.C. 
reported was consistent with Principal Sotelo’s testimony about what G.C. reported, 
especially that respondent touched her breast when he put his hand under her arm. 24 G.C. reported she “was afraid” and “just froze” when that happened. Assistant Principal 
Magana recalls G.C. saying respondent called her “pretty.” 
80. Assistant Principal Magana turned her notes over to human resources for 
its investigation, and does not know what happened to them. Respondent indicated 
they were never produced in discovery. 
81. Principal Sotelo said it is unusual for a teacher to have a student stay 
behind and miss the student’s next class. In such circumstances, the teacher will reach 
out to the next period teacher, but that did not occur. Also, it is recommended that 
teachers always keep their doors open and never be alone with students. 
82. Principal Sotelo left G.C. with Assistant Principal Magana who had her 
write a statement. Per district protocol, Principal Sotelo contacted Ms. McLeod and 
informed her what had happened. She also told Ms. McLeod she would send her an 
email with the information including G.C.’s statement, which she did.
83. In her email to Ms. McLeod, Principal Sotelo provided “a quick draft of 
notes that were taken while student [G.C.] was sharing this information with me and 
[Assistant Principal] Magana in my office.” Principal Sotelo wrote, as written in original: 
[Respondent] math joke around - random stuff didn’t see as 
anything bad. Target me for answers 
On Friday last week, 2/16 test due.. late and on her about 
making up the test missed but after class 
She said no I cant after school have something to do. 25 He said no you’re staying and closed the door. Sit her right 
next to his desk. Wasn’t saying much but looking at her
She pulled out phone and then
He stood up grabbed phone and scrolled randomly and 
told her to use this for the test on Google classroom. Use 
class notes. He left too. For 5 minutes and she put her head 
down 
He came back and stroked her hair with her head down. He 
told her to wake up don’t want you sleeping on Me. 
Then he came to her and wrapped left arm around hers arm 
and took pen with right hand and wrote. Left hand wrapped 
around was close to her chest got close to her then sat in 
front of her staring at her. 
She kept saying I really have to go then he let her go late to 
Sampsons class 
Today he screamed at her and said you’re scared of me. She 
said don’t scream at me it scares me. He tried to joke. 
He then kept walking by my desk staring at my chest. 
84. Principal Sotelo described the annual trainings teachers undergo, 
including trainings regarding mandated reporting, preventing sexual harassment, and 
proper student/teacher interactions. She also described the training she has 
undergone regarding investigating allegations and ensuring a fair process. 26 G.C.’s Written Statement
85. In her written statement, which she prepared at Principal Sotelo’s
suggestion, in which she wrote 10:45 on both the date and time lines, G.C.’s wrote, as 
written in original:
Feb, 16, there was this test that I had to due that was due 
long time ago that he kept insisting that I had to do it after 
class and I kept saying no I have something to do I really 
have to go by said no multiple times but he kept saying no 
that he wants me to stay their was multiple kids that haven’t 
finished be he didn’t say nothing to them only need and he 
stood up and close both doors and told me to sit down 
right their basically next to his desk so I sat down and took 
my test and each time I turned around he would be staring 
at me I felt very uncomtable and I took my phone out and I 
was gonna go to class notes to help me but he stood up 
and took my phone away and started scrolling trough it and 
then went to google classroom and put the class notes 
without my permission I was just like what the fu** is going 
on and he told me use that I was like okay so I was using it 
he got out of the class room cor about smth and I put my 
head down cuz I was so bored and he came and started 
stroking my hair and play with it I put my head put really 
quick and he told me don’t fall asleep on me coninte with 
the test and I was just looking at it and he came to me and 
put his arm around mine amost touching my tit his should 27 was the like he kept lenning on the holding my hand Also 
and I saw he was looking at my chest a lot I was getting 
really weird out and he stood up in front of my desk and 
bended down whirling looking at me do my past and I 
looked at him and he said continute doing it and I told him 
you know what I really have to go and he said no and I 
conitnted saying I have to get to class and he like okay go I 
have noted the restroom anyway so I left and I went to 
guitar. 
February 20, I was on my way to class he was waiting by the 
door and when I was gonna go in he screamed at me and 
acted like he was going to atack me and I got scared and I 
jumped he stared laughing at me saying your scared of me 
and I told him not to scare me I really felt like crying, and 
then every thing I did like say I was okay like if I make the 
smallest noise he would say if I am okay and would pass 
alot next to my desk and sometimes just stand their and I 
looked up and notice he was looking at my test the whole I 
was really really uncomfortable I could wait to get outa 
class I can’t foces at all in their I can’t fouces in any of my 
classes to be honest and when I noticed he was looking at 
my chest I really felt like crying I hold my tears and I 
couldn’t hold them for long and I told my guitar teacher 
about it I told him can I tell you something I told him thar 
this teacher that forcerly makes me stay after class and I 28 stared sobbing on him I couldn’t hold it back and I told him 
if I could talk with someone 
I don’t remember the date exactly but it when I stared 
notices this wasn’t right it’s when I had these really nice 
pure of gloves on my hand and he came holded my hand 
took my gloves off and he stared wearing them with saying 
anything then came back saying these are for girls Ion want 
them he does this a lot like gets thing without permission 
like my iPad my notebook my food or drinks. 
86. After reporting the incident, G.C. was transferred out of respondent’s 
mathematics class. However, she later stopped going to school because she was 
scared to see respondent. She was very anxious, had anxiety attacks, and did not want 
to see anyone anymore. 
87. Principal Sotelo contacted G.C.’s mother to report the incident. Given 
how shaken up G.C. was by it, her mother requested G.C. be enrolled in independent 
study, which she was. G.C. has not returned to the high school since these incidents. 
88. Principal Sotelo testified these incidents have had a negative impact on 
both her and the school. It is her responsibility to keep students safe and ensure that 
parents feel their children are safe at school. She is concerned there will be a 
recurrence of respondent’s behavior if he is allowed to return and these incidents have 
impaired relationships between teachers and students. Dr. Makiewicz also testified 
these incidents brought negative publicity to the school. 29 G.C’s and Respondent’s Testimony About Restaurant
89. G.C. has seen respondent in the community, at stores “a lot.” Each time 
he looks at her “with so much hatred like he wants to strangle me.” Respondent and 
her family also encountered him at a local restaurant. G.C. did not see respondent until 
she was seated but ignored him as she did not want to make a scene. After he left, she 
told her family he was the teacher involved in her matter and her mother said that 
explained why respondent was looking at G.C. “very strangely.” 
90. Respondent testified that he and his mother were at a restaurant before 
going to church when G.C. and her family entered. He noticed them because the 
restaurant was fairly empty but the family came and sat at a table right next to him 
and his mother. He recalls at some point G.C.’s mother had her phone out and he 
could not tell if she was texting or filming and G.C.’s family members were staring at 
him. He and his mom left about 10 to 15 minutes after G.C.’s family arrived. 
EVIDENCE REGARDING ADMISSIBLE PART OF ALLEGATION NO. 6 
91. The district alleged that respondent once called G.C. a “little calientita” 
after observing G.C. kiss her then boyfriend. The district alleged this translates to “little 
hot babe.”
92. G.C. testified that she was kissing her boyfriend goodbye before entering 
respondent’s classroom and in Spanish he called her “calientita,” which translates to 
“very horny,” an expression used to call someone very horny. G.C. was stunned, but 
ignored the comment and “did not put much thought into it.” 
93. Respondent denied making that statement, but did recall saying, “Don’t 
get hickies” to a student. 30 EVIDENCE REGARDING ADMISSIBLE PART OF ALLEGATION NO.7 
94. The district alleged that during the 2023-2024 school year, G.C. had a 
pair of gloves on during respondent’s class. Respondent held G.C.’s hand, took her 
gloves off, then put the gloves on himself. During the 2023-2024 school year, 
respondent took G.C.’s belongings without her permission on multiple occasions. 
95. G.C. testified that her then boyfriend had given her a pair of black gloves 
as a gift. She was wearing them when respondent grabbed her wrist without her 
permission, took the gloves away from her, and began wearing them in his classroom. 
This took place in front of the other students in the class. Respondent continued 
teaching the class while wearing G.C.’s gloves. Respondent gave the gloves back at the 
end of class but G.C. was “really, really mad he took them away.” 
96. G.C. testified that respondent took her iPad and cell phone without her 
permission on several occasions. She denied that he ever took her purse. 
97. Respondent denied taking G.C.’s gloves. He did not deny he took G.C’s 
iPad and cell phone. 
EVIDENCE REGARDING ADMISSIBLE PART OF ALLEGATION NO. 9 
98. The district alleged that respondent asked G.C. to stay after class, during 
lunch, or after school, to makeup tests and/or assignments. 
99. G.C. testified respondent made her stay after class. Respondent denied 
keeping G.C. after class, but acknowledged that students did come into his classroom 
during his lunch and after school to make up work. 31 EVIDENCE REGARDING ALLEGATION NO.10 
100. The district alleged respondent was dishonest when interviewed by Ms. 
McLeod because he denied touching and/or smelling G.C.’s hair or making improper 
jokes. He denied keeping students alone in his classroom, claiming he had two or 
more students stay at a time in his classroom.
101. Ms. McLeod testified about her interview of respondent and the notes 
she took during that interview were introduced. Respondent initially said he never kept 
students in class, then later said he might have kept some students in class. At first he 
was adamant he had not done so and then admitted maybe he had. His answers were 
not consistent. However, Ms. McLeod wrote in her notes: “don’t remember only one 
student,” and that respondent asked for information regarding the students making 
the allegations but she did not provide that information to him. 
102. Respondent also told Ms. McLeod that he thought the student was lying 
when she asked him if he kept a student after class or touched a student. Respondent 
could not recall if he smelled a student’s hair. He said the student was lying when Ms. 
McLeod asked if he ever touched a student’s hair. 
103. Ms. McLeod felt respondent was not being honest during the interview. 
She felt he was not truthful when answering questions, and at one point during the 
interview the union representative present said “that was enough,” and the interview 
ended. 
104. Respondent denied lying when interviewed. He was told about the 
allegations and said the students were lying. He asked for the specific names and class 
periods of when the incidents allegedly took place, and Ms. McLeod would not provide 32 that information to him. He was trying to explain to her the options his students had 
when choosing to complete missing work and she found that “contradictory.” 
105. Respondent explained that when asked if he ever had a student alone in 
his classroom he told Ms. McLeod that he could not recall ever doing that and she 
interpreted that to mean he was lying. He explained that when he was interviewed, he 
could not recall ever having a student alone and he was not told who made that claim.
 MEETING EVIDENCE 
106. Mr. Nichols served as the  officer, testifying he never had any 
official training. This was the first time he ever did a  meeting for a certificated 
employee, he had done ones for classified employees. He reviewed the district’s file 
and agreed with the district’s decision. At hearing, he had “a hard time remembering” 
most of the statements he reviewed given how “long ago” he reviewed them. He did 
recall G.C. claimed respondent touched her breast which respondent denied. He did 
not recall there being a discrepancy between G.C.’s written statement that respondent 
“almost touched” her breast and her oral claims he touched it. He did not review Ms. 
McLeod’s notes of her interview with respondent. Mr. Nichols never made a specific 
finding regarding dishonesty. 
107. Respondent submitted written responses rather than attend the 
meeting. In his first response dated January 13, 2025, respondent began by 
acknowledging the time and process district personnel had taken to investigate the 
allegations. Respondent wrote, “I acknowledge that I am not perfect, can improve how 
I communicate and interact with students, and accept some measure of responsibility 
for poor efforts at humor and sarcasm. However, I respectfully object to a [ ] 
disagree with most of the allegations levied in the draft charges.” Respondent then 33 detailed his education and employment background, noting the high scores and 
improvements his students have achieved, including respondent receiving an 
acknowledgment when his “students scored on the top 10 highest from” the district on 
the benchmark tests administered.
108. Respondent acknowledged the 2019 incident. He wrote that since that 
time he has “been mindful of maintaining boundaries with students as to personal 
space, not touching (except, rarely, to redirect their attention for behavior such as a 
shoulder tap or nudge) and in communications with students, verbally and in writing.”
Respondent referenced a November 2021 closed head injury he suffered that caused 
concussion symptoms which eventually required brain surgery in January 2022, 
resulting in “episodes of disorientation and some memory lapses on-and-off.” (No 
other facts about this injury were introduced.)
109. Respondent provided his bell schedule and described his classroom 
layout. He acknowledged walking around his classroom to check for student 
understanding and help students but he does “not violate students’ personal space, 
meaning I do not get excessively close when helping them. I tap students on the 
shoulder and tell them ‘good job, you got it, do you need help, you did a little mistake 
on this part of the problem’, but am not ‘touchy’ nor inappropriate.” Respondent next 
provided background information regarding each of the students referenced in the 
Statement of Charges. He noted that even though many of the students had different 
issues, he was committed to supporting and encouraging them to reach their potential 
and succeed. He “encouraged all my students to ask questions when they do not 
understand a concept, and I was always willing to support and explain the math each 
time they needed my help.”34 110. Respondent noted that the Statement of Charges only referenced 
“snippets of the students’ written statement and/or their interviews” with district 
personnel. He requested seeing the full statements and notes, pointing out that 
several of the statements “include positive comments about me that are not consistent 
with others’ allegations.” 
111. Regarding G.C.’s allegations respondent wrote: 
[G.C.] did stay after-school to make up a quiz in mid-
February 2024. I remember telling [G.C.] to pay attention 
during class lecture about solving multistep equations by 
applying the distributive property, the quiz was on solving 
two-step equations. I noticed that [G.C.] solved the 
problems on solving multistep equations by applying the 
distributive property correctly. Seeing she was ready for the 
quiz, I asked [G.C.], when she was going to finish it. I offered 
her staying for my 4th period to finish the quiz. She said she 
had something to do during 4th period, but that she would 
come back to my classroom after-school to finish the quiz. I 
did not direct her to do so but was willing to accommodate 
her schedule. 
112. Respondent wrote of his policy to allow students to make up quizzes 
during class time, during lunchtime, during a different class period with permission 
from that period’s teacher, or after school. Students must let him “know in advance” 
which option they do so he can “wait for them after class or during lunchtime.” 35 113. Respondent wrote that G.C. showed up at his classroom after school on 
February 16, 2024, and sat in her own desk. He told her she could use notes from 
Google classroom but noticed she was not finding the notes on her phone. He asked 
to assist her and showed her where to find the notes on her phone, giving her phone 
back to her and returning to his desk as she started the quiz. He monitored her to 
ensure she was not cheating but “did not stare as she claims.” Respondent wrote, as 
written in original, that while he was at his desk: 
12. . . . I noticed that she had her head down on her desk. I 
called out her name several times with no response, so I 
then approached her desk. I first tapped on the desk and 
may have touched her hair some since it was covering her 
desk. She didn’t respond, so I tapped her shoulder calling 
her name. Still no response. All of the sudden, she lifts her 
head up quickly with a surprised look on her face. I asked: 
“are you okay, I thought that something happened to you; 
were you sleeping? Please don’t fall asleep. She says she 
had to go. I responded that she was almost done with the 
test, with one more problem to go, why not just finish it 
now, and get it done. She insisted that she had to go, and I 
said fine, just study the word problem that you still need to 
finish. In retrospect, I should not have been alone with the 
student in my classroom. That was my mistake. 
13. I didn’t think much of her departure and to my 
knowledge she didn’t complain or report any incident. But 
the next week, her behavior upon arriving to class was odd. 36 It was like she was trying to provoke me. I should’ve 
reported that sentiment to a site administrator.
[¶] . . .[¶] 
I sincerely apologize for any of my actions/judgment that 
were perceived as inappropriate. I’m prepared to accept 
reasonable consequences, including a suspension of some 
material duration and undertake further training about 
classroom management and/or teacher-student 
boundaries. 
I respectfully request the Board appreciate my years of 
dedicated service to this District, the foregoing facts, and 
my willingness to take proactive steps to improve how I 
communicate and interact with student [ ], and my 
contrition, to not impose the most severe forms of 
punishment -- a suspension of unlimited duration and 
termination of my employment.
An immediate suspension without pay and benefits would 
deprive me of the funding necessary to cover the cost of 
on-going medical care.
114. Respondent submitted a revised written statement the next day where he 
corrected his bell schedule and added the following to paragraph 12:
As G.C. entered the classroom, I left my classroom door 
open (the door that is inside the pod). She was about to 37 start the quiz when a student started to make noise by 
laughing and making noise right next to my classroom pod 
door. [G.C.] told me that she could not concentrate because 
of the noise from the pod. She stood up and closed the 
door. I went to the pod to see what was going on, opened 
the door, and I found a female student leaning on my 
classroom’s wall next to the door. I asked the female 
student if she needed anything. She said no, she said that 
[G.C.] was her friend, and that she was waiting for [G.C.]. I 
then invited the female student to enter the classroom and 
wait for [G.C.] inside the classroom. The female student said 
that she had to go somewhere, and then she left. Then, I 
went to my desk and [G.C.] started the quiz. 
115. Respondent submitted a third revised statement, dated April 2, 2025, but 
it did not revise paragraphs 12 or 13 any further. 
Character Witness Testimony 
116. Jose Angel is a math teacher in the district who has known respondent as 
a colleague since 2012. They initially worked together at the middle school before 
working together at Desert Mirage High School. Their classrooms are pretty close. Mr. 
Angel never saw or heard about respondent engaging in any inappropriate conduct 
with students. Respondent never did or said anything that was inappropriate or 
disrespectful during mathematics department meetings. Mr. Angel described how 
students often hang out in the classrooms during lunch but agreed it is not 
appropriate for a teacher to be alone with a student in the classroom or have the door 
closed. Touching students is also inappropriate. 38 117. Howard Pass is a special education teacher who has been employed with 
the district for 26 years. He provides mathematics support to students and did so in 
respondent’s classroom approximately 15 minutes every day as he and respondent 
had different lunch schedules. Mr. Pass provided support in respondent’s fourth period 
mathematics class. He never observed respondent doing anything inappropriate. Mr. 
Pass has an opportunity to observe many teachers and “learning was always 
happening” in respondent’s class, something he does not always see in other classes. 
Because of the types of students Mr. Pass helps, there are times when he will be alone 
with a student with the door closed to keep the student’s matter confidential. 
However, he agreed it is appropriate to keep boundaries with students and there is no 
reason for a teacher to place his arm around a student. 
Respondent’s Performance Evaluations and Email 
118. An undated performance evaluation done when respondent worked at 
the middle school documented that he received meets or exceeds standards scores. 
He “has demonstrated knowledge of the content area and is consistent with the 
home/school communication.” Respondent “supports his department team members 
above and beyond.”
119. Principal Sotelo signed respondent’s 2020 performance plan which is the 
document teachers review and prepare at the beginning of each school year. It 
requires them to review California teaching standards and document how they will 
meet those standards in their classrooms. It gives teachers an opportunity to reflect on 
the standards and how to meet them during the upcoming school year.
120. Principal Sotelo did the classroom observation for respondent’s 2023 
performance evaluation. She noted he used a variety of strategies to meet students’ 39 diverse learning needs, promoted social development and responsibility within a 
caring community where each student was treated fairly and respectfully, organized 
his curriculum to facilitate student understanding, and addressed the needs of English 
learners and special needs students to provide equitable access to the course content. 
Principal Sotelo testified that during her observation, she did not see any behavior that 
concerned her regarding respondent’s interaction with students.
121. Respondent’s final teacher evaluation before these allegations were 
made also documented that he got meets or exceeds standards scores. He was 
commended for connecting with students, using a variety of strategies, promoting 
social development responsibility, organizing his content, and addressing the needs of 
all students. 
122. A September 19, 2023, email from a University of California, Irvine, 
mathematics team thanked respondent for allowing them to observe his classroom 
and praised him for how he used the mathematics lessons the team created. The email 
was very complimentary on how respondent implemented the programs that team 
developed. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
Applicable Code Sections Regarding Dismissal Actions 
1. A permanent employee may be dismissed for cause only after a dismissal 
hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44934 & 44944.)
2. Education Code section 44932 provides the grounds for dismissing a 
permanent employee. Subdivision (a)(1) authorizes dismissal for immoral conduct. 40 Subdivision (a)(4) authorizes dismissal for dishonesty. Subdivision (a)(6) authorizes 
dismissal for evident unfitness for service. 
3. Education Code section 44944 establishes the right to a hearing, the 
process for selecting the three-member Commission on Professional Competence, and 
sets forth the Commission’s authority regarding its final decision. 
4. Education Code section 44938 outlines the procedures the governing 
board must follow before acting on any charges brought against a permanent 
employee. 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
5. The “burden of proof” means the obligation of a party, to convince the 
trier of fact that the existence of a fact sought to be proved is more probable than its 
nonexistence. (  (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 1121, 
1128.) The district has the burden of proof to establish cause to dismiss its employee.
6. The standard of proof in a teacher dismissal proceeding is a 
preponderance of the evidence. (
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) A preponderance of the evidence means that 
the evidence on one side of an issue outweighs, preponderates over, and is more than, 
the evidence on the other side of the issue, not necessarily in number of witnesses or 
quantity, but in the convincing effect the evidence has on those to whom it is 
addressed. In other words, the term refers to evidence that has more convincing force 
than that opposed to it. ( (2009) 171 
Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 41 Sexual Harassment Defined by Code 
7. Education Code section 212.5 defines sexual harassment. The evidence 
did not support a finding that respondent engaged in sexual harassment. 
Applicable Board Policies, Administrative Regulations and Ethics Code 
8. Board Policy Nos. 4119.21, 4119.24, 5137, 5141.4, 5145.3, Administrative 
Regulation No. 4118, and Code of Ethics of the Education Profession No. E 4119.21, set 
forth the professional standards the board expects of its employees. As noted, the 
board expects district employees to “maintain the highest ethical standards, behave 
professionally, follow district policies and regulations,” “exercise good judgment when 
interacting with students and other members of the school community,” and “engage 
in conduct that enhances the integrity of the district, advances the goals of the 
district’s educational programs, and contributes to a positive school climate.” 
9. The district did not charge respondent with persistent violation of these 
policies and many were procedural policies only. The Commission found respondent 
violated Board Policy No. 4119.21 because he did not show good judgement. The 
Commission also found respondent violated Board Policy No. 4119.24 because his 
actions were inappropriate and undermined trust in adult-student relationships. 
Relevant Judicial Authority 
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
10. “Immoral conduct” is conduct hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and is not confined to sexual matters. (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)42 11. There are certain professions which impose upon persons attached to 
them responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action, which do not exist in 
regard to other callings. Public officials such as judges, policemen, and schoolteachers 
fall into such a category. ( (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 
824.) 
12. “As between a teacher and his student, ‘(a)n important part of the 
education . . . is the instilling of a proper respect for authority and obedience to 
necessary discipline. Lessons are learned from example as well as from precept.’ 
(Citation.) ‘A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and 
pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 
by the [students] coming under [his] care and protection. . . . The teaching by example 
as well as precept, of obedience to properly constituted authority and discipline 
necessary to a well ordered society, is an important part of education.’” (
(1971) 22 Cal.App.3d 559, 565.)
13. “The calling of an educator is so intimate, its duties so delicate, the things 
in which a teacher might prove unworthy or would fail are so numerous that they are 
incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment. The educator’s ability to inspire 
children and to govern them, his power as an educator, and the character for which he 
stands are matters of major concern in an educator’s selection and retention. . . . An 
educator in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light 
of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the students 
coming under his care and protection. (Citation.)” (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-64.) 
14. The governing board of a district is entrusted with the conduct of the 
schools under its jurisdiction, their standards of education, and the moral, mental, and 43 physical welfare of the pupils during school hours. An important part of the education 
of any child is the instilling of a proper respect for authority and obedience to 
necessary discipline. Lessons are learned from example as well as from precept. “Book 
learning” is only a phase of the important lessons a child should learn in a school. 
(  (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 
967, 970–71.) 
15. Immoral conduct cannot be considered in the abstract. It must be 
considered in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public; more specifically, conduct which is hostile 
to the welfare of the school community. In providing standards to guide school boards 
in placing restraints on conduct of teachers, the Legislature is concerned with the 
welfare of the school community. Its objective is the protection of students from 
corruption. This is a proper exercise of the power of a state to abridge personal liberty 
and to protect larger interests. But reasonableness must be the governing criterion. 
( (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224.) The phrase “immoral 
conduct” within the meaning of the Education Code denotes immoral or 
unprofessional conduct or moral turpitude of the teacher that renders the teacher 
unfit to teach. ( at p. 225.)
16. The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 
the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. The term “immoral 
conduct” has been defined to include conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative 
of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare. “Immoral conduct” is not confined to sexual matters. It includes an 44 inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. It is sometimes 
synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, noting that 
no other California cases had previously defined the term “immoral conduct.”) 
17. Rejecting statutory terms, such as “immorality,” “unprofessional conduct,” 
or “moral turpitude” as overly broad to use as grounds for discipline of public school 
teachers, the court in created a seven-part test to assess whether a 
misbehaving teacher is fit to teach. (
(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 466.) “Because terms such as ‘immoral,’ 
‘unprofessional,’ or ‘involving moral turpitude’ are too broad and amorphous to be 
used as a basis for the termination of a professional license, it must be shown the 
conduct in question indicates an unfitness to engage in the profession.” ( pp. 
473-74.)
18. Since the term “immoral conduct” is vague and broad, whether the 
conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach must be measured against seven criteria 
set forth in . (
(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 383.)
DISHONESTY  
19. In  (1988) 45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn 
12, the Supreme Court required application of the  factors to the 
determination of “dishonesty.” As the Court noted: “Dishonest conduct may range 
from the smallest fib to the most flagrant lie. Not every impropriety will constitute 
immoral or unprofessional conduct, and not every falsehood will constitute 
‘dishonesty’ as a ground for discipline.” ( .) 45 20. In an often-cited definition, the court stated in 
 (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 712, 717: 
Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of bad faith. As 
defined in the dictionaries and in judicial decisions, it means 
fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness. [Citations.] As put 
by the court in , 91 Tex. Cr. 224, . . . 
‘dishonesty denotes an absence of integrity; a disposition to 
cheat, deceive or defraud; deceive and betray.’
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
21. The applicable standard or determinative test in teacher dismissal cases 
is whether the person is fit to teach. “Fitness to teach” is a question of ultimate fact. 
(  (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 
555, 560-561.) 
22. “Evident” is defined as “clear to the vision and understanding.” “Unfit” is 
defined as “not fit; not adapted to a purpose, unsuitable; incapable; incompetent; and 
physically or mentally unsound” and “unsuitable, incompetent and not adapted for a 
particular use or service.” (
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 
23. In 
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, the court noted the two parallel, yet 
contradictory, lines of cases regarding “unfit for service.” One line of cases equated 
that term with “unprofessional conduct” and the other line of cases distinguished the 
two definitions. In deciding that the latter line of cases was the correct way to evaluate 
“unfit to serve,” and complied with the rules of statutory construction, the 46 court concluded that “unprofessional conduct” and “evident unfitness for service” do 
not mean precisely the same thing. Although conduct constituting “evident unfitness 
for service” will often constitute “unprofessional conduct,” the converse is not always 
true. Evident unfitness for service requires that unfitness for service be attributable to 
defect in temperament, which is not necessary for a finding of unprofessional conduct. 
Nevertheless, lower courts may not disregard the criteria for unfitness set out in 
where that court concluded that “unprofessional conduct” meant conduct 
showing a teacher was unfit to teach. These criteria must be analyzed to determine, as 
a threshold matter, whether the conduct indicates unfitness for service. If it does, the 
next step is to determine whether the “unfitness” is “evident”; i.e., whether the 
offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. ( at pp.1442-1445.) A 
finding of “unfit to serve” can be made if the evidence, taken in the aggregate, shows 
that retaining the employee would pose a significant danger of psychological harm to 
students and fellow teachers. ( . at p.1456.)
24. To establish a teacher is unfit to teach, requires a nexus 
between government employment and alleged employee misconduct stemming from 
the principle that “[n]o person can be denied government employment because of 
factors unconnected with the responsibilities of that employment.” (
(2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th1454, 1463.) 
25. “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes 
a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 
one’s conduct fails to meet the expectation of the employing school district.” (
(2013) 214 
Cal.App.4th 1120, 1142-43.) 47 26. An employee’s actions on a given day may suggest a lack of judgment 
and discretion, or may be an isolated act precipitated by an unusual accumulation of 
pressure and stress. An absence of any other incidents in the employee’s teaching 
career suggestive of lack of judgment or discretion can further distinguish the aberrant 
character of the act at issue. In such a case, a fact finder could reasonably conclude 
that the isolated incident of poor judgment was overweighed by years of 
demonstrated teaching competence, and that on balance the employee possessed the 
qualities of character necessary for teaching fitness. (
(1977) 19 Cal. 3d 691, 696-701.) 
27. The nexus between an employee’s conduct and his fitness to teach is 
established when the conduct is detrimental to the mission and functions of the 
employer. Factors to consider are whether the acts demonstrate a serious lapse in 
good judgment, the teacher failed to recognize the seriousness of his misconduct, the 
teacher attempted to shift blame to parents and students who might access his 
posting, his principal had lost confidence in his ability to serve as a role model based 
upon the posting, or, most noteworthy, the teacher’s testimony that he did not think 
his postings would have any impact on his ability to teach his students if any of them 
had viewed his post and that he did not view his posting as immoral. The conduct 
itself, together with the teacher’s failure to accept responsibility or recognize the 
seriousness of it, given his position as a teacher and role model, demonstrates evident 
unfitness to teach. (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1465-66.) 
28. One act does not alone demonstrate the unfitness of the teacher, but is 
simply one of the factors to be considered. (
 (1980) 102 Cal. App.3d 555, 561-62.) 48 29. There must be a nexus between the teacher’s conduct and his usefulness 
to the school district and only when so construed can grounds to dismiss for immoral 
conduct or unfitness to serve be constitutionally applied. (
(1975) 50 Cal. App. 3d 920, 929.)
Evaluation of the Causes for Dismissal
IMMORAL CONDUCT EVALUATION
30. Two Commission members found cause exists to dismiss respondent
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), because complainant 
proved by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent engaged in immoral 
conduct. 
31. G.C. appeared as a truthful witness and her statements were consistent. 
The difference between her oral statements that respondent rubbed her breast versus 
her written statement that he “almost touched” her breast was not enough to find her 
not credible, and touching her versus almost touching was irrelevant. Respondent was 
close enough to G.C. to make her uncomfortable. In fact, although he initially denied it, 
respondent demonstrated how he reviews students’ work by crouching down next to 
them, which was what G.C. alleged he did. Further, respondent’s claim that G.C. pulled 
down her shirt and “provoked” him not only seemed false, but also an effort to blame 
the victim. It was curious that in his three written statements he never made the “lower 
her shirt” claim, only that “her behavior upon arriving to class was odd. It was like she 
was trying to provoke me.” His “upon arriving to class” claim was also not consistent 
with his testimony that G.C.’s lowered her shirt when he was walking around the 
classroom checking students’ work.49 32. Moreover, both Principal Sotelo and Assistant Principal Magana testified 
that G.C. reported that respondent rubbed her breast when they interviewed her on 
February 20, 2024. G.C.’s demeanor as described by Mr. Sampson and these two 
administrators, and as shown at this hearing, was consistent with one subject to 
inappropriate advances. On balance, G.C.’s testimony was credible and supported by 
the evidence, including the text messages she sent from respondent’s class referring to 
his behavior towards her. There was no other reasonable explanation for those texts. 
33. Respondent insisting G.C. came after school and that he did not make 
her stay after class was his attempt to explain away G.C.’s 9:50 a.m. text messages. If he 
admitted he kept her after class, then the text messages could only refer to him. But, 
by claiming she came after school, then he could argue, as he did here, that the text 
messages did not refer to him. However, the time of the text messages corroborated 
G.C.’s testimony and were a condemning piece of evidence. Further, at 9:50 a.m., G.C. 
would not yet be in Mr. Sampson’s class to send these texts, and since he was the one 
in whom she confided and clearly trusted, not one who “creeped her out,” the texts 
can only be about respondent. Moreover, it was highly doubtful any student would 
remain on campus after school on the Friday of a three-day holiday weekend. 
34. Two members of the Commission also found that respondent making the 
“little calientita” comment, taking G.C.’s gloves and her other personal items without 
her permission, were inappropriate and constituted immoral conduct. 
DISHONESTY EVALUATION
35. Cause does not exist to dismiss respondent pursuant to Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(4), because complainant did not prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent engaged in dishonesty. 50 36. Respondent failing to recall certain facts when interviewed is not the 
same as lying or knowingly misrepresenting facts. Respondent also did not know 
which students were making the allegations against him when interviewed, making his 
answers reasonable. 
EVIDENTLY UNFIT FOR SERVICE EVALUATION
37. Two members of the Commission found cause exists to dismiss 
respondent pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), because 
complainant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that respondent was 
evidently unfit for service. 
38. Respondent’s actions on February 16, 2024, and February 20, 2024, with 
G.C., his taking her gloves and other personal items, his admission to scaring students, 
and the findings regarding immoral conduct, make him unfit to serve as a teacher. 
 Factors 
39. Having found cause to discipline respondent, the issue becomes what 
discipline to impose. In deciding that question, the seminal case for teacher dismissals 
is (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214. The Supreme Court held 
that a district “cannot abstractly characterize the conduct . . . as ‘immoral,’ 
‘unprofessional,’ or ‘involving moral turpitude’ . . . unless that conduct indicates that 
the [teacher] is unfit to teach.” ( . at p. 229.) The Supreme Court suggested seven 
factors to consider when evaluating whether the school employee should be 
dismissed: 51 (1) the likelihood that the conduct adversely affected 
students or fellow teachers and the degree of such 
adversity; 
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 
(3) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; 
(4) the existence of extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the 
conduct; 
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct; 
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 
and 
(7) the extent that the discipline may adversely impact or 
have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the 
teacher. 
(.)
The Supreme Court found these “factors are relevant to the extent that they 
assist the [district] in determining whether the teacher's fitness to teach, i.e., in 
determining whether the teacher's future classroom performance and overall impact 
on his students are likely to meet the [district’s] standards. ( . at pp. 229-230.) An 
employee can be dismissed from the teaching profession only upon a showing that his 
retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to either students, 52 school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions as a teacher. The 
inquiry is whether any adverse inferences can be drawn from the teacher’s conduct as 
to his teaching ability, or as to the possibility that publicity surrounding the past 
conduct may in and of itself substantially impair his function as a teacher. ( . at p
235.) Those factors were considered in this decision. 
40. The notoriety and publicity accorded the conduct may also be 
considered. ( at p. 702, footnote 5.)
41. The factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate.
When a camel’s back is broken, the trier of fact need not weigh each straw in its load 
to see which one could have done the deed. A trier of fact is entitled to consider the 
totality of the offensive conduct. (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1456-1457.) 
42. Only the pertinent factors need to be analyzed. (
 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 476.) 
43. Unprofessional conduct has been defined as conduct, measured by the 
factors, which indicates unfitness to teach. ( (19 
70) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696-697; (1983) 
149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1173-1174.) 
44. Applying the pertinent factors to the facts here, two members 
of the Commission found that respondent’s conduct adversely affected students or 
fellow teachers and cast the district in a negative light; the incidents occurred fairly 
recently, happening during the 2023-2024 school year; respondent acknowledged 
having a student alone in the classroom was improper, especially with the doors 
closed; respondent was on notice not to touch students and to act professionally 53 towards them but even by his own admissions, he continued to “tap” students in his 
classroom and tell jokes; it is likely respondent’s behavior will recur as he scared G.C. 
the next time he saw her after the February 16, 2024, incident and admitted to scaring 
other students and making jokes; and disciplining respondent on the facts presented 
here will not adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 
other teachers in the district. 
Other Disciplinary Considerations 
45. An administrator’s loss of confidence in the educator and doubt 
regarding the educator’s ability to serve as a role model for students are factors that 
may be considered. (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1460.)
46. The Commission is vested with discretion not to dismiss an employee 
even if grounds for discipline exist. ( (1988) 
45 Cal.3d 209.) 
Commission’s Determination 
47. Having found respondent engaged in immoral conduct and evidently
unfit for service, and considering the case law and applicable factors, two 
members of the Commission determined that cause exists to dismiss respondent from 
employment in the district. 54 ORDER
Respondent’s appeal of his dismissal from employment with Coachella Valley 
Unified School District is denied. The district’s request to dismiss respondent is 
granted. Respondent shall be dismissed from employment with the district. 
DATE: 
KATE KEENER 
Commission Member 
DATE: 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
Dissent of Amar Samet 
I dissent to the Commission’s conclusions that cause exists to dismiss 
respondent pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), immoral 
conduct, or (a)(6), evident unfitness to teach. I dissent to the Commission’s conclusion 
that cause exists to dismiss respondent. 
While it was clear that something happened between respondent and G.C. that 
made her uncomfortable and caused her to report respondent’s behavior to the 
district, immoral conduct was not shown. Since respondent was monitoring G.C. taking 
an exam, he would have to watch her. There was also a discrepancy as to when the 
incident occurred and it was unclear why respondent insisted it happened at the end 55 of the day, yet G.C. insisted it happened after class. As to the February 20, 2024, 
scaring incident, there was not enough evidence to find respondent’s explanation not 
credible. Respondent was trying to engage students, and while doing so by scaring 
them showed a lack of judgment, his actions were not sufficient to dismiss him from 
employment. Taking G.C.’s gloves and making the “little calientita” comment also did 
not rise to the level of constituting immoral conduct. 
Respondent has an excellent educational background and teachers with his 
mathematics training and credentials are difficult to find, especially in districts like 
Coachella Valley Unified School District. There was no evidence that respondent has a 
fixed character trait making him unfit to serve, and respondent agreed to undergo 
additional training to improve his teaching skills. 
When applying the factors, I find that respondent has an excellent 
educational background which is sorely needed, and he should be allowed to remain a 
teacher in the district. I disagree it is likely respondent’s conduct will recur as he now 
recognizes the error of making jokes, scaring students, or being alone with students. I 
think dismissing respondent on these facts, including his willingness to change and 
undergo additional training, will adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the 
constitutional rights of other teachers. 
DATE: 
AMAR SAMET 
Commission Member 