BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND A 
COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE FOR 
MONTEBELLO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Dismissal of: 
GEORGE MURIEL, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent. 
OAH No. 2025010426 
DECISION 
This matter was heard by the Commission on Professional Competence 
(Commission) via videoconference on May 12 through May 15, 2025. The Commission 
consists of (1) John Chae, Alhambra Unified School District; (2) Marla Diaz, El Rancho 
Unified School District; and (3) Taylor Steinbacher, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), 
Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California. ALJ Steinbacher presided. 
Marina L. Ramirez, Esq. of Alvarez-Glasman & Colvin represented Montebello 
Unified School District (District). 
Respondent George Muriel appeared briefly on the first day of hearing, but 
otherwise was not present and was not represented. 2 Before the presentation of evidence, respondent appeared and moved for a 
continuance. The ALJ denied the motion, finding respondent had not established good 
cause to continue the matter under Government Code section 11525. 
The ALJ also heard oral argument on the District’s pre-trial motion in limine to 
exclude evidence, documents, and testimony from witnesses not identified or 
produced by respondent in discovery. The ALJ deferred ruling on this motion until 
respondent moved to introduce such evidence into the record. As respondent did not 
introduce any evidence into the record, the motion is denied as moot. 
Before the hearing, the District moved to have all exhibits and all transcripts of 
the hearing sealed under protective order to protect the identities of certain minor 
students and their families. The ALJ ordered that any testimonial reference to the 
names of minor students or their parents be replaced in the hearing transcript, 
obviating the need to seal the transcript. Moreover, the District’s request to place 
every exhibit under seal is overbroad, as not every exhibit concerns or identifies the 
minor students and their families. Accordingly, only certain exhibits and the District’s 
Final Witness list filed with OAH shall be placed under seal to protect the anonymity of 
those parties. A protective order sealing certain exhibits, and a confidential names list 
protecting the confidentiality of minor students and their families, is being issued 
concurrently with this decision. 
Testimonial and documentary evidence was received. The record closed and the 
matter was submitted for decision on May 15, 2025. Thereafter, the Commission 
conducted deliberations in executive session. 3 SUMMARY 
Respondent, a school counselor for the District, told a sixth-grade student that 
the student was adopted. The student was unaware he was adopted until this 
disclosure and respondent did this without the consent of the student’s parents and 
without notice to anyone at the District. After considering all the evidence and 
argument presented, the Commission concluded respondent’s disclosures to the 
student constituted egregious misconduct. The Commission further determined 
respondent’s misconduct, coupled with his years-long record of disobedience of 
District policies and the directives of his supervisors, warrant respondent’s dismissal 
from the District. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdiction and Parties 
1. Respondent is a certificated employee employed by the District as a 
school counselor. His most recent assignment was as a counselor, dividing his time 
between Montebello Intermediate School (MIS) and Bell Gardens Intermediate School 
(BGI). 
2. On August 22, 2024, Zepure Hacopian, Assistant Superintendent of 
Human Resources for the District (Hacopian), served respondent with a Notice of 
Proposed Discipline and Statement of Charges for Dismissal and Immediate Unpaid 
Suspension. 
3. Respondent was given an opportunity to challenge the proposed 
discipline at a  meeting scheduled for September 9, 2024. (Exs. 13, 53.) 4 Respondent did not attend the meeting. By letter dated September 10, 2024, the 
officer found that there was sufficient evidence to support the proposed disciplinary
action and that disciplinary action against respondent was appropriate. (Ex. 54.)
4. On November 6, 2024, the District’s Board of Education (Board) held a 
meeting in which it considered whether to adopt the officer’s findings. That day, 
the Board approved the recommendation to dismiss respondent and place him on 
immediate unpaid suspension pending the dismissal. (Ex. 13, pp. A328–A329; Ex. 14, 
p. A355.)  
5. On November 12, 2024, the District issued a Notice of Discipline and 
Statement of Charges for Dismissal and Immediate Unpaid Suspension to respondent 
(Statement of Charges). (Ex. 14.) The Statement of Charges alleges four grounds for 
dismissal and immediate unpaid suspension: immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident 
unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the state or by the governing board of the school district employing him (persistent 
violation). (Ex. 14, pp. A345–A353.) 
6. Respondent timely requested a hearing to challenge his suspension and 
dismissal. (Ex. 15.) 
Progressive Discipline of Respondent 
7. Respondent has worked for the District for over 20 years. (Testimony 
[Test.] of Tenorio.) In that time, he held various positions, including as a counselor 
administrator, an acting administrator, and a director in the student services 
department. (Test. of Hacopian.) After he was demoted from an administrative position 
back to a counselor, respondent alleged certain District employees and administrators 
engaged discriminatory, inappropriate, and unprofessional treatment towards him 5 during the 2019-2020 school year. (Ex. 46, pp. A1133–A1136; Test. of Hacopian.) In 
January 2022, the District engaged an outside firm called the Titan Group to 
investigate respondent’s allegations. (Ex. 46, p. A1136.) The Titan Group issued a 
Findings Letter in May 2022, stating that all respondent’s allegations were unfounded 
or could not be sustained. (  at pp. A1133–A1135.)
8. In June 2022, respondent twice used his District email address to send 
missives detailing personal issues and grievances he had with the District’s 
investigation. (Ex. 43, p. A1118.) Among the recipients of those emails were various Los 
Angeles County Office of Education (LACOE) and District employees. ( ) On 
June 15, 2022, Hacopian issued respondent a written warning, stating that using his 
District email address to send these emails was contrary to various District policies. 
() The written warning directed respondent to, among other things, stop sending 
mass emails using his District email account for “personal matters/grievances,” or 
emails addressed to outside agencies like LACOE, unless the communications related 
to union activities. ( ) 
9. On August 2, 2022, respondent sent an email to Hacopian and on 
August 10, 2022, he sent her a written letter (neither communication was introduced 
into evidence). (Ex. 44, p. A1129.) On August 10, 2022, Hacopian responded to those 
communications. Hacopian’s response include a directive to stop making baseless 
claims about (1) the Titan Group’s investigation into his claims of misconduct by the 
District; (2) alleged denials of his right to union representation in connection with that 
investigation; and (3) his entitlement to a management position he was allegedly 
promised outside the normal District hiring procedures. ( at pp. A1129–A1130.)
10. Thereafter, respondent continued to violate Hacopian’s directives from 
the written warning by sending emails with personal complaints and grievances to 6 LACOE staff and inappropriate District employees. (Ex. 46, pp. A1137–A1138.) In 
addition, while out on sick leave, respondent appeared at his assigned work site on 
January 12, 2023, without prior notice to Hacopian or any other District administrator 
that he would be returning to work that day. ( at p. A1139.) While still out on sick 
leave, respondent appeared at a District administrative office on February 3, 2023, and 
demanded to meet with Dr. Allison Garland, a District assistant superintendent, and 
then entered her office without permission. ( ) Respondent then, in May 2023, sent 
two additional emails with personal complaints and grievances to inappropriate 
District staff who were not assigned to receive such complaints, as noted previously by 
Hacopian. ( ) 
11. In response to respondent’s continuing violation of Hacopian’s directives, 
she issued respondent a Letter of Reprimand dated May 25, 2023. (Ex. 46.) The Letter 
of Reprimand provided a timeline of respondent’s conduct, reiterated previous written 
directives for respondent to follow, and provided additional written directives 
addressing respondent’s recent conduct. These included prohibiting respondent from 
appearing unannounced at District administrative offices to meet with District 
administrators or cabinet members, and directing him to stop sending threatening 
emails to any District employee. ( at pp. 1140–1141.) The Letter of Reprimand noted 
that failure to comply with those directives could result in further disciplinary action up 
to and including dismissal. This letter was personally served on respondent, but 
respondent refused to sign an acknowledgment stating he received it. ( at p. A1142; 
Test. of Hacopian.) 
12. On July 7, 2023, respondent again emailed District administrative staff, 
including Dr. Garland and Mark Skvarna, the District Superintendent, setting forth 
complaints and personal grievances. (Ex. 47.) The email demanded, among other 7 things, that Superintendent Skvarna and Hacopian respond to pointed questions. 
() 
Respondent’s Disclosure of Confidential Information 
13. About two weeks before February 23, 2024, Student #2, an eighth-grade 
student at MIS, approached respondent. Student #2 told respondent he had received 
information that his biological brother also attended MIS, but his brother’s identity 
was unknown to him. (Ex. 8, p. A80; Test. of R.O. 0F1) Student #2 expressed a desire to
meet his biological brother and presented respondent with a list of surnames his 
brother might have, but respondent could not locate anyone at MIS with those 
surnames using District student information databases. ( ) 
14. Respondent’s previous encounters with Student #2 were limited to
speaking with him about his schoolwork briefly on three or five occasions. (Ex. 8, 
p. A97–A98.) Respondent had also tried to contact Student #2’s father by telephone 
and email to praise Student #2’s schoolwork but received no response. (  at pp. A98–
A99.) Aside from those communications, respondent had little contact with Student #2 
1 Although respondent did not testify at the hearing, the District introduced into 
evidence a deposition transcript in which respondent testified under oath about his 
disclosure of confidential student information and the events leading up to that 
disclosure. (See Ex. 8.) That testimony is admissible as an exception to the hearsay rule. 
(See People v. Rodriguez (2014) 58 Cal.4th 587, 637.) The fact that the deposition 
transcript introduced into evidence is unsigned (see Ex. 8, pp. A129, A133) does not 
affect its admissibility. (Collins v. Superior Court (2001) 89 Cal.App.4th 1244, 1248; 
Code Civ. Proc., § 2025.520, subd. (f).) 8 and had not provided him with formal, one-on-one counseling before Student #2 
approached him about finding his biological brother. ( at pp. A80, A122–A123; 
Ex. 52.) 
15. Near the end of the school day on February 23, 2024, Student #2 
approached respondent with a new possible surname for his biological brother—this 
surname matched the surname of Student #1, then a 12-year-old and sixth-grade 
student at MIS. (Ex. 8, p. A110.) Student #2 urged respondent to arrange a meeting 
between him and Student #1 that day. (  at pp. A123–A125.) Student #2 told 
respondent the meeting “had to happen today,” and respondent did not ask him why 
arranging the meeting was so urgent. (  at pp. A85–A86, A101, A107, A123–A125.) 
Respondent believed Student #1 would be happy to learn that Student #2 was his 
biological brother, and as respondent would not be able to organize a meeting the 
next day because he was assigned to work at BIS, respondent arranged for Student #1 
to come to respondent’s office to meet Student #2. (  at pp. A79–A80; A108–A109.) 
Respondent then disclosed to Student #1 he was adopted, and Student #2 was his 
biological brother. ( at p. A76–A77.)
16. Student #1 and Student #2 have the same mother. (Ex. 8, p. A82; Test. of 
R.O.) Student #1 was adopted when he was just two weeks old. (Ex. 9, p. A142; Test. of 
R.O.) This was a “no contact” adoption, as Student #1’s parents were concerned about
Student #1’s biological mother’s past drug use and gang affiliation. (Ex. 8, pp. A84–
A85; Test. of Aguirre; Test. of R.O.) At the time respondent arranged the meeting 
between Student #1 and Student #2, Student #1 did not know he was adopted. (Ex. 9, 
pp. A142–A143; Test. of R.O.)
17. According to respondent, Student #2 was happy to get confirmation that 
Student #1 was his brother. (Ex. 8, p. A83.) Student #1, on the other hand, was 9 “bewildered” upon suddenly learning he was adopted. ( ) Given Student #1’s 
reaction, and because it was the end of the school day, respondent escorted 
Student #1 to his father, R.O., who was waiting to pick Student #1 up from school. 
(at p. A108–A110; Test. of R.O.) As respondent followed behind him, Student #1’s 
head was down and his face was red while approaching R.O. (Test. of R.O.) Respondent 
introduced himself to R.O. and told him, “I did something that you’re not going to 
like,” and then explained he introduced Student #1 to Student #2 and told them they 
were biological brothers. ( ) 
18. Furious about this disclosure, R.O. asked respondent what gave him the 
right to tell Student #1 he was adopted. (Ex. 8, p. A90; Test. of R.O.) Respondent 
explained that Student #2 was “in a bad situation,” and he was trying to help 
Student #2. (Test. of R.O.) Respondent told R.O. he had tried to meet with Student #2’s 
parents, but the parents had cancelled the meetings three or four times. (Test. of R.O.)
19. R.O. then took Student #1 home. (Test. of R.O.) Meanwhile, respondent 
approached MIS’s Assistant Principal, Lorena Guerrero Aguirre, and relayed to her that 
he had disclosed to Student #1 that he was adopted and that R.O. was upset about the 
disclosure. (Ex. 8, p. A87–A88; Test. of Aguirre.) Shortly after this, R.O. and Student #1’s 
mother, T.O., returned and demanded to speak to the school’s principal. (Test. of 
Aguirre.) Because the principal was not on campus at the time, Aguirre met with R.O., 
T.O., and respondent in her office. (Ex. 8, p. A87–A88, A107; Test. of Aguirre.) R.O. and 
T.O. were visibly upset and said respondent had neither the right nor their consent to 
disclose Student #1’s adoption to him. (Test. of Aguirre.) R.O. and T.O. “wanted 
something done,” to respondent for telling their son he was adopted. (Ex. 8, pp. A91–
A92.) Respondent laughed in R.O.’s face at this suggestion. (Test. of R.O.) Student #1’s 
parents scheduled a meeting with the school’s principal, Victor Solario, for the 10 following Monday morning to discuss the matter further. (Test. of Aguirre; Test. of 
R.O.; Test. of Solario.) 
20. On February 26, 2024, Student #1’s parents met with Solario. (Test. of 
Solario.) Before the meeting, respondent told Solario that he did not have ill intent and 
offered to apologize to Student #1’s parents. (Ex. 3; Test. of Solario.) But Student #1’s 
parents no longer wanted to have contact with respondent. ( ) Student #1’s parents 
reiterated to Solario that they never provided consent for any District employee to 
disclose to Student #1 his relationship to Student #2. ( ) Student #1’s parents 
repeated that they wanted respondent to face consequences for his disclosure and 
that they intended to file a complaint against respondent with the District. ( ) 
Following this meeting, Solario drafted a summary of the incident and provided it to 
the District’s Director of Human Resources, Phillip Tenorio. (Ex. 3.) Student #1’s parents 
filed a complaint with the District on March 4, 2024. (Ex. 4.)
21. On February 29, 2024, Tenorio met with respondent and told him that 
the District was placing him on administrative leave while it investigated his conduct. 
(Ex. 14, p. A485; Test. of Tenorio.) Tenorio provided respondent with a letter to this 
effect, which respondent refused to sign. (Ex. 14, pp. A486–A487; Test. of Tenorio.) The 
letter stated, in part, that respondent was prohibited from being present at any District 
facility without first obtaining Tenorio’s express permission. ( ) After placing 
respondent on administrative leave, respondent contacted Tenorio’s office on a few 
occasions to discuss issues he had with personnel in the District’s Human Resources 
Office. (Test. of Tenorio.) As a result, Tenorio gave respondent his personal cell phone 
number so respondent could discuss any questions or concerns with Tenorio directly. 
() Respondent is still on administrative leave. ( ) 11 22. When asked under oath if, with the benefit of hindsight, he would again 
disclose to Student #1 that he was adopted, respondent stated he “would do the same 
thing,” given the circumstances. (Ex. 8, pp. A106–A107.) 
23. Respondent’s disclosure that Student #1 was adopted had a profoundly 
negative effect on Student #1’s emotions and behavior. Just after returning home on 
February 23, 2024, Student #1 continued crying and then began vomiting. (Test. of 
R.O.) According to R.O., Student #1 previously was a happy child but now is depressed, 
anti-social, and “never happy.” ( ) Student #1 feels unwanted and is fearful that 
R.O. and T.O. are going to “give him away” just like his biological parents did. ( ) 
Student #1 no longer wants to do anything with his siblings and parents, opting to 
retreat alone to his room. ( ) R.O. and T.O. tell Student #1 every day they love him 
and he is their son, but the knowledge that he is adopted makes Student #1 feel as 
though he is “not worthy.” ( ) Student #1 now goes to counseling once a week to 
deal with the revelation he was adopted and the complex emotions associated with 
that knowledge. ( ) 
24. Student #1 and Student #2 are friendly now and occasionally play online 
video games with each other. (Test. of R.O.) As noted above, one of R.O.’s concerns 
about Student #1 learning he was adopted was because of his biological mother’s
criminal gang affiliation. ( ) After respondent revealed to Student #2 that 
Student #1 was his brother, social media posts appeared on Instagram implying that 
Student #1 was a member of a criminal gang in Montebello. (Ex. 7.) 
25. On May 24, 2024, respondent sent an email to various District, LACOE, 
and California Board of Education personnel, complaining about being placed on 
administrative leave. (Ex. 38.) According to respondent, he recently requested that the 
District allow him to return to work at BGI, as “none of the districts claims against [him] 12 occurred” there and because BGI was a place “where nothing has happened . . . .” 
(at p. A1089.) 
The Investigation and Respondent’s Later Conduct 
26. The District opened an investigation into respondent’s conduct shortly 
after placing him on administrative leave and receiving the complaint from 
Student #1’s parents. (Exs. 5, 6.) The District again retained the Titan Group to conduct 
the investigation. (Test. of Hacopian.) By letter dated April 27, 2024, Hacopian directed 
respondent to participate in an investigative interview by Zoom teleconference 
scheduled for April 30, 2024. (Ex. 48.) Respondent refused to participate in the 
interview because he was dissatisfied with the firm’s earlier investigation of his 
allegations of misconduct against the District. (Ex. 49; Test. of Hacopian.). 
27. On July 30, 2024, respondent sent a text message to Tenorio asking when 
he would be allowed to return to work. (Ex. 36, p. A1081.) Tenorio responded on 
August 2, 2024, informing respondent he would remain on administrative leave 
through the beginning of the school year. ( at p. A1084.) Respondent replied on 
August 6, 2024, expressing frustration about his placement on administrative leave, 
and stating he was eager to receive the results of the District’s investigation. ( at 
p. A1085.) 
28. Despite acknowledging Tenorio’s text message and expressing a clear 
understanding that the terms of his administrative leave were still in effect, respondent 
attended a start-of-school-year breakout session at Eastmont Intermediate School, a 
school within the District, on August 8, 2024. (Ex. 41; Test of Tenorio; Test. of Solario.) 
On August 9, 2024, respondent appeared at BGI, having told other District employees 
he was unaware of his work assignment for the coming school year. ( ) After 13 consulting the District’s Human Resources office and Hacopian, District staff informed 
respondent he was still on administrative leave and needed to leave District property. 
() 
29. By separate letters dated August 15, 2024, the District informed 
Student #1’s parents and respondent of the results of the Titan Group’s investigation. 
(Exs. 9, 10.) The Titan Group found respondent acted inappropriately when he revealed 
to Student #1 that he was adopted and that respondent knew or should have known 
his actions were “highly egregious and careless.” The Titan Group also found 
respondent was insubordinate by refusing to participate in the investigation, despite
receiving a directive from Hacopian to do so in April 2024. (Ex. 10, p. A143.) 
30. Shortly thereafter, the District initiated dismissal proceedings against 
respondent. 
Relevant Federal and State Laws, and Board Policies 
31. The federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and its 
implementing regulations set forth requirements regarding access and disclosure of 
student educational records. Generally, student educational records, and any 
information contained therein, may not be released without the consent of the 
parents. (See Ex. 31 [FERPA Regulations]; see also 20 U.S.C. § 1232g.)
32. Education Code section 49602 provides that “information of a personal 
nature” disclosed by a pupil 12 years or older in the process of receiving school 
counseling is confidential and “shall not be revealed, released, discussed, or referred 
to,” except under certain circumstances not present here. Similarly, District Board 
Policy (BP) 5145.1, requires that all school counselors shall “respect the confidentiality 
of any personal information disclosed by students 12 years of age or older during the 14 course of educational counseling,” except as required by law. (Ex. 34, p. A1077.)
BP 4119.23(a) also requires all District staff to “maintain the confidentiality of all 
confidential records until such time as laws, state regulations and/or bylaws of this 
district permit disclosure. Information and records pertaining to . . . student records 
are not subject to public disclosure.” (  at p. A1061.) 
33. A District employee’s use of District technological resources, such as an 
email address, is governed by BP 4040, Administrative Regulation (AR) 4040, and the 
District’s Acceptable Use Policy. (Ex. 43.) BP 4040 provides in part that employees “shall 
use the district’s electronic resources only for purposes related to their employment,” 
and failure to abide by the District’s regulations relating to use of technology shall 
subject the employee to “disciplinary action, revocation of the user account, and legal 
action as appropriate.” ( at p. A122.) AR 4040 provides that District employees are 
allowed to use the District’s technological resources in accordance with its Acceptable 
Use Policy. ( at p. A1124.) The District’s Acceptable Use Policy states in part that 
“inappropriate, unauthorized, or unacceptable use may lead to disciplinary and/or 
legal action . . . .” ( at p. A1125.)
Assessment of Respondent’s Conduct
34. The District introduced expert testimony about school counseling and 
school administration through Katherine Thorossian, Ed.D. According to 
Dr. Thorossian, there are two sets of key professional standards applicable to school 
counselors in California: the American School Counselor Association Ethical Standards 
for School Counselors (ASCA Standards) and the California Standards for the School 
Counseling Profession issued by the California Association of School Counselors. 
(Test. of Thorossian; Exs. 1, 2.) Dr. Thorossian opined that respondent breached 
numerous elements of the ASCA standards, including those relating to student 15 development, confidentiality, student recordkeeping, and responsibilities to parents 
and the school. (Test. of Thorossian.) In Dr. Thorossian’s opinion, respondent 
committed a grave violation of the ethical standards that all school counselors must
follow. Moreover, respondent’s disclosure to Student #1 was made with no rational or 
emergent justification. ( ) Under such circumstances, respondent’s actions might 
have been excused or mitigated. ( ) Dr. Thorossian further opined that the 
community’s trust in the District would have been shaken if respondent’s conduct was 
more widely publicized. 
35. District employees who testified at the hearing, including Solario, 
Tenorio, Aguirre, and Hacopian, universally expressed shock and dismay at 
respondent’s conduct, as respondent never provided a compelling reason to any of 
them why making the disclosure to Student #1 was necessary. No District employee 
who testified at the hearing believes it would be appropriate for respondent to return
as a counselor at MSI, especially because Student #1 still attends classes there. 
Dr. Thorossian concurred with this assessment, opining that respondent’s pattern of 
repeated disregard for District directives and his failure to take any responsibility for 
his grave misconduct make him unsuitable for continued employment within the 
District.
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Applicable Law 
1. A permanent certificated employee may be dismissed for cause only after 
a dismissal hearing. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 44934, & 44944.)16 2. When a school board recommends dismissal for cause, a Commission on 
Professional Competence may only vote for or against the dismissal; the Commission 
may not dispose of a charge seeking dismissal by imposing probation or an alternative 
sanction. (Ed. Code, § 44944, subds. (c)(1)–(3).) 
3. Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, a permanent certificated 
employee may be dismissed for, among other grounds, the following: immoral 
conduct, dishonesty, unfitness, and persistent violation. 
Burden and Standard of Proof
4. The standard of proof in these disciplinary proceedings is a 
preponderance of the evidence. (
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039–1040.) “Preponderance of the 
evidence” means evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it. 
(  (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 324.) “[T]he sole focus 
of the legal definition of ‘preponderance’ in the phrase ‘preponderance of the 
evidence’ is on the of the evidence. The  of evidence presented by each 
side is irrelevant.” (  at 324–325, original italics.) 
Analysis 
5. The Commission is charged to make the following determinations: (1) did 
the conduct in the Statement of Charges occur? (2) did the proven conduct violate a 
statute (here, immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness, or persistent violation); 
and (3) if so, is respondent unfit to hold is credential? 17 CAUSES FOR DISCIPLINE
Immoral Conduct 
6. The first cause for discipline in the Statement of Charges alleges 
respondent engaged in immoral conduct. “The term ‘immoral’ has been defined 
generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes 
conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as wilful [sic], flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. [Citation.]” (
(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740; see also 
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
7. The Commission finds the District has met its burden to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent engaged in immoral conduct. 
Respondent used confidential student records to determine that Student #1 and 
Student #2 shared the same biological mother. (Factual Finding 14.) Respondent then 
disclosed to Student #1 that he was adopted without consulting Student #1’s parents 
to ascertain if he was approved to make this disclosure. (Factual Findings 15–18.) 
When Student #1’s father, R.O., suggested respondent face some consequence for 
making this unauthorized disclosure, respondent laughed in his face. (Factual 
Finding 19.) Although respondent may have disclosed this information because of a 
sincere concern for Student #2’s well-being, there was no compelling justification, 
legal or otherwise, to reveal to Student #1 that he was adopted or assume Student #1 
would have been happy to learn about it. Moreover, even with the benefit of hindsight 
and after seeing Student #1 and his parents’ intensely negative reaction to the 18 disclosure, respondent still believes he did nothing wrong and would not do anything 
differently. (Factual Findings 19–22.) Such a callous disregard for the privacy rights of 
Student #1, Student #2, their parents, and the ethical standards of respondent’s 
profession as a counselor, constitutes immoral conduct. 
Dishonesty
8. The second cause for discipline in the Statement of Charges alleges 
respondent engaged in dishonesty. “Dishonesty necessarily includes the element of 
bad faith. . . . It means fraud, deception, betrayal, faithlessness,” and “denotes an 
absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive, or defraud; deceive and betray.” 
(  (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 712, 717 [internal citation omitted].) 
But not every falsehood constitutes dishonesty within the meaning of Education Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a). (See (1988) 
45 Cal.3d 208, 220, fn. 12). 
9. The Commission finds the District has not met its burden to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent engaged in dishonesty. Although 
respondent’s conduct in revealing Student #1’s biological relationship to Student #2 
was an egregious violation of the rights of Students #1 and #2 and their families, 
respondent did not attempt to hide this conduct from R.O., Guerrero, Solario, or 
Tenorio, and was not circumspect about his conduct in his later deposition testimony. 
(See Factual Findings 15–21.) Moreover, respondent’s later statement suggesting the 
District should allow him to return to work at BGI because “nothing happened” there is 
not dishonest. (See Factual Finding 25.) This statement is accurate in the sense that 
respondent’s disclosure of information related to students at MSI, not BGI. 
Respondent’s refusal to accept that his misconduct at MSI might also disqualify him 
from continuing to work at BGI is relevant to his fitness to be a school counselor. So 19 too is respondent’s refusal to show remorse or accept responsibility for his 
misconduct. But neither demonstrates dishonesty. 
10. Respondent feigned ignorance about his job assignment for the 2024-
2025 school year when he appeared at District events and premises in August 2024, 
even though he knew he was still on administrative leave. (Factual Findings 26–28.) His 
appearance at District premises violated the terms of his administrative leave and is 
relevant to other causes for discipline alleged by the District. (Factual Findings 21, 28.) 
But even if respondent’s stated reason for appearing at these District events was 
misleading, this Commission finds this single statement alone does not constitute 
dishonesty under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a). 
Evident Unfitness for Service 
11. The third cause for discipline in the Statement of Charges alleges 
respondent’s conduct demonstrates evident unfitness for service under Education 
Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). “Evident unfitness for service” means “clearly 
not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies. . . . [The term] connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 
meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 
( ).) It is not necessary to determine whether each proven act demonstrates 
unfitness for service; rather, the entirety of the offensive conduct should be 
considered. As stated in , , “[w]hen a camel’s back is broken we need 
not weigh each straw in its load to see which one could have done the deed.” ( at 
p. 1457.) 20 12. The Commission finds the District has met its burden to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent is unfit for service. Respondent 
engaged in an egregious violation of the privacy rights of Student #1, Student #2, and 
their families. (Factual Findings 15–19.) Respondent showed little remorse for his 
misconduct. (Factual Findings 19–20, 22.) This failure to acknowledge and reflect upon 
the immense pain he caused Student #1 and his family connotes an unfitness for 
continued service. (Factual Findings 22–24.) So too does respondent’s continued 
failure to abide by District Policies and Hacopian’s directives. (Factual Findings 7–12, 
26, 28.) 
Persistent Violation 
13. The fourth cause for discipline in the Statement of Charges alleges 
respondent’s conduct demonstrates “[p]ersistent violation of or refusal to obey the 
school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of 
the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district 
employing him,” under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 
14. A single violation of a school board’s rules by a permanent certificated 
employee is not of itself cause for discipline. (
(1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 77.) Rather, the District must show that the employee’s refusal to 
follow laws and regulations was “persistent,” , “stubborn and continuing.” (
(1985) 
174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1183.) Isolated incidents or incidents involving an issue 
unresolved over a period of time are not generally considered “persistent.” (
(1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 317.) 21 15. The Commission finds the District has met its burden to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that respondent engaged in persistent violation of or 
refusal to obey school laws or District regulations. Respondent violated numerous 
District policies by using his District email address to make complaints and air personal 
grievances about the District to inappropriate recipients, such as employees of LACOE 
and the California Board of Education. (Factual Findings 7–12.) Despite Hacopian’s 
repeated warnings, respondent continued to send these emails until at least May 2024, 
mere months before the District commenced dismissal proceedings against him. 
(Factual Findings 2, 25.) Respondent’s disclosure to Student #1 that he was adopted 
violated federal and state law, as well as District policies governing student privacy. 
(Factual Findings 15–19, 31–33.) Respondent also refused to comply with Hacopian’s 
directive to participate in the Titan Group’s investigation into his conduct relating to 
Student #1. (Factual Finding 26.) Taken together, this conduct constitutes a persistent 
violation of, or refusal to obey, the District’s regulations. 
Relationship of Misconduct to Fitness to Hold Credentials 
16. In deciding whether cause for dismissal exists under the amorphous 
concepts of immoral conduct, dishonesty, and evident unfitness for service, it also 
must be established an employee’s misconduct relates to their fitness, competence, or 
ability to perform the duties authorized by their credential within the meaning of 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 227–230 ( ). 
17. Under and as provided by California Code of Regulations, 
title 5, section 80302, the factors in making this determination may include, but are not 
limited to, the following (1) likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 
students, fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated; (2) proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) type of 22 credential held; (4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 
conduct; (5) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct; (6) likelihood of recurrence of the conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary 
action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of 
the person involved or other certified persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given 
to the conduct. Only the most pertinent factors need to be considered in a 
particular case. ( (1993) 
16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) The factors may be applied to the charges in the 
aggregate, considering the totality of the employee’s conduct. ( , , 
2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1444.) 
18. The  factors applicable to respondent’s conduct in this matter 
are discussed below: 
The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 
teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity 
anticipated – Respondent’s conduct adversely affected Student #1 and his 
parents. The adversity has been ongoing and severe, harming Student #1’s 
relationship with his parents and siblings and requiring him to undergo 
counseling.
The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct – Respondent’s 
disclosure to Student #1 occurred February 2024, which is recent. The 
District also adduced evidence of respondent’s persistent refusal to comply 
with the District’s regulations began in June 2022 and continued through 
May 2024, which is also recent. 23 The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct – 
Respondent offered no mitigating circumstances at hearing for his various 
acts of misconduct.
The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct – As discussed above, respondent may have had a sincere concern 
for Student #2’s wellbeing when disclosing to Student #1 that he was 
adopted, but that motive must also be weighed against the harm Student #1 
experienced in learning this fact. With respect to respondent’s other 
conduct, such as using his District email address inappropriately or flouting 
Hacopian’s directive to participate in the District’s investigation, respondent 
failed to explain why such actions were necessary or had an innocent motive.
 The likelihood of recurrence of the conduct – Respondent expressed little
remorse for his misconduct relating to Student #1 and testified under oath 
that he would do it again. Respondent also demonstrated a persistent, 
ongoing refusal to comply with District policies and Hacopian’s directives. 
Thus, the likelihood of recurrence of respondent’s misconduct is high.
The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 
chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved or other 
certified persons – Respondent advanced no argument at hearing 
concerning this factor. Nor is there any serious argument that a school 
counselor has a constitutional right to tell a 12-year-old student he is 
adopted under the circumstances presented here. 
 The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct – There appears to have 
been little publicity about respondent’s disclosure to Student #1 that he was 24 adopted. As Dr. Thorossian testified, the consequences for respondent’s 
disclosure would have been magnified even more, and the District’s 
reputation further harmed, if respondent’s conduct was well-known in the 
community. (Factual Finding 34.) 
19. After evaluating the factors, the Commission finds that 
respondent’s misconduct is related to his fitness and ability to perform the duties 
authorized by his credential as a school counselor. 
Disposition
20. “The Commission has broad discretion in determining what constitutes 
unfitness . . ., and whether dismissal or suspension is the appropriate sanction.” 
( (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327, 343–344.) The 
Commission finds that respondent engaged in immoral conduct, is unfit for service, 
and engaged in persistent violation of the District’s policies. That misconduct is related 
to his fitness to hold his credential. Respondent’s dismissal from his position as school 
counselor for the District is appropriate under the circumstances. 
//
//
//
//
//
//25ORDER
Respondent George Muriel’s appeal is denied. The District’s request to suspend 
and dismiss respondent George Muriel is granted. Respondent George Muriel shall be 
dismissed from the District.
DATE: 
DATE:
DATE:JOHN CHAE
Commission Member
MARLA DIAZ
Commission Member
TAYLOR STEINBACHER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
