  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  SALINAS  CITY  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  MONTEREY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES 
OF  THE  HAYWARD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL 
DISTRICT  REPRESENTING  133.5  FULL 
TIME  EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N20005030453 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  27,  2005,  in  Salinas,  California,  within  the  Board  Room  of  the 
Administrative  Offices  of  the  Salinas  City  Elementary  School  District  at  840  South  Main 
Street,  Salinas,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Keith  V.  Breon,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Breon  and  Shaeffer,  A  Professional  Law 

Corporation,  225  Bush  Street,  Suite  1600,  San  Francisco,  California  94104,  represented 
the  Superintendent  for  the  Salinas  City  Elementary  School  District  (the  District). 

Michelle  A.  Welsh,  Esq.,  of  Stoner,  Welsh  and  Schmidt,  Attorneys  at  Law,  413 

Forest  Avenue,  Pacific  Grove,  California  93  950-4201,  (Respondents’  attorney) 
represented  Respondents  in  this  matter,  except  Respondents  Linda  Barrera,  Helen 
Garcia,  Mario  Gutierrez,  Alvaro  Holguin,  Sheldon  Lasda,  Laura  Matter,  Christine 
Pereira,  Julia~-Anne  Scattini,  Sharon  Theis,  Andrea  Tocci,  and  Nancy  Trujillo. 

Respondent  Sharon  Loucks,  an  administrator  for  the  District,  appeared  at  the 

hearing  to  represent  her  own  interests. 

Respondents  Linda  Barrera,  Helen  Garcia,  Mario  Gutierrez,  Alvaro  Holguin, 
Sheldon  Lasda,  Laura  Matter,  Christine  Pereira,  Julia-Anne  Scattini,  Sharon  Theis, 
Andrea  Tocci,  and  Nancy  Trujillo  were  not  represented  by  legal  counsel  at  the  hearing; 
yet,  each  failed  to  appear  at  the  hearing.  However,  each  of  those  individuals  had 
requested  a  hearing  in  this  matter.  The  absent  respondents,  who  were  not  represented  by 
legal  counsel,  were  in  default  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  1  1520,  and  the 
hearing  proceeded  in  their  absence.

The  record  was  held  open  to  afford  the  parties  opportunity  to  file  written  closing 

arguments  with  OAH.  On  Wednesday,  May  3,  2004,  OAH  received,  via  telefacsimile 
transmission,  from  Respondents’  attorney  a  document  titled  “Respondents’  Post  Hearing 
Brief,”  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  “H”  and  was  received  as  argument.  Also,  on  May 
3,  2004,  OAH  received,  by  telefax,  from  Superintendent’s  attorney  a  written  argument 
titled  “Petitioner’s  Post  Hearing  Brief,”  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  “17,”  and  was 
received  as  argument. 

On  May  3,  2005,  the  parties  were  deemed  to  have  submitted  the  matter  and  the 

record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  31,  2005,  Donna  Alonzo  Vaughan,  Superintendent  (the 

Superintendent)  for  the  Salinas  City  Elementary  School  District  (the  District),  in  her 
official  capacity,  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents. 

2. 

The  respondents  to  the  proceeding  are  identified  by  name  on  the  list 

affixed  hereto  as  Attachments  “A.,”’  except  Ms  Sharon  Loucks,  an  administrator  for  the 
District.  Although  her  name  does  not  appear  on  the  attachment,  Ms  Sharon  Loucks  is 
also  a  respondent  in  the  proceeding. 

3. 

On  or  before  February  28,  2005,  the  District’s  Superintendent  presented 
the  District’s  Governing  Board  with  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that 
particular  kinds  of  services,  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated 
for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2005-2006). 

4. 

On  February  28,  2005,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  adopted  District 

Resolution  number  04/05-21.  On  March  7,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Revised 
District  Resolution  04/05-21.  And,  on  March  14,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  adopted 
Amended  District  Resolution  04/05-21. 

The  resolution,  in  its  final  amended  form,  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education 

Code  section  44955,  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to 
discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year,  particular  kinds  of 
services  in  the  form  of  F.T.E.  (full  time  equivalent)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  (“F.T.E.”) 

  

1. 
2. 
3. 

K-6  Multisubject  Regular  Education  (36:1) 
Psychologist 
Vice-Principals  (5  at  .5) 

123.0  F.T.E. 
3.0  F.T.E. 
2.5  F.T.E. 

  

' 
ing  certificated  staff  received  a  ‘Notice  of  Layoff.’

The  attachment  is  Complainant’s  hearing  exhibit  “9-A,”  which  has  a  caption  that  reads:  “The  follow- 

  

4. 
5. 
6. 

District  Coordinators 
Principals 
Director 

Total 

2.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E 
1.0  F.T.E. 

133.5  F.T.E. 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  14,  2005,  the  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices”  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent  except  Respondent  Sharon  Loucks,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had 
an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  discontinue  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person 
who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the 
particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned 
the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named  individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each 
had  worked. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  14,  2005,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  District’s 

resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent a  right  to  file  a 
request  for  hearing  “to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  you  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year.” 

6. 

By a  letter,  dated  March  15,  2005,  by  personal  service,  the  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices*  to  a  number  of  administrators,  including  Respondent 
Sharon  Loucks,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reassign  her  from 
the  administrator  position  held  by  her  into  a  teacher’s  position.  Certain  administrators, 
including  Respondent  Loucks,  learned  that  due  to  their  respective  lack  of  seniority  as  a 
certificated  teacher  to  the  District  that  they  were  subject  to  the  Board  approved  lay-off 
action.  Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  teacher  position  to 
which  she  had  been  reassigned,  Respondent  Sharon  Loucks  learned  the  District  would 
not  reemploy  her  for  the  ensuing  year. 

. 

7. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  District’s 

Superintendent  and  the  District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of the 
District’s  Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  as  delivered  by 
respondents. 

8. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

. 

9, 

District’s  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the 

Accusation  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

  

“Notice  of  Layoff.” 

“Notice  of  Reassignment.”

2 

> 

10. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

11. 

In  her  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  District,  Donna  Alonzo  Vaughan 
(the  Superintendent)  appeared  at  the  hearing.  The  Superintendent  provided  competent, 
credible  and  persuasive  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2005-2006 

school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s 
budget.  Also,  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the 
declining  pupil  attendance  for  the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  order  to 
partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the 
Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  certain  certificated  positions 
be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of  work  for  teachers  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

Initially  on  February  28,  2005,  and  then  in  a  final  amendment  on  March  14,  2005, 
the  Governing  Board  adopted  a  resolution  that  identified  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
for  the  next  year  as  a  means  to  handle  the  pressing  financial  difficulties  faced  by  the 
District. 

12. 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  upon  learning  that  the  District 
was  required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent  with  her  staff  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers,  psychologists  and  other  certificated 
professionals. 

The  Superintendent  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teachers  and 
psychologists  who  were  properly  designated  as  provisional  employees  and  temporary  . 
teachers.  She  studied  and  set  forth  on  the  District’s  2004-2005  seniority  list  dates 
calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  all  certificated  employees  to 
the  District. 

Pursuant  to  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent,  the  Board  determined  that 

the  District  eliminate  133.5  full  time  equivalent  positions  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

On  February  28,  2005,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  04/05-22  that  set  forth 
criteria  for  tie-breaking  for  contests  regarding  seniority  where  certificated  employees  had 
_  identical  first  days  of  paid  service  to  the  District.  The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  was 
grounded  upon  purely  objective  criteria  to  address  pressing  needs  of  the  District. 

On  March  14,  2005,  based  on  the  seniority  list,  the  Superintendent  caused  notices 
to  be  delivered  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary  teachers  that  their  services  would 
not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year.  On  March  15,  2005,  the 

  

4.

Superintendent  caused  to  be  personally  served  upon  specified  identified  junior 
administrators  that  their  services  to  perform  work  in  reassignment  positions  as  teachers 
would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 

13. 

The  parties  stipulate  and  agree  that  Pamela  Heitz,  who  holds  seniority 

number  312,  and  who  possesses  a  Special  Education  credential,  is  entitled  to  teach 
Resources  Specialist  (RSP)  classes.  Pamela  Heitz*,  who  now  teaches  a  kindergarten/first 
grade  combination  class,  may  bump  Julie  Caruthers,  an  intern  who  now  teaches  pupils  in 
RSP. 

Also,  the  parties  stipulate  and  agree  that  the  District  shall  rescind  the  lay-off 
action  as  against  Respondent  Linda  Piffero,  and  that  she  will  be  retained  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

The  parties  further  stipulate  and  agree  that  the  District  will  consider  in  its 
preparation  of  the  final  notice  of  lay-off  action,  any  documentary  evidence  supplied  by 
Monday,  May  9,  2005,  regarding  credentials  duly  held  by  teachers  for  the  proper 
implementation  of  tie-breaking  criteria  for  determining  seniority  as  set  out  in  the  Board’s 
resolution  existing  on  March  14,  2005. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

14. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  proposed  action  is  procedurally 
defective  and  improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed 
employees  does  not  account  for  vacancies  in  the  ranks  of  teaching  positions,  and  other 
certificated  employee  positions  such  as  psychologist  positions,  due  to  recent  retirements 
and  resignations.  Respondents  argue  that  by  failing  to  account  for  the  vacancies  caused 
by  retirements  and  resignations  if  the  District  executes  the  proposed  number  of  lay-off  of 
personnel  that  the  actual  reduction  will  exceed  170  F.T.E.  teacher  positions,  as  opposed 
to  123  F.T.E.  K-6  multisubject  regular  education  positions,  and  five  F.T.E.  psychologists 
position,  as  opposed  to  three  F.T.E  psychologist  positions,  with  the  District. 

Also  Respondents  aver  that  the  Board’s  criterion  for  skipping  with  regard  to 
retaining  psychologists  is  defective.  In  particular,  respondents  challenge  the  application 
of  the  proposed  retention  criterion  for  psychologists  that  prescribes  that  “the  District 

  

Respondent  Pamela  Heitz  (Respondent  Heitz)  occupies  a  general  education  teacher  during  the  current 

‘ 
school  year.  She  teaches  first  grade  and  kindergarten.  She  has a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as 
August  23,  1999.  Respondent  Heitz  occupies  seniority  number  312.  Respondent  Heitz  possesses  a 
professional  clear  education  specialist  level  two  (mild  to  moderate  disabilities)  credential  and  a  professional 
clear  CLAD.  At  the  hearing,  Respondent  Heitz  asserts  that  her  current  position  requires  that  she  that  care  of 
primary  special  needs  students  in  general  education  classroom.  Respondent  Heitz  persuasively  asserts  that  the 
education  specialist  credential  enables  her  to  hold  resources  positions,  SDC  positions  or  any  other  positions 
that  would  serve  pupils  enrolled  in  special  education  programs, 

-5-

shall  deviate  from  the  seniority  list  to  retain  certain  psychologists  with  advanced  Spanish 
language  proficiency  skills.” 

Next  respondents  contend  that  the  Board’s  resolution,  which  proposes  to  “skip” 
teachers  authorized  to  teach  special  education,  adaptive  physical  education,  speech  and 
language  therapists  and  resource  specialist,  is  not  appropriate  for  the  proposed  PKS 
elimination  action.  In  the  view  of  Respondents,  since  no  “RSP”  positions  are  subject  to 
reduction  or  elimination  in  the  PKS  reduction  in  force,  certain  respondents,  including  © 
Respondent  Amy  Brewster,  who  purportedly  are  credentialed  to  teach  special  education, 
must  be  retained  pursuant  to  the  Board’s  range  of  criteria  for  tie-breaking  in  establishing 
seniority. 

Further,  respondents  argue  that  two  intern-teachers  (Barbara  Chapman  and 

Yamara  Saldivar)  received  notice  of  non-reemployment  after  April  1,  2005. 
Respondents  contend  that  because  of  the  failure  of  the  District  to  properly  deliver  notice 
of  layoff  to  those  two  individuals,  the  notice  of  layoff  to  more  senior  teachers  is  invalid. 

Respondent  Loucks,  who  represented  herself,  contends  that  her  position  as  an 

administrator  with  the  District  should  not  be  eliminated.  Also,  Respondent  Loucks  avers 
that  she  has  a  credential  as  a  classroom  reading  teacher  and  should  be  retained  to  teach 
for  the  ensuing  year  2005-2006. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Individual  Respondents 

15.  |  Respondent  Yamara  Saldivar  (Respondent  Saldivar)  did  not  appear  at  the 

hearing  of  this  evidence.  But,  the  District’s  evidence  shows  that  Respondent  Saldivar 
occupied  an  employee  position  as  intern  to  the  District  for  that  part  of  the  current  school 
year  before  the  Superintendent  caused  non-reelection  letters  and  lay-off  notices  to  be 
dispatched. 

Because  of  the  status  as  an  intern  to  the  District,  on  March  15,  2005,  the 

Superintendent  prompted  service  of  a  non-reemployment  letter  upon  Respondent 
Saldivar. 

Respondents  offered  no  evidence  that  Ms  Saldivar  had  standing  to  be  served  with 
notice  of  lay-off  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  Respondents  show  no  prejudice 
to  Ms  Saldivar,  or  other  more  senior  certificated  employees,  when  the  District  took 
extraordinary  measures  to  present  her  on  April  1,  2005,  with  documents  pertaining  to  the 
lay-off  action  against  certain  employees  of  the  District  so  as  she  might  participate  in  the 
hearing  to  contest  the  validity  of  the  District’s  assessment  of  the  credential  held  by  her. 

© 

 

16. 

Respondent  Barbara  Chapman  (Respondent  Chapman)  appears  on  the 

April  18,  2005,  updated  District  seniority  list‘as  a  probationary-two  employee  with a  first 
date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  August  18,  2003.  She  possesses  a  preliminary 
multiple  subject  credential  with  ELA  emphasis.  During  the  past  year,  she  has  occupied 
one  F.T.E.  position  with  the  District. 

But,  during  the  past  school  year  and  until  a  date  in  April  2005,  Respondent 

Chapman  worked  under  an  intern  credential  at  Loma  Visa  Elementary  School. 

Respondent  Chapman  does  not  possess  a  BCLAD  authorization. 

Respondent  occupies  position  number  433  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

On  or  about  April  1,  2005,  the  District  dispatched  a  letter  to  Respondent 
Chapman  that  due  to  her  then  status  as  an  intern,  the  District  decided  to  non-reelect  her. 
The  letter  further  informed  Respondent  Chapman  that  her  status  as  an  intern  to  the 
District  did  not  provide  her  with  a  right  to  standing  as  a  respondent  in a  lay-off 
proceeding.  Sometime  after  April  1,  2005,  Respondent  Chapman  filed  her  preliminary 
_  credential  with  the  District  so  as  to  prompt  the  District  to  amend  its  seniority  list  to  show 
her  as  a  probationary  teacher. 

Respondent  Chapman  offered  no  persuasive  proof  the  District  should  have 
skipped  her  on  the  seniority  list  due  to  her  skills  in  Spanish  or  bilingual  education. 

Respondent  Chapman  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 
retained  any  school  psychologist  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Chapman  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  teach. 

17. 

Respondent  Amy  Lynn  Brewster  (“Respondent  Brewster”)  is  a 

probationary-one  employee  of  the  District  because  her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the 
District  was  August  18,  2003.  Over  the  past  year,  Respondent  Brewster  provided 
services  to  the  District  as  a  Resources  Specialist  (RSP). 

Respondent  Brewster  has  a  learning  handicap  credential  (mild  to  moderate 
disabled  pupils)  and  a  resources  specialist  certificate.  She  also  possesses a  single  subject 
credential  in  life  science. 

Respondent  occupies  number  420  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

Respondent  Brewster  provided  unpersuasive  and  weak  evidence  that  the  District 
has  retained  two  RSP  teachers  who  are  junior  to  her  in  the  particular  kind  of  service  for 
which  Ms  Brewster  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  The 
District,  through  the  Superintendent,  did  not  present  lay-off  notices  to  Christie  Lee  and 
Julie  Caruthers.

Ms  Lee  does  possess  a  Special  Education  mild/moderate  emergency  credential. 
And,  she  holds  multiple  subject  professional  clear  credential,  as  well  as  a  single  subject 
social  science  credential  and  an  English  professional  clear  credential.  No  evidence  came 
into  the  record  to  establish  that  Ms  Lee  will  provide  services  next  year  in  the  special 
education  programs  of  the  District.  Respondent  Brewster  offered  no  competent  evidence 
that  the  District  has  decided  to  retain  Ms  Lee  to  serve  the  District  under  credentials  other 
than  as  a  special  education  teacher  with  an  emergency  credential. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District’s  persuasive  and  strong  evidence  showed  that  during 

the  past  school  year  Ms  Caruthers  served  the  District  as  an  intern.  The  District 
recognized  that  Pamela  Heitz,  who  currently  is  a  kindergarten/first  grade  teacher,  holds  a 
Special  Education  credential  that  entitles  her  to  teach  RSP.  Accordingly,  Ms  Heitz,  who 
has  seniority  number  312,  has  bumping  rights  so  as  to  replace  Ms  Caruthers.  And,  Ms 
Heitz  has  more  seniority  than  Respondent  Brewster  and  also  bumps  her. 

Due  to  the  bumping  rights  of  Ms  Heitz  over  Respondent  Brewster,  the  District 
was  reasonable,  in  making a stipulation,  to  subject  Respondent  Brewster  to  receipt  of  a 
final  lay-off  notice  because  she  replaces  Pamela  Heitz  among  the  123  full-time 
equivalent  teacher  positions  that  are  to  be  eliminated. 

Respondent  Brewster  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 
retained  any  school  psychologist  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Brewster  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  teach. 

18. 

Respondent  Christine  Vitale  (Respondent  Vitale)  is  a  school  psychologist. 

Her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  July  1,  1991. 

Respondent  has  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  Rehabilitation,  and  a  Master’s  of  Arts 

degree  in  School  Psychology. 

Respondent  Vitale  points  out  that  there  are  seven  psychologists  now  working  for 

the  District.  She  believes  that  the  District  has  held  vacant  a  permanent  psychologist 
position.  Moreover,  at  the  time  of  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  lay-off  notice,  a 
psychologist  named  Jane  Mendoza  resigned  from  employment  with  the  District. 

The  District’s  Director  of  Pupil  Personnel  Service,  Randall  Schwartz,  Ph.D., 

authored  a  memorandum,  dated  March  29,  2005,  that  suggested  his  understanding  that 
for  the  ensuing  year,  four  school  psychologists  position  would  be  maintained.  The 
psychologists  who  occupy  positions  one  and  two  will  each  work  at  four  schools.  The 
psychologists  who  hold  positions  two  and  three  will  each  work  at  two  schools,  but  those 
position  holders  will  be  required  to  possess  “advanced  bilingual  skills”  that  will  enable 
the  position  holders  to  engage  in  bilingual  testing  and  other  work  that  requires  Spanish 
language  skills.

{  @ 

Respondent  Vitale  asserts  that  she  has  taken  four  years  of  Spanish  language 

classes.  Also,  she  took  a  sabbatical  to  study  in  Spain.  On  another  occasions  she 
retumed  to  Spain  to  attend  a  language  program.  Respondent  works  in  a  highly  bilingual 
school  and  she  has  worked  at  one  of  the  District’s  most  populous  English  Language 
Learner  schools,  namely  the  Sherwood  School. 

Respondent  Vitale  observed  that  two  psychologists  who  will  be  retained  for  the 
ensuing  year  -  Marilyn  Twisselman  and  Robert  De  la  Rosa  —  are  more  senior  than  she. 
But,  she  asserts  that  those  individuals  are  “the  least  bilingual”  psychologists  with  the 
District.  Yet,  Respondent  Vitale  offered  no  competent  evidence?  to  corroborate  her 
claim  that  she  has  greater  bilingual  skills  than  the  two  psychologists  who  were  not 
presented  with  preliminary  notice  of  the  prospective  lay-off  action.  And,  Respondent 
Vitale  offered  inadequate  evidence  to  establish  that  Randall  Schwartz  had  the  ability, 
training  or  skill  to  assess  or  evaluate  the  Spanish  language  proficiency  of  Respondent 
Vitale  relative  to  the  effectiveness  of  other  psychologists  in  Spanish/bilingual  matters. 

Respondent  Vitale  offered  inadequate  foundation  to  establish  that  she  is 
competent  to  establish  that  the  District’s  elimination  of  three  psychologist  positions  will 
be  insufficient  for  the  District  to  meet  the  lawful  level  of  services  needed  to  serve  the 
interests  of  students  of  the  District.  Respondent  Vitale  failed  to  show  that  she  has  such 
knowledge  and  experience  in  District  administration,  or  management  of a  District’s 
program  for  testing  and  teaching  special  education  pupils  and  other  students  in  need  of 
assistance  from  psychologist,  so  as  to  establish  credibly  and  persuasively  that  the  District 
can  not  fulfill  the  basic  or  minimum  demands  of  mandated  programs  by  retaining  four 
psychologists  as  District  employees. 

Respondent  Vitale  holds  number  169  on  the  seniority  list.  She  challenges  the 
District’s  retention  of  psychologist  Clifford  Siegel,  who  has  the  same  first  day  of  paid 
service  to  the  District  as  she  holds,  that  is  August  1,  1991.  Psychologist  Siegel  has  the 
number  of  168  on  the  seniority  list.  But,  Respondent  Vitale  acknowledges  that  Clifford 
Siegel®  is  bilingual  and  that  he  performs  work  in  Spanish  with  pupils.  Respondent  Vitale 
only  speculates  that  her  Spanish  language  skills  are  as  proficient  as  the. bilingual  ability 
of  Psychologist  Siegel. 

  

A  supposed  memorandum  by  Randall  Schwartz  that  supposedly  ranked  the  District’s  psychologists  on 

5 
a  scale  of  supposed  skill  in  bilingual  functions.  But  that  hearsay  document  was  not  shown  to  be  reliable  or 
trustworthy  as  an  component  in  the  decision-making  process  of  the  Superintendent  in  her  reasonable  exercise 
of  discretion  to  follow  the  advice  and  counsel  of  senior  administrators  regarding  retention  of  psychologists  who 
possess  the  Spanish  language  acumen  for  accomplishment  of  the  missions  of  the  District. 

6 
well  as  a  master’s  degree  in  school  psychology. 

The  District’s  seniority  list  shows  Clifford  Siegel  to  possess  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  psychology,  as 

  

-9.

Respondent  Vitale  was  not  persuasive  that  the  District  should  have  skipped  her 

on  the  seniority  list  due  to  her  skills  in  Spanish  and  bilingual  education. 

Respondent  Vitale  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  psychologist  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Vitale  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  offer  to  the  District  or  its  pupils. 

19, 

Respondent  Keith  Roybal  (Respondent  Roybal)  is  a  school  psychologist. 
His  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  July  1,  1990.  Respondent  Roybal  has  the 
number  of  153  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

Respondent  Roybal  represents  that  he  uses  Spanish  to  converse  with  parents  after 
testing,  such  as  during,  or  after,  IEP  (individual  education  plans)  meetings  for  students  in 
special  education  programs.  He  has  been  assigned  to  school  sites  that  have  the  highest 
census  of  bilingual  pupils  in  the  District.  Respondent  Roybal  proclaims  that  he  has 
performed  his  work  for  the  District  in  settings  that  require  bilingual  skills  in  a 
satisfactory  manner.  Respondent  Roybal  believes  that  he  has  attained  the  required  level 
of  bilingual,  or  advanced  Spanish  language,  proficiency  as  needed  to  perform  the  duties, 
functions  and  responsibilities  of  a  psychologist. 

Respondent  Roybal  points  to  having  developed  Spanish  language  skills  through 

such  activity  as  a  trip  to  Guadalajara,  Mexico. 

Respondent  Roybal  speculates  that  the  District  will  not  be  able  to  offer  the 

minimum,  lawful  level  of  services  to  pupils  during  the  ensuring  year  with  four 
psychologists  as  employees  of  the  District.  Respondent  Roybal  offered  no  insight  into 
plans  of  the  District  to  provide  services  by  psychologists  through  other  means  than  by 
the  work  of  employee-psychologists. 

. 

Respondent  Roybal  was  not  persuasive  that  the  District’s  prospective  ratio  of 

psychologists  to  students  will  be  so  deficient  as  to  expose  the  District  to  greater  risks  of 
civil  actions  at  law,  thereby  requiring  that  the  lay-off  proceeding  should  be  set  aside. 

Respondent  Roybal  asserts  that  the  District’s  administrators  never  caused  him  to 
be  tested  for  proficiency  in  the  Spanish  language.  But,  he  does  not  show  that  his  level  of 
bilingual  skills  (English  to  Spanish)  had  not  been  assessed,  observed  and  documented  by 
his  superiors,  or  school  principals,  teachers  or  parents. 

Respondent  Roybal  offered  no  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  a  proposition 

that  he  is  skilled  in  Spanish  to  a  degree  greater  than  the  psychologists  who  the  District 
‘has  determined  to  retain  for  the  ensuing  year. 

-10.

  

Respondent  Roybal  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 
any  school  psychologist  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Roybal  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  offer  to  the  District  or  its  pupils. 

20. 

Respondent  Karen  Bentley  (Respondent  Bentley)  is  a  school  psychologist. 
Her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  J anuary  18,  2000.  She  holds  number  321 
on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

Respondent  Bentley  is  one  of  the  three  psychologists  to  receive  a  preliminary 

notice  of  the  District’s  plan  to  reduce  its  certificated  employees  by  three  F.T.E. 
psychologist  positions. 

Respondent  Bentley  has  enrolled  and  passed  a  course  in  high  intensity  language 

training  to  an  advanced  intermediate  level. 

Over  the  past  school  year,  the  District  assigned  Respondent  Bentley  to  Los 

Padres  School,  which  she  believes  has  one  of  the  highest  bilingual  populations  in  the 
District.  Over  the  past  year,  she  has  only  referred  two  children  to  more  skilled bilingual 
psychologists.  She  has  been  able  to  attend  to  the  needs  of  many  students  who  were  more 
adept  in  the  Spanish  language  than  in  the  English  language.  The  two  children,  for  whom 
she  required  another  Spanish  speaking  professionals  to  assist  her,  were  pupils  who 
essentially  had  little,  if  any,  English  language ability. 

Respondent  Bentley  is  familiar  with  the  Board’s  resolution  that  prescribes 
“advanced  Spanish  language  proficiency”  criterion  for  tie-breaking  for  seniority 
purposes.  But,  she  was  not  persuasive  that  due  to  her  ability  to  have  performed  her  job 
as  a  psychologist  that  she  has  shown  her  advanced  Spanish  language  proficiency. 

Respondent  speculates  that  should  the  District  employ  four  psychologists  for  the 

2005-2006  school  year  that  the  District  will  be  subject  to  “law  suits”  because  of 
compliance  issues  under  federal  government  or  California  state  government  statutes  or 
regulations.  Respondent  Bentley  was  not  credible  when  she  theorized  that  the  District 
will  maintain  through  the  ensuing  school  year  an  inadequate  ratio  of  one  psychologist  for 
every  2,144  students.  And,  Respondent  Bentley  offered  no  evidence  that  she  has  insight 
into  the  District’s  inability  to  provide  legally  mandated  psychological  testing,  monitoring 
and  counseling  by  means  or  processes  other  than  through  services  of  employees  of  the 
District. 

Respondent  Bentley  offered  no  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  a  proposition 
that  she  is  skilled  in  Spanish  to  a  degree  greater  than  the  psychologists  who  the  District 
has  determined  to  retain  for  the  ensuing  year. 

Respondent  Bentley  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 
retained  any  school  psychologist  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Bentley  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  offer  to  the  District  or  its  pupils. 

-l1-

Pro  Se  Respondent 

21. 

Respondent  Sharon  B.  Loucks  (Respondent  Loucks)  currently  works  for 

the  District  as  the  Director  of  Curriculum  and  Staff  Development.  She  has  been 
employed  by  the  District  as  an  administrator  over  six  years.  Respondent  Loucks 
possesses  an  administrative  services  credential. 

Respondent  Loucks  has  never  worked  as  a  teacher  for  the  District;  but,  she  holds 
a  teacher’s  credential  as  a  reading  specialist.  She  possesses  a  master’s  degree  in  reading. 
Also,  Respondent  Loucks  has  a  doctorate  degree  in  Education. 

The  Board’s  resolution  04/05-21,  which  sets  forth  the  PKS  reduction  in  force  of 
the  District’s  certificated  personnel,  as  revised  on  March  7,  2005,  and  then  amended  and 
finally  adopted  on  March  14,  2005,  informed  Respondent  Louchs  of  the  District’s 
elimination  of  two  full  time  equivalent  positions  having  the  particular  service 
designation  of  “district  coordinators.” 

On  March  15,  2005,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  personally  served  on 
Respondent  Loucks  notice  of  reassignment  from  an  administrator’s  position  to  a 
teaching  position.  But,  she  then  received  preliminary  notice  of  the  lay-off  proceeding  in 
which  she  could  participate  as  a  respondent. 

Respondent  Loucks  holds  neither  status  nor  a  number  on  the  District’s  seniority 

list  of  certificated  teachers. 

Respondent  Loucks  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Loucks  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  offer  to  the  District  or  its  pupils. 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

22. 
and  compelling. 

The  Superintendent,  in  rebuttal  to  respondents,  was  credible,  persuasive — 
, 

. 

‘Before  making  a  recommendation  to  the  Board  for  its  final  approval  of  the  PKS 
reduction  of  psychologists,  the  Superintendent  analyzed  the  District’s  fiscal  pressures. 
She  then  recommended  for  next  year  the  elimination  of  three  currently  filled 
psychologist  positions.  The  Superintendent  is  aware  that  the  reduction  in  force  of 
psychologists  will  leave  the  District  with  four  psychologists  in  employment  positions 
next  year.  When  the  Superintendent  recommended  the  lay-off  of  three  school 

-12.

psychologist,  she  was  aware  of  an  existing  or  unfilled  vacancy  in  the  ranks  of  District 
school  psychologists  for  the  past  school  year. 

Based  upon  the  advice  and  counsel  of  senior  administrators  in  the  District,  the 

Superintendent  made  a  decision  to  retain  psychologists  who  had  met  the  District’s 
objective  that  some  of  the  school  psychologist  personnel  possess  advanced  Spanish 
language  skills. 

The  decision  to  terminate  three  psychologists,  who  are  now  subject  to  lay-off, 

was  made  with  consideration  of  the  skill  levels  of  the  psychologists  who  are  to  be 
retained. 

. 

The  Superintendent,  on  rebuttal,  showed  that  even  though  Respondent  Amy 

Brewster  now  works  in  an  RSP  class  setting,  she  is  a  school  teacher  who  is  subject  to 
lay-off  due  to  her  lack  of  higher  status  on  the  seniority  list.  Respondent  Brewster  is 
bumped  by  Ms  Heitz. 

And  the  Superintendent,  on  rebuttal,  persuasively  explained  that  when  the  Board 
adopted  in  mid-March  2005  the  resolution  for  the  PKS  lay-off,  which  included  the 
elimination  of  three  school  psychologist  positions,  the  fact  of  the  recent  resignation  of  a 
psychologist  was  not  known.  Therefore,  the  Board  did  not  take  into  account  attrition  of 
one  psychology  vacancy  after  March  14,  2005. 

23. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  found  that  the  District 
faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State  of 
California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  with  the  same  number  of 
teacher,  school  psychologist  and  administrator  positions  and  programs  during  the 
ensuing  school  year.  Hence,  the  District  must  prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a 
number  of  FTE  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the  positions  held  by  many  of  the 
affected  respondents  herein. 

24, 

No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of 
the  proposed  elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by 
respondents,  the  District  will  retain  any  teacher  or  psychologist  who  is  junior  to 
respondents  to  perform  services  for  which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to 
be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE  positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

25. 

The  recommendation  of  the  District’s  superintendent  and  the  Board’s 

decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  most  of a  total  of  133.5  FTE  positions,  including  the 
positions  held  by  most  of  the  respondents,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather, 
the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper 
exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

-13.

26. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 

positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  most  of  the  respondents,  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student 
population. 

27. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of 
the  next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of 
the  elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955. 

1. 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  10,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or 

official  duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 
regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
District  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non 
reemployment  of  respondents. 

4. 

Respondent  Chapman  and  Respondent  Saldivar  were  employed  as  interns 
by  the  District  during  much  of  past  school  year,  were  not  entitled  to  higher  placement  on 
the  District’s  seniority  list  because  their  credentials  were  not  registered  with  the  County 
Office  of  Education  and  the  District  by  the  date  for  dispatch  on  March  14,  2005,  of  the 
preliminary  lay  off  notices. 

After-acquired  credentials,  which  are  filed  after  the  date  for  mailing  the 
preliminary  lay-off  notice,  need  not  be  considered  by  a  District  in  the  lay-off  action. 
(Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.  App.3d  689.) 

The  California  Legislature’s  intent  in  prescribing  statutory  notice  deadlines  was 

expressed  as  follows: 

An  obvious  purpose  of  the  statute  is  to  allow  a  teacher, 
whose  employment  will  be  ended  with  the  school  year’s  _ 
termination,  timely  filed  notice  of  that  fact  in  order  that 
[she]  may  seek  other  employment  in  [her]  profession 

-14.

during  the  coming  school  year.  (Grzeskowiak  v.  Bd.  of 
Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  131.) 

On  March  15,  2005,  Respondent  Chapman  and  Respondent  Saldivar  were  each 

given  notice  of  nonreemployment.  With  the  timely  notice  from  the  District,  as  followed 
by  a  courtesy  copy  of  the  lay-off  notice  on  April  1,  both  Respondent  Chapman  and  Re- 
spondent  Saldivar  had  sufficient  time  to  “seek  other  employment”  in  the  teaching  profes- 
sion  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

. 

5. 

A  vacancy  and  a  resignation  among  the  ranks  of  school  psychologist  for 
the  current  year  have  no  effect  on  the  prospective  PKS  lay-off  action  that  anticipates  the 
reduction  of  three  psychologist  positions  for  the  ensuing  year. 

a. 

First,  the  Board’s  resolution  for  deviation  from  the  seniority  list  prescribed 
“BE  IT  ...  RESOLVED  that  the  District  shall  deviate  from  the  seniority  list  ...  to  retain 
certain  psychologists  with  advanced  Spanish  language  proficiency  skills.”  (Emphasis 
added.)  The  resolution  implied  that  seniority  was  to  be  followed  in  retaining 
psychologist  except  when  advanced  Spanish  language  proficiency  skills  existed.  Since 
three  psychologist  were  to  be  laid  off  from  the  District’s  seven  psychologist,  the  District 
was  not  obligated  to  deviate  from  the  seniority  with  regard  to  the  two  most  senior  school 
psychologists,  who  did  not  possess  Spanish  language  proficiency.  With  five  remaining 
psychologists,  the  District  decided  to  lay-off  three  of  those  employees.  The 
Superintendent,  with  the  advice  of  the  supervisor  to  the  psychologists,  assessed  the  five 
remaining  psychologist  and  determined  that  two  psychologists  would  be  retained 
because  each  possessed  advanced  Spanish  language  proficiency  skills. 

The  Superintendent’s  reasonable  exercise  in  discretion  to  retain  the  psychologists 
with  advanced  Spanish  language  proficiency  skills  was  not  shown  by  respondent  to  have 
been  unreasonable  or  unlawful. 

b. 

Secondly,  Respondents  are  not  persuasive  that  Lewin  v.  Board  of Trustees 

(1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977,  and  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.3d  648,  are  controlling  in  this  matter  on  the  question  of  attrition  in  the  ranks  of 
school  psychologists. 

The  court  in  Brough  v.  Governing  Board  of El  Segundo  Unified  School  District 
In  essence  the  later 

(1981)  118  Cal.App.3d  702,  addressed  the  Lewin  court  decision. 
court  held  that  attrition  is  required  to  be  considered  in  an  ADA  “decline  in  attendance”  - 
layoff  action,  but  attrition  is  not  a  consideration  for  a  PKS  layoff.  The  Brough  decision 
set  out,  in  part: 

Clearly  ‘normal’  or  ‘positively  assured’  attrition  includes 
retirements,  resignations  and  deaths,  but  layoffs  attributable  to 
PKS  reductions  do  not  fall  within  the  same  category.  The 

-15.

layoffs  attributable  to  a  decline  in  ADA  and  those  prompted  by 
a  reduction  in  PKS  are  distinct,  not  to  be  commingled,  even 
though  provisions  for  effectuating  both  are  delineated  in  section 
44955.  Burgess,  the  cornerstone  upon  which  the  line  of  cases 
defining  normal  attrition  is  built,  involved  only  layoffs  based  on 
a  decline  in  ADA.  Appellants'  reliance  on  Lewin,  which 
followed  Burgess,  as  support  for  the  proposition  that  PKS 
layoffs  offset  allowable  ADA  layoffs  is  misplaced.  (See 
generally  Ozsogomonyan,  Teacher  Layoffs  in  California:  An 
Update  (1979)  30  Hastings  L.J.  1727.) 

To  require  the  District  to  use  PKS  layoffs  to  offset  allowable 
ADA  layoffs  would  lead  to  incongruous  results.  Section  44955 
provides  that  ADA  layoffs  shall  not  be  proportionately  greater 
than  the  actual  decline  in  student  enrollment  during  the 
computation  period.  By  contrast,  the  only  limitations  on  PKS 
layoffs  are  that  they  be  necessary  and  that  they  not  be  governed 
by  any  statistical  computation.  Logically  the  plain  terms  of 
section  44955  relating  to  the  positively  assured  or  ‘normal’ 
attrition  during  the  computation  period  do  not  include  PKS 
layoffs....  ‘Moreover,  the  economic  salvation  resulting  from  the 
use  of  the  discretionary  power  to  reduce  services  will  be 
cancelled  if  teachers  laid  off  for  reduction  in  services  must  be 
counted  as  attrition  in  the  following  year's  ADA  calculations.’ 
(Ozsogomonyan,  Teacher  Layoffs  in  California:  An  Update, 
supra,  30  Hastings  L.J.  1727,  1735.) 

San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  establishes 
that  a  school  district  need  not  consider  positively  assured  attrition  that  occurs  between 
the  date  of  issuance  of  the  preliminary  notice  of  a  Board  determination  that  certificated 
employees  not  be  reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  by  reason  of  a  reduction  in 
particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  date  for  dispatch  of  the  final  notice  that  determines 
the  number  of  certificated  employees  that  are  to  be  terminated.  “In  PKS  cases  the 
determination  of  the  amount  by  which a  service  is  to  be  reduced  is  the  determination  of 
the  number  of  positions  to  be  eliminated.”  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144 
Cal.App.3d  at  636.) 

Contrary  to  respondents’  argument,  the  District  may  issue  final  lay-off  notices  to 
affected  respondents  without  accounting  for  retirements  and  resignation  of  psychologists 
or  teachers  that  occur  between  March  15,  2005,  and  May  15,  2005.  Attrition,  after 
dispatch  of  the  preliminary  notice  and  before  the  date  of  the  final  notice,  is  not  relevant 
to  this,  or  any,  PKS  lay-off  action. 

6. 

As  to  Respondent  Sharon  Loucks,  who  is  an  administrator  at  the  District 

level,  the  lay-off  action  is  lawful. 

-16.

  

Before  the  close  of  business  on  March  15,  2005,  the  District  correctly  served 

upon  Respondent  Loucks  with  two  notices  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  school  year.  The  first  notice  reassigned  her  from  an  administrator’s  position 
with  the  District  to  a  teacher’s  position.  The  second  notice  conveyed  to  Respondent 
Loucks  that  due  to  her  lack  of  status  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  certificated 
teachers  that  she  was  subject  to  lay-off  proceedings. 

During  her  six  years  of  service  to  the  District,  Respondent  Loucks  only  filled  a 
position  as  a  District  administrator.  An  administrator  in  a  school  system  serves  in  such 
capacity  at  the  pleasure  or  the  governing  board  (that  is,  the  appointing  authority),  and  an 
administrator  may  be  removed  or  reassigned  for  any  reason  satisfactory  to  the  appointing 
authority.  (Barton  v.  Governing  Board  (1976)  60  Cal.App.3d  476.) 

Under  the  law,  the  only  seniority  that  an  administrator  may  accrue  would  be 

through  a  position  at  a  site  or  school  level.  And  an  administrator  at  a  school  site  can  not 
acquire  more  than  a  maximum  of  three  years  of  seniority.  (Education  Code  section 
44956.5).  Under  the  facts  in  this  matter,  Respondent  Loucks  only  worked  at  the  District 
level  as  an  administrator,  and  hence,  she  acquired  no  seniority  as  among  certificated 
employees  of  the  District. 

The  District  was  lawful  in  determining  that  Ms  Loucks is  one  of  the  junior  most  — 

teachers  with  the  District  and  that  she  is  subject  to  receipt  of  a  final  PKS 
reduction/elimination  notice.  Hence,  she  may  be  one  of  the  first  individuals  who  will  be 
subject  to  receipt  of  a  final  lay  off  notice. 

Sanctity  of Stipulation  to  Dismiss  Teachers from  the  Accusation 

7. 

Judgments  entered  by a  tribunal  on  the  stipulation  of  the  parties  have  the 

same  effect  as  acts  tried  on  the  merits.  (John  Siebel  Associates  v.  Keele  (1986)  188 
Cal.App.3d  560,  565.) 

The  District  stipulates  to  withdraw  the  Accusation  against  Pamela  Heitz  as  set  out 

in  Factual  Finding  13. 

The  stipulations  are  binding  on  the  parties. 

Ultimate  Determinations 

8. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in 
Factual  Findings  11,  12,  22  to  25  inclusive,  and  27. 

-17-

9. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by 

each  respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in 
Factual  Finding  26. 

ORDER 

l. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed,  pursuant  to  a  stipulation  between  the  parties, 

as  to  Respondents  Pamela  Heitz  and  Linda  Piffero. 

2. 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent,  not  dismissed  from  the 

proceeding,  is  sustained. 

3. 

Other  than  the  employees  dismissed  as  set  out  in  this  Order,  final  notice 

may  be  given  to  those  respondents  identified  in  Attachment  “A,”  as  well  as  Respondent 
Sharon  Loucks,  that  their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  6,  2005 

  

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

~18.  

  

@  The  following  certificated  staff  received  a  “Notice  of  Layoff.” 

Tara  Aderman 
Martha  Aranda 
Elva  Arellano 
Linda  Barrera 
Glenda  Bell 
Patricia  Beltran 
Karen  Bentley 
Jodi  Bolinger 
Corrine  Bonynge 
Juana  Bravo-Vargas 
Amy  Brewster 
Michael  Burgess 
Stefanie  Burgess 
Maria  Camacho 
Esabel  Cervantes 
Cesar  Chaidez 
Barbara  Chapman 
Julie  Chobanian 
Donna  Clark 
Lesley  Clevenger 
Linda  Coleman 
Mary  Cominos 
Rito  Contreras 
Cheryl]  Correa 
Shannon  Cortes 
Mauricio  Cossyleon 
Jennifer  Cottle 
Eva  Covarrubias 
Merissa  Dacpano 
Bonnie  DeCuir 
Catherine  Delacruz 
Kellyann  Dickison 
Natalie  DiTusa 
Alexandra  Doherty 
Darcie  Edwards 
Veronica  Espinosa 
Tina  Fabel 
Valerie  Fern 
Cecilia  Fernandez 
Heather  Frerichs 
Kaylene  Galeano-Rodriquez 
Lauralea  Gaona 
Rosemary  Garcia

?  @ 
\ 

©} 

Helen  Garcia 
Erica  Gomez-Valenzuela 
Jose  Gonzalez 
Cynthia  Gonzalez 
Patricia  Gonzalez 
Kathryn  Gordon 
Rebecca  Gunwall 
Mario  Gutierrez 
Amy  Hawes 
Pamela  Heitz 
Michael  Henderson 
Gonzalo  Herrera 
Christi  Hicks 
Alvaro  Holguin 
Jennine  Howell 
Hilda  Huerta 
Velvali  Huston 
Amy  Jansen 
Annette  Kamos 
Mary  Kehlhofer 
Jeanne  Kerney 
Norma  Lara, 
Sheldon  Lasda 
Melissa  Lewington 
Regina  Leyva 
Diane  Lopez 
Oscar  Lopez. 
Julie  Lumsden 
Julie  MacGregor 
Paul  Magpusa 
Maria  Mariscal 
Beatriz.  Marquez 
Laura  Matter 
Jodie  McBride 
Kimberly  McCullick 
Deborah  McDill 
Linda  Mendoza 
Angel  Mendoza 
Sara  Mercado 
Juana  Mireles 
Dora  Moncada 
Ursula  Moncrief 
Holly  Moore 
Claudia  Morales 
Blanca  Navarro-Martinez 
Stacey  Neilsen

@ 

Sandra  Orozco 
Maria  Ortega 
Michele  Osorio 
Cheri  Pepito 
Christine  Pereira 
Gabriella  Perez 
Linda  Piffero 
Sandra  Puga 
Sue  Quetin 
Rubi  Ramirez, 
William  Randall 
Margaret  Randtke 
Sonia  Regalado 
Tricia  Reynolds 
Ana  Reynoso 
Melissa  Rocamora 
Carmen  Rocha 
Michelle  Ross 
Robert  Rossi 
Keith  Roybal 
Megan  Sacay 
Yamara  Saldivar 
Marisela  Santana-Gil 
Megan  Sawyer 
Julia-Anne  Scattini 
Sarah  Schuchterman 
Amy  Seid 
Susie  Shin 
Larry  Steffen 
Angela  Stone 
Elizabeth  Swain 
Sharon  Theis 
Francisca  Tinajero 
Andrea  Tocci 
Cesar  Torres 
Nancy  Trujillo 
Tiffany  Ura 
Connie  Valerio 
Lilia  Valladares 
Kristine  Vasquez 
Joanna  Veliz 
Katherine  Venza 
Christine  Vitale 
Carrie  Wallace 
Kelly  Zander

