BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
NAPA  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

Catherine  George, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  N2004040318 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Administrative  Law  Judge  Jonathan  Lew,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  on  April  27,  2004,  in  Napa,  California. 

Sally  J.  Dutcher,  General  Counsel,  represented  the  Napa  Valley  Unified  School 

District. 

David  Weintraub,  Esq.,  represented  Catherine  George,  who  was  also  present. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  27,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

John  P.  Glaser,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Napa  Valley  Unified  School 
District  (District).  He  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  such  public 
officer. 

2. 

Catherine  George  (respondent)  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary 

position  for  the  District  on  August  8,  2001.  Since  that  date  she  has  been  and  now  isa 
certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

3. 

OnMarch  11,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice,  in 

accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  Dr.  Glaser’s  recommendation 
that  respondent  be  notified  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

4. 

OnMarch  12,  2004,  the  District  served  respondent  with  written  notice  that  it  had 

been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and

.  44955  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  setting  forth 
the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

® 

5. 

6. 

OnMarch  16,  2004,  respondent  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  is  cause  for  terminating  her  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

OnMarch  11,  2004  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  passed  and  adopted  a 

resolution  providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
services:  Multi-Media  Design  and  Critique  —  1.00  Full  Time  Equivalent  (FTE). 

7. 

Respondent  is  the  only  teacher  in  the  District  who  teaches  Multi-Media  Design 
and  Critique.  Although  she  has  seniority  over  other  teachers,  none  were  retained  to  provide 
the  service  that  is  being  recommended  for  reduction  or  elimination.  Respondent  holds  no 
She 
other  credential  that  would  make  her  eligible  to  bump  into  another  teaching  position. 
currently  teaches  under  an  Education  Code  provision  that  allows  non-credentialed  persons  to 
teach  specialized  secondary  programs  who  possess  unique  talents  or  skills  from  business, 
performing  arts  or  post-secondary  institutions.  (Ed.  Code,  §  58803.) 

Respondent  has  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  Fine  Arts  from  Syracuse  University. 
She  has  also  attended  a  number  of  seminars  and  has  received  certifications  from  Macromedia 
and  various  other  programs.  Prior  to  teaching  respondent  was  a  manager  and  developer  with 
expertise  in  multimedia  product  development  and  production.  She  has  worked  for  a  range  of 
companies  including  small  businesses  and  large  corporations,  in  marketing  groups  as  well  as 
in  software  development  and  engineering  organizations.  Her  twelve  years  industry 
experience  includes  work  with  Adobe  Systems,  MP3.com,  as  well  as  her  own  start-up 
company. 

@ 

8. 

Respondent  is  currently  assigned  to  New  Technology  High  School  (NTHS) 

where  she  serves  as  the  Digital  Media  Instructor.  She  provides  11"  and  12"  grade  instruction 
in  Digital  Media  Design  and  Criticism,  I  and  II.  She  prepared  the  following  course 
description: 

This  year  long  course  is  a  beginning  study  in  contemporary  media.  The  class  is 
structured  around  projects  emphasizing  the  art  elements  of  line,  shape,  form,  color, 
space,  and  texture.  It  will  introduce  the  student  to  the  principles  of  design  including 
typography,  perspective,  color  theory,  and  layout.  Students  will  develop  an 
appreciation  of  traditional  artistic  expression  as  well  as  an  understanding  of  the  role 
of  contemporary  media  as  a  verbal  and  visual  means  of  communication  in  today’s 
society.  After  a  brief  teacher-led  instruction  to  hardware  and  software  common  to  the 
industry,  students  work  together  to  design,  create,  critique,  and  present  digital  media 
art  projects. 

Because  courses  entitled  “Digital  Media  I  and  IT”  are  being  offered  next  year  at 
NTHS  through  the  Napa  County  Office  of  Education,  Regional  Occupational  Program 

@

  

  

(ROP),  respondent  contends  that  the  District  is  not  really  reducing  or  eliminating  a  particular 
kind  of  service  and  that  she  should  therefore  be  retained  to  teach  these  courses. 

9. 

NTHS  currently  provides  instruction  for  high  school  juniors  and  seniors  only. 
The  District  intends  to  expand  NTHS  to  include  grades  9  and  10.  NTHS  historically  had 
difficulty  recruiting  students  owing  to  its  status  as  a  Grade  11  —  12  School.  By  adding grades 
9  and  10,  middle  school  recruitment  can  now  be  initiated.  The  District  plans  to  add  only 
grade  9  for  the  2004-05  school  year,  and  then  grade  10  the  following  school  year  as  the 
entering  9"  grade  class  advances.  The  projected  number  of  incoming  freshmen  is  100  and 
under  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  additional  FTEs  will  open  up  at  NTHS  asa 
consequence. 

Mark  Morrison  is  the  principal  of  NTHS.  He  and  other  interested  parties  convened  a 

special  committee  to  evaluate  and  establish  a  complete  program  for  incoming  freshmen  to 
ensure  that  courses  are  offered  them  that  meet  skill  and  graduation  requirements.  Thus,  a 
foreign  language  (Spanish)  course  was  added  along  with  a  course  called  “Power  Skills”  that 
is  considered  a  foundational  class  for  the  technology-based  high  school.  The  committee 
recommended  and  the  District  decided  not  to  offer  Digital  Media  Design  and  Criticism  for 
the  2004-05  school  year.  Instead,  the  District  plans  to  offer  Digital  Media  Design  and 
Criticism,  the  class  currently  taught  by  respondent,  to  tenth  graders  but  this  will  not  happen 
until  the  2005-06  school  year.  Respondent  has  been  offered  a  leave  of  absence  during  the 
interim. 

10. 

The  ROP  is  designed  to  offer  students  occupational  skills  leading  to 

employment.  The  “Digital  Media  I  and  II”  courses  offered  at  NTHS  next  year  will  be 
provided  directly  through  ROP.  This  means  that  the  ROP  instructor  will  be  employed  and 
supervised  by  the  Napa  County  Office  of  Education  and  not  by  the  District.’  Respondent  had 
a  big  hand  in  developing  the  current  curriculum  for  Digital  Media  Design  and  Criticism.  She 
believes  that  next  year’s  “Digital  Media  I  and  II”  curriculum  is  essentially  identical  to  that 
which  she  now  teaches.  The  District  disagrees. 

The  District  notes  that  within  NTHS  the  ROP  program  has  its  own  separate  computer 

lab  (classroom  9),  computers  and  software.  The  computer  hardware  and  software  are  all 
purchased  by  ROP  funds.  Respondent  uses  a  different  classroom  and  equipment/software 
supplied  through  the  District.  ROP  programs  are  also  linked  to  an  industry  review  board  so 
that  the  curriculum  can  be  regularly  supervised  and  modified  to  remain  current  and  to  change 
with  industry  needs.  The  course  currently  taught  by  respondent  is  not  so  linked.  By 
definition  ROP  course  offerings  are  more  business  and  technically  oriented  with  a  focus  on 
preparing  students  age  16  and  older  to  enter  the  job  market  with  competitive  vocational 

  

'  Respondent  may  apply  directly  for  this  position  through  the  Napa  County  Office  of  Education.  However,  the 
governing  collective  bargaining  agreement  provides  that  the  Napa  County  Office  of  Education  must  first  post  the  job 
announcement  internally  for  the  ROP  Digital  Media  Teacher  position.  Qualified  in-house  applicants  are  to  be 
provided  an  opportunity  to  be  interviewed  prior  to  any  outside  applicants  such  as  respondent.

skills.  ROP  also  incorporates  a  “capstone”  approach  which  provides  students  advanced 
training  in  viable  skills  just  prior  to  their  becoming  employed. 

As  a  result  the  “Digital  Media  I  and  II”  courses,  unlike  the  current  courses  taught  by 
respondent,  will  place  additional  emphasis  on  technical  skills  and  software  development  and 
less  focus  on  topography  and  art.  There  will  also  be  changes  in  how  the  course  is  presented 
to  students.  Up  to a  third  of  instruction  will  be  via  video  and  there  will  be  more  use  of  higher 
end  software.  The  current  course  does  not  rely  as  much,  if  any,  on  video  instruction. 
Respondent  is  certainly  capable  of  teaching  “Digital  Media  I  and  IT”  and  may  be  the  best 
qualified  to  do  so.  She  has  laid  much  of  the  foundation  for  these  important  and  innovative 
programs  at  NTHS.  However,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  courses  she  now  teaches  are  the 
same  as  those  being  offered  next  year  through  ROP.  Though  similar  there  are  different 
emphases  resulting  from  the  courses  being  offered  through  ROP. 

11. 

Although  “Digital  Media  I  and  IT”  are  being  offered  at  NTHS  next  school  year, 

the  District  has  demonstrated  that  these  courses  are  not  identical  to  those  currently  being 
taught  by  respondent.  The  proposed  service  reduction  (Multi-Media  Design  and  Critique  — 
1.00  (FTE))  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

It  was  established  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kind  of 
service  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  students  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  service 
was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion  of  the  District 
Superintendent. 

. 

12. 

Except  as  provided  by  statute,  no  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondent  is 
certificated,  competent  and  legally  entitled  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notice  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

A  district  may  not  dismiss  an  employee  and  yet  continue  the  identical  kind  of 

service  and  position  held  by  the  terminated  employee,  but  the  particular  kind  of  service  of  the 
employee  may  be  eliminated  even  though  the  service  continues  to  be  performed  or  provided 
in  a  different  manner  by  the  district.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v. 
Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  812;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing 
Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  844.)  The  district  has  the  burden  of  affirmatively 
showing  that  the  services  at  issue  would  continue  to  be  performed  but  in  a  different  manner. 
(See  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  640.)  The  District 
has  sustained  this  burden  here.  The  “Digital  Media  I  and  II”  courses  proposed  to  be  offered 

  

 

next  year  at  NTHS  through  ROP  are  sufficiently  differentiated  from  the  courses  currently 
taught  by  respondent  in  both  manner  offered  and  performed.  (See  Findings  8  through  11.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Napa  Valley 

Unified  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of 
service:  Multi-Media  Design  and  Critique  —  1.00  FTE.  The  service  identified  in  the 
Governing  Board’s  Resolution  is  a  particular  kind  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  identified  service  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

4. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  this  particular  kind  of  service  relates  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Catherine  George  before  May  15,  2004,  that  her  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
a  particular  kind  of  service. 

DATED: 

Lay.  4  Zov4 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

