BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 

LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

JOYCE  PAUL, 

OAH  No.  L2004040053 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  on  April  26,  2004  in  Los  Angeles, 

California,  before  H.  Stuart  Waxman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California. 

Mary  L.  Dowell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Los  Angeles  Unified 

School  District. 

Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent,  Joyce  Paul. 

The  hearing  was  not  completed  on  April  26,  2004  and  was  continued  to  May  6 

and  7,  2004,  a  total  of  eleven  days.  The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  7,  2004. 
Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949(e),  the  due  dates  for  this  Proposed 
Decision  and  for  Board  action  were  also  extended  by  eleven  days.  This  Proposed 
Decision  is  due  May  18,  2004.  The  Board  must  act  on  it  by  the  close  of  business  on 
May  26,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Deborah  Hirsh  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as 
Chief  Human  Resources  Officer,  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (“District”). 

2.  Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  District  employee. 

3.  On  March  8,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
the  District’s  Superintendent  gave  to  the  District’s  Board  of  Education  written  notice 
of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondent  that  affected  employees’ 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

1 

 

4,  On  or  before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  served  on  Respondent,  by 
certified  mail,  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 
respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  her  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  written  notice  set  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

5.  Respondent  timely  submitted  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6.  The  Superintendent,  by  and  through  the  District’s  Chief  Human  Resources 
Officer,  made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against  Respondent  who  requested  a  hearing. 
The  Accusation,  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notice  of 
Defense,  were  timely  served  on  Respondent. 

7.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

8.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

9.  The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular 

kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

Psychiatric  Social  Worker 

Staff  Counsel 

PSA 

Nurse 

Total  Net  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Reduction 

TOTAL  NET  FULL-TIME 
EQUIVALENT  REDUCTIONS 

40.00 

| 

2.00 

69.00 

60.00 

171.00 

171.00 

10.  This  case  involves  the  positions  of  Staff  Counsel  only.  The  reduction  or 

discontinuation  of  that  particular  kind  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District 
and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  that  particular  kind  of  services  was 
necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

HI

11.  The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to 
be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

12.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

13.  Respondent  is  an  attorney.  She  began  her  career  as  a  school  lawyer  in 

1990,  and  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  July  of  1999.  Since  that  time,  she 
has  held  a  certificated  position  known  as  Staff  Counsel.  She  is  assigned  to  the  Special 
Education  Legal  Team  of  the  Office  of  General  Counsel. 

14.  At  the  time  of  Respondent’s  hire,  all  attorneys  hired  by  the  District  were 

certificated  employees  who  became  permanent  employees  upon  successful  passage  of 
a  two-year  probationary  period. 

15.  Between  2001  and  2003,  the  Office  of  General  Counsel  underwent  a 

reorganization  that  resulted  in  the  creation  of  new  class  of  classified  attorneys  known 
as  Assistant  General  Counsel  and  Associate  General  Counsel.  In  addition  to  Staff 
Counsel  being  certificated  and  Assistant  General  Counsel  being  classified,  Staff 
Counsel  and  Assistant  General  Counsel  were  distinguished  by  other  specific 
differences.  For  example,  unlike  Staff  Counsel  which  required  no  experience  as  an 
attorney  for  an  entry  level  position,  Assistant  General  Counsel  required  three  years  of 
attorney  experience.  Assistant  General  Counsel  belonged  to  the  Public  Employees’ 
Retirement  System  (“PERS”).  Staff  Counsel  belonged  to  the  State  Teachers’ 
Retirement  System  (“STRS”).  The  two  groups  were  subject  to  different  rules 
regarding  vacations,  disciplinary  matters,  etc.  Originally,  the  salary  for  an  Assistant 
General  Counsel  well  exceeded  that  of  Staff  counsel.  The  two  groups’  salaries  have 
since  equalized.  The  two  groups  were  also  subject  to  different  rules  relating  to  layoff 
procedures.  For  example,  notice  to  Staff  Counsel  had  to  be  provided  by  March  15 
and  generally,  the  entire  layoff  procedure  had  to  be  completed  by  May  15.  Notice  to 
Assistants  General  Counsel  had  to  be  provided  no  later  than  45  days  before  the  end  of 
the  fiscal  year  (June  30). 

16.  The  Office  of  General  Counsel  was,  and  is,  divided  into  seven  teams. 
(Special  Education  is  one  such  team.)  Both  Staff  Counsel  and  Assistant  General 
Counsel  may,  have,  and  do  serve  on  all  seven  teams.  Staff  counsel  and  Assistant 
General  Counsel  perform  the  same  duties  on  their  respective  teams  although  some  of 
them  brought  individual  expertise  in  certain  areas  to  the  job.  Staff  Counsel  and 
Assistant  General  Counsel  are  commonly  transferred  between  and  amongst  the  teams. 

17.  Since  she  had  already  worked  for  the  District  a  number  of  years  before  the 

reorganization,  Respondent  has  more  years  in  service  than  any  of  the  Assistants 
General  Counsel,  and  she  has  served  as  a  mentor  for  some  of  the  newer  members  of 
that  group.

  

18.  After  the  creation  of  the  Assistant  General  Counsel  position,  some  Staff 

Counsel  were  offered  the  opportunity  to  transfer  to  Assistant  General  Counsel 
positions  in  order  to  earn  the  higher  salaries  paid  to  Assistants  General  Counsel.  The 
transfer  required  a  one-year  probationary  period  during  which  they  were  deemed  “on 
leave”  from  their  Staff  Counsel  positions.  Some  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity. 
Of  those  who  did,  at  least  some  chose  to  return  to  their  Staff  Counsel  positions  before 
the  end  of  the  probationary  period  in  order  to  protect  their  seniority  rights  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  45271. 

19.  Shortly  before  September  8,  2003,  Respondent  was  offered  the 

opportunity  to  transfer  to  an  Assistant  General  Counsel  position.  She  informed 
District’s  General  Counsel  she  would  do  so  if  she  could  take  her  seniority  date  with 
her  for  purposes  of  determining  the  order  of  layoffs,  if  any.  The  General  Counsel 
informed  her  he  could  not  permit  her  to  do  so.  Respondent  then  opted  to  remain  on  as 
Staff  Counsel. 

20.  Although  she  did  not  know  it  at  the  time,  Respondent  was  faced  with  a 

Hobson’s  Choice.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  45271,  she  could  not  transfer 
her  seniority  from  Staff  Counsel  to  Assistant  General  Counsel  to  bolster  her 
protection  against  a  layoff.  Instead,  if  she  chose  to  become  an  Assistant  General 
Counsel,  her  seniority  for  that  purpose  would  begin  again  and  she  would  be  junior  to 
the  other  attorneys  even  though  she  had  served  the  District  years  longer  than  they  had. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  she  remained  Staff  Counsel,  her  seniority  would  apply  only  as  to 
other  certificated  attorneys  (not  Assistants  General  Counsel),  and  she  would  be 
subject  to  the  layoff  procedure  at  an  earlier  date  than  Assistants  General  Counsel. 
Thus,  the  end  result  in  either  case  would  be  that  she  could  be  laid  off  while  other 
attorneys  with  fewer  years  in  District  service,  who  were  performing  the  identical 
work,  remained  employed. 

21.  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  serve  on  any  of  the  seven 

teams  in  the  Office  of  General  Counsel. 

22.  Facing  a  $500,000,000.00  deficit  for  the  2004-2005  school  year,  the 
District  timely  sent  layoff  notices  to  two  Staff  Counsel  (including  Respondent).  The 
Staff  Counsel  less  senior  to  Respondent  found  employment  elsewhere  and  left  the 
District. 

23.  District  also  targeted  two  probationary  Assistants  General  Counsel  and 

one  Associate  General  Counsel  for  layoffs  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  As  stated 
above,  notices  of  those  layoffs  are  to  be  sent  no  later  than  45  days  before  the  end  of 
the  fiscal  year.  (That  date  is  May  16,  2004  which  falls  on  a  Sunday.)  No  evidence 
was  offered  to  show  that,  as  of  the  final  day  of  the  hearing  (May  7,  2004),  a  notice 
had  been  sent  to  any  of  the  classified  attorneys.

24.  Respondent  contends:  (1)  The  District  should  be  equitably  estopped  from 

enforcing  the  pending  layoff  because  the  elements  of  equitable  estoppel  were  met  at 
the  time  the  District  offered  employment  to  Respondent,  and  (2)  the  District  failed  to 
comply  with  Education  Code  section  44955(b)  in  that  the  term  “employee  with  less 
seniority”  means  any  employee,  whether  or  not  certificated.  Therefore,  all  Assistants 
General  Counsel  were  subject  to  layoffs  before  Respondent  or,  put  another  way, 
Respondent  was  entitled  to  “bump”  less  senior  Assistants  General  Counsel. 

25.  Respondent’s  equitable  estoppel  argument  is  rejected  for  the  following 

reason: 

“Equitable  estoppel  arises  from  the  declarations  or 
conduct  of  the  party  estopped  and  has  five  elements: 
‘(a)  a  representation  or  concealment  of  material  facts 
(b)  made  with  knowledge,  actual  or  virtual,  of  the  facts 
(c)  to  a  party  ignorant,  actually  and  permissibly,  of  the 
truth  (d)  with  the  intention,  actual  or  virtual,  that  the 
latter  act  upon  it;  and  (e)  the  party  must  have  been 
induced  to  act  upon  it.’  (Citations.)” 

. 

Branson  v.  Sun-Diamond  Growers  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4"  327,  348. 

Stated  another  way: 

“The  requirements  for  application  of  the  doctrine  of 
equitable  estoppel  are:  ‘(1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must 
be  apprised  of  the  facts;  (2)  he  must  intend  that  his 
conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that  the  party 
asserting  the  estoppel  had  a  right  to  believe  it  was  so 
intended;  (3)  the  other  party  must  be  ignorant  of  the  true 
state  of  facts;  and  (4)  he  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to 
his  injury.”  (Citations.)” 

Fontana  Paving,  Inc.  v.  Hedley  Brothers,  Inc.  (1995)  38  Cal.App.4"  146,  156- 

157. 

26.  Respondent  claims  the  District  had  virtual  knowledge  of  the  true  facts 

(i.e.,  the  two-track  system  and  its  effects  on  seniority  of  certificated  attorneys)  when 
she  was  hired.  That  is  not  the  case.  Respondent  was  hired  in  1999.  The 
reorganization  that  gave  rise  to  the  new  classification  occurred  between  2001  and 
2003,  and  there  was  no  evidence  offered  to  show  that,  in  1999,  the  District  had 
knowledge  that  the  reorganization  would  occur  or  what  its  results  would  be.  Further, 
the  reorganization  did  not  necessarily  contemplate  a  two-track  system.  That 
apparently  came  about  when  some  Staff  Counsel  retained  their  original  positions 
rather  than  become  permanent  classified  employees.  Accordingly,  the  first  element  of 
equitable  estoppel  is  not  met  and  the  analysis  need  go  no  further.

@ 

44955(b)  is  also  rejected.  The  language  to  which  Respondent  refers  is  as  follows: 

27.  Respondent’s  argument  regarding  the  language  in  Education  Code  section 

“Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while 
any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less 
seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
‘employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 
(Emphasis  added.) 

28.  The  resolution  of  the  question  as  to  whether  “any  other  employee”  refers 
to  both  certificated  and  non-certificated  employees  is  resolved  by  way  of  reason  and 
logic.  If  a  less  senior  employee  were  to  be  retained  to  render  a  service  a  more  senior 
employee  was  “certificated  and  competent  to  render”  it  stands  to  reason  that,  if  the 
more  senior  employee  had  to  be  certificated  to  render  the  service,  the  same  would  be 
true  of  the  less  senior  employee.  Since  the  only  “service”  referred  to  in  section 
44955(b)  is  a  service  for  which  one  must  be  certificated  to  render,  the  expression, 
“any  other  employee”  must  necessarily  refer  only  to  a  certificated  employee. 

@ 

29.  Respondent  also  contends  the  District  acted  arbitrarily  and  capriciously  by 

notifying  her  of  its  intent  to  lay  her  off  while  keeping  in  its  employ  other  attorneys 
with  less  time  in  District  service  who  are  performing  services  Respondent  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render,  and  justifying  its  action  on  the  specious  basis  of 
maintaining  two  separate  but  functionally  identical  classes  of  attorneys  with  disparate 
layoff  procedures. 

30.  The  District  argues  that  (1)  layoffs  are  proper  because  legal  services  will 

be  provided  in  a  different  manner  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  (2)  the  Administrative 
Law  Judge  is  without  jurisdiction  to  determine  the  propriety  of  the  classified 
attorneys’  positions  at  the  time  of  the  reorganization  of  the  General  Counsel’s  Office, 
and  (3)  the  reason  there  now  exist  two  separate  tracks  of  attorneys  are  that  certain 
Staff  Counsel,  including  Respondent,  chose  to  remain  Staff  Counsel  instead  of 
becoming  Assistant  General  Counsel.  The  District  is  correct  on  all  three  counts. 
However,  the  question  to  be  determined  is  whether  the  District’s  decision  to  lay  off 
Respondent  was  arbitrary  and  capricious  in  light  of  the  circumstances. 

HM 

M1 

IH 

M1 

iil 

©} 

 

@ 

31.  An  Agency’s  decision  will  be  overturned  if  it  is  determined  to  be  arbitrary 
and  capricious.  (Sequoia  Union  High  School  District  v.  Aurora  Charter  High  School 
(2003)  112  Cal.App.4"  185,  195;  Jefferson  v.  Compton  Unified  School  District 
(1993)  14  Cal.App.4"  32,  37.) 

“In  determining  whether  the  decision  of  a  school  board  is  reasonable  as 
distinguished  from  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious,  its  action  is 
measured  by  the  standard  set  by  reason  and  reasonable  people,  bearing 
in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may  permit  a  difference  of  opinion  on  the 
same  subject.  (Citations.)” 
Arthur  v.  Oceanside-Carlsbad  Junior  College  District  (1963)  216 
Cal.App.2d  656,  663. 

““A  finding  that  governmental  conduct  is  arbitrary  and  capricious  is 
essentially  one  of  fact’  (Midstate  Theatres,  Inc.  v.  Board  of 
Supervisors,  46  Cal.App.3d  204,  212  [119  Cal.Rptr.  894];  Madonna  v. 
County  of  San  Luis  Obispo,  39  Cal.App.3d  57,  62  [113  Cal.Rptr.  916]) 
and  will  be  sustained  on  appeal  unless  an  abuse  of  discretion  is  shown. 
The  District  claims  that  the  court’s  finding  cannot  be  sustained  because 
there  is  no  evidence  or  finding  that  the  District’s  action  ‘was  based 
upon  ulterior  or  improper  motives.’  No  such  finding  is  necessary.  As 
was  explained  in  Madonna,  id.  at  pages  61-62:  ‘The  phrase  “arbitrary 
and  capricious”  has  no  precise  meaning,  and  the  code  does  not 
undertake  to  define  it.  However,  conduct  not  supported  by a fair  or 
substantial  reason  may  be  categorized  as  arbitrary  and  capricious. 
(Citation.)  The  courts  often  characterize  unsubstantiated 
determinations  as  arbitrary.  (Citations.)”  Similarly,  the  court  in 
Midstate,  supra,  46  Cal.App.3d  at  page  211,  pointed  out  that 
‘[h]owever  well  intended,  stubborn  insistence  on  following  an 
unauthorized  course  of  action  could  well  be  found  to  be  arbitrary  and 
Capricious.’” 
A.B.C.  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  A.B.C.  Unified  School  District 
(1977)  75  Cal.App.3d  332,  343,  142  Cal.Rptr.  111. 

32.  The  reason  the  District  chose  to  create  a  separate  track  for  classified 

attorneys  was  not  disclosed  by  the  evidence.  What  was  disclosed  is  that  both  Staff 
Counsel  and  Assistant  General  Counsel  do  the  same  work,  handle  the  same  files,  are 
interchangeable  between  and  amongst  teams,  serve  as  mentors  for  each  other  and  are, 
in  every  material  way  except  for  their  designations  as  certificated  or  classified,  the 
same. 

© 

Hf 

H/

33.  The  District  argues  that  the  two  groups  of  attorneys  are  not  the  same  and 
that  their  respective  positions  are  distinguishable  in  that  (1)  the  position  of  Assistant 
General  Counsel  requires  three  years  experience  as  an  attorney  as  opposed  to  no 
experience  for  Staff  Counsel’,  (2)  Assistant  General  Counsel  are  members  of  PERS 
while  Staff  Counsel  are  members  of  STRS’,  and  (3)  the  two  tracks  are  subject  to 
different  rules  relating  to  vacations,  disciplinary  matters,  layoffs,  etc.  For  purposes  of 
deciding  this  case,  the  District’s  arguments  constitute  a  distinction  without  a 
difference.  Respondent  had  well  in  excess  of  three  years  of  attorney  experience  at  all 
relevant  times,  and  the  other  differences  between  the  two  tracks  are  analogous  to 
wearing  different  uniforms  or  badges  to  designate  classifications,  rather  than  a 
substantive  difference  in  the  type  of  services  the  attorneys  are  competent  to,  and  do 
render. 

. 

34.  Regardless  of  how  the  two-track  system  came  about,  by  creating  a  group 
of  classified  attorneys  who  work  side-by-side  with  certificated  attorneys  performing 
the  same  work,  the  District  created  a  system  in  which  these  two  virtually  identical 
groups  are  inherently  in  competition  for  seniority.  Albeit  unlikely  that  it  was  the 
intended  result,  an  unfortunate  bi-product  of  the  new  group’s  creation  was  the 
deterioration  and  minification  of  the  tenured  employees’  seniority. 

35. 

In  light  of  the  above,  the  Board’s  action  with  respect  to  its  determination 
of  Respondent’s  seniority  for  purposes  of  establishing  an  order  for  layoffs,  is  deemed 
arbitrary  and  capricious.  It  is  not  the  District’s  decision  to  create  a  new  group  of 
classified  attorneys  that  was  arbitrary  and  capricious,  but  rather,  the  end  result  of  that 
decision,  specifically,  the  layoff  selection  process  by  which  the  District  chose  to  lay 
off  Respondent,  who  is  certificated  and  competent  to  perform  any  task  performed  by 
Staff  Counsel  or  Assistant  General  Counsel,  while  leaving  employed  other  attorneys, 
far  junior  to  Respondent  in  years  of  District  service,  who  are  identical  in  function  to 
Respondent  but  who  are  designated  as  non-certificated. 

Mf 

H/ 

Mf 

Ml 

M1 

  

'  That  requirement  is  apparently  not  strongly  enforced.  At  least  one  attorney  was  mistakenly  given  a 
position  as  Assistant  General  Counsel  without  the  requisite  three  years  experience.  She  was  permitted  to 
keep  the  position  after  the  mistake  was  discovered. 

*  That  is  not  always  the  case.  At  least  one  witness  who  transferred  from  Staff  Counsel  to  Assistant  General 
Counsel  retained  her  STRS  membership  after  the  transfer. 

 

36.  Further,  the  District’s  interpretation  of  the  relevant  statutory  scheme  in 

such  a  way  as  to  permit  Respondent’s  layoff  under  the  extant  circumstances  yields  an 
absurd  result,  specifically,  the  dismissal  of  a  long-employed,  highly  experienced 
attorney  while  the  District  retains  less  senior  attorneys  performing  the  same  work. 
The  law  does  not  favor  such  a  result.  In  Torres  v.  Parkhouse  Tire  Service,  Inc.  (2001) 
26  Cal.4th  995,  1003;  111  Cal.Rptr.2d  564,  the  Court  stated: 

“In  interpreting  a  statute  where  the  language  is  clear,  courts  must 
follow  its  plain  meaning.  (Droeger  v.  Friedman,  Sloan  &  Ross  (1991) 
54  Cal.3d  26,  38  [283  Cal.Rptr.  584,  812  P.2d  931].)  However,  if  the 
statutory  language  permits  more  than  one  reasonable  interpretation, 
courts  may  consider  various  extrinsic  aids,  including  the  purpose  of  the 
statute,  the  evils  to  be  remedied,  the  legislative  history,  public  policy, 
and  the  statutory  scheme  encompassing  the  statute.  (Wilcox  v. 
Birtwhistle  (1999)  21  Cal.4th  973,  977  [90  Cal.Rptr.2d  260,  987  P.2d 
727].)  In  the  end,  we  "  'must  select  the  construction  that  comports  most 
closely  with  the  apparent  intent  of  the  Legislature,  with  a  view  to 
promoting  rather  than  defeating  the  general  purpose  of  the  statute,  and 
avoid  an  interpretation  that  would  lead  to  absurd  consequences.’ 
[Citation.]"  (Id.  at  pp.  977-978.)” 

37.  The  District  argues  that  it  is  improper  to  combine  certificated  and 

classified  groups  to  arrive  at  a  seniority  list,  and  that  it  is  also  improper  to  “cross- 
bump.”  No  such  steps  are  necessary  to  decide  this  case.  This  case  concerns 
Respondent  only  and  the  Proposed  Decision  is  addressed  to  her  alone. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were 
satisfied. 

2.  Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  for  the  Los 

Angeles  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

3.  However,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  sustain  the  charges  set 

forth  in  the  Accusation  as  to  Respondent,  whose  services  could  not  be  terminated 
because  of  the  arbitrary  and  capricious  manner  by  which  the  layoff  selection  process 
was  determined. 

Mf

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondent,  Joyce  Paul,  is  not  sustained  and  the 

Accusation  related  to  Respondent  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  11,  2004 

  

H.  STUART  WAXMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

10

