BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SACRAMENTO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004030354 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

Bobby  Jo  Anderson 
Judy  M.  Baker 
Nora  Barnett 
Ranu  Bhatt 
Betty  Biederman 
Ingrid  Brosas 
Vienna  M.  Bustos 
Mary  L.  Carboni 
John  R.  Castro 
Scott  G.  Chapman 
Kristen  I.  Cluff 
Linda  Rae  Cochran 
Gary  M.  Corbett 
Peter  J.  Crawford 
Rebecca  S.  Cunningham 
Jeanne  D’ Angelo 
Barbara  L.  Edwards 
Maria  Estrada-Stetson 
Melinda  R.  Franzoni 
Sara  Gilbert 
Cheri  Harris-McCaskill 
Mary  A.  Hornsby 
Michael  L.  Howell 
Mark  James 
Irene  Jewett 
Maria  Johnson 
Wallace  D.  Johnson 
Tamzin  L.  Johnson-Ellsworth 
Rachelle  L.  Kane 
Melanie  Ann  Karnes 
Cathy  Katsura 
Beatrice  M.  Laguana 
Steven  G.  Laney 
Susan  L.  Lee 
Tiffany  Lee 

     

  

Lisa  Levasseur  | 
Norberto  Martin 
Wendy  Martinez 
Amber  Matranga 
Julia  A.  Mayer 
Robyn  McNary 
Linda  L.  Mellor 
Teresa  A.  Merkley 
Sherry  Milton 
Brian  Mitchell 
Christine  Mitchell 
Conrad  Mizuno 
Wendy  Money 
Karen  K.  Motoike-Lim 
Roswitha  Mueller 
Cynthia  Newton 
Carla  Otoya-Hart 
Matthew  G.  Pesci 
Geoffrey  W.  Pike 
Elizabeth  Reyes 
Ted  Richardson 
Marilyn  M.  Riffel 
Gary  T.  Sekikawa 
Shelly  Silveria 
Cheryl  L.  Sims 
Tara  Snyder 
Lynnette  M.  Thompson 
Sarita  Turner 
Virginia  C.  Uzelac 
Nikki  Waldron 
Richard  L.  Waller 
Marley  A.  Watters 
Linda  Wortman 
Donna  L.  Zahniser, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

  

     

M.  Amanda  Behe,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  20,  21,  22,  and  23,  2004,  at  the  Sacramento 
City  Unified  School  District,  Sacramento,  California. 

James  Scot  Yarnell,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the  Sac- 

ramento  City  Unified  School  District. 

Margaret  Geddes,  Law  Offices  of  Margaret  Geddes,  and  Costa  Kerestenzis,  Beeson,  Tayer  & 

Bodine,  represented  respondents  listed  in  the  above  caption  with  the  exception  of  Shelly  Silveria. 

Respondent  Shelly  Silveria  represented  herself. 

The  record  remained  open  for  receipt  of  the  parties’  closing  briefs.  On  April  30, 

2004,  the  District’s  Closing  Brief  was  filed  electronically  as  Exhibit  15,  and  Respondents’ 
Closing  Brief  was  filed  electronically  as  Exhibit  KKK.  The  matter  was  submitted  on  April 
30,  2004. 

By  stipulation  of  the  parties  the  exhibits  in  the  record  which  contain  employees’  So- 

cial  Security  numbers  are  returned  sealed  and  may  only  be  opened  upon  the  order  of  the 
Governing  Board  or  the  Superior  Court  of  the  State  of  California,  County  of  Sacramento. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Sacramento  City  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  serves 

approximately  49,000  students  from  kindergarten  through  grade  12  at  83  school  sites, 
including  59  elementary  and  10  K-8  schools.  The  District  currently  has  a  class  size  reduction 
program  with  a  maximum  of  20  students  per  class  in  grades  K-3,  and  32  students  per  class  in 
grades  4-6.  The  District  employs  approximately  2700  permanent  and  probationary 
certificated  employees. 

The  District  anticipates  a  $26  million  budget  shortfall  and  under-enrollment'  of 
approximately  1,200  students  for  the  2004-05  School  Year.  In  the  spring  of  2004  the  Budget 
Committee  formulated  recommendations  to  address  the  expected  decrease  of  funding  and 
devised  three  alternative  proposals  for  reduced  staffing  for  the  2004-05  School  Year.  Their 
calculations  included  that  the  expected  under-enrollment  represents  approximately  55  full- 
time  equivalent  (FTE)  teachers,  and  decreasing  the  class  size  reduction  program  represents 
approximately  60  FTE  teachers  per  grade  level. 

2. 

M.  Magdalena  Carrillo  Mejia,  Ph.D.,  has  been  the  Superintendent  of  the 

District  since  January  5,  2004.  Dr.  Mejia  was  informed  of  the  Budget  Committee’s  study  of 
the  expected  funding  shortfall  and  three  alternative  staffing  proposals. 

  

'  Approximately  49,000  students  are  enrolled  in  the  current  school  year,  down  from  last  year’s  enrollment  of  about 
50,000  and  the  preceding  year’s  enrollment  of  over  51,000  students.

3. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  (the  Board)  was  given  notice  in 

accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955 
recommendation  that  certificated  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation.  The 
three  alternative  proposals  were  considered  by  the  Board,  and  they  incorporated  one  proposal 
in  Resolution  No.  2343. 

of  the  Superintendent’s 

4, 

Board  Resolution  No.  2342,  adopted  on  March  11,  2004,  provided  for  a  layoff 

of  129,32  FTE  certificated  employees.  Specifically,  the  Board  Resolution  provided  for  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Full  Time  Equivalence  (FTE) 

Administrators 

-High  School  Vice  Principals 
-Vice  Principal,  Elementary  School 

0.70 

4.0 

4.70 

Sub  Total: 

Teachers 

-Elementary  Teachers 

-Elementary  Teacher 
-Middle  School  Teacher 
-PE  Teachers 
-Foreign  Language:  French  Teacher 
-Nurse 
-Teacher,  Resource 
-Psychologist 

115.0 

1.0 

0.80 

1.44 

2.0 

0.40. 
3.25 
0.73 

Sub  Total: 

9.62 - 

Total  Teachers: 

124.62 

Board  Resolution  2342  further  provided  that  as  between  certificated  employees  with 

the  same  seniority  date,  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  the  students  thereof,  as  defined  by  Board  Resolution  2343  [Finding  7,  below]. 

Board  Resolution  2342  further  stated  that  as  between  employees  who  are  fully 

credentialed  and  employees  who  are  not,  those  who  are  fully  credentialed  shall  be  given 
priority  in  regard  to  order  of  termination/reduction. 

Board  Resolution  2342  further  provided  that  as  between  employees  who  are  fully 

credentialed  and  have  secured  the  CLAD  requirement  (Cross-cultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development)  and  employees  who  have  not,  those  who  have  the  CLAD 
requirement  shall  be  given  priority  in  regard  to  order  of  termination/reduction. 

  

  
 
  

5. 

Carol  Mignone,  the  District’s  Chief  Personnel  Officer,  described  that  the  term 

“fully  credentialed”  in  Board  Resolution  2342  referred  to  employees  who  hold a  clear  or 
preliminary  credential.  The  term  was  used  in  the  Board’s  layoff  Resolution  in  School  Year 
2003-04. 

6. 

The  Board  stated  at  the  March  11,  2004,  meeting  that  the  reference  in  its 

Resolution  2342  to  “the  CLAD  requirement”  meant  a  Cross-cultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development  (CLAD)  credential  and  all  equivalent  credentials  or  certificates 
which  authorize  teachers  to  provide  English  Language  Development  (ELD)  instruction  and 
Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English  (SDAIE)  to  English  Learner  (EL) 
students.  Such  credentials  include  a  Bilingual  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic 
Development  (BCLAD),  a  multiple  or  single  subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Emphasis,  a 
Language  Development  Specialist  (LDS)  certificate,  a  Bilingual  Certificate  of  Competence, 
or  a  Certificate  of  Completion  of  Staff  Development  (SB  395  or  SB  1969). 

7. 

Board  Resolution  2343,  adopted  on  March  11,  2004,  provided  criteria”  used  to 
determine  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service 
on  the  same  date  and  the  weight  to  be  given  to  such  criteria.  The  resolution  was  not  required 
or  used  in  the  subject  layoff  proceeding. 

8. 

Board  Resolution  2346,  adopted  on  March  11,  2004,  provided  for  the  possible 

release/reassignment  of  certificated  and  classified  administrators. 

The  Personnel  Department  implemented  Resolution  2346  and  sent  layoff  notices  to 
129  classified  and  certificated  administrators.  Some  certificated  administrators  have  return 
rights  to  teaching  positions,  and  may  “bump*”  less  senior  incumbents  in  those  positions. 

9. 

The  District  released  its  224  temporary  employees  and  issued  Notices  of  Non- 

reelection  to  its  first  and  second  year  probationary  certificated  staff. 

Respondents  Martin  and  Matranga  are  interns  classified  as  temporary  certificated  em- 
ployees  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44885.5.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  they 
are  employed  to  backfill  for  employees  on  leave  of  absence  or  that  they  work  in  a  categorical 
program.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  they  are  incorrectly  classified  as  temporary  cer- 
tificated  employees. 

, 

10. 

On  March  15,  2004,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  in  the  United 

States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  employee’s  last  known  address, 

  

?  Resolution  2343  specifically  provided  that  its  purpose  was  solely  the  determination  of  the  relative  order  of  termina- 
tion  of  certificated  employees  as  part  of  the  subject  layoff  and  not  for  any  other  purpose,  including,  but  not  limited 
to,  any  subsequent  layoffs. 
>  A  senior  credentialed  employee  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or 
she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.

In  effecting  that  right,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

  

the  District  served  112  affected  employees  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended 
that  notice  be  given  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  Two  interns  classified  as  temporary  employees  received  “double  notices” 
of  layoff  and  non-reelection. 

Each  notice  further  advised  the  employees  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  including  that 
such  a  request  must  be  delivered  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination, 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

ll. 

Certificated  employees  Pamela  Pitcock,  Thurrell  Sanders,  Kim  Williams- 

Schouten,  Mary  Jo  Young,  and  Carmen  Hernandez  did  not  file  timely  requests  for  hearing. 
On  April  14,  2004,  the  District  filed  a  Pre-hearing  Conference  Statement  which  included  its 
motion  to  strike  those  individuals  as  respondents.  On  April  15,  2004,  Ms.  Geddes  filed 
Respondents’  Opposition  to  that  motion.  The  matter  was  argued  and  considered  at  the  April 
16,  2004,  telephonic  Pre-hearing  Conference. 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides  in  relevant  part  that;  “If  an  employee  fails  to 

request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute 
his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.” 

_ 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  the  District’s  motion  to  strike  as 

@ 

respondents  certificated  employees  Pamela  Pitcock,  Thurrell  Sanders,  Kim  Williams- 
Schouten,  Mary  Jo  Young,  and  Carmen  Hernandez  was  granted. 

12. 

Seventy-six  certificated  employees  who  are  designated  as  respondents  filed 

timely  requests  for  hearing. 

13. 

The  District  filed  Accusations  which  were  timely  served  on  respondents  as 

required  by  the  Education  Code,  and  the  information  that  a  Notice  of  Defense  must  be  filed 
within  five  days  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944(c)(1). 

Various  Accusations  were  dismissed  at  hearing. 

Each  respondent  appearing  in  this  matter  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

14. 

15. 

Every  four  years  the  California  Department  of  Education  (CDE)  conducts 

Coordinated  Compliance  Reviews  of  school  districts  receiving  state  and  federal  categorical 
funds  including  programs  for  ELs.  If  the  review  determines  that a  district  is  out  of 
compliance  with  relevant  statutes  or  regulations  it  must  submit  a  compliance  resolution 
within  45  days.  A  district’s  failure  to  come  into  compliance  can  jeopardize  its  funding.  A 
separate  CDE  “Comite”  unit  specially  addresses  districts  which  have  been  found  out  of 
compliance.  The  District  was  in  “Comite”  status,  or  under  on-going  compliance  scrutiny, 
from  January  1994  to  March  2002. 

  

  
  
 

@ 

In  May  2003  following  a  Coordinated  Compliance  Review  the  CDE  found  that  the 
District  was  out  of  compliance  in  14  of  21  items.  Its  “Notification  of  Findings”  contained 
two  assertions  of  non-compliance,  both  confusingly  identified  by  “site  name”  as  “Johnson 
HS  Districtwide  (sic).”  The  first  finding  stated  that  unspecified  “evidence”  indicated  an 
“inadequate  number  of  qualified  teachers”  have  been  assigned  to  implement  the  English 
language  development  instruction  for  each  EL  and  that  dual  identified  special  education-ELs 
are  not  receiving  instruction  from  properly  authorized*  teachers. 

The  second  finding  was  that  unspecified  “evidence”  indicated  an  “insufficient’ 
number  of  qualified  teachers”  have  been  assigned  to  provide  access  to  core  curriculum 
instruction  to  ELs  and  that  dual  identified  special  education-ELs  are  not  receiving  access  to 
the  core  curriculum  from  properly  authorized  teachers. 

The  CDE  “Notification  of  Findings”  did  not  specify  any  statute  or  regulation  as  the 

basis  for  any  of  the  asserted  violations. 

. 

Suanna  Gilman-Ponce  has  been  the  District’s  Director  of  Multilingual  Education  for 
five  years.  She  previously  was  a  CDE  Comite  consultant  with  responsibility  for  monitoring 
districts,  and  is  aware  of  districts  that  had  resolved  issues  and  then  later  became  non- 
compliant.  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce  drafted  the  District’s  responses  to  CDE  including  the  Plan  to 
Resolve  Non-compliant  Findings  which  was  approved  by  CDE.  In  January  2003  CDE  found 
that  the  District  was  in  compliance. 

16. 

The  District’s  “Master  Plan  and  Procedural  Handbook  for  English  Learner 
Programs”  which  was  approved  by  the  Board  on  February  4,  2002,  provides  that  each  EL 
“receives  a  program  of  instruction  in  English  language  development  in  order  to  develop 
proficiency  in  English  as  rapidly  and  as  effectively  as  possible.”  [Exhibit  L,  p.  26] 

17. 

Ms.  Gilman-Ponce  testified  that  an  unspecified  federal  law  requires  the  teacher 
have,  or  be  in  training®  for,  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  that  if  there  is  even  one  EL  ina 
core  curriculum  class.  The  “core  curriculum’  means  mathematics,  science,  social  science, 
language  arts  and  English  language  development  classes  which  are  either  a  required  part  of 
the  elementary/middle  school  curriculum  or  required  for  high  school  graduation.  Art,  music, 
and  physical  education  are  not  core  curriculum  classes,  and  those  teachers  are  not  required  to 
have  specific  authorization  to  teach  ELs. 

18. 

The  State  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC)  issues  credentials  and 

certificates,  some  of  which  require  passing  an  examination  administered  by  CTC  and  the 
remainder  of  which  are  issued  after  completion  of  specified  courses.  A  Bilingual  Cross- 

  

*  The  difference,  if  any,  between  a  “qualified”  and  a  “properly  authorized”  teacher  was  not  identified. 
>  The  difference,  if  any,  between  an  “inadequate”  and  an  “insufficient”  number  of  teachers  was  not  identified  or 
enumerated. 
°  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce  testified  that  “in  training”  means  preparing  for  the  CLAD  examination  or  taking  coursework  for 
a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential.  Generally  a  teacher  may  be  in  training  five  years  for  a  BCLAD  credential  and  two 
years  for  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential.

cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD’)  credential  or  a  multiple  or  single 
subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Emphasis  credential  authorize  instruction  for  primary 
language  development  and  content  instruction  in  a  student’s  primary  language.  Both  require 
passing  an  examination. 

@ 

Those  two  types  of  credentials,  or  a  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic 
Development  (CLAD)  credential,  or  a  Language  Development  Specialist  (LDS)  certificate, 
or  a  Bilingual  Certificate  of  Competence,  or  a  Certificate  of  Completion  of  Staff 
Development  (SB  395  or  SB  1969)  authorize  teachers  to  provide  English  Language 
Development  instruction  and  Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English  to  ELs. 
Teachers  who  already  hold  an  instructional  credential  can  add  a  CLAD  certificate  by 
completing  additional  course  work  or  passing  a  CTC  test,  for  which  there  are  preparation 
courses. 

The  CSUS  Department  of  Education  offered  a  three-semester  “Sacramento  Area 

Language  and  Academic  Development”  (SALAD)  course  which  began  in  the  fall  of  2003 
and  will  end  May  14,  2004.  Successful  completion  of  the  course  qualifies  a  teacher  for  a 
CLAD  credential  without  examination.  Respondents  Estrada-Stetson,  McNary,  Milton,  and 
Zahniser  are  enrolled  in  the  course. 

The  University  of  San  Diego  (USD)  offers  a  CLAD  certificate  course  which  permits 

teachers  to  complete  training  on-line,  or  by  videotape  or  audiotape.  The  University  of 
California  at  Davis  Extension  and  National  University  also  offer  CLAD  certificate  courses. 

The  District’s  Multilingual  Department  provided  an  opportunity  for  teachers  with 

nine  years  of  multiple  subject  teaching  experience  to  obtain  a  SB  395  Certificate  of  Comple- 
tion  of  Staff  Development  through  courses  offered  at  Burbank  High  School.  One  such 
course  started  February  27  and  will  conclude  on  May  14,  2004,  and  another  began  on  April 
12,  2004.  Respondents  James,  Laguana,  Susan  Lee,  Pike,  Reyes,  and  Uzelac  are  enrolled  in 
the  latter  course.  The  waiting  list  for  future  courses  includes  respondents  Biederman,  Car- 
boni,  D’  Angelo,  Hornsby,  James,  Martinez,  and  Sakikawa. 

District  teachers  can  also  enroll  in  the  SB  395  Certificate  of  Completion  of  Staff  De- 

velopment  course  offered  at  the  San  Joaquin  County  Office  of  Education  (COE).  That 
course  consists  of  approximately  45  class  hours  and  completion  of  an  acceptable  portfolio  of 
work. 

19. 

By  his  letter  of  March  5,  2003,  Ted  Tukloff,  the  previous  Chief  Personnel 
Officer,  advised  all  certificated  staff  that  teachers  assigned  to  provide  ELD  and  SDAIE 
instruction  to  ELs  must  hold  a  CLAD,  BCLAD,  SB  1969,  LDS,  or  BCC  credential;  or  be  in 
training  for  such  a  credential;  or  be  registered  to  take  the  CLAD  or  BCLAD  examination 

  

TTn  1992  the  Legislature  directed  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  to  issue  certificates  authorizing  the 
holders  to  provide  certain  services  to  limited-English  proficient  pupils.  Education  Code  section  44253.1  et  seq.

  

  
  
  

before  June  30,  2003.  The  letter  advised  that  the  District  established  a  two  year  timeline  for 
its  teachers  to  complete  the  requirement. 

Mr.  Tukloff’s  letter  advised  certificated  staff  of  the  availability  of  San  Joaquin  COE 

SB  395  training,  the  SALAD  training  at  CSUS,  and  that  National University  and  other 
providers  had  courses  leading  to  the  required  credentials. 

Mr.  Tukloff’s  letter  included  a  form  on  which  certificated  employees  were  to  state  if 

they  were  currently  enrolled  in  or  registered  to  begin  a  CLAD  course,  or  registered  to  take 
the  CLAD  examination.  No  response  was  received  from  110  certificated  employees, 
including  respondents  Hornsby,  James,  Kane,  Newton,  Reyes,  Ted  Richardson,  Riffel, 
Watters,  and  Wortman. 

20. 

On  June  5,  2003,  Ms. Mignone®  sent  letters  to  certificated  staff  as  a  follow-up 
to  Mr.  Tukloff’s  letter;  three  versions  tailored  to  the  teachers’  status  were  used.  Employees 
who  had  supplied  information  that  they  would  have  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  authorization  by 
June  2003  were  directed  to  take  their  transcripts  to  CTC  to  apply  for  the  credential  and 
provide  the  CTC  receipt  to  Terri  Lauzon,  Credential  Specialist,  at  Personnel  Services. 

Employees  who  had  not  responded  to  Mr.  Tukloff’s  letter  were  directed  to  provide 
information  by  June  17  to  Ms.  Lauzon  about  whether  they  had  made  arrangements  to  work 
toward  an  authorization.  They  were  advised  that  information  about  available  programs  was 
available  through  Pam  Tureen  in  the  Multilingual  Department. 

Employees  who  had  responded  to  the  Tukloff  letter,  but  had  not  indicated  the  date 

they  anticipated  completing  the  CLAD  requirement,  were  directed  to  indicate  the  estimated 
date  of  completion  on  the  document  and  return  it  to  Ms.  Lauzon  by  mail  or  fax. 

21. 

On  December  2,  2003,  Ms.  Mignone  wrote  to  all  certificated  staff  that  in 

March  2003  they  had  been  informed  that  within  two  years  they  would  need  an  authorization 
to  teach  ELs  to  remain  in  their  current  teaching  assignments.  She  directed  teachers  who  had 
completed  the  necessary  coursework  to  take  their  transcripts  to  CTC  to  apply  for  the 
credential  and  provide  a  receipt  to  Ms.  Lauzon  by  December  16,  2003.  Ms.  Mignone’s  letter 
further  stated  that: 

If  you  have  not  completed  steps  to  secure  the  CLAD  Certificate  or  equivalent  by  June 
30,  2004,  you  will  not  be  eligible  to  teach  in  any  assignment  that  requires  this 
certificate  and  will  need  to  be  reassigned.  If  there  are  not  positions  available  that  do 
not  required  the  CLAD  or  equivalent,  it  may  be  necessary  for  the  district  to  terminate 
your  employment. 

22. 

On  December  16,  2003,  Ms.  Mignone  wrote  to  all  certificated  staff  assigned  to 

teach  in  the  core  curriculum  to  ELs.  Her  letter  stated  that  all  teachers  assigned  to  provide 

  

8 

After  Mr.  Tukloff’s  retirement  Ms.  Mignone  was  appointed  Interim  Chief  Personnel  Officer.

  

  

ELD  and  SDAIE  instruction  to  ELs  are  required  to  hold  a  CLAD,  BCLAD,  SB  1969,  LDS, 
or  BCC  credential;  or  be  in  training  approved  by  the  CTC  for  such  a  credential;  or  be 
registered  to  take  the  CLAD  or  BCLAD  examination  before  June  30,  2003.  The  letter 
advised  that  the  District  established  a  two  year  timeline  for  its  teachers  to  complete  the 
CLAD  requirement. 

The  letter  advised  teachers  of  the  availability  of  courses  in  Sacramento  through  the 
San  Joaquin  COE,  including  preparation  courses  for  the  CLAD  and  BCLAD  examinations, 
and  through  National  University  and  SCUS.  Ms.  Mignone’s  letter  included  a  form  on  which 
certificated  employees  were  to  state  if  they  were  currently  enrolled in  or  registered  to  begin  a 
CLAD  course,  or  were  registered  to  take  the  examination. 

23. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  identifies  certificated  employees 
seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service’),  current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials  and 
authorizations,  and  a  permanency  indicator. 

3 

In  June  2003  Personnel  Services  completed  a  thorough  verification  of  the  Seniority 
List  data  including  checking  the  credential(s),  seniority  date,  etc.,  for  each  employee.  Em- 
ployees’  CLAD  or  equivalent  status  was  verified  by  Ms.  Lauzon  from  District  records  and 
information  received  in  response  to  Ms.  Mignone’s  letters.  Ms.  Lauzon  has  since  regularly 
updated  the  Seniority  List  to  reflect  changes  in  employee  credentials. 

24. 

There  are  ELs  at  every  school  site,  although  not  all  teachers  have  such 

students.  Approximately  1,760  of  the  District’s  2,020  teachers  assigned  to  teach  in  the  core 
curriculum  have  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential,  and  an  additional  250  or  so  teachers  are  in 
traming.  Approximately  700  of  the  District’s  teachers  have  no  ELs  in  their  classes.  Eighty 
of  the  district’s  elementary  teachers  do  not  have  a  CLAD  credential  or  equivalent. 

25. 

As  part  of  its  implementation  of  the  Master  Plan  each  September  the 

Multilingual  Department  identifies  ELs’°  at  all  sites  and  provides  that  information  to 
Personnel  Services.  Personnel  Services  checks  that  teachers  assigned  to  ELs  in  self- 
contained  classrooms  or  core  curriculum  subjects  have  one  of  the  credentials  which  permit 
teaching  such  students. 

In  September  2003  the  Multilingual  Department  found  that  a  couple  schools, 

including  Hiram  Johnson  High  School,  had  assigned  ELs  to  teachers  who  did  not  hold  a 
credential  or  were  not  in  training.  Steps  were  taken  including  reassigning  ELs  and  notifying 
teachers  that  they  had  to  commence  CLAD  training. 

  

?  Seniority  generally  is  measured  from  the  first  date  on  which  the  employee  rendered  service  as  a  probationary 
employee.  Education  Code  section  44845. 
'°  The  District’s  population  of  16,900  English  Learner  (EL)  students,  approximately  30%  of  the  census,  speaks 
about  49  languages.  The  largest  EL  group  speaks  Spanish  as  a  primary  language,  followed  by  Hmong,  Mien,  Can- 
tonese,  Vietnamese,  and  Russian.  In  excess  of  1,000  students  speak  each  of  the  listed  languages. 

10 

     

@ 

Other  than  designated  bilingual  classes  which  are  taught  by  teachers  with  BCLAD 

credentials,  the  District  does  not  know  at  present  which  teachers  will  have  ELs  in  the  2004- 
05  School  Year.  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce  acknowledged  that  the  District  will  remain  in 
compliance  if  it  continues  to  assign  teachers  in  training  and  those  with  CLAD  or  equivalent 
credentials  to  teach  ELs.  In  the  current  year  the  District  had  enough  teachers  in  training  or 
credentialed  to  provide  the  necessary  services  for  its  ELs,  and  could  document  that  to  CDE. 

26. 

Ms.  Mignone  was  responsible  for  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff  of  129.32 
FTE  certificated  employees  and  implementation  of  the  Board  Resolution  No.  2342  provision 
that  employees  “who  have  the  CLAD  requirement  shall  be  given  priority  in  regard  to  order 
of  termination/reduction.”  Ms.  Mignone  understood  that  the  Board’s  resolution  directed 
laying  off  senior  employees  who  were  in  training  for  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  and 
those  who  had  completed  course  work  and/or  filed  an  application  with  CTC  but  had  not  yet 
received  a  credential.  She  described  that  in  fairness  to  all  teachers  she  had  to  consider  that 
“either  you  had  it  or  you  did  not.” 

To  effect  the  layoff  of  116'’  FTE  elementary  teachers  the  current  elementary  teachers 
who  lacked  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  certificate  were  identified  to  receive  layoff  notices.  That 
process  did  not  yield  116  FTE  positions,  and  the  required  additional  reductions  were  made 
by  identifying  the  least  senior  elementary  teachers  with  CLAD  or  equivalent  certificates.  All 
teachers  assigned  to  elementary  schools,  including  those  who  did  not  have  any  EL  students 
or  were  not  assigned  to  classroom  instruction,  were  laid  off  if  they  lacked  a  CLAD  or  equiva- 
lent  credential.  For  reasons  not  identified  on  the  records,  teachers  of  the  elementary  grades  7 
and  8  at  middle  schools  were  not  subject  to  layoff  but  such  teachers  of  those  grades  at  ele- 
mentary  schools  were.  Music,  physical  education,  and  other  non-core  curriculum  teachers  at 
elementary  schools  were  not  considered  for  layoff. 

@ 

Nine  junior  elementary  teachers  who  hold  special  education  credentials  but  do  not 

have  CLAD  or  equivalent  credentials  were  “skipped,”  or  omitted  from  layoff.  The  District 
has  difficulty  finding  sufficient  special  education  teachers  and  will  assign  those  nine  indi- 
viduals  to  special  education  classes.  Ms.  Mignone  noted  that  special  education  is  different 
that  other  elementary  instruction  and  has  no  cutoff  date  by  which  teachers  must  obtain  a 
CLAD  or  equivalent  credential. 

The  reduction  of  1.0  FTE  middle  school  teacher  did  not  require  a  layoff  because  one 

position  was  vacant.  The  two  most  junior  physical  education  teachers  received  layoff  no- 
tices.  The  reduction  of  0.80  FTE  French  Teacher  and  0.40  FTE  nurse  positions  did  not  re- 
quire  layoffs  of  permanent  staff.  The  reduction  of  0.73  FTE  psychologist  was  accomplished 
by  not  reelecting  a  temporary  employee;  no  permanent  psychologist  received  a  layoff  notice. 
The  3.0  FTE  resource  teachers  who  received  layoff  notices  were  selected  because  they  did 
not  have  CLAD  or  equivalent  credentials. 

  

@ 

"|  Board  Resolution  2342  provided  for  a  reduction  of  116.44  FTE  elementary  teachers,  but  the  number  was  rounded 
off  to  116  FTE  elementary  teachers. 

11

Respondents  who  lacked  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential,  irrespective  of  assignment 

@ 

- 

or  contact  with  ELs,  were  not  consider  for  bumping  into  positions  for  which  they  held  cre- 
dentials.  Some  of  the  credentials  held  by  respondents  permit  teaching  in  middle  schools. 
Those  respondents  were  not  considered  for  bumping  into  middle  school  positions  held  by 
less  senior  teachers  even  when  the  junior  teacher  also  lacked  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  creden- 
tial.  Ms.  Mignone  testified  that  “Even  if  they  [senior  teachers]  were  entitled  to  teach  it  and 
the  incumbent  did  not  have  CLAD  ...  We  were  ...  not  bumping  out  if  they  did  not  have 
CLAD.” 

Ms.  Mignone  acknowledged  she  thought  Resolution  No.  2342  directed  the  layoff  of 
any  elementary  teacher  who  did  not  have  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  even  if  they  were 
in  training,  which  permits  teaching  ELs.  She  did  not  investigate  if  such  senior  teachers  could 
be  assigned  to  classes  or  sites  without  ELs. 

27. 

Respondent  Bobby  Jo  Anderson’s  seniority  date  is  September  4,  2001,  and 
she  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  and  a  preliminary  single  subject 
English  (grades  7-12)  credential.  She  taught  ELs  last  year  and  in  the  current  school  year  in 
her  sixth  grade  class  at  Elder  Creek  School.  In  2003  her  principal  advised  that  a  CLAD 
credential  was  required. 

. 

Ms.  Anderson  completed  the  CLAD  course  in  December  2003.  She  gave  a  transcript 

to  her  principal  but  did  not  notify  Personnel  Services.  Ms.  Anderson’s  CLAD  application 
was  not  filed  with  CTC  until  March  11,  2004.  She  testified  that  she  did  not  see  the  part  of 
the  Personnel  Services  letter  which  directed  her  to  provide  notification  of  her  application. 

Ms.  Anderson  was  very  surprised  to  be  laid  off  because  the  December  2003  letter 

indicated  she  had  till  June  2004  to  obtain  the  credential.  Ms.  Anderson  acknowledged  that  in 
December  2003  she  did  not  anticipate  a  layoff,  and  if  she  had  known  a  CLAD  certificate  was 
a  condition  of  employment  she  would  have  obtained  it  earlier.  Ms.  Anderson  questioned 
why  she  was  not  bumped  into  English  because  she  previously  was  bumped  from  her  eighth 
grade  English  assignment  to  sixth  grade. 

28.  |  Respondent  Betty  June  Biederman’s  seniority  date  is  September  6,  1983,  and 
she  holds  a life  standard  elementary  (K-9)  with  an  authorization  in  Sociology  issued  in  1979. 
Ms.  Biederman  teaches  first  grade  at  Peter  Burnett,  an  elementary  school  with  a  substantial 
percentage  of  EL  students.  She  uses  her  fluent  Cantonese  daily  with  two  students. 

In  1995  Ms.  Biederman  started  the  LDS  program  but  did  not  complete  it  due  to  family 

illnesses.  On  March  24,  2003,  she  stated  on  the  form  portion  of  Mr.  Tukloff’s 
letter  that  she 
was  enrolled  in  the  University  of  San  Diego  (USD)  CLAD  course.  She  did  not  complete  that 
on-line  course  because  of  her  husband’s  work  schedule.  In  2003  she  responded  to  Mr. 
Tukloff’s  letter  that  she  would  complete  her  CLAD  certificate  in  2005.  In  2003  she 
completed  one  class  at  UCD  Extension.  She  is  currently  enrolled  in  the  San  Joaquin  COE 

  

  

© 

12

SB  395  program;  classes  will  end  on  May  24  and  a  required  portfolio  is  due  in  November. 
She  claimed  she  was  not  told  she  had  to  complete  the  CLAD  more  quickly. 

29.  |  Respondent  Ranu  Bhatt’s  seniority  date  is  September  5,  2000,  and  she  holds  a 
preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  She  is  assigned  to  John  Bidwell  Elementary 
School. 

Ms.  Bhatt  has  passed  two  sections  of  the  CLAD  test  and  will  be  taking  the  remaining 

section  in  May  2004.  She  was  told  as  an  undergraduate  to  wait  until  she  was  teaching  to 
obtain  the  CLAD  certificate,  and  would  have  moved  more  quickly  if  she  had  known  that  it 
would  be  considered  in  the  layoff  action. 

30. 

|  Respondent  Ingrid  Brosas’  seniority  date  is  September  4,  2001,  and  she  holds 

a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  She  is  assigned  to  Pacific  Elementary 
School  where  more  than  70%  of  students  are  ELs.  Ms.  Brosas  taught  ELs  last  year,  and  18 
of  her  19  second  graders  this  year  are  ELs. 

Ms.  Brosas  was  told  when  she  was  hired  that  she  needed  to  obtain  a  CLAD.  As  an 

undergraduate  Ms.  Brosas  took  CLAD  classes  but  decided  to  take  the  test  rather  than  finish 
the  course.  She  believed  that  she  had  until  July  2003,  a  year  after  the  date  of  her  preliminary 
credential,  to  take  the  CLAD  test. 

Kathleen  Kingsbury  is  the  principal  of  Pacific  Elementary  School.  Because  her  site  is 
heavily  impacted  and  had  many  new  teachers  she  reminds  all  teachers  at  the  beginning  of  the 
year  that  they  need  to  obtain  CLAD  certificates.  Principal  Kingsbury  assigned  ELs  to  Ms. 
Brosas  because  she  is  in  training  for  a  CLAD  certificate. 

On  November  18,  2002,  Principal  Kingsbury  e-mailed  Ms.  Lauzon  that  Ms.  Brosas 

was  working  on  her  CLAD  but  needed  a  couple  more  classes,  and  asked  if  she  was  “in 
danger  of  losing  her  job  if  she  is  in  the  midst  of  completing  her  CLAD?”  Ms.  Lauzon 
_replied:  “No  danger.  We  can  always  apply  for  an  Emergency  Clad  (sic)  in  the  interim.” 
Principal  Kingsbury  described  Ms.  Brosas  as  concerned  about  requirements  because  she  is 
quite  conscientious.  After  Ms.  Brosas  received  a  layoff  notice  Ms.  Lauzon  said  the  Board’s 
resolution  supercedes  the  information  provided  in  her  e-mail. 

Ms.  Brosas  received  two  “A”’s and  an  “A-”  in  the  CLAD  classes  she  took  at  CSUS, 

and  she  is  currently  taking  the  final  class  in  a  USD  correspondence  course.  If  she  had  known 
of  the  layoff  she  would  have  finished  the  CLAD  course  or  taken  the  test  earlier. 

31.  |  Respondent  Vienna  Marie  Bustos’  seniority  date  is  September  4,  1990,  and 

she  holds  a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  She  has  one  EL  in  her 
fourth  grade  class  at  the  K-8  Leonardo  Da  Vinci  School,  which  has  fewer  than  30  ELs 
presently  enrolled. 

13

  

Last  year  the  principal  told  all  teachers  to  enroll  in  CLAD  training.  Ms.  Bustos 

attended  a  SB  395  training  course  in  July,  and  her  portfolio  was  approved  December  26, 
2003.  She  advised  the  principal  that  she  completed  the  class,  but  did  not  apply  for  the 
credential  until  March  2004  because  she  had  not  budgeted  the  $45  application  fee. 

Before  she  received  her  layoff  notice  Ms.  Bustos  sent  Personnel  Services  a  copy  of 

the  December  26,  2003,  San  Joaquin  COE  letter  that  she  had  completed  the  SB  395 
requirements.  If  Ms.  Bustos  had  known  of  the  layoff  she  would  have  borrowed  the 
application  fee  and  filed  her  application  earlier. 

32.  |  Respondent  Mary  Lee  Carboni’s  seniority  date  is  August  3,  1990,  and  she 

holds  a  life  standard  elementary  (K-9)  credential  and  an  Art/Fine  Arts  authorization  which 
permits  her  to  teach  departmentalized  art  classes  to  grades  K-9. 
graders  in  a  position  which  is  .60  FTE  art  and  .40  FTE  language  arts.  Ms.  Carboni  agreed  to 
teach  the  latter  classes  at  her  principal’s  request  for  limited  time  due  to  available  federal  class 
size  reduction  funding  for  students  each  who  special  assistance  with  language  arts.  She  has 
ELs  in  her  art  and  language  arts  classes  at  Leonardo  Da  Vinci. 

She  teaches  7”  and  8” 

Principal  Willoughby  advised  Ms.  Carboni  she  needed  a  CLAD  certificate  to  teach 

language  arts. 
In  2003  she  began  the  certification  course  and  was  notified  of  her  “A”  in  the 
second  course  on  April  2,  2004.  When  she  received  a  layoff  notice  she  immediately  signed 
up  for  the  remaining  classes  through  USD  and  expects  to  complete  them  in  May  2004. 

On  March  17,  2004,  Ms.  Lauzon  advised  Ms.  Carboni  that  she  did  not  need  a  CLAD 
certificate  to  teach  art  and  that  the  Multilingual  Department  does  not  list  art  as  a  subject  for 
which  that  certification  is  required. 
.60  FTE  art  teacher  and  is  only  teaching  language  arts  only  temporarily  at  her  principal’s 
request.  She  was  not  retained  in  any  portion  of  her  position  because  she  does  not  have  a 
CLAD  or  equivalent  credential. 

Ms.  Carboni  noted  that  she  has  worked  for  14  years  as  a 

33. 

|  Respondent  Scott  Chapman’s  seniority  date  is  October  30,  2000,  and  he  holds 

a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  He  is  teaching  ELs  at  Edward  Kimball,  a 
K-3  school.  In  the  spring  of  2003  his  principal  advised  Mr.  Chapman  that  if  he  had  ELs  he 
must  be  working  toward  a  CLAD  certificate  and  he  received  Ms.  Mignone’s  letters  with  the 
same  information. 

In  November  2003  Mr.  Chapman  commenced  CLAD  training  through  UC  Davis 

Extension.  He  is  taking  the  final  fourth  class  through  USD  and  expects  to  finish  in  mid-June 
2004.  He  testified  that  he  telephoned  Ms.  Lauzon  in  January  2004  to  ask  for  an  extension  to 
2005  and  written  confirmation  to  give  to  his  principal  “to  cover”  himself.  On  February  12, 
2004,  Ms.  Lauzon  sent  Principal  Gloria  Bandy  an  e-mail  that  “Scott  has  until  3/05  to 
complete  his  CLAD  requirements.”  Mr.  Chapman  was  surprised  and  unhappy  when  he 
received  a  layoff  notice,  and  called  Ms.  Lauzon  who  said  the  Board’s  resolution  superceded 
the  prior  information. 

  

14

© 

  
  
  

Mr.  Chapman  relied  on  Ms.  Lauzon’s  email  and  but  for  it  he  would  have  gotten  a 

CLAD  certificate  more  quickly.  He  testified  that  he  “thinks”  the  District  knows  of  his 
supplementary  authorization  for  7"  and  8"  grade  English  although  he  has  never  filed  that 
credential  with  the  District.  The  District  records  do  not  reflect  such  a  credential.  No 
evidence  suggested  that  Personnel  Services  amends  its  official  records  without  proper 
documentation. 

34. 

Respondent  Gary  Corbutt’s  seniority  date  is  September  8,  1970,  and  he  holds  a 
life  standard  elementary  (K-9)  credential  with  authorizations  in  History  and  Political  Science, 
and  a  life  standard  secondary  (grades  7-12).  He  is  currently  teaching  at  Isadore  Cohen, a  less 
impacted  school,  and  has  three  EL  students. 

Mr.  Corbett  received  Ms.  Mignone’s  December  3,  2003,  letter  regarding  the  need  for 

a  CLAD  certificate,  and  completed  three  USD  videotape  courses  in  the  summer  of  2003. 
The  final  class,  held  in  December  2003,  required  a  paper  which  Mr.  Corbett  intended  to 
complete  in  June  2004.  After  receiving  his  layoff  notice  Mr.  Corbett  immediately  completed 
the  paper,  which  was  in  rough  draft  form.  Although  the  USD  letter  directed  that  he  take  his 
transcript  to  CTC,  he  did  not  do  so  but  came  to  Personnel  Services  which  provided  the 
application  form.  He  returned  it  on  April  3  and  Personnel  Services  forwarded  it  to  the  CTC. 
His  clear  CLAD  certificate  (Preschool-Adult)  was  issued  on  April  2,  2004. 

Mr.  Corbett  testified  that  he  feels  “betrayed”  by  the  District  and  if  he  had  been  noti- 
fied  in  February  he  would  have  secured  his  CLAD  certificate  by  March  15.  Mr.  Corbett  did 
not  anticipate  that  the  District  would  lay  off  teachers  in  March  2004.  Mr.  Corbett  was  not 
bumped  into  any  vacant  history  or  political  science  position  because  he  did  not  have  a  CLAD 
credential  filed  by  March  15. 

35.  |  Respondent  Rebecca  Cunningham’s  seniority  date  is  September  5,  2000,  and 

| 

she  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  She  is  a  first  grade  teacher  at 
Pacific  Elementary  and  14  of  her  20  students  are  ELs. 

Ms.  Cunningham  received  the  Ms.  Mignone’s  December  2003  letter  that  she  would 
need  a  CLAD  certificate  within  two  years  of  March  2003.  She  took  and  passed  the  CLAD 
test  in  May  2003,  and  sent  her  scores  to  Principal  Kingsbury  and  Ms.  Lauzon..  Ms. 
Cunningham  testified  she  thought  that  was  all  she  had  to  do,  despite  the  specific  instruction 
in  the  December  2003  letter  to  take  her  transcript  to  CTC  and  provide  the  District  with  a 
receipt. 

In  approximately  January  2004  Principal  Kingsbury  sent  her  a  note  regarding 
applying  for  the  CLAD  credential,  but  Ms.  Cunningham  did  not  contact  Ms.  Lauzon  until  the 
beginning  of  March.  Ms.  Lauzon  sent  the  application  form  which  Ms.  Cunningham  filled 
out  on  March  10,  and  turned  in  a  week  later.  Ms.  Cunningham  testified  that  she  was  not 
warned  that  she  would  be  laid  off,  and  she  “would  have  moved a lot  faster”  if  such  a  warning 
had  been  provided. 

15

Ms.  Cunningham  obtained  a  clear  CLAD  certificate  (Preschool-Adult)  on  March  17, 
2004.  She  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate  by  March 
15. 

© 

36. 

Respondent  Jeanne  D’Angelo’s  seniority  date  is  October  16,  1973,  and  she 

hold  a  life  standard  elementary  (K-9)  credential.  She  has  taught  primary  grades  at  Genevieve 
Didion  School  since  1976,  and  did  not  have  any  EL  students  last  year  or  this  year. 
testified  that  she  relied  on  never  having  been  told  she  needed  to  secure  CLAD  credential. 
Ms.  D’Angelo’s  testimony  that  she  never  received  any  communication  from  the  District 
regarding  the  need  for  a  CLAD  credential  was  not  credible. 

She 

Ms.  D’Angelo  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate 

. 
by  March  15. 

37. 

|  Respondent  Barbara  Edwards’s  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003,  and  she 

has  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  CLAD  emphasis  (preschool-adult)  credential.  Ms. 
Edwards  received  a  notice  of  layoff  because  she  is  probationary.  She  is  currently  taking 
classes  to  obtain  a  clear  credential  and  needs  only  one  additional  course. 

38.  |  Respondent  Cheri  Harris-McCaskill’s  seniority  date  is  August  31,  1998,  and 

she  holds  a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  with  an  authorization  in 
English.  She  teaches  kindergarten  at  Earl  Warren  Elementary  and  has  had  ELs  last  year  and 
this  year. 

In  the  fall  of  2003  Ms.  Harris-McCaskill  entered  the  three-semester  SALAD  program 

which  will  end  May  14,  2004.  She  received  no  warning  from  the  District  that  if  her  CLAD 
certificate  was  not  completed  by  March  2003  she  would  be  laid  off.  She  received  a  layoff 
notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  credential  by  March  15. 

39.  |  Respondent  Mary  Hornsby’s  seniority  date  is  February  7,  1983,  and  she  holds 

a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  She  currently  has  one  EL  in  her 
kindergarten  class  at  Genevieve  Didion  Elementary  School.  For  a  short  time  in  a  team 
teaching  assignment  during  the  2003-04  School  Year  she  had  an  EL  although  she  was  not  in 
training  for  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential.  She  described  that  at  the  time  her  school  did 
not  realize  team  teaching  is  not  permitted  in  kindergarten.  The  EL  was  then  reassigned  to  a 
kindergarten  teacher  who  holds  a  LDS  certificate. 

In  the  spring  of  2003  Ms.  Hornsby  received  a  letter  from  Personnel  warning  that  if 
she  did  not  have  a  CLAD  certificate  ELs  could  not  be  assigned  to  her.  Principal  Norman 
Policar  told  her  that  because  their  school  has  so  few  ELs  she  need  not  worry  about  letters 
from  the  District.  Ms.  Hornsby  testified  that  she  was  very  upset  to  get  another  letter  in  the 
fall  of  2003  regarding  the  CLAD  requirement. 

Principal  Policar  testified  that  Genevieve  Didion  School  has  only  12  ELs  at  present 

and  has  never  had  more  than  19  EL  students.  Although  the  middle  school  students  including 

  

  
  
  

16

@ 

a  few  ELs  see  multiple  teachers  he  opined  that  only  the  language  arts  teacher  needed  a 
CLAD  or  equivalent  credential.  He  acknowledged  that  respondent  Hernandez,  the  middle 
school  math  teacher,  teaches  ELs  but  he  believes  did  not  need  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  creden- 
tial.  Principal  Policar  stated  that  his  opinion  was  based  Ms.  Hernandez’  predecessor  not  hav- 
ing  such a  credential,  and  that  his  school  “had  never  been  out  of  compliance  and  it  had  never 
been  an  issue  before.” 

Principal  Policar  could  not  identify  the  classes  in  the  core  curriculum;  he  defined  the 
core  curriculum  as  “the  curriculum  that  is  assigned  by  the  state  of  California.”  He  reiterated 
that  it  remains  his  opinion  that  a  teacher  does  not  need  a  CLAD  authorization  to  teach 
mathematics  to  ELs  in  grades  7-8,  and  that  he  conveyed  that  opinion  to  respondent  Hernan- 
dez  and  other  respondents.  Before  meeting  with  them  on  March  14,  2003,  to  express  his 
views  he  did  not  confer  with  the  Multilingual  Department  or  otherwise  verify  his  understand- 
ing. 

40. 

Respondent  Michael  Howell’s  seniority  date  is  September  4,  1990.  He  holds  a 

professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential,  a  professional  clear  administration 
services  credential,  and  a  professional  clear  single  subject  Business  Education  (grades  7-12) 
credential.  He  teaches  at  H.W.  Harkness.  Some  ELs  were  in  his  fifth  grade  class  last  year 
and  the  principal  advised  Mr.  Howell  that  he  needed  to  obtain  a  CLAD  credential  and 
reassigned  the  ELs.  Mr.  Howell  currently  has  ELs  in  his  third  grade  class. 

@ 

Mr.  Howell  returned  the  form  in  Mr.  Tukloff’s  letter  with  the  information  that  his 

CLAD  coursework  through  National  University  would  be  completed  by  June  1,  2004. 
completed  all  the  work  for  the  credential  on  March  27,  2004,  and  submitted  his  application  to 
CTC  through  National  University. 
on  March  27,  2004,  after  receiving  a  layoff  notice. 

He  obtained  a  clear  CLAD  certificate  (Preschool-Adult) 

He 

Mr.  Howell  received  a  layoff  notice  because  did  not  secure  the  CLAD  requirement  by 

March  15,  2004.  He  was  not  considered  for  a  Business  Education  position  although  he  is 
credentialed  to  teach  such  courses  because  senior  employees  were  not  bumped  if  they  did  not 
have  a  CLAD  certificate. 

41. 

Respondent  Mark  James’  seniority  date  is  January  29,  1990,  and  he  holds  a 
professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  He  is  an  elementary  teacher  at  Mark 
Twain  School. 

Mr.  James  enrolled  in  the  first  SB  395  course  offered  at  Burbank  High  School  which 

will  conclude  in  May  2004.  He  received  a  layoff  notice  because  did  not  secure  the  CLAD 
requirement  by  March  15,  2004,  and  was  not  considered  for  bumping  because  he  does  not 
have  a  CLAD  certificate. 

42. 

Respondent  Maria  De  Los  Reyes  Johnson’s  seniority  date  is  February  23, 

@ 

2004,  and  she  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  CLAD  emphasis  (K-8)  credential  and  an 
emergency  30-day  substitute  permit  which  will  expire  on  July  1,  2004.  Under  the  latter 

17  

permit  she  worked  as a  substitute  during  the  2003-04  School  Year.  She  is  assigned  as a  first 
year  probationary  teacher  at  C.P.  Huntington  Elementary  School,  where  12  of  her  19  students 
are  ELs. 

Ms.  Johnson  completed  the  training  session  for  administering  and  scoring  the 
California  English  Language  Development  Test  in  June  2003.  Although  she  has  a  CLAD 
certificate  Ms.  Johnson  received  notice  because  of  her  February  23,  2004,  seniority  date. 

43. 

.  Respondent  Beatrice  Laguana’s  seniority  date  is  September  6,  1988,  and  she 

holds  a  professional  clear  single  subject  physical  education  (preschool-adult)  credential,  and 
a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (preschool-adult)  credential.  Ms.  Laguana  taught  ELs 
before  her  September  2002-April  2003  leave  of  absence,  and  she  has  ELs  in  her  current 
assignment  at  Hollywood  Park  Elementary  School. 

Resource  teacher  Lynn  Teron  advised  Ms.  Laguana  that  she  needed  a  CLAD 

credential  and  in  December  2003  she  enrolled  in  the  USD  on-line  CLAD  course.  She  is 
currently  enrolled  in  the  SB  395  class  at  Burbank  High  School;  it  will  conclude  in  May  and 
she  has  until  November  to  turn  in  an  acceptable  portfolio.  Ms.  Laguana  was  not  warned  she 
would  be  laid  off  if  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  credential  by  March  15,  and  would  have 
taken  steps  to  obtain  a  CLAD  credential  sooner  if  she  had  known  of  the  layoffs. 

Ms.  Laguana  was  not  bumped  into  the  physical  education  classes  at  the  middle  or 

high  school  which  she  is  credentialed  to  teach  because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD  certificate. 

44. 

Respondent  Susan  Linda  Lee’s  seniority  date  is  August  5,  1994,  and  she  holds 

a  life  standard  credential  (K-9)  with  a  Social  Science  authorization.  She  is  assigned  to 
second  grade  at  C.P.  Huntington  School  and  had  7  ELs  last  year  and  8  ELs  this  year. 

Ms.  Lee  denied  receiving  any  written  notifications,  but  acknowledged  that  last  school 

year  her  principal  told  her  a  CLAD  credential  was  required  because  she  had  ELs.  She  sent 
away  for  the  USD  videotape  course  but  thought  it  was  inappropriate  for  her  because  there 
was  no  interaction.  She  signed  up  for  the  July  2003  San  Joaquin  COE  course  but  was  ineli- 
gible  because  her  job-sharing  resulted  in  less  than  nine  full-time  years  of  teaching.  Ms.  Lee 
described  that  she  was  “distraught”  because  she  had  made  time  during  the  summer  for  the 
course.  She  called  Ms.  Mignone  who  said  to  not  worry  because  the  CLAD  credential  was 
not  required  until  September  2005.  Neither  Ms.  Lee  nor  Ms.  Mignone  knew  that  there  would 
be  a  layoff. 

Ms.  Lee  received  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate  by  March  15, 

and  was  not  considered  for  bumping  into  other  assignments  because  she  did  not  have  a 
CLAD  certificate. 

45. 

Respondent  Tiffany  Lee’s  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003,  and  she  has  a 
preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  with  an  authorization  in  English.  Although 
she  was  advised  of  the  CLAD  requirement  during  new  teacher  orientation,  and  knew  she  had 

  

  
  
  

18

a  clear  CLAD  (Preschool-Adult)  certificate,  she  did  not  provide  it  to  Personnel  Services 
before  March  15.  She  is  a  first  year  probationary  kindergarten  teacher  at  Pony  Express" 
School  with  one  EL  student. 

Ms.  Lee’s  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003,  and  based  on  her  seniority  she  would  — 
not  have  been  retained  even  if  her  CLAD  certificate  had  been  provided  to  Personnel  Services 
March  15. 

46. 

Respondent  Wendy  Martinez’  seniority  date  is  September  4,  1990,  and  she 
holds  a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  Ms.  Martinez  is  assigned  to 
Genevieve  Didion  Elementary,  a  K-8  school  with  only  11  ELs  this  year. 

Ms.  Martinez  testified  that  she  did  nothing  to  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate  because  she 
had  no  ELs  this  year  or  last  year.  Her  testimony  that  she  never  received  notice  that  a  CLAD 
or  equivalent  credential  is  required  to  teach  ELs  was  not  credible. 

After  receiving  the  layoff  notice  Ms.  Martinez  applied  for  the  SB  395  courses  offered 

through  the  San  Joaquin  COE  and  through  the  Multilingual  Department.  She  had  not  re- 
ceived  confirmation  that  she  has  been  accepted  in  either  course. 

47. 

Respondent  Linda  Mellor’s  seniority  date  is  October  12,  1987,  and  she  holds  a 

professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  with  authorizations  in  English  and  a 
professional  clear  single  subject  (grades  7-12)  Government  credential..  She  has  filed  an 
application  for  a  reading  specialist  credential,  but  it  has  not  as  yet  been  issued.  She  described 
that  for  the  last  six  years  she  has  been  employed  as  a  “reading  coach”  at  Genevieve  Didion 
School.  The  District  does  not  have  such  a  classification  “reading  coach;”  she  is  employed  as 
a  teacher. 

Ms.  Mellor  opined  that  a  CLAD  is  not  necessary  for  her  job.  She  claimed  to  not 
remember  any  District  written  communications  regarding  a  CLAD  requirement,  but  admitted 
she  would  have  ignored  a  letter  about  2005  deadlines  because  she  is  retiring  next  year.  After 
March  15  Ms.  Mellor  enrolled  in  the  USC  videotape  program,  but  does  not  know  when  she 
will  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate. 

Ms.  Mellor  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate  by 

March  15.  She  was  not  considered  for  teaching  the  core  subjects  of  English  and  Govern- 
ment,  which  are  within  her  credential,  because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD  credential. 

48.  |  Respondent  Roswitha  Mueller’s  seniority  date  is  September  3,  2002,  and  she 

holds  a  professional  clear  single  subject  (  grddes  7-12)  German  language  credential,  and  a 
professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (preschool-adult)  credential.  Ms.  Mueller  has  ELS  in  her 
third  grade  class  Tahoe  Elementary,  and  taught  ELs  in  Spanish  and  German  classes  at 
Sacramento  High.  She  was  bumped  from  that  position  to  her  current  assignment. 

19

     

Since  receiving  a  layoff  notice  Ms.  Mueller  tried  to  sign  up  for  a  SB  395  course  but  is 

ineligible  because  she  lacks  nine  years  of  multiple  subject  teaching.  She  has  signed  up  for 
the  USD  videotape  course  which  costs  $1,080,  and  has  since  learned  of  a  preparation  class 
for  the  CLAD  test.  She  believes  her  extensive  experience  teaching  foreign  language  will 
enable  her  to  pass  the  test. 

Ms.  Mueller  received  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate  by  March 

15.  Although  she  is  certificated  to  teach  German  and  Spanish,  which  are  language  arts  and 
core  academic  subjects  required  for  graduation  for  some  students,  she  was  not  considered  for 
bumping  because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD  certificate. 

49. 

Respondent  Wendy  Money’s  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003.  She  holds  a 

life  standard  early  childhood  (preschool-3)  credential,  and  a  life  standard  elementary  (K-9) 
credential.  Ms.  Money  currently  has  10  ELs  at  Woodbine  Elementary,  and  was  advised  by 
her  principal  that  she  could  teach  them  because  she  was  in  training  for  her  CLAD. 

Ms.  Money  was a  District  teacher  from  1984-96,  and  knew  when  she  returned  to 

employment  that  a  CLAD  certificate  was  necessary  in  California  these  days.  In  July  2003 
she  began  the  USD  videotape  course,  and  in  January  advised  her  principal  Lynn  Soto  that  she 
completed  the  course  work.  She  submitted  her  application  to  CTC  on  February  9,  2004,  and 
obtained  a  clear  CLAD  certificate  (preschool-adult)  on  February  9,  2004.  She  did  not  file 
her  certificate  with  Personnel  Services. 

Ms.  Money  received  notice  because  she  did  not  have  a  CLAD  certificate  on  file  by 

March  15.  She  was  not  considered  for  bumping  for  the  same  reason. 

50.  |  Respondent  Cynthia  Newton-Nedich’s  seniority  date  is  September  3,  2002. 

She  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  with  supplementary  authorizations 
in  English,  mathematics  and  general  science.  Ms.  Newton-Nedich  teaches  at  Ethel  Phillips 
Elementary  and  has  12-13  ELs  this  year.  She  previously  taught  corrective  reading  and  math 
76  in  departmentalized  classes  in  the  junior  high  program  at  Martin  Luther  King  School,  and 
was  assigned  fewer  than  12  ELs. 

Ms.  Newton-Nedich  completed  three  of  the  required  CLAD  classes  as  an  undergradu- 

ate  and  believed  from  she  had  five  years  to  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate.  The  basis  of  her  be- 
lief  was  not  identified,  especially  because  she  acknowledged  receiving  Ms.  Mignone’s  June 
2003  letter.  Ms.  Newton-Nedich  passed  the  CLAD  test  in  December  2003  and  told  her  prin- 
cipal,  but  did  not  apply  for  the  credential  until  April  1,  2004  because  she  was  busy.  She  ob- 
tained  a  clear  CLAD  certificate  (preschool-adult)  on  April  1,  2004. 

After  June  2003  Ms.  Newton-Nedich  spoke  to  Ms.  Lauzon  about  the  CLAD  require- 
ment.  At  the  time  neither  of  them  was  aware  that  there  would  be  future  layoffs.  Ms.  New- 
ton-Nedich  was  surprised  to  be  laid  off  because  she  is  a  second  year  probationary  teacher  and 
passed  her  final  evaluations. 

  

20 

     

51.  |  Respondent  Carla  Otoya-Hart’s  seniority  date  is  October  16,  1987,  and  she 

holds  a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (preschool-adult)  credential.  Since  October  1999 
she  has  been  a  bilingual  [Spanish]  resource  teacher  at  Mark  Twain  Elementary  School  where 
her  job  involves  Title  1  testing,  communications  with  parents,  etc.  She  teaches  on a  pull-out 
basis,  which  she  described  was  helping  individual  students  with  independent  reading  levels 
when  their  class  comes  to  the  library. 

Ms.  Otoya-Hart  could  not  recall  any  District  communications  regarding  CLAD 

requirements,  but  admitted  her  prior  and  current  administrators  told  her  to  obtain  the 
certificate.  In  1996  she  took  two  National  University  CLAD  classes  and  completed  a 
Spanish  class  the  following  summer.  She  did  not  complete  the  course.  In  2002  she 
purchased  the  USD  tape  course  but  was  not  pleased  with  the  quality  and  “did  not  feel  any 
urgency”  because  as  a  resource  teacher  she  had  no  assigned  students. 

After  receiving  a  layoff  notice  Ms.  Otoya-Hart  enrolled  in  the  SB  395  course  and 
expects  to  obtain  a  CLAD  certificate  in  the  summer  of  2004.  She  testified  that  if  she  had 
known  of  the  consequences  she  would  have  moved  more  quickly  toward  the  CLAD 
credential. 

Ms.  Otoya-Hart  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  creden- 

tial  by  March  15.  Despite  her  significant  seniority  she  was  not  considered  for  bumping  into  a 
position  in  which  she  could  use  her  multiple  subjects  credential  because  she  does  not  have  a 
CLAD  credential. 

. 

52.  |  Respondent  Matthew  Pesci’s  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003,  and  he  holds 

preliminary  single  subject  (preschool-adult)  credentials  in  physical  education  and  health 
science.  He  is  one  of  eleven  teachers  assigned  to  New  Technology,  a  charter  high  school  of 
about  250  9"  and  10"  grade  students.  He  teaches  health  on  Mondays  and  PE  the  rest  of  the 
week  and  has  ELs  in  his  classes. 

| 

When  hired  in  June  2003  Mr.  Pesci  was  taking  one  USD  videotape  CLAD  course,  and 

he  plans  to  take  the  remaining  three  classes  this  summer.  Mr.  Pesci  denied  receiving  any  re- 
lated  communications  from  Personnel  Services.  In  fact  he  received  Ms.  Mignone’s  Novem- 
ber  20,  2003,  memorandum  regarding  CLAD  certification  and  wrote  on  the  form  that  he  was 
enrolled  in  the  USD  course  and  would  complete  it  by  September  2004. 

Mr.  Pesci  testified  that  during  training  in  Napa  last  July  and  again  in  March  2004  the 
principal  said  they  would  be  safe  from  layoff  because  of  the  small  schools  agreement.  The 
“Small  High  School  Dependent  Charter  Agreement  For  Identified  Schools,”  an  addendum  to 
the  collective  bargaining  agreement,  does  not  insulate  certificated  employees  of  charter 
schools  from  layoff.  In  Part  C  it  provides  that  except  as  specified  all  provisions  of  the  Edu- 
cation  Code  shall  apply.  Part  E  states  that  teachers  will  not  be  required  to  work  at  the  charter 
schools,  that  surplus  teachers  will  be  accorded  consideration  but  may  not  select  a  charter 
school,  and  that  District  schools  are  not  required  to  accept  surplussed  charter  school  teachers. 

21

  

Mr.  Pesci  did  not  secure  the  CLAD  certificate  by  March  15,  but  would  have  been  laid 

off  even  with  that  credential  because  of  his  September  2,  2003,  seniority  date. 

53. 

Respondent  Geoffrey  Pike’s  seniority  date  is  January  9,  1990,  and  he  holds  a 

professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  with  an  authorization  in  Music  and  a 
clear  supplementary  (preschool-adult)  authorization  in  Music.  He  taught  fifth  grade  for 
seven  years,  and  now  teaches  drums,  piano  and  recorder  to  grades  4,  5,  and  6  at  Peter  Burnett 
School. 

In  1994  Mr.  Pike  took  a  CLAD  credential  course  and  he  finished  the  required 
language  class  in  1996.  His  testimony  that  he  thought  attending  the  course  was  all  he  had  to 
do,  and  that  he  did  not  have  to  apply  to  CTC  for  the  CLAD  credential,  was  not  credible.  He 
acknowledged  that  he  had  to  submit  applications  for  his  teaching  credential  and  its  renewals, 
and  that  attending  courses  was  not  sufficient.  He  has  not  completed  enough  classes  to  obtain 
a  CLAD  credential. 

Mr.  Pike  testified  that  no  one  told  him  that  a  CLAD  credential  was  required  to  teach 
music  or  that  he  would  be  laid  off  without  such  a  credential.  Mr.  Pike  acknowledged  that  no 
resource  teachers  who  are  junior  to  him  are  being  retained. 

54. 

Respondent  Elizabeth  Reyes’  seniority  date  is  September  6,  1983,  and  she 

holds a  life  standard  elementary  (K-9)  credential  with  an  authorization  in  sociology.  She  has 
five  ELs  in  her  third  grade  class  at  Mark  Twain  Elementary  School  and  had  about  the  same 
number  last  year. 

In  April  2003  Ms.  Reyes  was  accepted  in  the  SALAD  program  at  CSUS  but  she  did 
not  complete  it  due  to  family  medical  problems.  At  a  March  4,  2004,  school  staff  meeting 
she  heard  about  the  SB  395  program  which  started  at  Burbank  High  School  on  February  27. 
She  was  allowed  to  enter  late  on  March  29  and  will  be  required  to  submit  an  acceptable  port- 
folio  after  the  class  concludes  in  May.  Her  effort  to  blame  her  principal  for  her  ignorance  of 
the  course  was  not  persuasive;  the  District  provided  three  letters  regarding  the  availability  of 
SB  395  courses  and  information  was  posted  at  school  sites. 

Ms.  Reyes  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  the  CLAD  requirement 
by  March  15.  Despite  her  significant  seniority  she  was  not  considered  for  bumping  into  an- 
other  position  because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD  credential.  Her  authorization  in  Sociology 
is  inapplicable  because  that  subject  is  not  currently  taught  at  the  District. 

55.  .  Respondent  Shelly  Silveria’s  seniority  date  is  September  3,  1985,  and  she 
holds  a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (preschool-adult)  credential  and  a  clear  pupil 
personnel  services-counseling  (preschool-adult)  credential.  She  uses  the  latter  credential  in 
an  evening  job  at  Fremont  Adult  School  and  in  volunteer  work  with  the  Family  and 
Assistance  Center.  She  teaches  third  grade  at  Pony  Express  School. 

       

  

22 

Ms.  Silveria  interpreted  the  Ted  Tukloff  letter  to  mean  that  she  had  until  2005-06  to 

complete  a  CLAD  credential.  She  completed  a  CLAD  course  on  April  7  and  obtained  a  clear 
CLAD  certificate  (preschool-adult)  on  April  14,  2004. 

Ms.  Silveria  was  laid  off  because  she  did  not  have  a  CLAD  certificate  by  March  15. 
Ms.  Silveria  has  authorizations  in  other  areas  and  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential  but 
was  not  considered  for  bumping  into  such  assignments  because  she  did  not  have  a  CLAD 
credential  on  March  15. 

56. 

|  Respondent  Cheryl  Lynn  Sims’  seniority  date  is  February  2,  2004,  and  she 
holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-9)  credential.  Ms.  Sims  is  assigned  to  a  second 
grade  class  with  3  ELs  at  David  Lubin  Elementary  School.  She  is  the  only  African- 
American  teacher  there,  and  opined  that  with  her  education,  corporate  background,  and 
fluency  in  Spanish  she  is  a  good  role  model. 

Ms.  Sims  applied  for  her  job  on  line,  and  acknowledged  that  the  District’s  website 

stated  a  CLAD  credential  was  required  “but  you  had  to  scroll  down”  to  see  it. 
attention  to  that  statement  she  could  have  started  on  the  requirement  more  quickly,  even 
before  she  moved  to  California.  On  March  30,  Ms.  Sims  received  a  clear  CLAD  certificate 
post-dated  to  February  2,  2004.  Her  application  for  a  BCLAD  on  the  basis  of  her  master’s 
degree  in  Bilingual  Education  from  an  Illinois  school  was  denied,  apparently  because  she  has 
not  taken  the  required  examination. 

If  she  had  paid 

Ms.  Sims  did  not  secure  the  CLAD  certificate  by  March  15,  but  would  have  been  laid 
off  even  with  that  credential  because  of  her  seniority  date.  She  has  held her  teaching  position 
for  only  1.5  months. 

57. 

Respondent  Sarita  Turner’s  seniority  date  is  October  4,  1984.  She  holds  a 
professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential  and  a  clear  pupil  personnel  services- 
counseling  (grades  7-12)  credential.  Since  1986  she  has  been  an  outreach  consultant  at  Peter 
Burnett  School.  She  was  planning  to  work  a  pre-retirement  .80  FTE  schedule  next  year  as 
she  did  this  year. 

Ms.  Turner  does  not  provide  instruction  in  a  classroom  and  testified  that  she  was 
never  told  she  needed  to  secure  a  CLAD  credential.  After  receiving  a  layoff  notice  she  signed 
up  for  a  CLAD  course  which  will  begin  April  29.  She  testified  that  she  should  be  reassigned 
to  another  resource  teacher  position,  but  does  not  know  her  seniority  in  relation  to  the 
resource  teachers. 

Ms.  Turner  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  or  equivalent 
credential  by  March  15.  Because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD  credential  she  was  not  consid- 
ered  for  bumping  into  another  certificated  position,  including  positions  authorized  by  her  pu- 
pil  personnel  services  credential. 

23

58. 

Respondent  Virginia  Uzelac’s  seniority  date  is  September  8,  1969,  and  she 

© 

holds  a  life  standard  elementary  (K-9)  credential  with  a  social  science  authorization.  There 
are  ELs  in  her  second  grade  class  at  Isadore  Cohen  School. 

Ms.  Uzelac  admitted  she  has  known  for  several  years  that  she  had  to  be  working  on  a 
CLAD  credential  if  she  had  any  ELs.  She  took  no  steps  to  do  so  because  her  school  has  very 
few  ELs  and  she  was  “only  sometimes”  assigned  such  students.  Her  claim  that  she  did  not 
know  there  was  any  special  time  limit  was  not  credible.  She  enrolled  in  the  SB  395  course  at 
Luther  Burbank  which  concludes  at  the  end  of  May. 

Ms.  Uzelac  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate  by 
March  15.  Her  credential  permits  her  to  teach  social  science,  a  core  curriculum  subject,  but 
she  was  not  considered  for  “bumping”  because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD  credential  and 
there  is  no  known  need  for  additional  social  science  teachers  in  the  next  school  year. 

59.  |  Respondent  Richard  Waller’s  seniority  date  is  October  7,  1985,  and  he  holds  a 

clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  He  is  assigned  to  Leonardo  Da  Vinci  magnet 
school,  which  has  very  few  ELs.  He  had  no  ELs  last  school  year,  but  some  this  year  because 
he  was  in  CLAD  training. 

After  hearing  in  April  2003  that  he  needed  a  CLAD  to  teach  ELs  he  signed  up  for  the 
34-hour  SB  395  class  held  July  19-30,  2003.  His  portfolio  was  accepted  in  December  2003, 
but  he  did  not  submit  his  application  to  CTC  until  February  2004.  He  did  not  advise  the 
District  that  he  had  completed  the  class  or  submitted  his  application.  Mr.  Waller  testified 
that  if  he  had  known  that  he  would  be  laid  off  he  would  have  taken  steps  to  expedite  getting 
the  395  certificate. 

60. 

Respondent  Marley  A.  Watters’  seniority  date  is  September  2,  1997,  and  she 

holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  She  teaches  third  grade  at  Elder 
Creek  and  17  of  her  20  students  are  ELs. 

After  receiving  Mr.  Tukloff’s  March  5,  2003,  letter  Ms.  Watters  took  and  failed  the 
CLAD  examination  in  June  2003.  She  described  that  the  District’s  communications  were 
“All  along  it  had  been  are  you  in  progress,  are  you  in  progress,  and  yes  I  was  finding  a 
course.”  She  testified  that  although  Ms.  Mignone’s  letter  said  she  had  to  finish  by  June 
2004,  she  did  not  understand  that  meant  she  had  to  have  her  CLAD  certificate  by  that  date. 
She  thought  it  was  sufficient  that  she  had  again  taken  the  test. 
her  testimony  was  illogical  and  not  credible. 

In  light  of  her  past  test  results 

Ms.  Watters  is  scheduled  to  take  the  CLAD  examination  on  May  8. 

If  she  had 

understood  that  she  could  be  laid  off  she  would  have  re-taken  the  CLAD  examination  in 
December  2003.  She  complained  that  in  the  “many  inservices”  she  attends  the  District  failed 
to  advise  her  of  the  consequences  of  not  having  a  CLAD  certificate.  In  light  of  her  failure  to 
respond  to  Mr.  Tukloff’s  letter,  and  the  numerous  letters  from  Personnel  Services  regarding 
the  CLAD  or  equivalent  requirement,  her  view  is  not  persuasive. 

  

  
  

@ 

24

Ms.  Watters  received  a  layoff  notice  because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  certificate 
by  March  15.  She  was  not  considered  for  “bumping”  because  she  does  not  have  a  CLAD 
credential. 

61.  |  Respondent  Linda  Wortman’s  seniority  date  is  August  31,  1998,  and  she  holds 

a  professional  clear  multiple  subjects  (K-8)  credential.  While  in  training  this  year  for  a 
CLAD  certificate  she  taught  ELs  in  her  third  grade  class  at  Pony  Express  School. 

Ms.  Wortman  thought  Ms.  Mignone’s  December  2,  2003,  meant  she  had  until  2005  to 

obtain  a  CLAD  certificate.  In  fact  the  letter  stated  that  if  she  did  not  have  one  by  June  30, 
2004,  she  would  not  be  eligible  to  teach  in  assignments  for  which  it  is  required  and  absent 
such  positions  could  be  terminated.  She  completed  the  USD  CLAD  course  on  March  28,  and 
submitted  her  application  to  CTC  on  April  15,  2004.  She  would  have  obtained  it  earlier  if 
she  had  known  she  would  be  laid  off. 

Ms.  Wortman  was  laid  off  and  was  not  considered  for  bumping  into  other  positions 

because  she  did  not  secure  a  CLAD  credential  by  March  15. 

62. 

-  Respondents  Harris-McCaskill,  Estrada-Stetson,  McNary,  Milton,  and 

Zahniser  stipulated  that  they  each  have  been  assigned  ELs  last  year  and  in  the  current  year. 
They  each  took  a  CLAD  course  based  on  the  understanding  that  such  certification  was 
required  and  they  could  teach  ELs  while  in  training.  They  relied  upon  the  District’s 
informing  them  of  the  SALAD  program  and  would  have  completed  a  faster  course  if  they 
had  known  that  lacking  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  certification  would  result  in  receiving  layoff 
notices. 

63. 

Respondents  Cluff,  Cochran,  Gilbert,  Kane,  Riffel,  Laney,  and  Howell 

stipulated  that  they  relied  upon  the  statement  in  the  March  5,  2003,  Tukloff  letter  that  the 
District  established  a  two  year  timeline  for  its  teachers  to  complete  the  CLAD  or  equivalent 
requirement  or  the  similar  letters  of  Ms.  Mignone. 

64. 

Respondents  Cluff,  Cochran,  Franzoni,  Gilbert,  Howell,  Kane,  Lacey,  Riffel, 

and  Watters  stipulated  that  they  are  permanent  elementary  teachers  who  would  have  speeded 
up  their  respective  plans  to  secure  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  if  they  had  known  they 
would  receive  layoff  notices.  They  each  expect  to  obtain  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential 
by  2005. 

65. 

Respondents  Estrada-Stetson,  McNary,  Milton,  and  Zahniser  stipulated  that 

they  received  notice  because  their  CLAD  credentials  were  not  on  file  by  March  15. 

66. 

Respondents  Richardson  and  Sekikawa  stipulated  that  they  are  on  the  waiting 
list  for  the  Multilingual  Department’s  SB  395  course,  and  would  have  enrolled  earlier  if  they 
had  known  of  the  consequences  of  not  having  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  by  March  15. 

25

  

67. 

|  Teachers  who  have  completed  the  CLAD  or  equivalent  course  and  filed  their 

@ 

application  with  CTC  can  request  an  emergency  CLAD  credential  from  the  County  Office  of 
Education.  Because  of  the  limited  time  available  to  implement  the  Board’s  resolutions  by 
the  March  15  deadline  Personnel  Services  did  not  instruct  respondents  in  that  situation  to 
request  emergency  credentials. 

68. 

The  District  considered  known  vacant  positions  for  the  2004-05  School  Year 

due  to  non-reelection  of  temporary  employees,  resignations,  retirements,  and  employees 
requesting  leave.  Ms.  Mignone  described  that  most  of  the  known  retirements  involved  high 
school  teachers. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  the  subject 
The  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

proceeding. 
44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  “elementary  teaching”  services  identified  in  the  Board  Resolution  No. 

2342,  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Edu- 
cation  Code  section  44955. 

A  school  district  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivi- 
sion  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter, 
be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered  ser- 
vices  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the 
pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179;  Cali- 
fornia  Teachers  Association  v.  Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32. 
the  latter  case  the  court  held  that  a  reduction  of  K-6  classes  was  a  reduction  of  a  particular 
kind  of  service  and  the  termination  of  the  teachers  who  provided  those  services  was  permit- 
ted  under  section  44955.  The  court  held  that  “Since  high  school  offerings,  such  as  mathe- 
matics,  science,  history  and  art,  are  particular  kinds  of  service,  logically  elementary  grade 
classes  which  teach  the  same  offerings,  although  with  a  single  teacher,  are  particular  kinds  of 
service.” 

In 

In  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  the  school  dis- 
trict  designated  categories  of  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated,  such  as  Counseling,  Cate- 
gorical  Programs,  Elementary  Instrumental  Music  Program,  Elementary  Specialist,  Elemen- 
tary  Vocal  Music.  The  court  noted  that  “The  number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by 
PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the  district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services  to  re- 
duce”  and  that  a  valid  reduction  in  service  can  be  found  “as  long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the 
method  of  teaching  or  in  the  particular  kind  of  service  in  teaching  a  subject.”  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association,  supra,  635. 

  

  
  

26 

@ 

 

Respondents’  argument  that  consideration  of  under-enrollment  transformed  the  sub- 

ject  particular  kind  of  services  proceeding  into  an  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  layoff 
was  not  persuasive.  In  the  latter  type  of  proceeding  the  number  of  positions  to  be  reduced  is 
determined  by  computation  of  the  percentage  of  decline  in  ADA  during a specific  time  pe- 
riod.  Brough  v.  Governing  Board  of  the  El  Segundo  Unified  School  District  (1981)  118  Cal. 
App.  3d  702,  713. 
In  the  subject  proceeding  such  a  computation  was  not  employed;  rather, 
the  District  considered  the  financial  consequences  of  under-enrollment  among  a  number  of 
economic  factors. 
The  financial  circumstances  of  a  district  may  be  affected  by  reduced  en- 
roliment  without  converting  a  particular  kind  of  services  layoff  into  an  ADA  layoff. 

3, 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious.  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings  are 
necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis. 
next  school  year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As 
stated  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduc- 
tion  of  particular  kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under 
that  section,  and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certifi- 
cated  staff,  section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effec- 
tuate  that  reduction.” 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  for  the 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  de- 
crease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

4. 

The  District  is  not  required  to  consider  attrition  in  layoffs  based  upon  reduc- 
tion  or  discontinuance  of particular  kinds  of  services.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Al- 
The  requirement  that  a  school  district  account  for 
len  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.  3d  627,  636. 
positively  assured  attrition  in  determining  the  number  of  certificated  employees  to  be  re- 

—  duced  applies  only  to  ADA  layoffs.  Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.  App.  3d  977, 

980. 

5. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  District  should  have  notified  respondents  to  obtain 
emergency  CLAD  or  equivalent  credentials  to  avoid  layoff.  The  argument  is  without  merit. 
Emergency  credentials  may  be  issued  only  after  a  school  district  files  with  the  Commission 
on  Teacher  Credentialing  a  “Declaration  of Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators”  and  a  sepa- 
rate  application  for  an  emergency  permit  for  each  teacher.  Education  Code  44300.  Emer- 
gency  permits  are  valid  for  one  year.  Education  Code  44251,  Title  5,  CCR  sections  80024.1, 
80026,  80026.6.  Districts  are  not  obligated  to  file  such  declarations  and  there  is  no  guarantee 
that  a  current  holder  of  an  emergency  credential  will  receive  a  renewed  emergency  creden- 
tial. 

Here  it  is  premature  for  the  District  to  file  such  a  declaration  for  the  2004-05  School 

Year.  Moreover,  no  evidence  suggests  a  factual  basis  for  such  a  declaration. 

27

  

6. 

Respondents  argue  that  Resolution  2346  will  have  the  impact  of  moving  certi- 

ficated  employees  currently  working  as  administrators  into  the  Sacramento  City  Teachers 
Association  unit.  The  rights  of  those  District  administrators  are  established  by  the  Education 
Code  and  cannot  be  curtailed  by  the  displeasure  of  the  teachers’  association. 

Certificated  administrators  are  subject  to  layoff  in  the  same  manner  as  teachers. 
Hentschke  v.  Sink  (1973)  34  Cal.App.3d  19.  With  the  appropriate  credential  and  seniority  an 
administrator  may  be  entitled  to  bump  into  a  teaching  position.  Administrators  first  hired  as 
teachers  retain  their  original  seniority  dates,  as  do  those  first  hired  as  administrators  before 
July  1,  1983.  Education  Code  section  44956.6. 

7. 

Respondent  Howell  argues  that  he  should  bump  less  senior  instructors  who 
teach  Business  Education  courses  in  the  District’s  adult  school.  The  contention  is  without 
merit.  An  adult  school  is  a  statutorily  separate  program  from  a  district’s  regular  K-12 
program,  with  a  separate  tenure  track  and  salary  schedule.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44929.25,  adult  school  teachers  employed  0.60  FTE  or  less  are  classified  as 
temporary  and  do  not  become  probationary  or  tenured.  If  an  adult  school  teacher  is  eligible 
for  tenure  in  both  the  adult  school  and  regular  school,  he  or  she  must  choose  in  which 
program  to  be  tenured  and  cannot  be  tenured  in  both.  Education  Code  section  44926.26. 
Service  in  adult  school  does  not  count  toward  tenure  in  regular  school.  Education  Code 
section  44929.26. 

Adult  school  teachers  do  not  have  tenure  or  seniority  in  regular  school  and  cannot 

bump  into  it  and  regular  school  teachers  do  not  have  tenure  or  seniority  in  adult  school  and 
cannot  bump  into  it.  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167;  Kamin  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  72  Cal.App.3d  1014. 

8. 

The  testimony  of  Ms.  Mignone  and  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce  established  that  the 

District  is  motivated  to  serve  the  needs  of  its  English  Learners  and  concerned  that  the  CDE 
may  again  determine  that  it  is  out  of  compliance.  Because  the  census  of  ELs  is  markedly 
increasing  and  ELs  are  found  in  all  schools,  the  District  engaged  in  the  prudent  and 
reasonable  effort  reflected  in  Mr.  Tukloff’s  and  Ms.  Mignone’s  letters  to  assure  that  every 
teacher  has  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential. 

However,  the  extreme  measure  enunciated  in  Board  Resolution  No.  2342  of  laying  off 

senior  certificated  employees  who  did  not  have  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  and 
retaining  junior  employees  who  have  such  a  credential  violates  Education  Code  section 
44955.  That  section  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
discontinued  ... 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as - 
well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 

  

28 

     

provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee 
with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  ... 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  ... 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 
that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  ... 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  ...  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training 
and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  (emphasis  supplied). 

Education  Code  section  44955  places  an  affirmative  obligation  on  the  District  to 

reassign  senior  teachers  whose  positions  are  being  reduced/discontinued  into  positions  held 
by  junior  teachers  if  they  have  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The 
only  exception  to  making  layoff  decisions  on  the  basis  of  seniority  is  the  narrow 
circumstance  described  by  subsection  (d)(1),  where  the  District  “demonstrates  a  specific 
need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study...  and  that  the  certificated 
employee  (to  be  skipped)  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course 
or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

Here  the  District  has  identified  no  “specific  course”  or  course  of  study’*”  in 
Resolution  2342.  Rather,  it  resolved  to  lay  off  certificated  employees  who  lacked  a  CLAD 
or  equivalent  credential,  and  skip  certificated  employees  teaching  any  course  in  any  school 
holding  such  authorizations.  Such  layoffs  are  proposed  across  the  District’s  educational 
offerings,  affecting  mathematics,  language  arts,  science,  art,  etc.,  as  well  as  resource  teachers 

  

Education  Code  section  51015  states:  “’Course’  means  an  instructional  unit  of  an  area  or  field  of  organized 

knowledge,  usually  provided  on  a  semester,  year,  or  prescribed  length  of  time  basis.” 
5  Education  Code  section  51014  states:  “’Course  of  study’  means  the  planned  content  of a series  of  classes,  courses, 
subjects,  studies  or  related  activities.” 

29

and  other  credentialed  assignments.  Furthermore,  the  Resolution  2342  was  implemented  to 
preclude  all  senior  teachers  without  CLAD  or  equivalent  credentials  from  bumping  into  any 
assignment  within  the  District,  not  just  a  “specific  course  or  course  of  study.”  The  effect  of 
the  District’s  layoff  action  is  that  very  senior  employees”  are  displaced  by  junior  employees 
who,  in  some  instances,  are  distinguishable  only  because  they  have  completed  a  45-hour 
videotape  course.  Resolution  2342  is  not  justified  by,  or  within  the  parameters  of,  Education 
Code  section  44955(d)(1). 

@ 

The  court  in  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  139  Cal.  App.  3d  567,  held  that 

such  skipping  of junior  employees  violated  Education  Code  section  44955.  Alexander 
concerned  a  school  board’s  decision  to  not  lay  off  Spanish-speaking  teachers  and  to  consider 
that  ability  as  a  criterion  for  breaking  ties  between  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  dates. 
Although  the  school  district  considered  that  the  skipped  teachers  would  fill  its  language 
needs,  they  were  not  necessarily  assigned  to  its  bilingual  courses. 

As  between  teachers  of  equal  seniority,  the  Alexander  court  acknowledged  the 
propriety  of  considering  language  skills  as  a  tie-breaking  criterion.  The  potential  advantage 
of  their  ability  to  communicate  with  Spanish-dominant  students  would  be  consistent  with  the 
“needs  of  the  district  and  the  students”  as  that  phrase  is  used  in  that  part  of  subdivision  (b)  of 
Education  Code  section  44955  that  deals  with  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  date. 
Alexander,  pg.  573. 

However  with  regard  to  teachers  with  different  seniority  dates,  the  Alexander  court 

held  that  the  “needs  of  the  district  and  students”  is  not  a  proper  measure  of  priority. 
Ordinarily,  the  test  is  whether  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  displace 
the  more  junior  employee.  The  Alexander  court  rejected  the  school  district’s  contention  that 
bilingualism  was  a  proper  general  criterion  for  competency.  It  noted  the  legislative  mandate 
to  provide  bilingual  education,  but  added: 

Employment  of  new  teachers  with  bilingual  ability  and  gradual,  prospective 
amendment  of job  descriptions  to  include  language  skills  may  be  a  proper  means  of 
creating  district-wide  bilingualism.  However,  presently  employed  teachers  hired  as 
monolingual  teachers,  who  are  otherwise  competent,  may  not  be  discharged  under 
these  conditions  merely  because  more  junior  employees  have  achieved  passing  grades 
from  a  committee  of  bilingual  teachers. 

In  the  subject  case,  the  District  proposes  to  do  that  which  Alexander  forbade  —  to 

discharge  otherwise  competent  teachers  who  were  hired  without  the  requirement  of  a  CLAD 
or  equivalent  credential  and  retain  junior  teachers  who  hold  such  a  credential  irrespective  of 
whether  the  junior  teachers’  assignments  require  such  a  credential. 

  

For  example,  respondents  with  seniority  dates  in  1969  (Uzelac),  in  1970  (Corbutt),  in  1973  (D’Angelo),  in  1983 
(Biederman,  Reyes,  Hornsby),  in  1984  (Turner),  in  1985  (Waller,  Silveria),  in  1987  (Mellor,  Otoya-Hart),  in  1988 
(Laguana),  in  1990  (Pike,  Bustos,  Martinez,  Carboni,  Howell,  James),  etc. 

  

  

@ 

30

The  District  contends  that  Resolution  No.  2342  and  its  implementation  is  authorized 

by  Education  Code  section  44955(d)(2)  because  its  purpose  is  to  maintain  or  achieve 
compliance  with  constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  law.  That 
argument  is  not  supported  by  the  evidence,  most  notably  that  because  they  lack  a  CLAD  or 
equivalent  credential  senior  respondents  were  not  considered  for  bumping  into  middle  school 
positions  even  when  the  junior  teacher  also  lacked  such  a  credential.  Finding  26,  above. 
Moreover,  the  evidence  of  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce,  Ms.  Thomas,  and  Ms.  Mignone  established 
that  teachers  who  do  not  have  a  CLAD  or  equivalent  credential  could  teach  ELs  because  they 
were  in  training. 

. 

The  District  further  argues  that  if  it  did  not  skip  teachers  with  CLAD  credentials  in 

preference  to  teachers  who  do  not  possess  such  credentials,  “it  would  have  been  compelled  to 
layoff  a  greater  number  of  CLAD  credentialed  teachers,  thereby  aggravating  the  District’s 
ability  to  achieve  and  maintain  compliance  with  federal  equal  access  laws  for  EL  pupils.” 
That  argument  is  not  supported  by  the  evidence.  The  testimony  of  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce,  Ms. 
Thomas,  and  Ms.  Mignone  established  that  the  District  is  in  compliance  if  it  has  teachers  in 
training  teach  ELs  and  that  practice  will  be  acceptable  in  the  2004-05  School  Year. 

None  of  the  District’s  generalized  references  to  state  and  federal  law  or  the  citations 

to  42  U.S.C.  §  2000d  and  Lau,  et  al.  v.  Nichols,  et  al.  (1974)  414  U.S.  563,  566,  provide 
authority  for  the  proposed  layoff.  As  noted  above,  the  District’s  own  witnesses  testified  that 
the  District  is  in  compliance  with  its  current  configuration  of  staff  and  assignment  of  ELs  to 
teachers  in  training.  Moreover,  Education  Code  section  44325.10  permits  the  District  to 
‘reassign  teachers  to  provide  instruction  to  ELs.  The  testimony  of  Ms.  Gilman-Ponce 
established  that  the  District  has  done  so  to  achieve  compliance  at  Hiram  Johnson  and  other 
schools. 

Finally,  the  District  offers  that  if  it  has  assignments  in  the  2004-05  School  Year  in 

subject  areas  which  do  not  require  a  CLAD,  or  contemplates  assigning  a  less  senior  CLAD 
credentialed  teacher  to  render  a  service  which  a  more  senior  non-CLAD  teacher  on  the  reem- 
ployment  list  is  able  to  perform,  the  District  shall  offer  reemployment  to  the  senior  teacher. 
That  suggestion  does  not  remedy  the  violation  of  the  employment  rights  of  senior  certificated 
staff. 

9. 

In  light  of  Legal  Conclusion  8,  above,  it  is  not  necessary  to  address  respon- 
dents’  argument  that  the  District  is  estopped  from  terminating  teachers  who  do  not  hold  a 
CLAD  or  equivalent  credential. 

31

  

ORDER 

The  layoff  notices  issued  pursuant  to  Board  Resolution  No.  2342  based  solely  on 

seniority  are  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  those  employees  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2004-2004  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

The  layoff  notices  issued  because  certificated  staff  lacked  a  CLAD  or  equivalent 

credential  are  rescinded. 

Dated:  big.  Z  cL) Z  “yf 

UK, Ge,  ye Leb 

AM.  Le  BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

  
  

32

