BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
RIVERBANK  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

James  F.  Boling, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  N2004030218 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

M.  Amanda  Behe,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  7,  2004, at  the  Riverbank  Unified  School  Dis- 
trict,  Riverbank,  California. 

Chesley  D.  Quaide,  Attorney  at  Law,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  rep- 

resented  the  Riverbank  Unified  School  District. 

Wesley  T.  Greene,  Attorney  at  Law,  Tuttle  and  McCloskey,  represented  respondent 

James  F.  Boling. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  7,  2004. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Board  of  Education  of  the  Riverbank  Unified  School  District  determined  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  teachers  for 
budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the  competency  of  the  individuals  whose 
services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  and  determination  of  whether  respondent  is  credentialed 
to  teach  in  another  District  position.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code. 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

The  Riverbank  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  Riverbank, 

California.  Joseph  Galindo  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

On  March  2,  2004,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  (the  Board)  was  given 

notice  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  of  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  that  certificated  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

3. 

Board  Resolution  No.  03-04-12,  adopted  on  March  2,  2004,  reduced  and 

eliminated  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

5.0 
1.0 
1.57 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 

FTE’ 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

Elementary  Teaching  Positions 
Art  Teaching  Position 
Business  Teaching  Positions 
Counseling  Position 
English  Teaching  Position 
Foreign  Language  (Spanish)  Teaching  Position 
Social  Science  Teaching  Position 
Music  Teaching  Position 

4, 

Board  Resolution  No.  03-04-11,  adopted  on  March  2,  2004,  established 

competency  criteria  and  a  “skipping”  protocol  to  address  its  obligation  to  provide  instruction 
to  students  who  have  limited  English  language  proficiency.  It  provided  in  relevant  part  that 
there  is: 

...  a  specific  need  for  fully  credentialed  personnel  to  teach  Core  academic  courses  of 
student  in  the  District,  and,  therefore,  the  Superintendent  or  designee  is  directed  to 
identify  those  ELL  certified  teachers  who  are  fully  credentialed  and  to  maintain  those 
teachers  over  teachers  with  more  seniority  who  do  not  possess  full  credentials,  when 
it  is  necessary  to  have  an  ELL  [English  language  learner]  certified  teacher  in  a  Core 
academic  class  as  defined  by  20  U.S.C.  section  7801 (ii). 

5. 

On  March  6,  2004,  by  registered  mail,  the  District  served  affected  employees 
with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  and  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

Each  notice  further  advised  the  employees  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  including  that 
such  a  request  must  be  delivered  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination, 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

  

'  The  acronym  “FTE”  refers  to  a  full-time  equivalent  position.

  

8. 

9. 

6. 

On  March  12,  2004,  respondent  James  T.  Boling  (respondent)  filed  a  timely 

and  proper  request  for  hearing. 

7. 

On  March  22,  2004,  Superintendent  Galindo  filed  an  Accusation  which  was 
personally  served  on  respondent  that  date  and  served  by  mail  on  that  date.  The  Accusation 
packet  contained  information  required  by  the  Education  Code  including  that  a  Notice  of 
Defense  must  be  filed  within  five  days  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944(c)(1). 

On  March  24,  2004,  respondent  filed  a  timely  and  proper  Notice  of  Defense. 

The  District  considered  known  vacant  positions  for  the  2004-05  School  Year 

due  to  resignations,  retirements,  and  leaves.  Barbara  Cortese,  the  District’s  Director  of 
Human  Resources,  testified  that  originally  12.57  FTE  positions  were  affected  and  four 
employees  requested  hearings.  On  March  11,  2004,  the  Board  was  notified  that  as  the  result 
of  recent  resignations  and  a  job  share  request  it  was  not  necessary  to  provide  layoff  notices  to 
three  teachers. 

10. 

The  District  currently  has  4.0  FTE  business  teachers  including  respondent  who 
currently  teaches  business  applications  and  work  experience  at  Riverbank  High  School.  Ms. 
Cortese  described  that  1.57  FTE  reduction  in  Business  Teaching  is  necessitated  by  a 
continual  decrease  in  student  enrollments  and  low  class  loads.  The  reduction  will  affect  1.0 
FTE  at  Riverbank  High  School  and  .57  FTE  at  Cardozo  Middle  School. 

11. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  identifies  employees’  names, 
dates  of  first  paid  service,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  Respondent’s  date  of  first  paid 
service  is  August  13,  1998,  and  he  holds  a Professional  Clear  Single  Subject  Business 
credential  and  has  a  CLAD?  certificate, 

12.  _  Ms.  Cortese  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the 

layoff.  For  each  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  service  she  identified  the  affected 
incumbents,  and  then  determined  whether  those  individuals  held  credentials  which  would 
permit  them  to  “bump”?  into  another  position. 

To  implement  the  1.57  FTE  reduction  in  Business  Teaching  Ms.  Cortese  reviewed  the 
seniority  of  the  four  business  teachers.  The  two  other  1.0  FTE  high  school  business  teachers 
are  senior  to  respondent  with  seniority  dates  of  November  27,  1989  and  August  13,  1987. 

  

>  The  State  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  tests  for  and issues  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic  De- 
velopment  (CLAD)  Certificates  which  authorize  teachers  to  provide  certain  types of  instruction  to  English  learners. 
>  Generally  speaking,  a  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  a  position  heid  by  a  junior 
teacher  if  the  senior  teacher is  properly  credentialed.  That  displacement  of  a  junior  teacher is  known  as  “bumping.” 
The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and  a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential/skill  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more 
senior  teacher  is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by  statute  (Education  Code  section  44955(d)(1))  and 
appellate  law  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board  of  the  Santa  Clara  Unified 
School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831).

Mary  Phoenix  is  the  least  senior  business  teacher  with  a  seniority  date  of  October  1,  2001. 
She  is  presently  teaching  computer  applications  in  a  1.0  FTE  position  at  Cardozo  Middle 
School.  Ms.  Phoenix  did  not  receive  a  layoff  notice  because  she  is  credentialed  to  teach  a 
science  position  which  will  be  vacant  due  to  a  resignation. 

@ 

With  the  exception  of  Ms.  Phoenix  respondent  is  the  least  senior  business  teacher. 

His  sitigle  subject  credential  does  not  authorize  him  to  teach  any  other  subjects.  No  one  less 
senior  is  being  retained  to  teach  a  subject  which  respondent  is  credentialed  and  qualified  to 
teach. 

13. 

|  Respondent  is  entitled  to  “bump”  into  the  .43  FTE  Business  Teaching  position 

which  will  remain  at  Cardozo  Middle  School.  Ms.  Cortese  noted  that  there  is  a  possibility 
that  the  partial  position  may  increase  above  .43  FTE  if  enough  students  enroll  in  the  business 
classes  at  that  site. 

14. 

Respondent’s  CLAD  certificate,  while  of  benefit  to  the  District’s  students, 
does  not  affect  the  subject  layoff  because  business  classes  are  not  Core  academic  class  as 
defined  by  20  U.S.C.  section  7801(ii). 
implemented  solely  on  the  basis  of  seniority  and  credentials. 

The  layoff  of  the  District’s  business  teachers  will  be 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44944  provides: 

“(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 
board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  writ- 
ten  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  ...,  that  it  has 
been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefor. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or  has 
waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor  shall  be  confi- 
dential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the 
performance  of  duties.  However,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality, 
in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of  any 
hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reem- 
ploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in  writing 
and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a), 
on  or  before  a  date  specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven 
days  after  the  date  on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee 
fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so 
shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided

  

  
  

© 

for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be  con- 
ducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section 
11500  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the  governing 
board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  fol- 
lowing  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five 
days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be  no- 
tified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code 
shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service 
of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  so  indicate. 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall 
prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as 
to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for 
the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of 
the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing 
board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and 
disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  con- 
tained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared.  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall 
be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  commit- 
ted  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not 
constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  er- 
rors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing 
board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  pro- 
ceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the 
administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  dis- 
trict  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not  incon- 
sistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate  this 
section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in  person  to 
the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States  regis- 
tered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continuance  is  granted 
pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the  dates  prescribed  in  subdivi-

  

sion  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  pre- 
scribed  in  subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the 
continuance  shall  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance.” 

@ 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides: 

“(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 
than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  in- 
clusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)  ...  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  ...  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of 
these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  per- 
centage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probation- 
ary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  ser- 
vices  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  sec- 
tion  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  com- 
petent  to  render. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of 
May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employ- 
ees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  em- 
ployed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sec- 
tions  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  em- 
ployee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Sec- 
tion  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a 
manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  sen- 
iority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or 
reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has 
not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  cre- 
dential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee 
to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  ... 

3. 
ceeding. 
44944  and  44945  were  met.

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  the  pro- 
The  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

  

  

©} 

6 

4. 

Elementary  Teaching,  Art  Teaching,  Business  Teaching,  Counseling,  English. 

Teaching,  Foreign  Language  (Spanish)  Teaching,  Social  Science  Teaching,  and  Music 
Teaching  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified 
services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  Dis- 
trict  and  its  pupils  and  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the 
District  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

_ 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue a  particular  kind  of  service  need 

not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  students. 
San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.  A  school  board  may 
reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  statute  either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of 
service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who 
perform  such  services.  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of  Bellflower  Unified  School 
District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167. 

6. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the  sen- 
ior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  No  employee  with  less  seniority 
than  respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  he  is  certificated  to  render. 

ORDER 

Respondent  James  Boling’s  services  in  his  current  1.0  FTE  position  will  not  be  re- 
quired  for  the  2004-2005  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  ser- 
vices,  specifically,  Business  Teaching.  Respondent  is  entitled  to  “bump”  into  the  .43  FTE 
Business  Teaching  position  which  will  be  continued  in  the  2004-2005  School  Year. 

   

M  AMANDA  BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

2, 

@ 

   

