BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
VACAVILLE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

22  FTE  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  OF 
THE  VACAVILLE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 

Respondents. 

  

  

OAH  No.  N2004030256 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Catherine  B.  Frink,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  19,  2004  in  Vacaville,  California. 

The  Vacaville  Unified  School  District  was  represented  by  Terry  Filliman,  Attorney  at 

— 

Law,  Atkinson,  Adelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  555  Capitol  Mall,  Suite  645,  Sacramento, 
CA  95814. 

Respondents  were  represented  by  Joan  Maredyth,  Attorney  at  Law,  Maredyth  & 

McCallum,  5820  Landis  Avenue,  Suite  3,  Carmichael,  CA  95608. 

The  record  remained  open  pending  submission  of  additional  evidence  and  closing 

briefs.  Documents  pertaining  to  the  job  duties  and  qualifications  of  the  Charter  School 
Testing  and  Assessment  Alignment  Coordinator  were  received  via  facsimile  on  April  20, 
2004  and  April  22,  2004  and  were  marked  collectively  as  Exhibit  6  in  evidence. 
Respondents’  brief  was  received  on  April  26,  2004  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  D  for 
-  identification.  The  District’s  brief  was  received  on  April  29,  2004  and  was  marked  as 

Exhibit  7  for  identification.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision 
on  April  29,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

John  T.  Aycock  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Vacaville  Unified  School  District 

(“District”).  He  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity.

2. 

Each  of  the  respondents  listed  on  Attachment  A,  attached  hereto  and 

incorporated  herein  by  reference,  was  at  all  times  mentioned  herein  and  now  is  a  certificated 
employee  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  4,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 
No.  37,  relating  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  directed 
the  Superintendent  to  give  notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  not  be 
needed  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  also  adopted 
Resolution  No.  38,  Criteria  for  Order  of  Certificated  Layoff  and  Reemployment  Following 
Layoff  for  Employees  with  Equal  Seniority  (“tiebreaker  criteria”).' 

4. 

On  March  13,  2004,  respondents  were  served  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  law 

with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  them  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year.  The  Notice  stated  the 
reasons  for  such  recommendation,  and  Board  Resolution  No.  37  was  attached  to  the  Notice. 

5. 

Respondents,  within  the  time  limit  specified  in  Education  Code  section  44949, 

subdivision  (b),  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them 
- 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6. 
satisfied. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were 

7. 

Pursuant  to  Board  Resolution  No.  37,  2003-2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
District  decided  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  (34  Full  Time  Equivalent 
positions)  (“FTE”)  of  the  District  beginning  not  later  than  the  commencement  of  the  2004- 
2005  school  year  as  follows: 

13  FTE 
1  FTE 
5  FTE 
8  FTE 

1  FTE 
6  FTE 

Elementary  Education 
Enrichment  Elementary  Preparation 
Music 
Special  Education  with  only  Waivers,  Emergency  Permits 
or  Pre-Intern/Intern  Permits 
Testing  and  Assessment  Alignment  Coordinator 
Nurses 

8. 

The  Pre-Hearing  Brief  filed  on  behalf  ofthe  District  stated  that,  as  of  the  date 
of  hearing,  the  District  is  proposing  to  lay  off  approximately  22.  FTE  certificated  employees, 
as  follows: 

4.2  FTE 
4.8  FTE 
13.0  FTE 

Music 
Nurses 
Elementary  Education 

  

'  The  tiebreaker  criteria  was  not  utilized  in  determining  the  order  of  layoffs  in  this  proceeding.

  

  
  
  

e 

Although  the  Board  Resolution  lists  additional  services  being  cut  and  additional  FTE 

positions  being  reduced,  those  proposed  reductions  have  been  withdrawn.  - 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  determined  to  exempt  from  elimination  or 

reduction  the  following  classes  of  teachers: 

Certificated  teachers  holding  Bilingual,  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic 
Development  (BCLAD)  Credential  or  authorization,  or  who  are  currently  in 
training  for  BCLAD  Credential  or  authorization  as  of  March  1,  2004. 

Special  Education  Teachers  who  hold  a  Preliminary  or  Clear  Teaching  Credential, 
and  all  Special  Education  Teachers  who  hold  Emergency  Permits,  Waivers,  or 
Pre-Intern/Intern  Permits  who  are  currently  enrolled  in  a  credentialing  program, 
making  progress  toward  a  Special  Education  Credential,  and  can  submit 
verification  from  their  college  or  university  by  March  12,  2004. 

c. 

Independent  Study  Teachers  in  the  Ulatis  Transitional  Program  at  the  Ulatis 
Alternative  Education  Center. 

@ 

10. 

The  District  is  facing  its  third  year  of  budget  cuts.  According  to  Ron  Hawkins, 
the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Personnel  for  the  District,  the  District  is  facing  a  $3.5  million 
budget  deficit.  The  District  is  taking  steps  to  resolve  its  budget  crisis,  apart  from  the 
reduction  in  certificated  personnel,  including  closing  an  elementary  school  with  low 
enrollment. 

11.  |  Education  Code  section  44955  states  in  pertinent  part  as  follows: 

“(b)...  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,...and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary...to  decrease  the 
number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate 
the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school 
year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9, 

a. 

b. 

«ee 

46 

© 

“(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in 

the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be  

terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the 
event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

@ 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 
that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 

and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the 

-  employee’s  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 

governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test 
in  the  appropriate  subject. 

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

“(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 
or  course  of  study,...  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  - 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...  which  others  with 
more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

ee 

29 

Reduction  in  Music 

12. 

The  District  sent  layoff  notices  to  certificated  probationary  and  permanent 
employees  occupying  3.8  FTE  music  teacher  positions.  As  a  precaution,  the  District  also 
sent  a  layoff  notice  to  respondent  Ron  Nikiado,  who  is  currently  employed  as  a  .4  FTE  music 
teacher,  for  a  total  reduction  in  music  of  4.2  FTE.  Respondent  Nikiado  is  a  substitute  teacher 
in  a  categorical  position.  He  did  not  challenge  his  status  as  a  temporary  employee  at  hearing. 
He  is  not  entitled  to  the  rights  and  protections  afforded  probationary  and  permanent 
certificated  employees  under  the  Education  Code  as  it  pertains  to  these  layoff  proceedings, 
and  he  may  be  released  from  employment  by  the  District  at  the  end  of  the  2003-04  school 
year.  The  remaining  music  teachers  noticed  for  layoff  hold  single  subject  music  credentials 
or,  in  one  case,  a  life  standard  elementary  music  credential.  Except  as  noted  in  Finding  33 
below,  they  are  not  entitled,  by  virtue  of  their  seniority  and  qualifications,  to  serve  in  any 
other  position  with  the  District.  The  District’s  decision  to  lay  off  3.8  FTE  music  teachers 
(excluding  respondent  Nikiado)  is  upheld. 

6 

 

  

Reduction  in  Nurses 

13. 

The  District  sent  layoff  notices  to  certificated  employees  occupying  4.8  FTE 

school  nurse  positions.  Except  as  noted  in  Finding  29,  none  of  the  school  nurses  are  entitled 
by  virtue  of  their  seniority  and  qualifications,  to  serve  in  any  other  position  with  the  District. 

14. 

The  District  proposes  to  reduce  the  current  11.7  FTE  nurses  by  4.8  FTE  (41 

percent).  After  the  reduction,  6.9  FTE  nurses  will  remain.  Approximately  .7  FTE  of  the 
service  is  used  for  Head  Nursing  functions,  leaving  6.2  FTE  for  regular  nursing  functions. 
This  equates  to  1140  work  days  (184  x  6.2  FTE).  There  are  approximately  14,000  students 
in  the  District. 

15. 

|  Education  Code  section  49422(a)  states  that,  “[n]o  physician,  psychiatrist, 

oculist,  dentist,  dental  hygienist,  optometrist,  otologist,  podiatrist,  audiologist,  or  nurse  not 
employed  in  that  capacity  by  the  State  Department  of  Health  Services,  shall  be,  nor  shall  any 
other  person  be,  employed  or  permitted  to  supervise  the  health  and  physical  development  of 
pupils  unless  he  or  she  holds  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  health  or  a  valid 
credential  issued  prior  to  the  operative  date  of  Section  25  of  Chapter  557  of  the  Statutes  of 
1990.”  Education  Code  section  49426  states  in  pertinent  part  that,  “...School  nurses  may 
perform,  if  authorized  by  the  local  governing  board,  the  following  services: 

“(a)  Conduct  immunization  programs  pursuant  to  Section  49403  and  assure  that  every 
pupil's  immunization  status  is  in  compliance  with  the  law,  including  parental  or 
guardian  consent,  and  good  health  practice. 

“(b)  Assess  and  evaluate  the  health  and  developmental  status  of  pupils  to  identify 
specific  physical  disorders  and  other  factors  relating  to  the  learning  process, 
communicate  with  the  primary  care  provider,  and  contribute  significant  information 
in  order  to  modify  the  pupils'  educational  plans. 

“(c)  Interpret  the  health  and  developmental  assessment  to  parents,  teachers, 
administrators,  and  other  professionals  directly  concerned  with  the  pupil: 

“(d)  Design  and  implement  a  health  maintenance  plan  to  meet  the  individual  health 
needs  of  the  students,  incorporating  plans  directed  by  a  physician. 

“(e)  Refer  the  pupil  and  his  or  her  parent  or  guardian  to  appropriate  community 
resources  for  necessary  services. 

“(f)  Maintain  communication  with  parents  and  all  involved  community  practitioners 
and  agencies  to  promote  needed  treatment  and  secure  reports  of  findings  pertinent  to 
educational  planning.

  

“(g)  Interpret  medical  and  nursing  findings  appropriate  to  the  student's  individual 
educational  plan  and  make  recommendations  to  professional  personnel  directly 
involved. 

@ 

“(h)  Consult  with,  conduct  in-service  training  to,  and  serve  as  a  resource  person  to 
teachers  and  administrators,  and  act  as  a  participant  in  implementing  any  section  or 
sections  of  a  comprehensive  health  instruction  curriculum  for  students  by  providing 
current  scientific  information  regarding  nutrition,  preventive  dentistry,  mental  health, 
genetics,  prevention  of  communicable  diseases,  self-health  care,  consumer  education, 
and  other  areas  of  health. 

“(i)  Counsel  pupils  and  parents  by: 

“(1)  Assisting  children  and  youth,  parents,  and  school  personnel  in  identifying  and 
utilizing  appropriate  and  mutually  acceptable  private  and  community  health  delivery 
services  for  professional  care  and  remediation  of  defects. 

(2)  Counseling  with  parents,  pupils  and  school  staff  regarding  health-related 
attendance  problems. 

‘(3)  Helping  parents,  school  personnel  and  pupils  understand  and  adjust  to  physical, 
mental  and  social  limitations. 

“(4)  Exploring  with  families  and  pupils,  attitudes,  information  and  values  which 
affect  their  health  behavior. 

““)  Assist  parents  and  pupils  to  solve  financial,  transportation  and  other  barriers  to 
needed  health  services....” 

Education  Code  section  49426  lists  services  a  school nurse  may  perform,  not  services 

that  must  be  performed  by  a  school  nurse. 

16. 

There  are  certain  services  that  must  be  provided  by  a  school  district 

(“mandated  services”).  However,  it  is  not  required  that  certificated  nursing  staff  perform  all 
of  these  mandated  services.  Among  the  services  which  the  District  is  mandated  to  provide 
are  screening  services,  including  referral,  follow  up  and  reporting  requirements,  i.e.  vision 
screening  (Education  Code  sections  49452  and  49455)  for  all  students  in  grades  K,  1,  3,  6,  8, 
10  and  all  special  education  504  assessments,  plus  yearly  assessments  of  students  in  special 
education  and/or  who  receive  speech  and  language  services;  hearing  screening  (Education 
Code  section  49453)  for  all  students  in  grades  K,  2,  5,  8,  10  and  all  special  education  504 
assessimenits,  plus  yearly  assessments  of  students  in  special  education  and/or  who  receive 
speech  and  language  services;  color  vision  screening  (Education  Code  sections  49452  and 
49455)  for  all  boys  in  first  grade;  and  scoliosis  screening  (Education  Code  sections  49452.5 
and  49422)  for  all  7™  grade  girls  and  8"  grade  boys.  Other  mandated  services  include 
assessment  of  students  with  health  problems  and  preparation  of  Individual  Health  Services 

  

 
  

Plans;  performance  of  specialized  health  care  procedures  (either  directly  by  nurse,  or  by 
another  individual  who  is  trained  and  monitored  by  nurse);  medication  training  and  oversight 
of  medication  administration;  staff  training  in  universal  precautions  and  child  abuse 
reporting;  child  abuse  reporting;  initial  health  and  developmental  assessments  on  students 
being  assessed  for  special  education,  with  updates  every  three  years;  participation  in  IEP 
team  meetings;  preparing  mandated  reports  for  7"  grade  immunizations;  services  to 
Vacaville  students  in  non  public  school  placements;  and  services  to  preschool  students  with 
special  needs. 

17.  .  In  addition  to  mandated  services,  the  current  staff  of  certificated  nurses 

provides  services  for  the  District  that  are  not  mandated,  which  may  not  be  provided  as  a 
consequence  of  the  layoff  of  nurses  by  the  District.  These  services  include  follow-up  on 
truancy,  some  home  visits,  follow  up  for  students  with  lice,  and  participation  in  student  study 

teams. 

18. 

|  Respondents  contend  that  the  reduction  contemplated  by  the  District  will 

reduce  the  nursing  staff  below  the  level  needed  in  order  to  provide  mandated  services. 
Margaret  Pay,  head  nurse  for  the  District,  testified  that  many  of  the  services  now  provided  by 
school  nurses  will  not  be  able  to  be  performed  by  a  reduced  staff.  As  one  example,  she 
estimated  that  approximately  70  percent  of  nursing  staff  time  is  devoted  to  tasks  related  to 
special  education  students.  However,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  every  task  currently 
performed  by  nursing  staff  for  special  education  students  is  a  “mandated  service,”  or  that 
some  of  those  services  could  not  be  performed  by  someone  other  than  a  school  nurse.  The 
Governing  Board  has  the  discretion  to  determine  how  and  in  what  manner  mandated  services 
are  to  be  provided.  See,  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott,  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  811-12;  Gallup  v.  Board of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4”  1571,  1582-90. 

19. 

The  District  has  made  no  final  decision  about  how  the  duties  will  be  assigned 
to  remaining  nursing  and  other  staff.  The  District  is  considering  various  options,  including 
the  contracting  out  of  some  mandated  services  if  necessary,  and  the  delegation  of  some 
functions  to  other  District  staff,  under  the  supervision  of  certificated  nurses.”  The  work 
assignments  of  the  retained  nurses  will  change  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  nursing  staff  and 
they  will  be  required  to  perform  many  functions  in  a  different  manner.  In  the  absence  of  any 
evidence  as  to  how  the  District  intends  to  deliver  the  required  services,  it  is  premature  to 
consider  whether  the  District  will  or  will  not  meet  the  statutory  requirements.  Evidence 
Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official  duties  of  a  public 
entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  Governing  Board,  have  been  regularly  performed. 
Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  696.  The  District’s  decision  to  lay 
off  4.8  FTE  nurses  must  be  upheld. 

  

?  Respondents  contend  that  any  action  by  the  District  to  provide  mandated  services  by  contracting  work  performed 
by  school  nurses  targeted  for  layoff  to  outside  entities  would  violate  Article  19.1.6  of  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement  between  the  District  and  the  Vacaville  Teachers  Association/CTA/NEA.  The  potential  violation  of  the 
collective  bargaining  agreement  is  an  issue  which  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  layoff  proceeding  and  must  be 
resolved  in  another  forum.  See,  Government  Code  section  3540  et  seq. 

  

 

Reduction  in  Elementary  Education 

  

@ 

. 

20. 

As  the  language  of  Education  Code  section  44955  reflects,  economic  layoffs 
are  generally  to  be  done  on  the  basis  of  seniority.  The  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation 
to  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior 
teachers  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such 
positions.  In  order  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic  layoff,  Education  Code  section 
44955(d)(1)  requires  the  District  to  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study...  and  that  the  certificated  employee  (to  be  skipped)  has 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.” 

21. 

The  District  prepared  a  “bumping  chart”  to  determine  the  employees  who 

would  be  given  layoff  notices  to  effectuate  the  proposed  reduction  of  13.0  FTE  Elementary 
Education.  The  District  issued  Notices  to  the  17  least  senior  Multiple  Subject  (“MS”) 
credentialed  teachers  who  did  not  have  other  specific  credentials  that  would  permit  them  to 
be  retained,  or  “skipped”  by  the  District. 

Exemption  of  Teachers  Holding  BCLAD 

  

22. 

The  District  did  not  send  layoff  notices  to  seven  teachers  who  hold  MS 

credentials  with  BCLAD  credentials  or  authorizations  who  would  have  otherwise  been 
subject  to  layoff  based  upon  their  seniority  dates.’  Six  of  these  teachers  have  served  during 
the  2003-04  school  year  in  the  District’s  Dual  Spanish-English  Immersion  Program  (“Dual 
Immersion  Program’),  for  which  a  BCLAD  is  required.  One  teacher,  Loretta  Meyer-Taylor, 
is  currently  assigned  to  a  5/6  combination  classroom,  for  which  a  BCLAD  is  not  required. 
The  Dual  Immersion  Program  requires  intensive  teacher  instruction  in  both  Spanish  and 
English  and  is  required  to  be  offered  as  an  alternative  to  English  language  programs  for 
English  learner  (“EL”)  students.*  The  District  expects  to  expand  the  Dual  Immersion 
Program  for  the  2004-05  school  year  by  at  least  one  additional  classroom,  for  which  a 
BCLAD-credentialed  teacher  would  be  required. 

23. 

The  Dual  Immersion  Program  is  a  “particular  course  or  course  of  study” 

within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955(d)(1).  The  evidence  established  that 
there  is  a  specific  need  for  employees  with  BCLAD  credentials  or  authorizations  to  teach  in 
the  Dual  Immersion  Program  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  The  District  is  entitled  to  deviate 
from  seniority  order  and  to  skip  teachers  holding  BCLAD  credentials  or  authorizations, 
including  Loretta  Meyer-Taylor,  specifically  to  teach  in  the  Dual  Immersion  Program.  The 
teachers  holding  BCLAD  credentials  have  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach 

  

>  Loretta  Meyer-Taylor,  Gricelda  Rodriguez,  Maria  Rosa  Serrano,  Sofia  Felix-Hatfield,  Danesa  Montana,  Juana 
Saunders-Caldera  and  DJ  Whaley 
*  According  to  Education  Code  section  306(a),  an  “English  learner”  means  “a  child  who  does  not  speak  English  or 
whose  native  language  is  not  English  and  who  is  not  currently  able  to  perform  ordinary  classroom  work  in  English, 
also  known  as  a  Limited  English  Proficiency  or  LEP  child.”  See  also,  Education  Code  section  310. 

  

 
  

  

that  particular  course  or  course  of  study  that  is  not  possessed  by  more  senior  certificated 
personnel  holding  MS  credentials. 

Teacher  “Currently  in  Training  for  BCLAD  Credential  or  Authorization” 

24. 

Norma  Guerrero  is  a  certificated  employee  noticed  for  layoff.  She  holds  a 

Preliminary  MS  credential  with  CLAD  emphasis,  and  an  Emergency  BCLAD.  For  the  2003- 
04  school  year,  she  has  taught  a  third  grade  Dual  Spanish-English  Immersion  class. 
Respondent  Guerrero  is  enrolled  in  courses  at  Chapman  College  to  obtain  her  master’s 
degree.  Respondent  Guerrero  is  scheduled  to  take  the  BCLAD  examination  on  May  8,  2004. 
She  is  not  aware  of  any  particular  course  of  study  or  curriculum  that  specifically  “trains”  a 
teacher  fora  BCLAD.  She  believes  the  coursework  she  has  taken  for  her  advanced  degree 
has  prepared  her  to  take  the  BCLAD  examination.  By  working  in  the  Dual  Immersion 
Program  this  school  year,  she  has  demonstrated  that  she  has  special  experience  necessary  to 
teach  that  particular  course  or  course  of  study  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955(d)(1). 

25. 

As  part  of  Board  Resolution  No.  37,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District 

determined  that  “Certificated  teachers...who  are  currently  in  training  for  BCLAD  Credential 
or  authorization  as  of  March  1,  2004”  were  exempt  from  elimination  or  reduction.  The 
District  argued  at  hearing  that  respondent  Guerrero  was  not  “currently  in  training”  for  a 
BCLAD  credential  or  authorization  because  possession  of  an  emergency  BCLAD  did  not 
constitute  “training”  for  BCLAD  credential  or  authorization  and,  in  the  absence  of  a  specific 
course  of  study,  “training”  for  BCLAD  meant  having  taken  the  BCLAD  test.  The  District 
further  contends  that  Board  Resolution  No.  37  reflected  an  erroneous  assumption,  namely, 
that  there  was  a  training  program  for  certificated  personnel  seeking  BCLAD  certification. 
The  District’s  arguments  are  not  persuasive.  Respondent  Guerrero  falls  within  the  express 
language  of  the  Governing  Board’s  exemption  in  Board  Resolution  No.  37  as  a  certificated 
teacher  currently  in  training  for  BCLAD  credential  or  authorization  as  of  March  1,  2004,  and 
she  is  entitled  to  be  retained  by  the  District  to  teach  in  the  Dual  Immersion  Program  for  the 
2004-05  school  year. 

Exemption  of  Independent  Study  Teacher  in  the  Ulatis  Transitional  Program 

26.- 

Susan  Hoover,  seniority  date  January  5,  2004,  holds  a  single  subject  social 

science  credential  with  a  supplemental  authorization  in  introductory  mathematics.  She  did 
not  receive  a  layoff  notice  from  the  District  and  will  be  retained  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 
She  is  assigned  to  the  Ulatis  Transitional  Program  in  an  independent  study  position  created  in 
January  of  2004  to  find  students  who  are  not  currently  attending  school  and  transition  them 
back  to  the  District  through  independent  study  over  a  period  of  60  to  80  days.  Ms.  Hoover 
has  a  background  as  an  independent  study  teacher  in  middle  school  and  high  school;  she  has 
worked  in  a  continuation  program  of  teen  mothers,  and  in  an  independent  study  project 
through  the  county  day  school.

27. 

Education  Code  section  44865  provides  in  part  that,  “[a]  valid  teaching 

credential  issued  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  the  Commission  for  Teacher  Preparation 
and  Licensing,  based  on  a  bachelor’s  degree,  student  teaching,  and  special  fitness  to  perform, 
shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for  assignment  as  a  teacher  in  the  following  assignments, 
provided  that  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  to  a  position  for  which  qualifications  are  prescribed 
by  this  section  shall  be  made  only  with  the  consent  of  the  teacher:...  (f)  Alternative 
schools....” 

28. 

The  District  established  that  Ms.  Hoover  has  special  fitness  to  perform  the 

independent  study  position  in  the  Ulatis  Transitional  Program.  Respondents  failed  to 
establish  that  any  respondent  had  special  fitness  to  perform  the  position  currently  held  by 
Ms.  Hoover  in  order  to  bump  her  from  that  position.  Furthermore,  the  District  established 
that  the  transitional  independent  study  program  created  by  Ms.  Hoover  is  a  “particular  course 
or  course  of  study”  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955(d)(1).  The 
evidence  established  that  there  is  a  specific  need  for  an  employee  to  teach  this  course,  and 
that  Ms.  Hoover  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  particular  course 
or  course  of  study  that  is  not  possessed  by  more  senior  certificated  personnel. 

Bumping  Rights 

29. 

Respondent  Taryn  Carter  was  issued  a  layoff  notice  by  the  District.  She  is 

currently  employed  1.0  FTE  as  the  Testing  and  Assessment  Alignment  Coordinator  (“Testing 
Coordinator”)  for  Buckingham  Charter  School  and  has  served  in  that  position  since  its 
creation  on  Decembér  4,  2000.  The  Testing  Coordinator  position  is  not  being  reduced  or 
eliminated  by  the  District;  however,  due  to  her  level  of  seniority,  respondent  Carter  is  subject 
to  bumping  by  a  more  senior  certificated  employee  whose  position  is  being  reduced  or 
eliminated.  Although  the  job  description/posting  related  to  the  Testing  Coordinator  position 
specified  “certificated  personnel,”  the  evidence  did  not  establish  what,  if  any,  credential  was 
required  for  the  position.  The  most  senior  certificated  employees  noticed  for  layoff  are 
school  nurses,  Pam  McGoveny  (.8  FTE),  seniority  date  September  4,  1990,  and  Cynthia 
Wesp  (1.0  FTE),  seniority  date  September  11,  1991.  The  District  suggested  in  written 
closing  argument  that  respondents  be  given  final  notices  of  layoff  and  that  individual 
respondents  be  offered  rehire  into  the  Testing  Coordinator  position  by  seniority  with  the 
opportunity  to  decline  because  of  the  unique  duties  of  the  position.  However,  Education 
Code  section  44955(c)  requires  that  “[t]he  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which 
their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  In  this  case,  the  District  shall  be 
required  to  offer  the  Testing  Coordinator  position  to  respondent  McGoveny  for  .8  FTE  and  to 
respondent  Wesp  for  .2  FTE  and,  if  accepted,  they  shall  be  retained  to  perform  the  service  as 
set  forth  herein.  If  respondent  McGoveny  declines,  then  she  shall  be  laid  off  and  respondent 
Wesp  shall  be  offered  the  Testing  Coordinator  position  for  1.0  FTE.  If  respondent  Wesp 
declines,  she  shall  be  laid  off;  if  both  of  them  decline,  they  shall  be  laid  off,  and  the  District 
shall  be  entitled  to  offer  rehire  to  individual  respondents  into  the  Testing  Coordinator 
position  by  seniority. 

@ 

  

    
  

10

30.  |  Respondent  Anne  Silva,  seniority  date  August  26,  2002,  was  issued  a  layoff 

notice  by  the  District.  She  holds  a  MS  credential  and  is  assigned  to  .6  FTE  in  an  enrichment 
preparation  position  and  .2337  FTE  as  a  fourth  grade  teacher,  for  a  total  of  .8337  FTE.  She 
is  subject  to  layoff  in  her  .2337  FTE  fourth  grade  teaching  position  as  a  result  of  the 
District’s  reduction  in  Elementary  Education.  Her  .6  FTE  enrichment  preparation  position 
was  not  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District,  but  due  to  her  level  of  seniority,  respondent 
Silva  is  subject  to  bumping  by  a  more  senior  certificated  employee  whose  position  is  being 
reduced  or  eliminated.  Respondent  Margaret  Bernard,  seniority  date  August  28,  1997,  is  the 
most  senior  teacher  with  a  MS  credential  designated  for  layoff  due  to  the  reduction  in 
Elementary  Education.  She  is  entitled  to  bump  respondent  Silva  from  her  .6  FTE  enrichment 
preparation  position,  and  shall  be  retained  to  provide  that  service  for  the  2004-05  school  year 
(.6  FTE). 

31. 

Respondent  Robert  Minor,  seniority  date  August  28,  1997,  was  issued  a  layoff 

notice  by  the  District  as  a  result  of  the  District’s  reduction  in  Elementary  Education.  He 
holds  a  MS  credential  with  a  supplemental  authorization  in  English.  He  is  currently  assigned 
to  1.0  FTE  position  as  an  elementary  teacher  in  a  5/6  combination  class.  Respondent  Marcia 
Wynes  is  the  least  senior  7-8  English  teacher  in  the  District  (1.0  FTE).  She  holds  an 
Emergency  Single  Subject  English/Art  credential.  Respondent  Minor  is  entitled  to  bump 
respondent  Wynes  from  her  7-8  English  position,  and  shall  be  retained  to  provide  that  service 
for  the  2004-05  school  year  (1.0  FTE). 

.32.. 

Respondents  contend  that  they  should  be  permitted  to  bump  Andrew  Bower,  a 
less  senior  teacher  in  the  District’s  alternative  education  program.  The  District  contends  that 
teachers  serving  in  the  alternative  education  program  should  not  be  subject  to  bumping 
because  none  of  the  respondents  has  consented  to  an  assignment  to  the  alternative  education 
program. 

California  Teachers’  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of  Central  Union  High  School 
District  (1983)  141  Cal.App.3d  606  held  that  Education  Code  section  44865  requires  teacher 
consent  for  certain  assignments  outside  the  initial  authority  of  the  credential,  but  does  not 
require  consent  for  those  assignments  by  teachers  whose  credentials  already  contain 
authority  for  such  assignments.  “The  purpose  of  section  44865  is  similar  to  the  other 
enumerated  sections  in  that  it  is  designed  to  expand  rather  than  restrict  the  authority  of  the 
school  board  to  place  willing  individuals  in  job  assignments  outside  the  scope  of  their 
respective  credentials.”  (emphasis  in  original)  (141  Cal.App.3d  at  page  615).  The  consent 
requirement  adds  a  layer  of  protection  for  the  teacher;  the  court  noted  that,  “[t]here  is  good 
reason  for  the  requirement  of  consent  if  a  teacher  is  assigned  outside  the  scope  of  his  or  her 
expertise.  Evaluation  is  made  on  the  basis  of  performance  of  the  assigned  task.  A  teacher 
may  be  unwilling  to  risk  a  critical  evaluation  while  teaching  outside  the  ambit  of  his  or  her 
credential.”  (141  Cal.App.3d  at  page  612).  Thus,  Education  Code  section  44865  acts  as  a 
shield  to  protect  a  teacher  whose  credentials  do  not  contain  authority  for  an  assignment  from 
involuntary  placement  in  such  an  assignment.  The  question  remains  whether,  and  under 
what  circumstances,  it  can  become  a  sword  to  allow  a  teacher  to  serve  in  a  position  outside 
the  initial  authority  of  his  or  her  credential.  The  statute  requires  teacher  consent  to  the 

11

assignment,  plus  a  valid  teaching  credential based  on  (1)  a  bachelor’s  degree,  (2)  student 
teaching  and  (3)  special  fitness  to  perform. 

@ 

33. 

|  Andrew  Bower,  seniority  date  September  19,  2000,  holds a  single  subject 

social  science  credential  and  teaches  high  school  alternative  education.  He  did  not  receive  a 
layoff  notice  from  the  District  and  will  be  retained  for  the  2004-04  school  year.  The  exact 
nature  of  his  teaching  assignment  was  not  established  by  the  evidence.  He  has  experience  in 
the  alternative  education  program  with  the  District  and  has  worked  with  homeless  students 
and  other  troubled  students  through  the  probation  department.  It  was  not  established  that  any 
special  qualifications  are  needed  to  teach  high  school  alternative  education.  Thus,  a 
respondent  with  greater  seniority  than  Mr.  Bower  who  holds  a  valid  teaching  credential  and 
consents  to  the  assignment  would  be  entitled  to  “bump”  Mr.  Bower  from  his  position.  The 
two  most  senior  credentialed  teachers  noticed  for  layoff  are  Sue  MacDonald  (.6  FTE), 
seniority  date  August  28,  1996,  and  Christine  Thomas  (1.0  FTE),  seniority  date  August  26, 
1997.  Both  hold  single  subject  music  credentials.  Neither  testified  at  the  administrative 
hearing,  and  neither  had  consented  to  an  assignment  in  the  alternative  education  program  as 
of  the  date  of  hearing. 

_ 

The  District  shall  be  required  to  offer  the  high  school  alternative  education  position  to 

respondent  MacDonald  for  .6  FTE  and  to  respondent  Thomas  for  .4  FTE  and,  if  accepted, 
they  shall  be  retained  to  perform  the  service  as  set  forth  herein.  If  respondent  MacDonald 
declines,  then  she  shall  be  laid  off  and  respondent  Thomas  shall  be  offered  the  high  school 
alternative  education  position  for  1.0  FTE.  If  respondent  Thomas  declines,  she  shall  be  laid 
off;  if  both  of  them  decline,  they  shall  be  laid  off,  and  the  District  shall  be  entitled  to  offer 
rehire  to  individual  respondents  into  the  high  school  alternative  education  position  by 
seniority. 

34. 

Susan  Lloyd,  seniority  date  December  16,  1997,  holds  a  MS  credential.  She  is 

assigned  to  1.0  FTE  4/5/6  Structured  English  Immersion  class:  She  believes  she  has  special 
qualifications  to  serve  in  this  classroom  because  she  is  fluent  in  Spanish.  However,  any 
teacher  with  a  MS  credential  can  be  assigned  to  teach  in  a  Structured  English  Immersion 
class.  She  did  not  establish  any  basis  to  require  the  District  to  retain  her  for  the  2004-05 
school  year. 

Other  Matters 

35. 

Except  as  noted  above,  no  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is 
retained  to  perform  services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

36. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather 
a  proper  exercise  of  discretion  of  the  District  Superintendent  and  Governing  Board. 

  

  
  

12

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  20-23,  the  District  may  retain  the  services  of 

certificated  employees  in  the  2004-05  school  year  regardless  of  seniority  who  possess  - 
BCLAD  credential  or  authorizations. 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  24-25,  the  District  shall  retain  the  services  of  Norma 

Guerrero,  a  certificated  employee  currently  in  training  for  BCLAD  credential  or 
authorization  as  of  March  1,  2004,  and  the  accusation  with  regard  to  Norma  Guerrero is 
dismissed. 

4. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  26-28,  the  District  may  retain  the  services  of  Susan 

Hoover,  an  independent  study  teacher  in  the  Ulatis  Transitional  Program  at  the  Ulatis 

.  Alternative  Education  Center. 

5. 

By reason  of  the  facts  set  forth  in  Finding  30,  Margaret  Bernard  shall  be 

retained  in  .6  FTE.and  shall  be  laid  off  .4  FTE,  as  a  result  of  her  right  to  bump  into  a  position 
held  by  a  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
perform. 

6. 

By  reason  of  the  facts  set  forth  in  Finding  31,  the  accusation  with  regard  to 

Robert  Minor  is  dismissed,  as  a  result  of  his  right  to  bump  into  a  position  held  by  a 
certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  that  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

7. 

As  a  result  of  the  facts  set  forth  in  Finding  29,  the  District  shall  be  required  to 
retain  respondent(s)  occupying  1.0  FTE  Testing  Coordinator  position.  The  District  shall  be 
required  to  offer  the  Testing  Coordinator  position  to  respondent  Pam  McGoveny  for  .8  FTE 
and  to  Cynthia  Wesp  for  .2  FTE  and,  if  accepted,  they  shall  be  retained  to  perform  the 
service  as  set  forth  herein.  If  Pam  McGoveny  declines,  then  she  shall  be  laid  off  and  Cynthia 
Wesp  shall  be  offered  the  Testing  Coordinator  position  for  1.0  FTE.  If  Cynthia  Wesp 
declines,  she  shall  be  laid  off;  if  both  of  them  decline,  they  shall  be  laid  off,  and  the  District 
shall  be  entitled  to  offer  rehire  to  individual  respondents  into  the  Testing  Coordinator 
position  by  seniority. 

- 

8. 

As  a  result  of  the  facts  set forth  in  Findings  32  and  33,  the  District  shall  be 

-  required  to  retain  respondents  occupying  1.0  FTE  high  school  alternative  education  position. 
The  District  shall  be  required  to  offer  the  high  school  alternative  education  position  to  Sue 
MacDonald  for  .6  FTE  and  to  Christine  Thomas  for  .4  FTE  and,  if  accepted,  they  shall  be 
retained  to  perform  the  service  as  set  forth  herein.  If  Sue  MacDonald  declines,  then  she  shall 
be  laid  off  and  Christine  Thomas  shall  be  offered  the  high  school  alternative  education 
position  for  1.0  FTE.  If  Christine  Thomas  declines,  she  shall  be  laid  off;  if  both  of  them 

13

decline,  they  shall  be  laid  off,  and  the  District  shall  be  entitled  to  offer  rehire  to  individual 
respondents  into  the  high  school  alternative  education  position  by  seniority. 

@ 

9. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Vacaville 

Unified  Schoo!  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 

ORDER 

1. 

The  accusations  against  Norma  Guerrero  and  Robert  Minor  are  dismissed 

pursuant  to  Legal  Conclusions  3  and  6.  They  shall  be  retained  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

The  District  shall  comply  with  Legal  Conclusions  5,  7  and  8. 

Except  as  noted  above,  notices  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services 

will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

3. 

DATED: 

5-b  -o4 

  

  

Catwum  Bind 

CATHERINE  B.  FRINK 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  
  

14

  

ATTACHMENT  A 

VACAVILLE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESPONDENTS  TO  HEARING 

Ronald  Nikaido  (temporary) 
Yana  Silvia  (temporary) 

— 

Jennifer  Allard 
Kimberly  Belk 
Margaret  Bernard 
Mary  Burrell 
Taryn  Carter 
Lisa  Colombani 
Victoria  DeLaFuente 
Janet  Fafard 
Ann  Fincke 
Norma  Guerrero 
Denice  Haddox  | 
Andrew  Herout 
Douglas  Jaynes 
Susan  Lloyd 
Susan  MacDonald 
Dawn  Marsh 
Glenda  Mazzuca  (withdrew) 
Pamela  McGoverny 
Stephen  Millington  (Prob-0) 
Robert  Minor 
Kathryn  Morrell 
Danielle  Scheper 
Darian  Schwieger 
Ann  Silva 
Ivan  Simmons 
Christine  Thomas 
Cynthia  Wesp 
Marcia  Wynes  (Prob-0) 

15

