BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
HAYWARD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  ALAMEDA,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004020397 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Certificated  Reduction 
in  Force,  Hayward  Unified  School  District; 

Certain  Certificated  Employees, 
(listed  on  Appendix  A,  attached) 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Michael  C.  Cohn,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 
California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Hayward,  California  on  April  28  and  29, 
2004. 

Karen  M.  Rezendes  and  Cynthia  A.  Schwerin,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith,  2000 

Crow  Canyon  Place,  Suite  200,  San  Ramon,  California  94583,  represented  the  Hayward 
Unified  School  District. 

Dale  Brodsky  and  Mandy  G.  Leigh,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Beeson,  Tayer  &  Bodine,  1404 
Franklin  Street,  Fifth  Floor,  Oakland,  California  94612,  represented  those  respondents  listed 
on  Appendix  A  in  bold  italics. 

Except  for  Andrew  Kevy,  who  was  present  and  represented  himself  at  the  hearing  on 

April  28,  no  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  any  of  the  remaining  respondents. 

After  the  hearing,  all  exhibits  not  previously  admitted  were  received  in  evidence  by 

agreement  of  the  parties.  The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  February  25,  2004,  the  governing  board  of  the  Hayward  Unified  School 

District  adopted  Resolution  No.  0304-21,  in  which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  specified  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  and 
directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  notice  to  certificated  employees  that  their 
services  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year.  A  subsequent 
amendment  added  more  positions  to  the  list.  As  amended,  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  following  services:

SERVICE 

A. 

Administration 

FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENT 
POSITION/FTE 

@ 

B. 

Instructional 

Director  —  Elementary  Education 
Elementary  Principal 
Elementary  Vice  Principals 
Vice  Principal  on  Special  Assignment 
Principals  on  Special  Assignment 
C.W.A.  Supervisors 
Coordinator  —  Latchkey 
Manager  —  Y.E.P. 

Total: 

Elementary 
K-3  Classroom  Teachers 
1-6  Preparation  Teachers/7-8  Project  School 
K-8  Classroom  Teachers 
5-6  Music 
Latchkey  Teachers 

Secondary 

Math 
English 

Special  Education 

RSP  Teachers 
SDC  Teachers  (LH) 
SDC  Teachers  (HI) 

C. 

Teachers  on  Special  Assignment 
  

Program  Resource  Teachers  (PRT’s) 
Special  Education  Inclusion  Specialist 
Bilingual  Education 
District  Librarian 
TUPE  &  Drug-Free  Program  Coordinator 
P.A.R.  Teachers 
Bilingual  Resource  Teachers 
Language  Resource  Teacher 

D. 

Student  Services 

Counselors 
Nurses 

Total: 

Total: 

Total: 

1.0 
1.0 
2.0 
5 
2.0 
2.0 
1.0 
_1.0 
10.5 

142.0 
62.0 
2.0 
1.5 
14.5 

6.5 
6.5 

2.0 
1.0 
3.0 
241.0 

16.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
3.0 
3.0 
_1.0 
27.0 

7.2 
3.75 
10.95 

  

GRAND  TOTAL:  289.45

  
  
  

2. 

Before  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  board  deleted  from  the  service  reduction  list 

the  categories  of  K-3  Classroom  Teachers,  1-6  Preparation  Teachers/7-8  Project  School, 
Latchkey  Teachers,  and  Nurses.  Those  categories  totaled  222.25  FTE,  reducing  the  number 
of  positions  still  subject  to  reduction  in  this  proceeding  to  67.2. 

3. 

The  superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  that  it  had  been 

recommended  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year.  Respondents  are  all  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing 
and  notices  of  defense.  The  parties  stipulated  that  all  jurisdictional  requirements  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  have  been  met. 

4. 

Respondents  have  challenged  a  number  of  the  PKS  reductions,  arguing  either 

that  they  are  mandated  by  law  and  cannot  be  eliminated,  or  that  the  planned  reductions  in 
those  services  will  preclude  the  district  from  being  able  to  comply  with  state  or  federal 
mandates. 

The  2.0  FTE  reduction  of  CWA  (Child  Welfare  and  Attendance)  Supervisors 
and  the  3.0  FTE  reduction  of  PAR  (Peer  Assistance  and  Review)  Teachers  will  result  in  the 
elimination  of  those  services  in  their  current  forms.  Respondents  contend  that  both  are 
mandated  by  law  and  cannot,  therefore,  legally  be  eliminated.  Education  Code  section  48240 
states  that  the  board  of  a  school  district  “shall  appoint  a  supervisor  of  attendance  and  such 
assistant  supervisors  of  attendance  as  may  be  necessary  to  supervise  the  attendance  of  pupils 
in  the  district.”  However,  section  48244  provides  that  a  district  may  provide  this  service 
through  a  contract  with  the  county  office  of  education.  A  district  is  not,  therefore,  mandated 
to  employ  its  own  supervisors  of  attendance.  Nor  is  a  district  mandated  to  create  and  operate 
a  PAR  program.  Education  Code  section  44500  is  permissive,  providing  only  that  a  district 
“may  develop  and  implement”  such  a  program.  The  district  intends  to  continue  providing 
the  kinds  of  support  services  now  provider  under  PAR  through  the  BTSA  (Beginning 
Teacher  Support  and  Assessment)  program. 

In  February  2004,  the  California  Department  of  Education  completed  a 

Coordinated  Compliance  Review  in  which  the  district  was  found  to  have  10  out-of- 
compliance  items  in  its  English  Learners  program.  And  a  February  2004  evaluation  of  the 
district’s  special  education  programs  by  School  Services  of  California  found  a  number  of 
problems  with  the  district’s  maintaining  compliant  special  education  services.  Respondents 
contend  that  the  planned  service  reductions  in  the  special  education  and  bilingual  program 
areas  will  only  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  district  to  provide  mandated  services.  That  may 
or  may  not  be  the  case.  But  it  does  not  show  that  services  will  fall  below  any  mandated 
levels.  The  district  intends  to  meet  all  such  service  levels  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

5. 

As  indicated  above,  the  number  of  positions  subject  to  reduction  in  this 

proceeding  is  67.2  FTE.  Yet  83  individuals  remain  as  respondents.  Respondents  maintain 
that  this  ““over-noticing”  is  an  abuse  of  discretion.  No  abuse  was  shown.  In  some  instances, 
individuals  to  be  laid  off  share  a  seniority  date  with  other  employees  who,  by  virtue  of  the 
In  other  instances,  more  than  one
application  of  tie-breaking  criteria,  will  not  be  laid  off. 

  

  

employee  may  have  been  noticed  for  a  single  reduction  because  of  the  uncertainties  of 
bumping  rights.  These  are  valid  reasons  for  over-noticing  respondents.  The  district  is 
prepared  to  rescind  the  notices  sent  to  all  respondents  who  will  not,  in  fact,  be  subject  to 
layoff  in  this  proceeding. 

6. 

The  district  created  a  bumping  chart  as  a  tool  for  determining  which 

certificated  employees  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  various  service  reductions.  The 
number  of  employees  shown  on  the  chart  as  being  subject  to  layoff  is  less  than  the  number  of 
service  reductions  because  the  district  took  into  account  certain  positively  assured  attrition. 
In  particular,  the  district  considered  the  retirements  or  resignations  of  certificated  employees 
serving  in  the  targeted  PKS  areas.  Each  such  retirement  or  resignation  was  deemed  to  create 
a  vacancy,  which  meant  that  fewer  respondents  needed  to  be  terminated.  Respondents 
stipulated  that  the  district  had  properly  computed  the  number  of  retirements  and  resignations. 

In  addition  to  the  retirements  and  resignations,  13  probationary  employees 

were  non-reelected.  Michael  Janvier,  the  district’s  director  of  certificated  personnel,  testified 
that  these  non-reelections  would  have  been  considered  as  attrition  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
retirements  and  resignations  but  for  the  fact  that  a  grievance  had  been  filed  against  the 
district  concerning  non-reelections.  The  district  takes  the  position  that  until  the  grievance  is 
resolved,  it  cannot  be  assured  that  the  non-reelections  will  create  vacant  positions.  The 
grievance,  filed  by  six  of  the  13  non-reelected  employees,  alleges  that  “[t]he  District  violated 
the  contract  by  discriminating  against  the  grievants  and  releasing  them  through  the  non- 
reelect  process.”  The  district  views  this  as  a  challenge  to  the  non-reelection  process  itself, 
and  therefore  maintains  that  all  non-reelections  remain  uncertain  until  the  grievance  is 
resolved.  However,  the  evidence  showed  that  the  grievance  is  based  upon  alleged 
discrimination  against  the  named  grievants  only  and  is  not  a  challenge  to  the  non-reelection 
process  itself  or  to  the  non-reelection  of  the  non-grievants.  Therefore,  the  non-reelection  of 
the  remaining  seven  probationary  employees  created  attrition  that  was  as  positively  assured 
as  that  created  by  the  retirements  and  resignations.  To  the  extent  those  seven  non-reelected 
employees  serve  in  positions  in  which  respondents  are  entitled  to  serve,  the  number  of 
respondents  who  may  be  terminated  in  this  proceeding  must  be  reduced. 

7. 

Janvier  testified  that  the  6.5  FTE  reductions  in  both  math  and  English  at  the 

secondary  level  are  due  to  the  elimination  of  the  9th  grade  class  size  reduction  program. 
Under  that  program,  classes  are  limited  to  a  maximum  of  20  students.  With  the  elimination 
of  the  program,  class  sizes  can  increase  to  the  collective  bargaining  contract  maximum  of  29 
students.  Respondents  assert  that  enrollment  figures  demonstrate  that  far  fewer  than  6.5  FTE 
reductions  in  each  math  and  English  will  be  necessary  to  implement  this  change.  During  the 
current  school  year,  there  are  a  total  of  1662  9th  graders  at  the  district’s  three  comprehensive 
high  schools.  Ata  student:teacher  ratio  of  20:1,  slightly  more  than  83  sections  of  math  and 
English  must  be  staffed.  Since  a  full-time  teacher  has  six  sections  per  day,  this  equates  to 
13.85  FTE  in  each  discipline.  If  enrollment  were  to  remain  static  (and  evidence  shows  it  is 
actually  likely  to  increase  because  there  are  more  8th  graders  than  9th  graders),  staffing 
classrooms  at  a  29:1  ratio  would  require  about  57  sections,  or  9.55  FTE,  in  each  discipline. 
This  is  4.3  FTE  less  than  the  current  year.  Other  figures  presented  by  respondents  show  that 

 

the  district  had  only  73  sections  of  9th  grade  English  and  81  sections  of  9th  grade  math 
during  the  current  school  year.  (The  reason  why  there  were  fewer  sections  than  the 
enrollment  would  seem  to  require  was  not  established.)  Using  these  figures,  respondents 
maintain  that  the  service  reduction  required  to  increase  class  sizes  to  29  students  would 
actually  be  only  2.6  FTE  in  English  and  3.95  in  math.  Whichever  set  of  figures  is  used, 
respondents  argue  that  the  district  has  abused  its  discretion  by  cutting  math  and  English  more 
than  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  elimination  of  the  class  size  reduction  program.  The 
district,  citing  San  Jose  v.  Allen’,  argues  that  in  a  PKS  reduction,  a  service  cut  need  not  be 
related  to  any  statistical  computation.  Rather,  “[t]he  number  of  terminations  made  necessary 
by  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the  district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services  to 
reduce.” 

The  proposition  stated  by  the  district  is  generally  true:  PKS  reductions  need 

not  be  related  to  any  statistical  computation  related  to  enrollment  figures.  But  where  a 
district  explicitly  states  that  the  basis  for  a  particular  cut  is  related  to  student  population 
numbers,  then  the  reduction  it  proposes  should  be  justified  by a  statistical  computation. 
Here,  the  computation  used  by  the  district  shows  projected  9th  grade  enrollment  of  1,361  in 
English  and  1,314  in  math.  The  district  computation  then  shows  that  12.74  “additional 
classrooms/teachers”  are  needed  to  operate  the  class  size  reduction  program.  It  was 
apparently  this  figure  that  resulted  in  the  proposed  reductions  of  6.5  FTE  in  each  program. 
But  no  calculations  were  provided  to  show  how  this  number  was  reached.  Dividing  these 
lower  enrollment  figures  by  29  would  result  in  a  reduction  in  math  of  6.3  FTE,  but  a 
reduction  in  English  of  only  4.5. 

It  is  true  that  the  enrollment  figures  and  calculation  methods  used  by 

respondents  produce  a  lower  needed  service  reduction  than  those  used  by  the  district.  It  is 
also  true  that  even  using  the  district’s  figures,  the  proposed  English  reduction  is  overstated 
by  2.0  FTE.  But  considering  the  impossibility  of  determining  the  most  accurate  calculation 
method  and  the  relatively  small  difference  produced,  it  cannot  be  found  that  the  district 
abused  its  discretion  in  reducing  math  and  English  by  6.5  FTE  each.  The  board  would  be 
well-advised,  however,  to  carefully  examine  the  district’s  calculations  before  finally 
determining  how  large  a  service  reduction  to  make.. 

8. 

The  district’s  bumping  chart  shows  that  respondent  Anthony  Delsener  is  being 

bumped  from  his  1.0  FTE  position  by  senior  employee  Sharon  Friedman.  However, 
Friedman  only  occupies  a  0.5  FTE  position  and  is  on  leave  for  0.5  FTE.  The  district 
stipulated  that  Delsener  is  therefore  subject  to  layoff  only  for  half  of  his  full-time  position. 

9. 

Respondent  Andrew  Kevy  has  served  as  a  CWA  supervisor  with  the  district 

since  1994.  He  was  originally  hired  in  a  temporary  position,  and  then  into  an  administrative 

  

(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627. 

' 

2 

Id.,  at  p.  635.

position  in  1995.  He  is  classified  on  the  seniority  list  as  a  permanent  management  employee. 
He  has  not  been  given a  seniority  date.  Kevy  seeks  a  seniority  date  of  February  28,  1994. 

Although  he  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential  that  would  allow  him 

to  work  as  a  school  counselor,  Kevy  has  never  been  assigned  to  a  school  site.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44956.5,  for  employees  initially  hired  as  administrators  the  time 
spent  in  an  administrative  position  is  not  included  for  determining  seniority  for  purposes  of 
layoff,  except  that  three  years’  seniority  credit  may  be  earned  while  serving  as  a  school  site 
administrator.  Because  Kevy  was  initially  hired  as  an  administrator  and  has  never  served  at  a 
school  site,  he  is  not  entitled  to  the  seniority  date  he  seeks. 

10. 

The  district  has  classified  certificated  employees  who  are  not  fully 

credentialed,  i.e.,  those  serving  under  emergency  permits  or  provisional  or  intern  or  pre- 
intern  credentials,  as  “Prob  0”  employees.  Prob  0  employees  are  not  included  on  the 
district’s  seniority  list.  A  separate  Prob 0 list  is  maintained,  ranking  those  employees  in 
order  of  their  hire  date.  Regardless  of  their  years  of  service,  Prob  0  employees  are 
considered  junior  to  all  fully-credentialed  employees. 

11. 

|  Respondent  Jose  Cantu  is  a  Prob  0  employee  with  a  hire  date  of  January  29, 
2001.  Cantu  teaches  bilingual  history  classes  at  the  English  Language  Center.  His  students 
are  all  recently-arrived  immigrants  and  his  classes  are  taught  in  Spanish.  Cantu  does  not 
have  any  clear  credentials.  He  holds  an  emergency  single  subject  credential  in  social 
science.  Cantu  is  currently  working  toward  completing  the  requirements  for  a  CLAD 
certificate.  He  expects  to  obtain  that  certificate  in  the  fall.  Until  he  receives  it,  he  is 
ineligible  to  take  the  tests  for  a  BCLAD  certificate,  which  authorizes  the  teaching  of 
bilingual  classes. 

According  to  the  bumping  chart,  Melanie  Morsy,  a  counselor  whose  position 

is  being  eliminated,  is  bumping  Cantu.  In  addition  to  a  counseling  internship  credential, 
Morsy  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  social  science  and  a  temporary  CLAD  certificate. 
Cantu  contends  Morsy  is  not  competent  to  bump  into  his  bilingual  teaching  position,  and  that 
he  must  therefore  be  retained. 

That  Morsy  is  shown  bumping  Cantu  on  the  bumping  chart  does  not 

necessarily  mean  that  she  will  be  serving  in  the  same  position  in  which  he  serves  for  the 
current  school  year.  Under  Education  Code  section  44955(c),  the  board  is  obligated  to  make 
assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render 
any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  Morsy  has a  full 
social  science  credential;  Cantu  has  only  an  emergency  credential.  Morsy  is  entitled  to  be 
retained  over  Cantu.  If  Morsy  is  unable  to  teach  the  bilingual  class  in  which  Cantu  now 
serves,  and  if  that  class  will  be  offered  next  year,  the  district  may  have  to  make 
reassignments  to  cover  it.  But  as  the  “least  senior”  remaining  social  science  teacher,  Cantu  is 
subject  to  being  bumped. 

  

     

12. 

Respondent  Evelyn  Kunkel  is  a  Prob  0  employee  who  teaches  fine  arts  at  Mt. 
Eden  High  School.  She  has  an  internship  credential  in  art  and  is  currently  finishing  the  final 
three  weeks  of  her  credential  program,  after  which  she  expects  to  receive  her  preliminary 
single  subject  credential.  According  to  the  bumping  chart,  Susan  Olsen,  a  senior  teacher 
whose  Program  Resource  Teacher  position  is  being  eliminated,  is  bumping  Kunkel.  Olsen 
holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  supplementary  authorization  for  art  in  grades  K-9. 
Because  Kunkel’s  current  assignment  is  to  teach  art  in  mixed  classes  that  include  9th 
thorough  12th  grade  students,  she  asserts  that  Olsen  is  not  credentialed  to  bump  her. 
However,  for  the  same  reasons  expressed  in  the  preceding  finding,  Kunkel  may  be  bumped 
by  Olsen. 

13. 

Respondent  Soledad  Padilla-Hernandez  is  a  Prob  0  employee.  She  has  been 

credited  with  a  hire  date  of  August  26,  2002.  Padilla~Hernandez  does  not  hold  any  clear 
credentials.  She  currently  holds  an  internship  credential  and  is  in  training  for  a  BCLAD 
certificate.  She  was  first  hired  by  the  district  in  October  1997  to  teach  a  bilingual 
kindergarten  class.  For  the  following  three  school  years,  she  taught  a  bilingual  fourth  grade 
class.  All  of  these  assignments  appear  to  have  been  under  emergency  permits.  In  the  2001- 
2002  school  year,  Padilla-Hernandez  initially  taught  as  a  long-term  substitute  under  a  30-day 
substitute  permit.  She  did  substitute  work  for  the  remainder  of  the  year,  during  which  she 
worked  fewer  than  75%  of  the  school  days.  She  also  received  a  stipend  of  some  sort  for 
extra  duty  services.  In  the  2002-2003  and  2003-2004  school  years,  Padilla~Hernandez  was 
again  hired  to  teach  bilingual  classes,  once  more  with  an  emergency  permit.  She  asserts  she 
has  never  had  a  break  in  service  with  the  district  since  1997  and  is  therefore  entitled  to  be 
credited  with  a  hire  date  in  October  1997. 

The  evidence  shows  Padilla-Hernandez  did  have  a  break  in  service  when  she 
worked  as  a  substitute  for  fewer  than  75%  of  the  school  days  in  the  2001-2002  school  year. 
She  is  not  entitled  to  a  hire  date  any  earlier  than  August  26,  2002. 

14. 

All  contentions  made  by  respondents  not  specifically  addressed  above  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  67.2  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  set  forth  below,  cause  further  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 
This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949. 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  6,  the  non-reelection  of  seven  probationary  employees 
shall  be  considered  as  positively  assured  attrition  used  to  reduce  the  number  of  respondents 
who  may  be  terminated  in  this  proceeding  to  the  extent  those  non-reelected  employees  serve 
in  positions  in  which  respondents  are  entitled  to  serve.

  

3. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  8,  respondent  Anthony  Delsener  is  subject  to  layoff 

@ 

only  for  a  0.5  FTE  position. 

4. 

The  district  shall  rescind  the  layoff  notices  sent  to  all  respondents  who  will 

not,  in  fact,  be  subject  to  layoff  in  this  proceeding. 

ORDER 

Except  as  limited  by  Legal  Conclusions  2,  3,  and  4,  notice  may  be  given  respondents 

that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

  

  

MICHAEL  C.  COHN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

   

APPENDIX  A 

List  of  Respondents 

LAST  NAME 
ASHLEY 
BACH 
BLACKSHIRE 
BOLLWEG-CLEARY 
BOROVSKY 
CADILE 
CANIZALES 
CANTU 
CASTILLO 

 
>

 D
H
D
W
R
A
W
A
N
O
A

 
P
H

.  CATO 
.  CHALA-KUBITZ 
.  CHANG 
.  CHENAULT 
.  CHOVNICK 
.  CLARK 
.  CROOM 
.  CROSBY- YOUNG 
.  DAILEY 
.  DAILEY 
.  DELSENER 
.DO 
.  ESCOBEDO 
.  FORMAN 
.  FREYRE 
.  GILMETE 
.  GONSALVES 
.  GRIZZLE 
.  HAVEN 
.  HAYES 
.  HODGES 
.  JENSEN 
.  JOHNSTON 
.  KANG 
.  KELLOGG 
.  KEVY 
KIM 
KUDENOV 

36. 
37. 

FIRST  NAME 
JANET 
KATHRYN 
SUBERIA 
STEPHANIE 
DAVID 
LINDSAY 
CLAUDIA 
JOSE 
JESSICA 
KEVIN 
ADELFA 
KELLY 
ADRIANA 
AMY 
MATHEW 
KAHLELAH 
YVONNE 
ELIZABETH 
MATTHEW 
ANTHONY 
FLORENCE 
ROSA 
MICHAEL 
TRACEY 
ADRIANA 
PAUL 
DAVID 
RYAN 
ANDREA 
PATRICIA 
JENNESIS 
KRISTINE 
TOMMY 
COURTNEY 
ANDREW 
SANDRA 
AMY

  

KUNKEL 
LACEBAL-VALDEZ 
LAI 
LEISER-WILLIAMS 
LONG 
LOPEZ 
MACIAS 
MAGALLON 
MAGINNIS 
MARCONI 
MARES 
MARTIN 
MATTEIS 
MC  NEIL 
MITCHELL 
MORENO 
MUNKELT 
O'BRIEN 
OLSON 
PABLEY 
PADILLA-HERNANDEZ 
PATRICK 
PATTERSON 
PERDUE 
PINEDA 
PLAGMAN 
POINTER-DEWHIRST 
RAMIREZ 
REYES-RIVERA 
RILEY 
RODRIGUEZ 
ROSE 
SHARUFA 
SICKLER 
SKIBBINS 
SMITH 
SPARLING 
SUHOVA 
TOFANELLI 
TRAN-RAZZARI 
VALDEZ 

38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 

EVELYN 
MARIA 
PAUL 
CARRIE 
GIA 
LOURDES 
ARSELIA 
ELIZABETH 
SHELLEY 
JOHN 
MICHAEL 
TERESA 
LAUREN 
DAMION 
TRACI 
FRANK 
JENNIFER 
AARON 
PETER 
HARRY 
SOLEDAD 
PHILIP 
IRMA 
WILLIAM 
HILARY 
CHANTEL 
MICHELE 
BELINDA 
MARIA  ELENA 
CHRISTIAN 
SONIA 
LORETTA 
SHERRY 
JUDSON 
HEATHER 
TERRY 
JULIE 
TATYANA 
CHRISTOPHER 
NHUNG 
YVONNE 
DIANA 

VAZQUEZ   

   

@ 

80.  VON  ESCH 
81.  WEST 
82.  WOODS 
83.  YACOUB 

KERRY 
CASEY 
ROBERT 
SABRINA 

 

