BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
ACTON-AGUA  DULCE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  LOS  ANGELES 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Case  No.  L2004030537 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

_) 
) 
JEANNE  HUNEYCUTT,  LOIS  HUPP,  _  ) 
) 
SUZAN  L.  KENT,  MARGARET 
MARRONE,  JOAN  MILLAR, 
) 
VIRGINIA  WEDDING,  JEAN  WRIGHT,  ) 
) 
and  ROBERT  FERGUSON, 
) 
) 
) 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  30,  2004,  in  Lancaster,  California. 

Peter  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Linda  Wagner,  Chief  Administrative 

Officer,  Acton-Agua  Dulce  Unified  School  District  (“District”). 

Richard  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents. 

The  parties  presented  oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  oral  stipulation 

on  the  record,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 
capacity. 

Chief  Administrative  Officer  Wagner  filed 

the  Accusation  in 

her 

official 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

In  March  2004,  Wagner,  as  acting  superintendent  of  the  District,  recommended 
to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (“Board”)  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

4, 

The  Board  adopted  Resolution  Number  03-04.11  on  March  11,  2004,  approving 

Wagner’s  recommendation.

5. 

On  March  12  and  15,  2004,  the  District  gave  each  Respondent  written  notice  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  them  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

7. 

The  District  filed  and  served  an  Accusation  on  each  Respondent. 

8. 

9. 

Respondents  filed  timely  Notices  of  Defense. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

10. 

‘In  adopting  Resolution  Number  03-04.11,  the  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the 

following  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year: 

Service 

Full  Time  Equivalent  Positions 

  

K-6  Instruction 
Assistant  Principal  Position 
Counselor  Position 

Total 

, 

5.0 
1.0 
10 

7.0 

11. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  10  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955’. 

12. 

The  District  has  suffered  declining  enrollment  and  the  resulting  decline  in  State 
revenue  over  the  past  four  years.  In  order  to  meet  its  obligations  to  the  District  and  its  pupils  in 
light  of  the  declining  revenue,  the  Board  directed  the  net  closure  of  five  elementary  classrooms 
and  the  elimination  of  two  positions  at  the  middle  and  high  school.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

13. 

The  reduction  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils, 
and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  by  7  FTE 
positions  as  determined  by  the  Board  and  its  designees. 

  

All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.  

14. 

The  District  seeks  to  exempt  from  layoff,  or  “skip”  in  the  seniority  order,  certain 
employees  certificated  to  teach  at  the  elementary  school  level  because  they  possess  special 
training,  experience,  or  credentials.  The  following  teachers  hold  Crosscultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development  (“CLAD”)  certificates:  Albus,  Heidi  (who  has  a  seniority  date  of 
October  31,  2003);  Van  Ornum,  Michelle  (August  28,  2003);  Rosenberg,  Aline  M  (May  7, 
2001);  Bakoo,  Christina  (July  29,  2000);  Gunnip,  Stacy  (May  4,  2000);  Zankich,  Stephanie 
(April  28,  1999).  Albus  is  also  certificated  to  teach  special  education.  Van  Ornum  is  also 
certificated  to  teach  math. 

15. 

Retention  of  teachers  with  CLAD  certificates  is  important  to  the  District  as 
these  certificates,  or  waivers  from  them  (“SB395  waivers”),  are  needed  to  teach  English 
language  learners  (“English  learners”)  in  accordance  with  State  law.  Wagner  is  concerned, 
based  on  communications  from  State  officials,  that  the  District  may  not  be  in  compliance 
with  mandates  pertaining  to  the  teaching  of  English  learners. 

16. 

In  January  2004,  the  District  sent  all  certificated  employees  a  letter  requesting 
verification  of  credential  and  seniority  information  by  February  15,  2004.  It  did  not  inform 
them  that  CLAD  certificates  or  their  equivalent  would  have  to  be  obtained  by  the  deadline.  It 
did  not  inform  teachers  that  CLAD  certification  would  be  a  criteria  in  the  District’s  layoff 
determination. 

17. 

Also  in  January  2004,  the  District  started  providing  or  facilitating  training  to 
its  employees  in  order  for  them  to  acquire  CLAD  or  SB395  certification.  Respondents 
Huneycutt,  Hupp,  Kent,  Marrone,  Millar,  Wedding,  and  Wright  participated  in  this  training 
and  all  had  completed  it  and  applied  for  certification  by  the  time  of  the  hearing. 

18. 

The  District  has  approximately  100  English  learners,  or  about  7  percent  of  the 
student  body.  During  the  2003-04  school  year,  the  overwhelming  majority  of  these  students 
received  instruction  from  CLAD-certificated  teachers.  This  matching  of  need  with  credentials 
is  likely  to  continue  in  the  2004-05  school  year  given  the  closure  of  one  elementary  school. 

19. 

The  District  does  not  know  the  enrollment  or  composition  of  its  2004-05 
student  body.  The  District  has  not  made  class  assignments  for  the  2004-05  school  year  and  it 
is  not  known  whether  those  it  seeks  to  retain  because  of  CLAD  certification  will  in  fact  teach 
English  learners. 

20. 

Respondents  Huneycutt,  Hupp,  Kent,  Marrone,  Millar,  Wedding,  and  Wright 
are  all  permanent  employees  who  hold  multiple  subject  credentials  that  allow  them  to  teach 
in  elementary  school  and  certain  self-contained  upper  grades.  They  have  the  following 
seniority  dates:  Huneycutt  (September  2,  1998);  Hupp  (August  25,  2000);  Kent  (August  27, 
1998);  Marrone  (December  1,  1997);  Millar  (September  21,  2001);  Wedding  (September  2, 

1999);  and  Wright  (August  26,  1997).  

21. 

Respondents  Huneycutt,  Hupp,  Kent,  Marrone,  Wedding,  and  Wright  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render  a  service,  elementary  school  instruction,  that  Rosenberg 
has  been  retained  to  render.  In  addition,  Respondents  Huneycutt,  Kent,  Marrone,  Wedding, 
and  Wright  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  a  service,  elementary  school  instruction, 
that  Bakoo  and  Gunnip  have  been  retained  to  render.  In  addition,  Respondents  Huneycutt, 
Kent,  Marrone,  and  Wright  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  a  service,  elementary 
school  instruction,  that  Zankich  has  been  retained  to  render. 

22. 

The  District  presently  has  two  counselors,  one  at  Vasquez  High  School  and  one 
at  High  Desert  Middle  School.  It  plans  to  have  the  remaining  counselor  provide  all  the 
counseling  services  to  students  at  both  locations.  Respondent  Ferguson  is  the  junior  of  the  two 
counselors,  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  20,  2001.  He  holds  a  clear  school  counselor 
credential,  which  authorizes  him  to  provide  counseling. 

23. 

The  District  did  not  retain  any  junior  employee  to  perform  a  service  Respondents 

Ferguson  and  Millar  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  9. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  10  are  each  determined  to  be  a 
particular  kind  of  service  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  10  and  11. 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  by  7 
FTE  positions  due  to  the  reduction  of  the  services  described  in  factual  finding  number  10,  by 
reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  10,  11,  and  12. 

4, 

Cause  for  the  reduction  of  the  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  10 
relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949, 
by  reason  of  actual  finding  numbers  11  through  13,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  1  through  3 

5. 

Section  44955  directs  that  certificated  permanent  and  probationary  employees 
are  to  be  laid  off  by  seniority,  consistent  with  their  qualifications  and  status.  Thus,  subsection 
(c)  provides,  in  pertinent  part, 
“the  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
in  subsection  (b),  gives 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  The  statute, 
preference  to  permanent  employees:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of 
no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service

that 

which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  Districts  are  permitted 
to  disregard  seniority  in  two  specific  instances: 

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a 
services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services 
or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

For  purposes 

compliance 
(2) 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

of  maintaining 

achieving 

or 

with 

As.is  evident  from  the  plain  language  of  the  statute,  in  order  for  a  district  to  skip  a  more 
junior  employee  it  must  show  a  “specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course 
of  study”  and  a  that  the  junior  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  to  teach  “that 
course  of  study”  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  Thus,  specificity  is  required 
in  terms  of  the  District’s  need  and  in  the  intent  to  fill  the  need  with  the  junior  employee. 

In  this  case,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  it  had  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course.  While  a  small  percentage  of  the  student  population  requires  instruction 
from  teachers  who  hold  CLAD  certificates  or  their  equivalent,  the  district  has  several  senior 
CLAD-certificated  teachers  and  the  English  learner  students’  needs  appeared  to  have  been  met 
during  the  2003-04  school  year.  More  importantly,  however,  the  District  has  not  been  able  to 
show  that  the  retained  junior  teachers  will  be  needed  to  teach  specific  classes  with  English 
learners;  in  fact  it  does  not  yet  know  the  enrollment  or  the  likely  classroom  need.  Further,  the 
District  did  not  show  that  teacher  assignments  and  reassignments  will  be  insufficient  to  address 
the  needs  of  English  learner  students.  Its  generalized  desire  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  English 
learner  students  is  insufficient  to  meet  the  narrow  exception  in  subsection  (d)  to  the  seniority 
mandate  of  section  44955.  Accordingly,  the  District  has  not  established  that  the  teachers  set 
forth  in  factual  finding  number  14  may  properly  be  skipped  by  reason  of  CLAD  certification. 

6. 

Respondents  Huneycutt,  Hupp,  Kent,  Marrone,  Wedding,  and  Wright  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render  a  service,  elementary  school  instruction,  that  more  junior 
employees  were  retained  to  render,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  14  through  21. 

 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  with  respect  to  Respondents  Millar  and  Ferguson 
and  the  District  may  notify  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2004-05 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  with  respect  to  Respondents  Huneycutt,  Hupp, 
Kent,  Marrone,  Wedding,  and  Wright  and  the  District  may  not  terminate  their  services  for  the 
2004-05  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

  

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

