:  “.  . 

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
VALLEJO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

EIGHT  RESPONDENTS  IDENTIFIED 
BELOW 

OAH  No.  N  2004040135 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Robert  Walker,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

— 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Vallejo,  California,  on  April  23,  2004. 

Sandra  Woliver,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Neha  M.  Sampat,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 

the  complainant,  Clifford  Solari,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  the  Vallejo  City  Unified  School 
District. 

David  Weintraub,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  respondents,  Rocquel  Colbert, 

Michael  Duarte-Gomes,  Michele  Hawley-Pelton,  Dwayne  Jones,  Gena  Keck,  Elisabeth 
Mallia,  Marilu  Saldana,  and  Almatha  Suggs. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Clifford  Solari,  the  complainant,  wishes  to  make  a  record  of  the  fact  that  the 
school  district  has  rescinded  the  accusation  as  to  two  employees  who  are  not  respondents  in 
this  proceeding.  Those  employees  are  Retina  Bowen  and  Louise  Brown. 

2. 

Not  later  than  March  15,  2004,  in  accordance  with  sections  44949  and  44955 

of  the  Education  Code,'  the  superintendent  caused  the  governing  board  of  the  district  and 
respondents  to  be  notified  in  writing  that  it  was  recommended  that  respondents  be  notified 
that  the  district  would  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  notice 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  stated  reason  was  a  proposed  reduction  or 
discontinuation  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to 
respondents’  competency. 

  

!  All  references  to  the  Code  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified.

3. 

The  superintendent  proposed  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of 

services  by a  total  of  183.42  full  time  equivalent  positions  (FTE).  The  superintendent 
proposed  reducing  or  discontinuing  social  work  services  by  4  FTE  and  counselor  services 
by  14  FTE. 

© 

4. 

A  notice  was  delivered  to  each  respondent  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by 

depositing  the  notice  in  the  United  States  mail,  registered,  postage  prepaid,  and  addressed  to 
respondent’s  last  known  address. 

5. 

The  notice  advised  each  respondent  of  the  following:  He  or  she  had  a  right  to 

a  hearing.  In  order  to  obtain  a  hearing,  he  or  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in 
writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice.  The  request  had  to  be  delivered  by  March  22,  2004, 
which  was  not  less  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served.  And  the 
failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

6. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  accusation 
was  timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All 
prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

7. 

Within  the  meaning  of  section  44955  of  the  Code,  the  services  are  “particular 

kinds  of  services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  recommendation  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise 
of  discretion. 

© 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  to  the 

welfare  of  the  district  and  its  students.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  is  necessary  in  order 
to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

9. 

Seven  of  the  respondents  are  counselors,  and  the  district  plans  to  lay  off  all 

seven  of  them.  The  district  is  eliminating  its  counseling  program  for  the  middle  schools  and 
severely  reducing  it  in  the  high  schools.  Colleen  O’Neal  Anderson  also  is  a  counselor,  and 
she  has  less  seniority  than  the  seven  counselors  the  district  plans  to  lay  off.  The  district 
mistakenly  failed  to  notify  Ms.  Anderson  that  it  was  recommended  that  she  be  notified  that 
the  district  would  not  require  her  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Ms.  Anderson  holds 
a  teaching  credential,  and  the  district  intends  to  offer  her  a  teaching  position.  Respondents 
contend  that  there  is  no  teaching  position  available  in  Ms.  Anderson’s  field  and  that, 
therefore,  the  district  will,  ultimately,  have  to  retain  her  as  a  counselor.  Respondents  further 
contend  that  the  district  may  not  lay  them  off  while  retaining  Ms.  Anderson  as  a  counselor. 

10. 

Except  for  one  break  in  service,  Almatha  Suggs  has  worked  for  the  district  for 
19  years.  Because  of  her  break  in  service,  however,  for  seniority  purposes,  the  date  on  which 
she  first  rendered  paid  service  is  August  30,  2002.

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Code. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Within  the  terms  of  sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Code,  the  district  has 

cause  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  to  give  notices  to  respondents 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils. 

3. 

If  the  district  retains  Ms.  Anderson  as  a  counselor,  it  must  lower  —  by  one  — 
the  number  of  FTE  positions  in  counseling  that  it  eliminates.  And  it  must  retain  the  most 
senior  counselor  who,  were  it  not  for  the  district’s  failure  to  serve  a  notice  on  Ms.  Anderson, 
could  be  laid  off.  That  counselor  may  be  —  but  will  not  necessarily  be  —  one  of  the 
respondents. 

4. 

The  language  of  subdivision  (b)  of  section  44955  of  the  Code  might  be  read 
as  requiring  that  —  if  the  district  were  to  retain  Ms.  Anderson  as  a  counselor  —  it  would  be 
required  to  retain  all  counselors  who  are  permanent  employees  with  more  seniority  than 
Ms.  Anderson  has.  That  subdivision  says,  in  part: 

[T]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  ... 
while  any  ...  other  employee  with  less  seniority  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render. 

5. 

But  if  the  district  had  sent  a  notice  to  Ms.  Anderson,  that  would  not  have  saved 
the  jobs  of  seven  or  more  employees  — only  the  job  of  the  counselor  who  is  most  senior.  And 
in  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District,’  the  court 
spoke  of  a  similar  circumstance  in  terms  of  which  teachers  had  and  which  had  not  suffered 
prejudicial  error.  Counselors  who  would  have  been  laid  off  even  if  the  district  had  notified 
Ms.  Anderson  will  suffer  no  prejudice  by  the  district’s  retaining  her. 

6. 

In  Alexander  the  court  said: 

Because  at  least  some  of  the  persons  skipped  should  have 
received  the  notices,  a  corresponding  number  of  the  most  senior 
of  the  employees  who  were  not  reemployed  must  have  been 
improperly  given  notices.  The  trial  court  must  determine  which 
of  the  Teachers  suffered  prejudicial  error  in  this  case.” 

  

?  (1983)  139  Cal.  App.3d  567. 

3  Id.  at  p.  576.

7. 

Thus,  even  if  the  district  retains  Ms.  Anderson  as  a  counselor,  it  is  not  required 

to  retain  all  of  the  respondents. 

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  the  respondents  are  sustained. 

1. 

2. 

Before  May  15,  2004,  the  district  may  give  notice  to  the  respondents  that  the 

district  will  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

3. 

If  the  district  retains  Ms.  Anderson  as  a  counselor,  it  must  lower  —  by  one  —  the 
number  of  FTE  positions  in  counseling  that  it  eliminates.  And  it  must  retain  the  most  senior 
counselor  who,  were  it  not  for  the  district’s  failure  to  serve  a  notice  on  Ms.  Anderson,  could 
be  laid  off. 

DATED:  April  30,  2004 

Meticlths 

Robert  Walker 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

