  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
FORT  BRAGG  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
_  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Reduction  of  8.80  FTE 
in  Particular  Kinds  of  Services  affecting: 

OAH  No.  N2004030815 

Bea  Austin,  E.  Anne  Barham,  Joseph  Bell, 
John  Gilmore  and  Kirsten  Maurer, 

_’  Respondents. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  30,  2004,  in  Fort  Bragg,  California. 

Robert  J.  Henry,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Fort  Bragg  Unified  School  District. 

Phoebe  Graubard,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Bea Austin,  E.  Anne 

Barham,  Joseph  Bell,  John  Gilmore  and  Kirsten  Maurer.  ' 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  30,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Fort  Bragg  Unified  School District  (“District”)  operates  seven  schools; 
two  elementary  schools,  one  middle  school,  one  high  school,  a  necessary  small  school  and 
two  community  day  schools.  The  District  serves  approximately  2,075  students. 

2. 

Steven  Lund  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions  and  the  actions 

of  the  Governing  Board  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted 

  

'  These  five  employees  are  the  only  noticed  employees  who  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  followed  by  Notices  of 
Defense  to  the  Accusations.  Thus,  these  five  employees  are  the  only  respondents  in  this  action.

that  the  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services 
(PKS)  which  reduced  the  certificated  staff  by  8.80  full-time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  certificated 
positions. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 
District. 

- 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

7. 

On  March  11,  2004,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(the  Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  employees  holding  8.80  FTE  positions 
be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating 
the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

8. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  04-13,  providing  for 

the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
position. 
5. 
6. 
position. 
7. 
position. 
8. 

Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (.40)  FTE  Middle  School  Reading  Teaching  position. 
Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (1.0)  FTE  Middle  School  Title  1  Teaching  position. 
Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  two  (2.0)  FTE  Elementary  Teaching  positions. 
Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (1.0)  FTE  Success  For  All  Facilitator  Teaching 

Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (.70)  FTE  Elementary  3-5  Music  Teaching  position. 
Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (.70)  FTE  Elementary  grades  3-5Art  Teaching 

Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (1.0)  FTE  Elementary  grades  3-5CARE  Teaching 

Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  two  (2.0)  FTE  School  Counselor  positions. 

9. 

The  District  is  experiencing  financial  difficulties.  The  Governing  Board 

determined  that  it  needs  to  reduce  its  2004-2005  operating  budget  by  at  least  $600,000  in 
order  to  remain  solvent.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  and  eliminate 
teaching  and  counseling  services  affecting  employment  of  8.80  FTE 
certificated  positions. 
The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  in 
order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students.

  

  
  

10. 

- 

Supervisor  Lund  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 

implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  maintains  a  Certificated 
Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status 
(tenured,  probationary  or  temporary)  and  credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential 
and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  District’s  records. 

11. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 
senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of 
affected  service,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  known 
vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The 
District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump” 
other  employees.  The  District  then  looked  at  employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as 
opposed  to  other  positions. 

- 

12. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 

seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  did 
not  become  necessary  to  employ  the  tie  breaking  criteria. 

13. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

14.  —  Joseph  Bell  holds  a  Single  Subject  Credential  in  Social  Science  and  a  CLAD 

certification.  His  seniority  date  is  10/6/03.  He  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  elementary 
education  classes  at  a  Community  Day  School  (Shelter  Cove).  Although  the  Board  did  not 
resolve  to  reduce  or  eliminate  positions  at  the  Shelter  Cove  Community  Day  School,  Mr. 
Bell is  the  District’  most  junior  employee  and  may  be  “bumped”  from  his position  by  any  of 
the  teachers  who  have  been  laid  off. 

The  District  intends  to  fill  Mr.  Bell’s  position  with  Shelley  De  Angelis.  She  has  a 

seniority  date  of  9/14/81  and  holds  a  Multiple  Subject-self  contained  Credential,  SDAIE  and 
Reading  Certifications.  Ms.  De  Angelis  currently  teaches  the  1.0  FTE  Middle  School  Title  1 
Teaching  Position  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  eliminate.  Alternatively,  Lenore  Naal 
may  bump  Mr.  Bell  from  his  position.  She  has  a  seniority  date  of  8/18/99  and  holds  a 
Multiple  Subject-self  contained  Credential  and  a  CLAD  Certificate.  Ms.  Naal  currently 
teaches  1.0  FTE  Elementary  Teaching  Positions  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  eliminate. 
Ms.  Naal  has  consented  to  teach  at  the  Continuation  School. 

There  is  no  assignment  the  District  can  make  for  Mr.  Bell  in  which  he  is  credentialed 

and  has  the  seniority  to  serve. 

15. 

Karsten  Maurer  has  a  seniority  date  of  9/14/02.  She  holds  a  Multi-Subject  self 

contained  Credential  and  CLAD  certificate.  She  teaches  .80  FTE  at  the  elementary  school.

Ms.  Maurer’s  position  was  eliminated  by  the  .40  FTE  elimination  of  the  Middle  School 
Reading  position  and  by  .40  FTE  of  the  1.0  FTE  elimination  of  Middle  School  Title  1 
Teaching  position.  Only  Joseph  Bell  is  junior  to  Ms.  Maurer. 

@ 

There  is  no  assignment  the  District  can  make  for  Ms.  Maurer  in  which  she  is 
credentialed  and  has  the  seniority  to  serve.  There  are  no  employees  junior  to  Ms.  Maurer 
who  are  being  retained  to  render  services  Ms.  Maurer  is  competent  and  qualified  to  render. 

16. 

|  Bea  Austin  has  a  seniority  date  of  8/15/01.  She  holds  a  Single  subject  Art  K- 

Credential  and  a  CLAD  certificate.  She  teaches  Art  at  the  High  School  and  Elementary 
School.  She  holds  a  1  FTE  position  teaching  elementary  and  high  school  classes.  Her 
position  was  reduced  by  .60  of  the  1.0  FTE  elimination  of  Middle  School  Title  1  Teaching 
position.  She  was  noticed  at  1FTE,  even  though  she  retains  .40  FTE  of  instruction  in  Art  at 
the  High  School.  However,  E.  Anne  Barham,  whose  qualifications  and  seniority  date  appear 
in  Factual  Finding  18,  may  bump  Ms.  Austin  from  the  .40  FTE  of  instruction  in  Art  at  the 
High  School.  There  are  no  employees  junior  to  Ms.  Austin  who  are  being  retained  to  render 
services  Ms.  Austin  is  competent  and  qualified  to  render. 

17. 

John  Gilmore  has  a  seniority  date  of  12/15/97.  He  holds  a  Multisubject:  Self- 

Contained;  Music  K-9  and  Single  Subject  English  K-12.  He  holds  a  .70  FTE  position 
teaching  Music  in  elementary  classes.  His  position  was  eliminated  by  the  Board’s  resolution 
to  eliminate  .70  Elementary  School  Music  Teacher. 

Mr.  Gilmore  contends  that  he  should  be  retained  to  teach  the  .80  High  School  English 

class  taught  by  Malcolm  McDonald.  Mr.  Mc  Donald  has  resigned  from  his  position  as  a 
High  School  English  Teacher  effective  6/30/2004. 

Superintendent  Lund  did  not  offer  evidence  as  to  the  District’s  intentions  with  respect 

to  Mr.  Mc  Donald’s  position.  Although  the  District  offered  evidence  that  it  took  known 
attrition  into  consideration,  the  District  did  not  provide  evidence  that  it  took  into  account  Mr. 
McDonald’s  resignation  when  determining  the  number  and  type  of  positions  to  be  included 
in  the  PKS.  No  High  School  positions  were  reduced  or  eliminated  in  the  Board’s  resolution. 
Thus,  the  position  vacated  by  Mr.  McDonald  is  vacant.  However,  that  position  is  a  1  FTE 
position  and  Mr.  Gilmore  has  a  .70  FTE.  An  employee  may  not  use  the  bumping  process  to 
move  into  a  position  which  affords  him  greater  employment  rights  than  he  has  with  the 
District.  Nor  can  a  District  be  required  to  fractionalize  the  1FTE  English  position  to  allow 
Mr.  Gilmore  to  assume  part  of  that  position.  Although  the  District  may  always  consent  to 
transferring  Mr.  Gilmore  into  the  vacant  High  School  English  position,  the  District  is  not 
required  to  do  so. 

No  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Gilmore  is  being  retained  to  render  services  Mr.  Gilmore 

is  competent  and  qualified  to  render. 

18. 

E.  Anne  Barham  has  a  seniority  date  of  8/30/88.  She  holds  a  Standard 

Secondary  Credential  in  Art  K-12  and  History  7-12.  She  teaches  Art  at  the  elementary

  

  
  

school.  Her  position  was  eliminated  by  the  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  .70  Elementary 
School  Grades  3-5  of  Art.  However,  Ms.  Barham  is  senior  to  Ms.  Austin  and  is  qualified  and 
competent  to  teach  Art  in  High  School.  Therefore,  she  may  bump  Ms.  Austin  from  the  .40 
FTE  of  instruction  in  Art  at  the  High  School  which  Ms.  Austin  now  teaches.  No  employee 
junior  to  Ms.  Barham  is  being  retained  to  render  services  Ms.  Barham  is  competent  and 
qualified  to  render. 

19, 

Mr.  Gilmore,  Ms.  Barham  and  Ms.  Austin  contend  that  the  PKS  resolution, 

coupled  with  the  non  renewal  of  temporary  Art,  Band  and  Music  teachers,  would  cause  the 
District  to  fall  below  State  Mandated  levels  of  Music  and  Art  programming  in  the  2004-2005 
school  year.  They  maintain  that  the  District  cannot  possibly  offer  the  number  and  quality  of 
Music  and  Art  programs  students  need  to  meet  admission  requirements  to  State  colleges. 

The  District  is  confident  that  it  can  meet  State  mandates  and  the  needs  of  college 

bound  students  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Superintendent  Lund  testified  persuasively  that 
the  needs  of  the  students  and  State  mandates  will  be  met  by  the  teachers  currently  providing 
art  and  music  classes. 

20. 

The  District  employees  receiving  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be 

required  next  year,  whether  temporary  or  certificated  employees,  have  all  rendered  valuable 
services  to  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  04-13  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949.

4, 

~  A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689. 

Respondent  Joseph  Bell  argued  that  he  was  not  given  adequate  notice  that  he  would 
be  terminated  because  his  lay  off  notice  did  not  state  that  the  particular  service  he  rendered 
(Community  Day  School)  would  be  reduced.  Mr.  Bell  relies  on  Campbell  Elementary 
Teacher's  Association  Inc.  v  Abbott  76  Cal.  App.  3d  796  and  Karbach  v.  Board  of Education 
39  Cal.  App.  3d  355  as  support  for  this  position. 

- 

The  District  notified  Mr.  Bell  of  layoff  because  of  the  fact  that  he  could  be  bumped 
by  one  of the  teachers  occupying  a  PKS  which  was  reduced  by  Board  resolution.  Mr.  Bell 
was  notified  that  he  was  laid  off  due  to  elimination  or  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  identified  in  the  Board’s  resolution.  Education  Code  section  44955  and  the  cases 
cited  by  Mr.  Bell  provide  only  that  the  noticed  employee  be  informed  whether  the  basis  for 
layoff  is  an  ADA  reduction  or  elimination  or  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The 
District  is  not  required,  in  the  preliminary  notice  stages  of  the  section  44955  lay  off 
proceedings,  to  specify  the  bumping,  skipping,  attrition  and  other  rights  of  all  employees 
which  determine  the  ultimate  order  of  layoff. 

‘ 

6. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469. 

Pursuant  to  Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469  and 

Education  Code  section  44945  Ms.  Barham  may  bump  into  .40  FTE  of  the  position  held  by 
junior  employee  Bea  Austin. 

7. 

Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the 

junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts 
lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

  

 

  

Mr.  Bell  argues  that  he  has  special  skills,  training,  and  experience  that  exempt  him 
from  lay  off.  Mr.  Bell  has  performed  well  in  his  position.  However,  the  District  bears  the 
burden  under  Education  Code  section  44955  (d)  (1)  to  make  certain  showings  when  the 
District  wishes  to  retain  a  junior  employee  while  terminating  a  senior  employee(s). 
Education  Code  section  44955  9d)  (1)  does  not  grant  the  junior  employee  a  right  to  make 
said  showing,  over  objection  by  the  District.  Even  had  the  legislature  afforded  the  junior 
employee  this  right,  Mr.  Bell  did  not  demonstrate  that  the  District  has  a  specific  need  for  his 
services  and  that  no  more  senior  employee  possesses  the  training  and  experience  needed  to 
teach  Community  Day  School. 

8. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide 

notice  to  respondents  Bea  Austin,  E.  Anne  Barham  (.60  FTE),  Joseph  Bell,  John  Gilmore  and 
Kristen  Mourer  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Such 
cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  8.80  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Said  notice  shall 
include  notices  to  respondents  Bea  Austin,  E.  Anne  Barham  (.60  FTE),  Joseph  Bell, John 
Gilmore  and  Kristen  Mourer. 

DATED:  Ws  2  ae 

Ve 

ANWNELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge  | 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  

