BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
DURHAM  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff  of 
Probationary  and  Permanent  Certificated 
Employees. 

OAH  No.  N2004030662 

Kathleen  Anderson,  Paul  Arnold,  Bill 
Askea,  Mark  Bender,  Greg  Blake, 
Rebecca  Bill,  Liz  Capen,  Jennifer 
.Cooper,  Michelle  Eaton,  Brian  Glover, 
Kathy  Harris,  Nelda  Jessee,  Becky 
Konyn,  Mary  Peterson,  Bill  Stevens, 

    

Respondents 

_  PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  Jaime  René  Roman,  Administrative 

Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Durham,  California,  on  April  22,  2004. 

Penny  Chennell,  Ed.D.,  Superintendent  of  the  Durham  Unified  School  District  (“the 

Superintendent”),  State  of  California,  was  represented  by  School  and  College  Legal  Services, 
by  Elizabeth  B.  Mori,  Esq. 

Respondents  were  represented  by  Wells,  Small,  Selke  &  Graham,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

by  Tyler  Maize  Lalaguna,  Esq. 

Evidence  and  argument  were  received  and  the  matter  submitted  on  April  22,  2004.' 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 
and  high  schools.” 

The  Durham  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  provides  elementary,  middle 

  

'  Prior  to  the  receiving  of  evidence,  respondents  moved  for  a  continuance  of the  hearing.  Opposed  by  complainant, 
and  lacking  good  cause,  the  motion  was  denied.

  

2. 

3. 

services  to  the  District. 

Penny  Chennell,  Ed.D.,  is  the  District  Superintendent. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  render  paid 

4. 

The  District  Superintendent,  following  an  analysis  of,  inter  alia,  District  trends 

and  student  course  preferences,  gave  written  notice  of  her  recommendation  to  the  District 
Governing  Board  (“Board”)  that  particular  kinds  of  services  (“PKS”)  be  reduced  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

5. 

The  Board  adopted  Resolution  04-2  establishing  criteria  for  the  order  of 

termination  among  personnel  who  have  the  same  date  of  hire. 

6. 

On  March  10,  2004,  the  Board,  mindful  of  then-extant  positively  assured 

attrition  and  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  notice  be  provided  particular 
respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§44949  and  44955,  adopted  Resolution  #04-4 
reducing  or  discontinuing  5.82  full-time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  positions  of  the  District  to 
effectuate  a  concomitant  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services,  and  directing 
the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  give  notices  to  affected  certificated  employees  that 
their  services  would  not  be  needed  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2004  —  2005,  and  stating  the 
reasons  therefore. 

7. 

As  early  as  January  2004,  the  District  promulgated  a  seniority  list.  The 

District  employed  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  “bumping”  list  of  the 
least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District 
then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  or  authorizations 
entitling  such  employee  to  “bump”  another  employee.  To  determine  who  would  be 
identified  for  layoff  each  kind  of  service  to  be  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of 
reductions  not  covered  by  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in 
inverse  order  of  seniority. 

8. 

On  March  12,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  timely  notice  to  respondents 

Walter  Mark  Bender,  Greg  Blake,  Rebecca  Bill,  Michelle  Eaton,  Brian  Glover,  Becky 
Konyn,  Mary  Peterson  and  William  Stevens  pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§44949  and  44955 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004  -  2005  school  year,  and  stating 
the  reasons  therefore. 

9. 

Each  respondent  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  2004  —  2005  school  year. 

  

?  Education  Code  §83:  “A  unified  school  district  means  a  district  maintaining  grades  kindergarten  or  1  through  12.  A 
unified  district  may  comprise  territory  in  more  than  one  county.” 

  

  
  

.  rd 

 

10. 

|  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  respondent.  The 

Accusations,  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were 
timely  served  on  each  respondent. 

Respondents  filed  timely  Notices  of  Defense. 

11. 

12. 

The  services  rendered  by  respondents  in  the  Board’s  Resolution  were  the  kinds 

of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
§44949.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion.  Further,  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  these  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  overall  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils.  In  sum,  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  kinds  of  services 
rendered  by  respondents  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  District  certificated 
employees  as  properly  determined  by  the  Board. 

13. 

|  Some  respondents  submit  that  notice  was  insufficient  and  that  the  resolution  as 

applied  to  them  does  not  categorically  set  forth  the  PKS  reduction  applicable  to  the  affected 
respondent’s  FTE. 

A. 

With  respect  to  the  claim  of  improper  notice  of  the  layoff,  the  claim  is 
readily  belied  by  the  District’s  evidence  of  personal  service  or  certified 
mail  to  the  address  of  record.  Indeed,  one  respondent,  William 
Stevens,  claimed  to  have  received  no  March  12,  2004  mailing;  despite 
uncontroverted  evidence  by  the  District  Secretary  of  the 
Superintendent’s  effort  to  personally  provide  service  to  him  and,  upon 
his  rebuff,  her  multiple  efforts  to  reach  Mr.  Stevens  and  apprise  him  of 
the  March  12,  2004  mailing.  Mr.  Stevens  failure  to  receive  the  March 
12,  2004  mailing  was  clearly  effectuated  by  his  own  personal 
dereliction  in  obtaining  mail  at  a  post  office  box  reported  to  the  District 
as  his  address  of  record  for  mail.  His  dereliction  becomes  further 
compounded  by  his  own  direction  to  the  District  in  both  his  March  18, 
2004  Request  for  Hearing  and  March  18,  2004  Notice  of  Defense  that, 
on  each  document,  further  provided  such  post  office  box  as  his  mailing 
address.° 

B. 

With  respect  to  the  claims  of  insufficient  notice  setting  forth  the 
categorical  application  of  each  PKS  to  each  affected  respondent’s  FTE, 
the  District  Superintendent  provided  a  matrix*  specifically  establishing 
and  linking  the  affected  FTE  to  the  recommended  PKS  for  reduction  or 
discontinuance. 

  

>  Mr.  Stevens’  claims  of  an  unidentified  Budget  Committee  member’s  bias  or  partiality  are,  lacking  cogent 
competency  or  credibility,  summarily  dismissed.  In  addition,  his  claim  relating  to  the  scope  and  extent  to  which  his 
credential  permits  teaching  in,  for  example,  independent  study,  is  belied  by  his  credential. 
“  Exhibit  13.  Admittedly  not  a  model  of  clarity,  it  nevertheless  sets  forth  both  the  application  of  seniority  as  it 
relates  to  bumping  affected  employees  and  respondents  within  the  context  of  both  FTE  and  PKS. 

 

C. 

Respondent  Walter  Mark  Bender’s  contention  that  he  should  be  senior 
to  another  teacher  unaffected  by  the  layoff  fails  by  Mr.  Bender’s  failure 
to  articulate  any  objective  criteria  other  than  his  opinion  and  a 
categorical  misunderstanding  of  the  limitation  of  his  credential  vis-a- 
vis  the  credential  of  the  teacher  he  claims  lacks  his  particular 
competency  and  seniority. 

14. 

In  reviewing  the  criteria  imposed  by  the  Board  and  applied  by  the  District,  no 

abuse  of  discretion  or  evidence  of  capriciousness  or  arbitrary  exercise  is  competently 
demonstrated  by  any  respondent.° 

15. 

| No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§44949  and 

44955. 

L. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  §44955  to  give  notice  to  District  certificated  employees  in  5.82  full-time 
equivalent  certificated  employee  positions  as  set  out  in  Findings  1  -  15.  Such  cause  relates 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
§44949. 

3. 

Respondents  objected  to  the  Accusation  upon  the  ground  that  it  did  not  state 
acts  or  omissions  upon  which  the  District  may  proceed.  No  competent  or  credible  evidence 
having  been  presented  thereon,  the  objections  are  each  overruled  pursuant  to  Government 
Code  §§11506(a)(2)  and  11517. 

4. 

Respondents  objected  to  the  Accusation  upon  the  ground  that  it  was  so 

indefinite  or  uncertain  that  no  respondent  could  identify  the  transaction  or  prepare  his  or  her 
defense.  No  competent  or  credible  evidence  having  been  presented  thereon  (Findings  1  — 
15),  the  objections  are  each  overruled  pursuant  to  Government  Code  §§11506(a)(2)  and 
11517. 

  

>  A.B.C.  Federation  of T: eachers  vy.  A.B.C.  Unified  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  75  Cal.App.3d  332;  El  Dorado  Union  High 
School  Dist.  v.  City  of Placerville  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  123. 

     

  

ORDER 

The  Accusations  are  sustained  as  to  respondents. 

l. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  each  of  their  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  2004  —  2005  School  Year  because  of  the  District’s  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notices  shall  be  given  to  respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated: 

if  ~  Z  E-0  7 

    p  ffice  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

  

  

