BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SOUTHERN  HUMBOLDT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
HUMBOLDT  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

MICHAEL  CARROLL, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  N2004030807 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Administrative  Law  Judge  Jonathan  Lew,  State  of 
California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  on  April  29,  2004,  in  Eureka,  California. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Associate  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal  Services 

of  California,  represented  the  Southern  Humboldt  Unified  School  District. 

Anne  M.  Randolph,  Esq.,  represented  Michael  Carroll,  who  was  also  present. 

The  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  29,  2004.! 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Clifton  Anderson  is  the  Superintendent  for  the  Southern  Humboldt  Unified 

School  District  (District).  He  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  such 
public  officer,  and  not  otherwise. 

2. 

Michael  Carroll  (respondent)  has  been  employed  by  the  District  as  certificated 

employee. 

_ 

3. 

On  March  15,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the 

District  (Governing  Board)  written  notice,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955,  of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondent  by  the  Governing  Board 
that  his  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year.  Such  letter 
stated  the  reasons  for  such  recommendation. 

  

'  By  letter  dated  April  30,  2004,  the  parties  also  submitted  documentation  confirming  that  Carol  Van  Sant  possesses 
a  Clear  Resource  Specialist  Certificate  of  Competence  authorizing  her  service  as  a  Resource  Specialist.  This  was 
marked  and  received  into  evidence  as  Exhibit  23. 

  

 

4. 

Respondent  duly  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
not  reemploying  him  for  the  ensuing  school  year.’  An  accusation  was  served  on  respondent 
and  on  April  7,  2004,  he  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
-Tequirements  were  satisfied. 

5. 

OnMarch  11,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  adopted a  resolution  (Resolution  No. 

9-0304)  reflecting  its  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  certain 
particular  kinds  of  services.  The  resolution  provided  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
certificated  services  would  be  reduced/eliminated  for  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

1.0 
1.0 
£8 
.8 
1.0 
.2_. 
1.0 
3.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
25 
25. 
25 
.25. 
50 
25 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

Certificated  Administrator 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Counselor/District  Psychologist 
Counselor  Osprey  Learning  Center 
School  Nurse 
Title  1  Teacher  Osprey  Learning  Center 
Independent  Study  Teacher 
Southern  Humboldt  Community  Day  Teacher 
Elementary  Teachers 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Dean 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  English  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Social  Science  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Mathematics  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Auto/Metals  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senor  HS  Drama  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Woodshop  Teacher 
Elementary  Music  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Driver  Ed/Geography  Teacher 
South  Fork  Junior-Senior  HS  Computer  Literacy  Teacher 

The  proposed  reductions  total  14.55  full-time  equivalent  positions  for  the  ensuing 
2004-2005  school  year.  The  services  set  forth  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  may 
be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

6. 

The  proposed  reductions  were  prompted  by  anticipated  budget  shortfalls  for  the 

2004-2005  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  has  amended  its  Resolution  to  restore 
positions  for  Elementary  Teacher  (1.0  FTE),  South  Fork  Junior-Senior  High  School 
Auto/Metals  Teacher  (.25  FTE),  South  Fork  Junior-Senior  High  School  Woodshop  Teacher 
(.25  FTE)  and  an  Elementary  Music  Teacher  (.25  FTE).  The  revised  proposed  reductions 
total  12.8  full-time  equivalent  positions  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year. 

  

2  Additional  teachers  submitted  requests  for  hearings  but  their  individual  cases  were  resolved  prior  to  hearing. 
These  teachers  include  Natalia  Boettcher,  Jonathan  Borah,  Richard  Givins,  Susan  Ivey,  Laura  Lameris,  Nancy  Lewis, 
William  Richards,  Paul  Schmollinger,  Eric  Shafer  and  Robert  Standish. 

© 

   

  
  

7. 

Respondent  holds a  professional  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  (K-12) 

with  a  supplementary  authorization  in  business.  He  also  has  a  professional  clear  specialist 
instruction  credential  in  special  education,  the  authorized  field  being  learning  handicapped. 
His  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the  District  is  December  4,  1996.  He  is  currently  assigned 
full  time  to  the  alternative  education  center  at  the  Osprey  Learning  Center.  There  are 
approximately  100  students  at  the  Center  and  respondent  works  with  up  to  25  of  them  on  an 
independent  study  basis.  He  provides  them  instruction  in  all  subjects.  Although  the 
District’s  independent  study  program  will  continue  next  year  it  is  anticipated  that  there  will 
be  fewer  such  students  based  on  District  projections  using  cohort  enrollment  numbers. 

Respondent  is  impacted  by  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  .20  FTE 
Independent  Study  Teacher.  He  is  further  impacted  by  another  teacher,  Eric  Shafer,  bumping 
into  his  position.  Eric  Shafer’s  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the  District  is  August  24,  1994, 
making  him  senior  to  respondent.  He  was  noticed  as  a  result  of  the  Governing  Board’s 
decision  to  eliminate  2.0  FTE  Elementary  Teachers.  Eric  Shafer  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  bump  into  the  remainder  (.8  FTE)  of  respondent’s  Independent  Study  position. 
Respondent  also  has  bumping  rights.  Respondent  is  senior  to  Jennifer  Kubik.  Her  date  of 
first  paid  service  with  the  District  is  August  19,  1998.  Respondent  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  bump  into  her  .33  FTE  elementary  teacher  position.  The  net  result  of  the  above 
is  that  respondent  faces  a  reduction  of  .67  FTE  from  his  current  full  time  position  as  an 
Independent  Study  Teacher. 

8. 

Respondent  believes  that  he  is  also  entitled  to  bump  into  a  position  held  by  Brice 

Gummersall.  Gummersall’s  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the  District  is  August  21,  1997. 
He  holds  a  professional  clear  specialist  instruction  credential  in  special  education,  the 
authorized  field  being  learning  handicapped.  He  also  holds  a  clear  resource  specialist 
certificate  of  competence,  something  not  held  by  respondent.  Brice  Gummersall  is 
completing  his  seventh  year  with  the  District  and  he  has  worked  as  a  resource  specialist 
teacher  the  entire  time.?  Respondent  notes  that  over  the  2001-2002  school  year  he  provided 
comparable  resource  specialist  services  (.25  FTE)  for  the  District. 

  

>  The  Administrator’s  Assignment  Manual  provides  that  resource  specialists  provide  instruction  and  services  for 
students  whose  individualized  education  program  has  them  assigned  to  a  regular  classroom  for  a  majority  of  a 
school  day.  Such  services  include: 

(1)  Provide  instruction  and  services  for  pupils  whose  needs  have  been  identified  in  an  individualized 

education  program  developed  by  the  individualized  education  program  team  and  who  are  assigned  to 
regular  classroom  teachers  for  a  majority  of  a  school  day. 

(2)  Provide  information  and  assistance  to  individuals  with  exceptional  needs  and  to  their  parents. 
(3)  Provide  consultation,  resource  information,  and  material  regarding  individuals  with  exceptional  needs 

to  their  parents  and  to  regular  staff  members. 

(4)  Coordinate  special  education  services  with  the  regular  school  programs  for  each  individual  with 

exceptional  needs  enrolled  in  the  resource  specialist  program. 

(5)  Monitor  pupil  progress  on  a  regular  basis,  participate  in  the  review  and  revision  of  individualized 

education  programs,  as  appropriate,  and  refer  pupils  who  do  not  demonstrate  appropriate  progress  to 
the  individualized  education  program  team. 

(6)  Emphasize,  at  the  secondary  school  level,  academic  achievement,  career  and  vocational  development, 

and  preparation  for  adult  life.

  

The  District  acknowledges  that  respondent  was  assigned  at  one  time  to  provide 
resource  specialist  instruction.  However,  he  was  not  properly  certified  to  do  so  and  this  was 
an  oversight  by  the  District..  Resource  specialist  duties  are  not  limited  to  teaching.  For 
example,  they  must  also  monitor  pupil  progress  on  a  regular  basis,  participate  in  the  review 
and  revision  of  individualized  education  programs  as  appropriate,  and  refer  pupils  who  do 
not  demonstrate  appropriate  progress  to  the  individualized  education  program  team. 

6 

Paula  Wyant-Kelso  is  the  District’s  Special  Education  Director.  She  oversees 
implementation  of  individualized  education  programs  for  all  special  education  students.  She 
notes  that  children  are  assigned  a  single  resource  specialist  who  knows  comprehensively 
what  that  child’s  disability  and  individualized  educational  program  requires.  It  is  not 
practical  for  one  specialist  to  provide  instruction  to  a  child  and  another  to  provide  services. 
She  believes  that  respondent’s  credentials  not  sufficient  to  authorize  him  to  provide  such 
services.  Respondent  was  assigned  to  provide  resource  specialist  instruction  during  the 
2001-2002  school  year  when  additional  teachers  were  needed  to  reduce  caseloads. 
Circumstances  are  different  now  and  District  caseloads  have  been  reduced  by  60  students 
and  the  program  is  staffed  appropriately.  When  respondent  was  assigned  to  do  this  work  in 
2001-2002  the  District  was  required  to  obtain  an  emergency  permit  for  him  to  do  so  from  the 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  The  District  failed  to  do  so  and  acknowledges  this 
oversight. 

9. 

It  was  established  that  respondent  is  not  properly  certificated  to  perform  the 

services  and  duties  required  of  a  resource  specialist  with  the  District. 

10. 

It  was  also  established  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds 

of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  students  thereof  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of 
discretion  of  the  Governing  Board. 

10. 

Except  as  provided  by  statute,  no  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 
employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondent  is 
certificated,  competent  and  legally  entitled  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Southern 
Humboldt  Unified  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils 
thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949.

© 

  
  

3. 

Respondent  is  not  entitled  to  bump  into  the  position  held  by  Brice  Gummersall 

by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Findings  8  and  9. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Michael  Carroll  that  his  services  will  be  reduced  by  .67  FTE. 
Notice  shall  be  given  to  remaining  teachers  before  May  15,  2004,  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

Mey  4  Zovl- 

   inistrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

