BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
RAMONA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2004030481 

SEVENTEEN  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  16,  2004,  in  Ramona,  California,  Alan  S.  Meth,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Mark  R.  Bresee,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Ramona  Unified  School  District. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Attorney  At  Law,  represented  the  following  respondents:  Connie 

Ochoa,  Susan  Stanfield,  Jill  VanGassen,  Leslie  Wilson,  and  Kimberly Wilson. 

Respondent  Margaret  Millen  did  not  request  a  hearing  and  did  not  appear  at  the 

hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  16,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  23,  2004,  Joe  Annicharico,  Jr.  Ph.D.,  Assistant  Superintendent, 
Human  Resources  Development  of  the  Ramona  Unified  School  District  (hereafter,  “the 
District”),  made  and  filed  the  accusations  against  respondents  in  his  official  capacity. 

Prior  to  the  hearing,  the  District  requested  the  accusations  against  Robin  Arend,  Lea 
Jenkins,  Faith  Lakamp,  Amanda  Language,  Becky  Leduc,  Jerry  Patenaude,  Stefanie  Reagan, 
Carol  Scheuer,  Kathleen  Schweitzer,  Kristine  Whigham,  and  Jennifer  Woods  be  dismissed. 
The  motion  was  granted. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District.

  

3. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  of  the 
Superintendent's  recommendation  that  respondents  be  notified  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Superintendent's  notification  to  the  Governing 
Board  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  each  respondent  was  given  written  notice  by  the 
Superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

5. 

Each  respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Accusations  were  timely  served 
on  respondents,  and  each  respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 

following  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year: 

Elementary  Classroom  Teaching  Services  (Gr.  K-6)-- 
6  full-time  equivalents 

Prior  to  the  hearing,  the  District  determined  to  reduce  the  number  of  full-time 

equivalent  positions  to  5.6. 

* 

The  services  set  forth  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of 
the  District's  discretion. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  retained  to  perform 

services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted a resolution  listing  criteria  to  be  applied  to 

determine  the  order  of  layoff  for  those  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  first  paid 
probationary  service.  The  criteria  were  to  be  applied  in  the  following  priority  order  indicated 
in  the  resolution:  (1)  persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials;  (2)  persons  with 
preliminary  or  clear  credentials  or  certificates  authorizing  services  in  the  classes  for  limited 

7. 

    

10. 

9. 

2

“ 

or  non-English  proficient  students  priority  listed  as  follows:  (A)  BCLAD,  (B)  CLAD,  (C) 
language  development  specialist  certificate,  (D)  supplemental  authorization  for  English  as  a 
second  language,  and  (E)  SDAIE;  (3)  persons  with  the  most  years  of  teaching  experience  in 
current  department;  (4)  persons  with  the  most  years  of  teaching  experience  in  current  grade 
assignment;  (5)  persons  with  one  or  more  of  the  following  credentials,  certificated  and/or 
graduate  degrees  priority  listed  as  follows:  (A)  two  or  more  teaching  credentials,  (B) 
standard  secondary  or  single  subject  credential,  and  (C)  standard  elementary  or  multiple 
subject  credential;  (6)  persons  with  specialized  training/experience  in  Early  Literacy 
Intervention;  and  (7)  use  of  the  last  four  digits  of  the  person’s  social  security  number  with  the 
highest  number  being  the  most  senior. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  in  5.6  full- 
time  equivalent  positions  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to'the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44949. 

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

The  Accusations  against  Robin  Arend,  Lea  Jenkins,  Faith  Lakamp,  Amanda 

Language,  Becky  Leduc,  Jerry  Patenaude,  Stefanie  Reagan,  Carol  Scheuer,  Kathleen 
Schweitzer,  Kristine  Whigham,  and  Jennifer  Woods  are  dismissed. 

The  Accusations  served  on  respondents  Margaret  Millen,  Connie  Ochoa, 

Susan  Stanfield,  Jill  VanGassen,  Kimberly  Wilson,  and  Leslie  Wilson  are  sustained.  Notice 
shall  be  given  to  each  respondent  before  May  15,  2004,  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be

ig 

required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  to  the  extent  of  5.6  full-time  equivalent  positions 
pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED:  Yao  F 

LbgP 

ALAN  S.  MET 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

