BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
WILMAR  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

_ 

Inthe  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

KATHLEEN  KAHL 

OAH  No.  N2004030813 

and 

SHIRLEY  O’CONNOR, 

  

Respondents.   

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Mary-Margaret  Anderson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of Administrative 

Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Windsor,  California  on  April  28,  2004. 

Robert  J.  Henry,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Superintendent  Robert  Raines. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents,  who  were  present. 

The  record  closed  on  April  28,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Superintendent  Robert  Raines  of  the  Wilmar  Union  School  District  (District) 

filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Kathleen  Kahl  and  Shirley  O’Connor  (Respondents)  are  permanent  certificated 

District  employees. 

By  letter  dated  March  9,  2004,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  District’s  Board 

of  Trustees  (Board)  that  he  recommended  that  certain  services  need  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  the  2004/2005  school  year. 

4. 

On  March  9,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  Number  03-04-07.  The 

resolution  sets  forth  the  Board’s  adoption  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation. 
Specifically,  the  Board  resolved  to  reduce  or  eliminate  3.0  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
Elementary  Classroom  Teachers.

  

5. 

By  letter  dated  and  hand  delivered  March  12,  2004,  the  Superintendent 

notified  each  Respondent  of  the  Board’s  resolution  and  that  her  services  would  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  2004/2005. 

Each  Respondent  made a  timely  request  for  a  hearing. 

Accordingly,  an  Accusation  and  a  Notice  of  Hearing  were  prepared  and  timely  served 

on  each  Respondent. 

Each  Respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense  and  this  hearing  followed. 

6. 

The  District  consists  of  one  K-6  grade  elementary  school  serving  211  students. 

Approximately  23%  are  considered  English  language  learners  to  some  degree.  The  reason 
for  the  proposed  reduction  in  services  is  financial.  The  District  is  facing  a  projected  budget 
shortfall  of  $45,000.00  to  $50,000.00  in  the  next  three  years.  Its  current  budget  is 
approximately  $1.4  million. 

7. 

The  Resolution  also  authorized  the  Superintendent  to  deviate  from  terminating 

teachers  “in  order  of  seniority  for  those  reasons  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section 
44955(d).”  In  essence,  the  section  provides  that  junior  teachers  can  be  retained  over  senior 
teachers  following  a  determination  that  a  district  has  a  specific  need  that  the  senior  teachers 
cannot  fill. 

8. 

In  the  2002/2003  school  year  the  California  Department  of  Education’s 

English  Leaner  Accountability  Unit  conducted  a  compliance  review  in  the  District.  The 
review  identified  non-compliance  issues  that  required  resolution.  The  District  was  instructed 
to  increase  the  number  of  properly  certificated  teachers  for  English  learners. 

In  addition  to  the  need  for  teachers  qualified  to  instruct  English  learners,  the  District 

has  a  specific  need  for  personnel  certificated  to  teach  special  education  students. 
Accordingly,  the  Superintendent  decided  that  teachers  with  such  qualifications  should  be 
skipped,  or  passed  over  for  termination.  In  choosing  the  teachers  to  be  notified  of 
termination,  the  District  therefore  passed  over  junior  teachers  who  possess  the  qualifications 
it  seeks. 

9. 

The  Superintendent  shared  the  findings  of  the  reviewer  with  staff  on  several 
occasions  in  2003.  Teachers  were  also  informed  of  the  requirements  of  the  No  Child  Left 
Behind  Act,  a  federal  program.  Efforts  were  made  to  support  all  teachers  who  chose  to  be 
trained  to  receive  the  desired  qualifications,  whether  via  a  Cross-cultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development  Certificate  (CLADD)  or  by  taking  a  training  available  to  more 
senior  teachers  known  as  SEDAI. 

   

Although  staff  were  not  advised  that  they  would  be  subject  to  lay-off  in  the  next 
school  year  if  they  did  not  become  so  trained,  there  was  significant  discussion  about  the 

  

legality  of  skipping  on  that  basis.  A  neighboring  district  was  applying  that  criterion  at  the 
time.  The  discussion  revolved  around  the  legality  of  that  action  and  whether  it  was 
appropriate. 

Staff  was  not  given  a  timeline  that  needed  to  be  met;  however,  the  importance  of 
obtaining  additional  training  was  stressed.  And  as  a  result,  several  teachers  did  enroll  in 
programs  and  have  obtained  CLADD  certificates. 

12. 

Respondent  Shirley  O’Connor  teaches  second  grade.  She  was  hired  on 

September  6,  1963  and  is  number  two  on  the  Seniority  List.  Respondent  O’Connor  was 
present  at  staff  meetings  where  the  desirability  of  further  training  was  discussed.  She 
understood  that  the  District  considered  it  to  be  very  important,  and  initially  planned  to  take  a 
CLADD  class  in  the  summer,  when  she  could  give  it  her  full  attention.  Subsequently,  she 
became  aware  of  an  earlier  class  and  has  been  watching  the  instructional  videos  on  Monday 
nights. 

13. 

Respondent  Kathleen  Kahl  teaches  kindergarten.  She  was  hired  August  31, 

1990,  but  actually  started  as  an  aide  in  the  District  in  1974.  Respondent  Kahl  is  number  six 
on  the  Seniority  List.  She  was  present  at  the  staff  meetings,  but  was  also  aware  of  the  issues 
by  virtue  of  her  position  with  the  teacher’s  association.  In  November  of  2003,  she  learned 
that  there  would  be  a  possibility  that  teachers  with  CLADDs  would  be  skipped  if  there  were 
a  lay-off. 

Respondent  Kahl  enrolled  in  a  CLADD  program  through  the  Santa  Rosa  County 

Office  of  Education  and  began  in  March  of  2003.  Unfortunately,  she  did  not  pass  one  of  the 
three  modules.  She  will  be  taking  the  test  again  on  May  8,  2004,  and,  if  she  passes,  will  hold 
a  CLADD  certificate. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Wilmar 
Union  School  District.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955.  The  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

3. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  District’s  decision  is  arbitrary  and  capricious  in 

that  it  was  not  made  clear  to  them  that  they  would  be  laid  off  if  they  did  not  obtain 
certifications  by  a  specific  time.  In  other  words,  they  were  not  provided  with  notice  that  they 
must  proceed  immediately.  The  cases  cited  by  Respondents  do  not  support  this  theory,  nor 
do  the  facts  fit  the  common  meaning  of  arbitrary  or  capricious.

  

Some  districts  have  made  the  importance  of  the  certification  very  clear  to  their 
teachers,  by,  for  example,  giving  them  a  deadline.  Some  have  found  enrollment  in  a  class  or 
partial  completion  to  be  sufficient.  Not  doing  so  does  not  mean  that  a  district  has  acted  in  an 
illegally  arbitrary  or  capricious  manner.  The  law  does  not  require  specific  notice  that  lack  of 
certification  will  result  in  lay-off  regardless  of  seniority.  Districts  possess  enormous 
discretion  in  this  regard. 

© 

It  is  therefore  concluded  that  no  employee  with  less  seniority  than  either  Respondent 
is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  either  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

ORDER 

Notices  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Kathleen  Kahl  and  Shirley  O’Connor  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Dares  df  4  20044 

Wri 
MABY-  MARGARBT  ANDERSON 

ucarkl  _  e 

Adrhinistrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

     

    

