BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
CAMINO  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

TARA  BLANTON  AND  AMY  SILAN 

OAH  No.  N2004030500 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  12,  2004,  in  Camino,  California,  Leonard  L.  Scott,  Administrative  Law 

Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Ann  M.  Murray,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Camino  Union  School  District 

(School  District). 

Silan. 

Eugene  Huguenin,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Tara  Blanton  and  Amy 

Evidence  was  received,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  or  before  March  15, 2004,  Carroll  W.  (Wally)  Newberry, Superintendent  of 
the  School  District,  sent  a  written  recommendation  to  the  Governing  Board  for  the  reduction, 
discontinuation  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  also  for  a  reduction  in 
certificated  employees  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.  The  Superintendent 
recommended  the  reduction  of  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  at  the  end  of  the 
2003/2004  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services 

and  the  decline in  average  daily  attendance  during  the  2003/2004  school  year.  

  

2. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  the  Superintendent  had  served  on  respondents 
written  notice  that  he  had  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  respondents’  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  due  to  a  reduction  or  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  and  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.  The  notice  set 
forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation,  as  required  by  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955. 

Attached  to  the  notice  were  copies  of  Resolution  No.  03/04-6,  authorizing  the  layoffs 

due  to  a  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  decline  in  average 

AAN£LL 

was  a  blank  Request  for  Hearing  form. 

3. 

On  March  10,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  determined  that  (1)  the  decline  in 

average  daily  attendance  necessitated  the  reduction  of  2.0  FTE  certificated  teacher  positions, 
and  (2)  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  certain  particular  kinds  of  services  with  1.2 
FTE  certificated  teacher  positions.  The  Resolution  provided  for  the  reduction  or  elimination - 
of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

Reduce  the  Title  I  Program  (math) 

0.2  FTE 

Eliminate  Science  Resource  Preparation  Period  Program  0.5  FTE 

Reduce  the  Computer  Preparation  Period  Program 

0.5  FTE 

Total  of  particular  kinds  of  services  reduced  or  eliminated 

Total  reductions  due  to  decline  in  average  daily  attendance 

Overall  Total 

12 FTE 

2.0  FTE 

3.2  FTE. 

In  Resolution  No.  03/04-6,  the  Governing  Board  established  criteria  to  break  ties 

among  certificated  staff  (teachers)  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service.  The  Governing 
Board  based  the  criteria  upon  the  needs  of  the  School  District  and  of  its  students,  and  acted 
within  its  discretion  in  creating  the  tie  breaking  criteria. 

_ 

4, 

Respondents  timely  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  to  determine  whether  there  is 

cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44949(b). 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  03/04-6,  the  Superintendent  made,  signed  and  had 

timely  served  upon  respondents  an  Accusation.  The  Superintendent  acted  in  his  official 
capacity. 

6. 

Respondents  timely  signed  and  served  their  Notices  of  Defense  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44949(c)(1)  and  Government  Code  section  11506. 

  

       

a 

7. 

8. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  School  District. 

A  continued  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  during  the  two  preceding 

school  years,  the  2001-2002  and  2002-2003  school  years,  necessitated  the  reduction  of  2.0 
full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year.  The 
reduction  in  average  daily  attendance  over  the  last  three  school  years  was  13.5  percent.  If  the 
School  District  had  reduced  its  32.05  FTE  certificated  positions  by  13.5  percent,  it  could 
have  eliminated  4.3  FTE  certificated  positions  due  to  the  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 
instead  it  chose  to  eliminate  2.0  FTE  certificated  positions. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  1.2  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions 

in  particular  kinds  of  services  is  for  the  welfare  of  the  School  District  and  the  pupils. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  reduction 

in  average  daily  attendance  are  the  sole  causes  for  not  re-employing  respondents. 

11. 

The  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  will  not  cause  those  services  to 
fall  below  the  level  necessary  to  provide  such  services  to  the  students  nor  will  the  reduction 
violate  any  mandate  regarding  the  provision  of  such  services. 

12. 

The  School  District  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition  before 

determining  which  teachers  would  be  laid  off  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  and  the  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

13. 

The  tie  breaking  system  established  by  the  Governing  Board  in  Resolution  No.  — 

03/04-6  was  used  to  break  ties  among  certificated  staff  (teachers)  with  the  same  first  date  of 
paid  service.  The  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  was  fair  and  appropriate. 

To  determine  which  teachers  would  be  affected  by  the  lay  off,  the  School  District  first 

bumped  those  teachers  in  temporary  or  provisional  positions,  then  used  the  Seniority  List  to 
develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  “bumping”  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently 
assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the 
least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other 
employees.  Teachers  were  laid  off  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

The  least  senior  certificated  teacher  employed  by  the  School  District  has  resigned  and 

will  not  return  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  next  three  least  senior  certificated  teachers 
were  noticed  for  this  layoff.  Together,  those  three  occupy  2.7  FTE  certificated  positions. 
One  of  those  three  did  not  return  a  Request  for  Hearing  and  so  is  not  a  party  (respondent)  to 
this  hearing.  The  other  two  are  respondents  in  this  matter. 

Respondent  Tara  Blanton  has a  first  date  of  paid  service  of  September  8,  2000.  She 

has  a  Prof.  Clear  Multiple  Subjects  credential  plus  a  CLAD  and  an  M.A  in  Crosscultural

  

Teaching  Specialties:  Education  Technology.  She  is  employed  in  a  full  time  position,  but  is 
noticed  for  a  0.7  FTE  layoff,  so  she  will  continue  to  have  a  0.3  FTE  certificated  position. 

Respondent  Amy  Silan  has a first  date  of  paid  service  of  August  7,  2001.  She  has  a 

Preliminary  Clear  Multiple  Subjects  credential  plus  a  CLAD.  She  is  employed  in  a  full  time 
position  and  is  noticed  for  a  1.0  FTE  layoff. 

14. 

Elizabeth  Easterling  (Easterling)  has  a  first  date  of  paid  service  of  August  31, 

1989.  She  has  a  PC  SS-LifeScience  credential  with  supplemental  authorization  in  Chemistry, 
plus  a  Temporary  Prof.  Clear  Multiple  Subjects  Credential  and  a  CLAD. 

Easterling  was  laid  off  0.5  FTE  in  the  spring  of  2003  and  has  continued  to  work  0.5 

FTE  in  the  Science  Resource  Preparation  Period  Program,  which  is  being  abolished. 
Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44956,  she  has  a  preferred  right  to  reappointment  for  39 
months  from  the  date  of  her  layoff  (termination)  for  the  0.5  FTE  in  2003. 

In  order  not  to  be  laid  off  the  other  0.5  FTE  this  year  due  to  the  elimination  of  the 

Science  Resource  Preparation  Period  Program,  Easterling  revived  her  expired  Preliminary 
Clear  Multiple  Subjects  credential  as  a  temporary  credential  and  the  School  District  has 
bumped  her  into  another  position  for  next  fall.  As  a  result  she  was  not  noticed  for  layoff  this  - 
year  and  the  0.5  FTE  she  was  employed  this  year  is  safe  from  bumping  by  either  respondent 
because  of  Easterling’s  much  earlier  seniority  date  (also  called  first  date  of  paid  service). 

If  the  respondents  in  this  matter  are  laid  off,  they  will  also  be  placed  on  the  preferred 
right  to  reappointment  list  (often  referred  to  as  a  rehire  list),  and  at  that  point,  Easterling  will 
have  first  right  to  rehire  over  respondents  for  the  0.5  FTE  she  was  laid  off  in  2003  because  of 
her  earlier  seniority  date,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44956(a)(1). 

15. 

Two  full  time  certificated  teachers,  each  of  whom  now  teaches  a  class  in  the 

elementary  school,  have  indicated  that  they  each  want  to  take  a  0.5  FTE  leave  of  absence 
next  year  and  each  continue  to  teach  0.5  FTE  by  sharing  one  full  time  equivalent  teaching 
position.  While  they  are  on  approved  leaves  of  absence,  the  School  District  must  hold  their 
full  time  positions  for  them  by  back  filling  with  a  temporary  certificated  employee  because 
they  have  a  right  to  return  to  those  positions  at  the  end  of  the  leaves  of absence,  see 
Education  Code  sections  449962,  44963  and  44973.  Therefore  the  position  created  by  the 
leaves  of  absence  is  not  available  for  any  of  those  subject  to  this  reduction. 

16. 

|  No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is 

being  retained  to  perform  a  service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

17. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  can  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing 

  

       

  

Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and 
was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing  board 

that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in 
Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the 
superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no 
superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  ithas  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

_ 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or  has  waived  his 
or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not 
be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties. 
However,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in  any 
manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this 
section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying 

him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be 
delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date 
specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  on  which 
the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before 
the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her 
right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the 
provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be  conducted 
and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part 
1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the 
power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five  days  after 
service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day 
period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code  shall  be 

available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service  of  the  accusation,  and 
the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate.

  

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall  prepare  a 
proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as  to  whether  the  charges 
sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The 
proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition. 
However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the 
cause  and  disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained 
in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be  binding  on  the 
governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges 
unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to 
the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May 7  of  the  year  in  which  the 
proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the 
administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not  inconsistent  with 

provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate  this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in  person  to  the 
employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  . 
postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continuance  is  granted 
pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the  dates  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c) 
which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in 
subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  shall 
be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other  than 
those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no 
probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as 
specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of  a  district 
for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below  the 
corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing 
board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of 
the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  463  04,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of 
curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have 
become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 

  

       

employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this  section  for  a  newly 
formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school  of  the  district  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
been  a  school  of  the  newly  formed  or  reorganized  district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school 
years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the 
governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of 
termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five 
days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in 
the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent 
or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in 
Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee 
to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not 
have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a 
subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course 
of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in 
either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee 
has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

  

 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44956(a)(1)  provides: 

(a)  Any  permanent  employee  whose  services  have  been  terminated  as  provided  in  Section 

44955  shall  have  the  following  rights: 

(1)  For  the  period  of  39  months  from  the  date  of  such  termination,  any  employee  who  in  the 
meantime  has  not  attained  the  age  of  65  years  shall  have  the  preferred  right  to  reappointment, 
in  the  order  of  original  employment  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  Sections  44831  to  44855,  inclusive,  if  the  number  of  employees  is  increased  or 
the  discontinued  service  is  reestablished,  with  no  requirements  that  were  not  imposed  upon 
other  employees  who  continued  in  service;  provided,  that  no  probationary  or  other  employee 
with  less  seniority  shall  be  employed  to  render  a  service  which  said  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render.  However,  prior  to  reappointing  any  employee  to  teach  a  subject 
which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the 
equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

4. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  Lacy 
v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be  given 
retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393, 
v.  Governing  Board  of  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

In  doing  so,  the 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction,  discontinuation  or  elimination  of  particular 

kinds  of  services  and  of  those  1.2  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the 
2003-2004  school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  In  addition, 
cause  exists  for  the  reduction  of  2.0  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of 
the  2003-2004  school  year  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Therefore,  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  in a  total  of  3.2  full  time 
equivalent  certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school 
year,  2004-2005.  However,  since  the  three  certificated  teachers  noticed  for  layoff  occupied 
only  2.7  full  time  equivalent  positions,  only  those  three  occupying  that  2.7  full  time 
equivalent  positions  are  subject  to  the  layoff. 

5 

6 

     

  

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  (and  the  third  noticed  teacher)  occupying  2.7  full 

time  equivalent  certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
school  year,  2003-2004,  because  of  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  and  because  of  the  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority,  as  it  has  been. 

Dated:  Geek  he,  AGP YS 

       

LEONARD  L. 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

SCOT 

    

  

