BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
SOUTHERN  KERN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  KERN 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

CHARLES  WILLIAM  GORDON 

Case  No.  L2004030514 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  30,  2004,  in  Lancaster,  California. 

Peter  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Rodney  James  Van  Norman,  Superintendent 

(“Superintendent”),  Board  of  Trustees,  Southern  Kern  Unified  School  District  (“District”). 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent. 

District  seeks  to  lay  off  Respondent,  following  its  decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Respondent  asserts  that  cause  to  terminate  his  services  does  not  exist  because  he  is  the 
only  teacher  in  the  District  competent  to  teach  auto  mechanics. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  presented  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Superintendent  Van  Norman  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  He  was  hired  on  December 
13,  1991.  Respondent  holds  a  clear  vocational  educational  credential  that  allows  him  to  teach 
auto  mechanics  and  welding  at  the  high  school  level. 

3. 

The  Superintendent  has  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District 
(“Board”)  that  respondent  be  notified  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

4. 

The  Board  approved  the  recommendation  on  March  3,  2004,  by  adopting 

Resolution  Number  03-04-09,

5. 

On  March  8  2004,  the 

of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  Respondent’s  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004- 
05  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

District  gave  Respondent  written  notice 

6. 

Respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  him  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

The  Accusation  was  thereafter  filed  and  served  on  Respondent. 

Respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

discontinue  1 
year. 

10. 

In  adopting  Resolution  Number  03-04-09  the  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or 
full  time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  position  in  Industrial  Arts  for  the  2004-05  school 

11. 

Industrial  Arts  teaching  services  is 

a  particular  kind  of  service  that  may  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955". 

12. 

The  District  has  experienced  a  reduction  in  the  funds  presently  used  to  fund 
photography,  work  coordination,  and  internet  research.  It  has  decided  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  by  1  FTE  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  funds.  It  decided  that  the 
reduction  in  services  would  be  achieved  in  industrial  arts  teaching  services.  It  was  not 
established  that  the  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  industrial  arts  services  was 
arbitrary  or  capricious. 

13. 

Respondent  is  the  most  junior  employee  certificated  to  teach  industrial  arts.  The 
other  two  are  Keith  Wyrostek  (“Wyrostek”),  who  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  30,  1976,  and 
Terry  Allred  (“Allred”),  who  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  8,  1986. 

14. 

The  District  plans  to  offer  auto  mechanics  classes  in  the  2004-05  school  year.  It 
expects  either  Wyrostek  or  Allred,  who  are  both  certificated  to  teach  the  subject,  to  teach  the 
classes. 

15.  |  Respondent  teaches  three  periods  of  auto  mechanics,  including  an  advanced 
course,  and  one  period  of  work  experience.  Allred  teaches  welding,  computer  design,  and 
internet  research.  Wyrostek  teaches  other  industrial  arts  subjects. 

  

All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

16.  |  Wyrostek  or  Allred  both  testified  at  the  hearing  that  they  would  not  be 
competent  to  teach  a  modern  auto  mechanic  class.  Allred,  whose  education  in  auto  mechanics 
dates  to  1976,  last  taught  auto  mechanics  in  1991.  Wyrostek  has  never  taught  auto  mechanics  in 
the  District;  his  last  course  in  the  subject  was  also  in  1976. 

17. 

Respondent,  on  the  other  hand,  is  very  competent  to  teach  the  auto  mechanics 
13  years.  He  takes  yearly  courses  in  auto 

classes.  He  has  been  teaching  the  classes  for 
mechanics  to  stay  current  on  new  developments. 

18. 

A  significant  advance  occurred  in  automotive  technology  after  Wyrostek  and 
Allred  left  school:  the  advent  of  fuel-injection.  But  a  greater  revolution  occurred  with  the 
introduction  of  the  on-board  computer  in  1980,  the  platform  for  continuing  advance  and 
complexity  in  auto  mechanics. 

19. 

Termination  of  respondent’s  services  will  for  all  practical  purposes  deprive 
students  in  the  District  of  auto  mechanics  courses.  The  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  two 
teachers  the  District  plans  to  use  to  teach  the  subject  is  limited  to  cars  built  in  1976  or  earlier. 
Even  if  possessed  of  historical  interest  in  older  cars,  students  will  not  be  prepared  to  work  on 
modern  cars,  which  cars  have  undergone  major  and  significant  changes  since  1976.  In  these 
circumstances,  the  reduction  in  industrial  arts  services,  which  services  are,  in  effect,  the  auto 
mechanics  courses  taught  by  Respondent,  is  not  in  the  best  interests  of,  or  related  to  the  welfare 
of,  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

20. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondent  was  retained  to  render  a  service 

which  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  9. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  10  are  determined  to  be  a  particular 

kind  of  service  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955. 

3. 

In  cases,  such  as  this  one,  where  a  district  seeks  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 
services  and  to  issue  a  layoff  notices  to  affected  employees,  Section  44949  requires  a 
“determination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.”  By  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  13  through  19, 
reduction  of  industrial  arts  and  Respondent’s  layoff  will  effectively  deprive  District  students  of 
their  only  competent  auto  mechanics  teacher,  which  result  is  not  “related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof,”  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949.

  

4. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the 
District  by  1  FTE  position  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  services  described  in 
factual  finding  number  10,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  19,  and  legal 
conclusion  number  3. 

5. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondent  for  the  2004-05 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of 
factual  finding  numbers  1  through  19  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  1  through  4. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

1. 

2. 

The  District  may  not  terminate  Respondent’s  services  for  the  2004-05  school 

  

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

