BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CARUTHERS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

SANDRA  GOSTANIAN,  WAYNE 
MCKEEMAN 

OAH  No.  N2004010539 

  

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION . 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Caruthers,  California,  on  April  14,  2004. 

Deborah  Garabedian,  Legal  Counsel,  Fresno  County  Office  of  Education,  represented 

the  Caruthers  Unified  School  District. 

Wesley  T.  Green,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Tuttle  &  McCloskey,  represented  respondents 

Sandra  Gostanian  and  Wayne  McKeeman. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  14,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dwight  Miller,  Superintendent  of  the  Caruthers  Unified  School  District,  made 

and  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 
District. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  Caruthers  Unified  School 

  

 

3. 

On  March  11,  2004,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (the  Board)  and 
respondents  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  respondents  be  notified 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Superintendent 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to 
respondents’  competence  as  teachers. 

4. 

Prior  to  March  15,  2004,  a  notice  of  termination  was  delivered  to  each 

respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  the  notice  of  termination  in  the 
United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  respondents’  last  known 
addresses. 

The  written  notices  of  termination  specifically  stated  that  respondents’  services  would 

not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

Each  notice  advised  respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each  respondent  had 

to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination  by 
March  21,  2004  which  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served, 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Each  appearing  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to 
determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  ensuing  year. 

6. 

Accusations  were  timely  served  on  respondents  thereafter.  Each  respondent 

appearing  in  this  matter  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.'  All  prehearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  were  met. 

. 

7. 

On  February  24,  2003,  the  Board  took  action,  through  Resolution  #2004-02,  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  (“PKS”)  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 
The  Resolution  designated  reductions  in  PKS,  which  would  necessitate  a  corresponding 
reduction  of  15  full  time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  certificate  positions.  Ultimately,  the  number  of 
PKS  was  reduced  to  two,  and  two  FTEs  were  affected.  The  PKS  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  are: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE) 

Third  Year  Physical  Education  Requirement 
(BP  6146.1) 

Wood  Shop 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

  

'  Several  other  employees  were  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  in  the  2004-2005  school  year. 
Prior  to  the  hearing,  the  Board  rescinded  lay  off  notices  of  the  affected  employees,  with  the  exception  of 
respondents.

  

8. 

The  designated  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  Board  determined  that  the  woodshop  class,  which 
is  taught  by  Mr.  McKeeman,  should  be  discontinued  to  allow  the  Board  to  replace  that  class 
with  a  Health  Careers  class.  The  Board  determined  that  a  Health  Careers  class  was  more 
appropriate  to  the  current  vocational  needs  of  the  students. 

10. 

|  The  Board  determined  that  it  would  discontinue  the  third  year  of  physical 

education  requirements  at  the  high  school.  This  reduction  did  not  affect  the  District’s  State 
mandate  to  provide  two  years  of  physical  education.  Ms.  Gostanian  is  the  least  senior 
physical  education  teacher. 

. 

11. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

12. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Gostanian  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  Ms.  Gostanian  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

13. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Mr.  McKeeman  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  Mr.  McKeeman  was  certificated  and  competent to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  these  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  for  the  Caruthers 

Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  respondents  notice 
that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District.

  

@ 

ORDER 

The  Accusations  served  on  the  respondents  are  Sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 

respondents,  Sandra  Gostanian  and  Wayne  McKeeman,  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as 
indicated. 

Dated: 

  

  ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

