BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OF  THE 
BARSTOW  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004030271 

All  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Barstow 
Unified  School  District  Receiving 
Preliminary  Layoff  Notices  for  the  2004- 
2005  School  Year, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Riverside,  California,  on  April  23,  2004. 

Sherry  G.  Gordon  and  Mark  W.  Thompson,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

Barstow  Unified  School  District. 

Marianne  Reinhold,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Scott  Jester,  a  certificated 

employee  of  the  Unified  School  District  who  received  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  for 
the  2004-2005  school  year.  Scott  Jester  was  present  throughout  the  entire  proceeding. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2003. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Barstow  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Barstow  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  about  80 
miles  northeast  of  Riverside,  California.  The  District  serves  the  education  needs  of 
approximately  7,000  students  at  the  14  schools  within  the  District,  from  Kindergarten 
through  12"  Grade.  The  District  employs  about  360  certificated  employees. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  a  Board  of  Education  (the  Board). 

Jerry  Bergmans,  Ph.D.  (Dr.  Bergmans),  is  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  is 
the  Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer.  Donald  Haught  (Director  Haught)  is  the  Interim 
Director  of  Personnel  Services.

  

 

The  Economic  Layoff 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and 

reduced  a  major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education.  Following 
the  passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the 
State  of  California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  necessary  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive 
until  the  state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before 
then,  the  school  district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends 
meet  if  the  worst-case  financial  scenario  develops. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 
teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary 
layoff  notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school 
year.  These  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require 
the  retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of 
permanent  employees  over  probationary  employees  and  others  with  less  seniority. 

4. 

On  March  9,  2004,  Dr.  Bergmans  recommended  to  the  Board  in  writing 
that  preliminary  notices  be  served  on  several  certificated  employees  advising  them  that 
their  services  would  not  be  necessary  in  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the 
recommendation  that  the  District  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Resolution  #33,  2003-04 

5. 

On  March  9,  2004,  Resolution  #33,  2003-04  was  adopted.  That 

resolution  provided: 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Barstow  Unified  School  District  has 

determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  herein  must  be  reduced  or 
discontinued;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the  aforementioned 

reason  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  that  the  number  of  regular  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  services  of  regular 
certificated  employees  based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily  attendance  during  the  past 
two  years. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 

Barstow  Unified  School  District  as  follows: 

  

@ 

A. 

That  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  below  be  reduced  or 
eliminated  commencing  in  the  2003-2004  school  year. 

HIGH  SCHOOL  SCIENCE  TEACHER 
HIGH  SCHOOL  FINE  ARTS  TEACHER 
HIGH  SCHOOL  BUSINESS  TEACHER 
HIGH  SCHOOL  ENGLISH  TEQACHER 
INDEPENDENT  STUDY  TEACHERS 
TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES 

1  F.T.E. 
1  F.T.E. 
1F.T.E. 
1  F.T.E. 
2  F.T.E. 
6  F.T.E. 

  

B. 

Cc. 

D. 

That  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
the  legal  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  be  terminated 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 

That  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  be  affected  by  termination  of 
regular  employees  and  not  by  terminating  temporary  and  substitute 
employees. 

That  the  District  Superintendent  (or  legal  designee)  is  directed  to  initiate 
layoff  proceedings  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44955  and 
44949, 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  at  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Education  held 

© 

_5_ 

(Acevedo,  Clemmer,  Hailey,  Hemingway,  and  Vogt.) 

on  March  9,  2004. 

AYES: 
NOES: 
ABSENT: 
ABSTAIN: 

Jerry  Bergmans 

Superintendent 

I  certify  under  penalty  of  perjury  that  this  is  a  true  and  correct  copy  of  the  Board 

of  Resolution,  adopted  by  the  Board  of  Education,  March  9,  2004. 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

6. 

On  March  11,  2004,  a  Notice  of  Recommendation  That  Services  Will 

Not  Be  Required,  a  Notice  of  Accusation,  an  Accusation,  a  (blank)  Notice  of  Defense 
and  Request  for  Hearing,  copies  of  relevant  Education  and  Government  Code  statutes 
and  a  Notice  of  Hearing  were  served  on  Mark  Hassell  (Hassell)  and  Scott  Jester 
(Jester). 

Jester  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  requested  a  hearing. 

Hassell  did  not  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  or  request  a  hearing.  

Thereafter,  Jester  and  his  attorney  were  served  with  an  Amended  Notice  of 

Hearing. 

7. 

On  April  23,  2004,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 
Counsel  for  the  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  Counsel  for  Respondents  waived 
the  giving  of  an  opening  statement.  Stipulations  were  recited.  Sworn  testimony  and 
documentary  evidence  was  received. 

Each  counsel  was  given  through  the  close  of  business  on  April  26,  2004,  to  file 

a  closing  written  argument. 

On  April  26,  2004,  the  matter  was  submitted. 

Stipulations 

8. 

9. 

Stipulations  were  reached  concerning  the  validity  and  admissibility  of 

Exhibits  1  through  5  and  8  through  14. 

It  was  stipulated  that  on  November  18,  2002,  Jester  began  his 

employment  with  the  District  under  a  Pre-Intern  Certificate  and  that  he  continued his. 
employment  for  the  remainder  of  the  2002-2003  school  year  under  that  certificate. 

It  was  stipulated  that  on  October  9,  2003,  Jester  began  serving  the  District 
under  an  Individualized  Internship  Certificate  and  that  he  has  continued  and  will 
continue  his  employment  with  the  District  for  the  remainder  of  the  2003-2004  school 
year  under  that  certificate. 

The  District’s  Seniority  List 

10. 

According  to  Director  Haught,  the  District’s  Interim  Director  of 

Personnel  Services,  the  District’s  administrative  staff  created  a  10  page  Certificated 
Seniority  List  (Exhibit  6)  under  his  supervision. 

The  Certificated  Seniority  List  contained  the  names  of  all  certificated 

employees,  each  employee’s  seniority  date,  status  (Permanent,  Probationary  II, 
Probationary  I,  Intern  or  Temporary),  the  school  site  where  the  employee’s  services 
were  provided  in  the  2003-2004  school  year,  the  employee’s  assignment,  the  grade(s) 
taught,  the  employee’s  credential,  the  subject(s)  the  employee  was  credentialed  to 
teach,  whether  a  Board  resolution  was  passed  authorizing  the  employee  to  teach 
another  subject(s),  and  the  amount  of  services  being  provided  by  the  employee 
measured  by a 

full  time  equivalent  (F.T.E.) 

Director  Haught  testified  the  District  assigned  a  “seniority  date”  to  each 
employee  based  upon  the  employee’s  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary 
employee.  If  an  employee  provided  service  to  the  District  as  “temporary”  employee, 

 

  

under  a  temporary  credential,  an  emergency  credential  or  a  pre-intern  certificate,  the 
employee  was  not  given  a  seniority  date  until  his  or  her  service  with  the  District 
began  under  something  other  than  a  provisional  credential. 

There  was  no  direct  attack  on  the  seniority  list  on  the  basis  that  it  was  false  or 

inaccurate. 

The  Bump  Analysis 

11. 

Under  Director  Haught’s  supervision,  the  District’s  staff  created  a 

“Bump  Analysis,”  a  schedule  used  to  determine  which  employees  should  receive  a  final 
layoff  notice.’ 

The  “Bump  Analysis”  contained  the  particular  kinds  of  services  being  reduced, 

the  names  of  the  certificated  employees  providing  services  in  those  areas,  each 
employee’s  status  (i.e.,  Permanent,  Probationary  II,  Probationary  I,  Intern  or 
Temporary),  each  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee,  the 
employee’s  credential(s),  and  whether  the  employee  was  senior  to  other  employees 
providing  the  same  particular  kind  of  service. 

12. 

In  the  2003-2004  school  year,  Jester  provided  services  as  a  Middle 
School  Language  Arts  teacher.  His  seniority  date,  based  on  his  first  date  of  paid 
employment  with  the  District  when  he  held  an  Individualized  Internship  Certificate 
from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing,  was  October  9,  2003. 

Gilberto  Pena  (Pena)  was a  District  employee  with  an  Internship  Certificate 

(Single  Subject  English)  who  taught  high  school  English.  Pena  was  the  District’s 
most  recently  employed  high  school  English  teacher  and  his  position  was  eliminated 
with  the  passage  of  Resolution  #33,  2003-04.  However,  Pena’s  seniority  and 

  

The  concept  of  “bumping”  relates  to  the  statutory  right  of  a  senior  certificated  employee  to 
I 
displace  a  more  junior  employee  who  renders a  particular  kind  of  service  the  senior  employee  can  lawfully 
provide. 

Upon  determining  a  need  for  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  permanent  employees,  a  school  district 
Senior  employees 

must  comply  with  the  layoff  procedures  enumerated  in  Education  Code  section  44955. 
are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will  not  be  terminated  if  there  are  junior  employees  retained  who  render 
services  which  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Conversely,  a  district  may 
move  upward  from  the  bottom  of  the  seniority  list,  “skipping”  over  and  retaining  junior  employees  who  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  which  more  senior  employees  are  not.  Seniority  is  not  an 
inherent  or  constitutional  right.  Seniority  itself  confers  no  rights  on  employees  but  entitles  them  to 
preferential  treatment  only  to  the  extent  that  a  statute  or  collective  bargaining  agreement  so  provides. 
Seniority  rights  may  be  limited  by  subsequent  legislation.  (See,  Ozsogomonyan,  Teacher  Layoffs  in 
California:  An  Update  (1979)  30  Hastings  L.J.  1727.) 

 

credential  entitled  him  to  “bump”  Jester  and  to  teach  Language  Arts  in  Middle  School 
under  the  “Bump  Analysis.” 

13. 

Jester  was  not  and  is  not  credentialed  and  competent  to  provide  any 

service  presently  being  provided  by  any  less  senior  employee  within  the  District, 
assuming,  as  the  District  does,  that  service  under  a  pre-intern  certificate  does  not 
provide  an  individual  with  probationary  employment  status. 

Jester’s  Testimony 

14. 

Jester  testified  that  he  was  a  day-to-day  substitute  teacher  with  the 

District  before  he  began  his  employment  on  November  18,  2002.  Jester  taught 
Language  Arts  to  students  with  mild  to  moderate  disabilities  in  his  first  year  with  the 
District;  since  then,  he  taught  Language  Arts  to  7”  and  8"  graders. 

Jester  taught  the  same  classes  and  the  same  students  in  the  2003-2004  school 

year  under  his  Pre-Intern  Certificate  and  his  Individualized  Internship  Certificate. 

Jester  was  taking  classes  from  Chapman  College  when  working  under  his  Pre- 

Intern  Certificate  and  he  is  taking  classes  from  Chapman  College  under  his 
Individualized  Internship  Certificate. 

Seniority  and  Service  under  a  Pre-Intern  Certificate 

15.  |  There  is  no  factual  dispute.  Jester  claimed  his  seniority  date  should  be 

the  date  he  first  started  working  for  the  District  under  his  Pre-Intern  Certificate  — 
November  18,  2002  —  and  his  seniority  date  should  not  be  the  date  he  began  working 
under  his  Individualized  Internship  Certificate  -  October  9,  2003  —  which  was  the 
date  his  certificate  was  issued.  Jester  argued  all  employees,  including  pre-interns, 
should  be  treated  as  probationary  employees  for  the  purpose  of  this  economic  layoff 
proceeding. 

The  District  argued  that  persons  serving  under  a  pre-intern  certificate  cannot 

receive  seniority  credit  under  the  Education  Code  in  economic  layoff  proceedings  and 
that  Jester  should  be  given  final  notice  that  his  services  are  not  needed  in  the  2004- 
2005  school  year. 

: 

Other  Matters 

16. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered 

to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  more  senior 

employee  was  retained  to  perform  any  service  which  a  more  senior  employee  was 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform.

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  including  resignations,  retirements 

and  requests  for  transfer,  in  determining  the  number  of  layoff  notices. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

L. 

Jurisdiction:  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in 
those  sections  were  satisfied  as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  in  the 
seniority  lists. 

2. 

Reduction  of Particular  Kinds  of Services:  A  school  board’s  decision  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical 
computation,  such  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  students.  It  is  within  a  board’s 
discretion,  subject  to  the  minimum  level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the  extent  to 
which  a  reduction  of  services  is  necessary  and  proper  under  the  circumstances.  The 
board’s  decision  is  made  at  the  time  of  the  final  notice.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.  3d  627 

3. 

Credentialing:  The  following  information  and  opinion  is  taken  from 
“Symposium:  Access  to  Quality  Teaching:  An  Analysis  of  Inequality  in  California’s 
Public  Schools,”  appearing  in  43  Santa  Clara  Law  Review  1045  (2003). 

The  primary  tool  California  uses  to  ensure  teachers  are  prepared  to  teach  is  its 
teacher  credentialing  system.  The  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing 
(CCTC)  is  charged  with  ensuring  that  candidates  recommended  for  a  credential  have 
demonstrated  satisfactory  ability  to  assist  students  to  meet  or  exceed  state  content  and 
performance  standards.  The  CCTC  has  integrated  preparation  for  teaching  the 
standards  into  both  the  subject  matter  and  professional  preparation  requirements  for 
receiving  a  credential  (primarily  in  the  form  of  courses,  tests  and  supervised  practice 
teaching)  and  the  accreditation  requirements  that  pertain  to  schools  of  education. 

California  issues  two  types  of  clear  teaching  credentials:  Single  subject  (for 

teachers  who  teach  a  specific  subject  in  a  departmentalized  class,  usually  in  secondary 
school)  and  multiple  subject  (for  teachers  who  teach  all  subjects  in  a  self-contained 
classroom,  most  often  used  in  elementary  school).  In  order  to  earn  either  type  of 
credential,  candidates  must  demonstrate  subject  matter  competence.  This  can  be 
accomplished  either  by  completing  an  approved  subject  matter  preparation  program  in 
a  California  college  or  university  or  by  passing  one  or  more  subject  matter 
competency  tests  adopted  by  the  CCTC. 

In  addition  to  demonstrating  subject  matter  competence,  candidates  for  a 

single  subject  or  multiple  subject  credential  must  also  complete  an  accredited 
program  of  professional  preparation.

The  courses  and  tests  required  of  candidates  are  carefully  mapped  onto  the 
CCTC’s  standards,  which  describe  what  teachers  should  know  and  be  able  to  do, 
which  are  in  turn  directly  related  to  the  content  standards  expected  of  students. 

Equally  important  are  the  state’s  expectations  -  reflected  in  its  requirements 

for  the  teacher  credential  and  for  the  accreditation  of  teacher  education  programs -  for 
teaching  content  to  diverse  learners:  knowledge  of  second  language  acquisition  and 
development,  knowledge  of  child  development,  and  knowledge  of  the  needs  of 
exceptional  learners  and  strategies  for  teaching  to  these  special  needs. 

A  sizeable  minority  of  California’s  teachers  -  well  over  40,000  in  2000-2001  - 

lack  a  full  credential  for  all  or  part  of  their  teaching  assignment,  and  many  have  not 
completed,  or  even  begun,  a  teacher  education  program.  Candidates  who  receive  other 
credentials,  permits  or  waivers  satisfy  some  but  not  all  of  the  requirements  necessary 
to  obtain  a  teaching  credential. 

To  hold  an  intern  credential,  candidates  must  have  satisfied  most  of  the  subject 
matter  requirements,  passed  the  CBEST,  and  hold  a  bachelors  degree.  They  must  also 
be  enrolled  in  an  approved  internship  program  providing  coursework  and  a  supervised 
teaching  experience.  Generally,  interns  serve  as  the  teacher  of  record  for  all  or  part  of 
the  school  day.  Some  intern  programs  provide  some  student  teaching  experience 
before  candidates  take  on  this  role,  others  do  not.  Interns  generally  complete  the 
professional  preparation  requirements  over  a  two-year  period  while  they  are  teaching. 

Teachers  on  emergency  permits  or  pre-intern  certificates  lack  either  the 
professional  preparation  and/or  the  content  preparation  expected  of  a  fully  prepared 
teacher  or  both.  To  hold  an  emergency  permit  or  a  pre-intern  credential,  candidates 
must  pass  the  CBEST,  hold  a  bachelor’s  degree  and  meet  a  less  rigorous  subject 
matter  standard. 

Emergency  permit  holders  must  submit  a  statement  “demonstrating  intent”  to 
complete  requirements  for  a  credential.  Emergency  permits  can  be  renewed  for  five 
consecutive  years,  during  which  the  candidate  is  expected  to  complete  a  minimum  of 
six  semester  units  of  coursework  annually  to  renew  the  permit.  Some  teachers  who 
are  fully  prepared  and  credentialed  in  another  state  teach  on  emergency  permits  while 
they  are  completing  specific  California  requirements;  some  who  are  credentialed  in 
another  field  hold  emergency  permits  while  they  teach  out  of  field. 

Pre-interns  are  emergency  permit  teachers  who  have  not  yet  satisfied  the 
subject  matter  competence  requirement  for  entry  into  an  internship  program  and  who 
have  agreed  to  work  toward  subject  matter  competence  while  they  are  teaching  as 
teachers  of  record.  They  also  generally  have  not  begun  studying  toward  the 
professional  preparation  requirements.  They  must  “demonstrate  intent”  to  take  the 
state’s  subject  matter  examinations  for  teachers  and  take  content  courses  in  a 

 

university  while  they  hold  the  certificate.  Pre-interns  are  not  expected  to  have  met  the 
longer  list  of  professional  preparation  requirements.  If  they  enter  an  intern  program, 
they  then  will  be  expected  to  pursue  those  requirements. 

Finally,  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  also  grants  short-term  and 
variable  term  waivers  that  allow  non-credentialed  teacher  candidates  to  waive  any  of 
the  statutory  and  regulatory  requirements  for  credentials.  Waivers  are  generally  issued 
to  candidates  who  have  not  passed  the  CBEST  or  met  the  subject  matter  standards. 

None  of  these  adjunct  categories  of  credentials,  permits,  or  waivers  requires 

that  the  candidates  fully  meet  the  state’s  subject  matter  competence  standards,  which 
are  tied  to  the  student  learning  standards,  before  assuming  teaching  responsibilities. 
Furthermore,  none  of  them  requires  that  teachers  have  studied  or  demonstrated 
proficiency  in  standards-based  methods  of  teaching  subject  matter,  reading,  English 
language  learners,  or  special  education  students  before  they  take  responsibility  for 
students,  as  full  (preliminary  or  clear)  credential  holders  are  required  to  have  done. 
None  of  the  alternative  credentials  require  that  teachers  have  had  the  opportunity  to 
work  under  the  direct  daily  supervision  of  a  practicing  veteran  teacher  available  to 
demonstrate  effective  strategies. 

Thus,  while  it  is  possible  that  some  individuals  working  in  California  on  less- 

than-full  credentials,  permits  or  waivers  have  the  preparation  and  teaching  skill 
needed  to  teach  students  to  the  state’s  learning  standards,  there  are  few  guarantees 
that  non-credentialed  teachers  have  the  depth  of  content  knowledge  and  the  breadth  of 
teaching  skills  needed  to  assure  access  to  equal  educational  opportunities  for  the 
diverse  set  of  learners  found  in  California  classrooms. 

Statutes  and  Appellate  Decisions  re  Probationary  and  Temporary  Status: 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44845  provides: 

“Every  probationary  or  permanent  employee  employed  after  June  30,  1947, 
shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed  on  the  date  upon  which  he  first 
rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.” 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44929.21(b)  provides  in  part: 

“Every  employee  of  a  school  district  . 
.  having  an  average  daily  attendance  of 
. 
250  or  more  who,  after  having  been  employed  by  the  district  for  two  complete 
consecutive  school  years  in  a  position  or  positions  requiring  certification 
qualifications,  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year  to  a  position 
requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the  commencement  of  the

@ 

succeeding  school  year  be  classified  as  and  become  a  permanent  employee  of 
the  district.” 

© 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44911  provides: 

“Service  by  a  person  under  a  provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in 
computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility 
to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a  school  district. 

This  section  shall  not  be  applicable  to  teachers  granted  a  one-year  emergency 
credential  under  the  conditions  specified  in  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44252 
and  subdivision  (h)  of  Section  44830.” 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44466  provides: 

“An  intern  shall  not  acquire  tenure  while  serving  on  an  internship  credential. 
A  person  who,  after  completing  a  teaching  internship  program  authorized 
pursuant  to  this  article,  is  employed  for  at  least  one  complete  school  year  in  a 
position  requiring  certification  qualifications  by  the  school  district  that 
employed  the  person  as  an  intern  during  the  immediately  preceding  school 
year  and  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year  to  a  position 
requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
succeeding  school  year,  acquire  tenure.” 

8. 

Arguments:  As  Jester  pointed  out,  no  Education  Code  section  requires 
the  “temporary”  classification  of  a  person  who  serves  under  an  emergency  permit,  a 
pre-intern  certificate  or  an  intern  credential;  however,  there  is  no  Education  Code 
section  that  authorizes  a  person  serving  under  a  pre-intern  certificate  to  receive 
seniority  credit  for  such  service. 

As  the  District  argued: 

“If  the  Legislature  had  intended  pre-interns  to  receive  the  same  retroactive 
credit  as  interns  receive,  it  knew  how  to  craft  such  language.  Since  the 
language  is  missing,  we  must  assume  that  no  such  right  was  either  intended  or 
conferred.” 

Golden  Valley  and  Summerfield: 

9. 

California  Teachers  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Golden 
Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4"  369  stated  “teachers  serving 

© 

A  complete  school  year  for  purposes  of  seniority  is  attained  by  serving  at  least  75%  of  the  number 

  

> 
of  days  the  regular  schools  are  maintained. 

Education  Code  section  44908. 

10 

 

under  an  emergency  permit  who  satisfy  the  requirements  of  section  44915  are  entitled 
to  the  statutory  protections  governing  the  dismissal  of  a  probationary  employee.” 

Golden  Valley  involved  a  mid-year  “for  cause”  termination  action  rather  than 

an  economic  layoff  action.  In  Golden  Valley,  the  written  contract  between  the 
employee  and  the  district  specifically  provided  the  employee  with  contingent 
probationary  status. 

10. 

Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4" 

1026  involved  the  question  of  whether  service  under  a  temporary  permit  should  count 
towards  the  completion  of  a  mandatory  two-year  probation  period. 

Summerfield  concluded  that  under  Education  Code  section  44911,  time  spent 
teaching  under  an  emergency  teaching  credential  should  not  be  counted  in  computing 
progress  toward  permanent  status  unless  the  employee  was  credentialed  in  another 
state  and  demonstrated  adequate  basic  skills  pending  successful  completion  of  the 
California  Basic  Educational  Skills  Test. 

Summerfield  reasoned  that  the  plain  language  of  Education  Code  section 
44911  suggested  that  emergency  credentials  were  the  same  as  provisional  credentials, 
or  are  at  least  were  one  type  of  provisional  credential,  and  under  Education  Code 
section  44911  service  by  an  individual  under  a  provisional  credential  could  not  be 
included  in  computing  the  mandatory  probationary  service. 

11. 

A  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  continues  to  serve  under 

that  permit  and  under  the  contract  to  which  the  teacher  agreed  until  the  teacher  is 
issued  a  credential  and  registers  the  credential  with  the  district.  The  district  has  no 
duty  to  classify  a  teacher  as  probationary  employee  retroactive  to  the  validity  date  of 
the  credential.  No  statutory  provision  suggests  a  contrary  conclusion,  and  precedent 
confirms  that  contract  terms  to  which  a  teacher  has  agreed  should  not  be  abrogated 
unless  the  statutory  mandate  is  clear.  Moreover,  this  conclusion  comports  with  related 
statutory  provisions,  as  well  as  considerations  of  practicality  and  common  sense.  Fine 
v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  Dist.  (2004)  116  Cal.  App.  4th  1070,  1078. 

12. 

Estoppel:  Jester  did  not  present  a  factual  argument  that  the  District 

misled  him  into  believing  he  was:a  probationary  employee.  This  is  not  a  case  of  the 
District’s  manipulation  of  the  classification  system  to  any  temporary  employee’s 
detriment.  See,  American  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Board  of Education  (1977)  77 
Cal.  App.  3d  100,  109. 

13. 

Conclusion:  Within  the  context  of  this  economic  layoff  proceeding  —  as 

opposed  to  a  termination  for  cause  proceeding  —  it  makes  little  sense  to  provide 
seniority  status  to  persons  holding  pre-intern  certificates  and  to  grant  them  more 
rights  than  others  with  intern  status  or  preliminary  or  permanent  credentials. 
economic  layoff  statutes  were  designed  to  ensure  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  that 

The 

11 

 

qualified  and  competent  senior  employees  would  be  retained  over  more  junior 
employees  and  that  permanent  employees  would  be  retained  over  probationary 
employees.  A  teacher  cannot  become  a  permanent  (tenured)  employee  without 
serving  a  mandatory  two  year  probationary  period  first,  and  a  teacher  cannot  attain 
probationary  status  under  a  pre-intern  certificate. 

For  these  reasons,  and  based  on  a  review  of  the  authority,  opinion  and 
arguments  cited  in  Legal  Conclusions  3-12,  it  is  concluded  that  Jester  was  not  entitled 
to  seniority  credit  for  serving  under  a  pre-intern  certificate  in  this  layoff  proceeding. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

The  Barstow  Unified  School  District  shall  give  notice  to  Mark  Hassell  and 
Scott  Jester  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Dated:  Lope 

30,2004 

ES  AHLER 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

12

