BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
ANTIOCH  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff  of: 

Certificated  Employees, 

OAH  No.  N2004020394 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  30,  2004,  in  Antioch,  California. 

Laurie  S.  Juengert  of  Lozano  Smith  represented  the  Antioch  Unified  School  District. 

Margo  A.  Feinberg  of  Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers,  LLP,  represented 
the  respondents,  of  whom  Stephanie  Andrews-Garcia,  Brian  Barnes,  Nella  Cockerham,  Diana 
Degering,  Dolores  Erickson,  Neil  Gardiner,  Megan  Keesling,  Sonia  Manuel,  David  Price, 
Carolyn  Roberts  and  James  Wolley  were  present  at  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  30,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dennis  Goettsch  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as 

Superintendent  of  the  Antioch  Unified  School  District  (District). 

2. 

Respondents  are  listed  on  Appendix  A,  attached  hereto  and  by  this  reference 

incorporated  herein.  They  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  3,  2004,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  (Board)  adopted  Resolution 

No.  2003-04-27  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the 
Superintendent  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

4. 

On  March  4,  2004,  Associate  Superintendent  for  Personnel  Services  Donna 

Becnel  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recom- 
mendation.

    

5. 

Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
terminating  their  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  An  accusation  was  served  on  respon- 
dents,  all  of  whom  are  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  notices  of  defense.  All  prehearing  juris- 
dictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds 

of  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year: 

SERVICES 
Administrative  Positions: 

Elementary  Vice  Principals 
Director  of  Certificated  Personnel 

Certificated  Positions: 
K-5  Specialists 

Computers 
Music 
PE 

Counselor  —  Prospects  High  School 
Hourly  Positions  —  Prospects  High 
Food  Service/Atrium  —  Prospects  High 
Music 

. 

TOTAL 

FTE’ 

13.0 
1.0 

13.0 
9.4 
13.0 
6 
2.54 
A 
1.0 
53.94 

7. 

8. 

a. 

b. 

c. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  layoff  notice  sent  to  Pat  Lamson. 

The  parties  stipulated  to  the  following  matters  concerning  the  seniority  and 

credentials  of  respondents: 

Dolores  Erickson’s  seniority  date  shall  be  changed  from  August  1,  2000  to  July 
26,  1999. 
Mark  Hurtado,  a  provisional  employee  in  physical  education,  also  holds  an 
emergency  permit  for  multiple  subject  teaching.  The  District  will  retain  him  for 
the  2004-05  school  year  in  a  position  requiring  a  multiple  subject  credential.  His 
layoff  notice  is  rescinded. 
James  Wolley  is  impacted  by  the  .4  FTE  reduction  in  Food  Service/Atrium  at 
Prospects  High  School.  He  will  receive  a  final  layoff  notice  for  .4  FTE  of  his 
current  1.0  FTE  position.  Ifa  full-time  position  exists  for  the  2004-05  school 
year  at  Deer  Valley  High  School,  the  District  will  recall  Wolley  to  that  position. 
Wolley  has  a  right  to  work  at  Deer  Valley  High  School  if  the  position  there  is 
full-time  or  to  work  at  Prospects  High  School  and  Deer  Valley  High  School  if 
there  is  a  full-time  position  between  those  two  sites. 

  

"  Full-time  equivalent  positions. 

 
  
  

  

9. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  non-respondents  Jason  Ebner  and  Margarita 

Martinez  De  Madrid”  were  temporary  teachers  whose  status  is  being  changed  to  probation- 
ary.  They  will  be  treated  as  having  probationary  status  for  the  2003-04  school  year.  They 
are  not  impacted  by  the  layoff. 

10. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  respondent  Megan  Keesling  was  hired  as  a 

provisional  employee  on  an  emergency  permit  on  August  6,  2001.  She  later  received  her 
preliminary  credential  and  is  now  a  probationary  employee.  The  validity  date  of  Keesling’s 
preliminary  credential  is  June  15,  2003. 

The  parties  do  not  agree  on  what  respondent  Megan  Keesling’s  seniority  date  should 

be. 
In  this  district  an  employee  teaching  on  an  emergency  permit  is  called  a  provisional 
employee.  When  a  provisional  employee  receives  a  credential  the  District  changes  his  or  her 
status  to  Probationary  1  as  of  the  validity  date  of  the  credential.  This  date  also  becomes  the 
employee’s  seniority  date.  Accordingly  the  District  considers  Keesling’s  seniority  date  to  be 
June  15,  2003.  Keesling  claims  that  once  she  received  her  preliminary  credential  she  was 
entitled  to  a  seniority  date  of  August  6,  2001,  the  date  she  started  teaching  under  an 
emergency  permit.  (She  does  not  claim  that  her  service  under  an  emergency  permit  should 
count  for  purposes  of  accruing  tenure.)  Keesling’s  claim  to  an  earlier  seniority  date  is 
without  merit  and  is  rejected. 

In  California  Teachers’  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Golden  Valley  Unified 

School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369,  the  court  construed  section  44915?  to  allow  a 
teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  to  be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee  and 
held  that  such a  teacher  is  entitled  to  the  statutory  protections  governing  the  dismissal  of  a 
probationary  employee.  However,  the  Golden  Valley  court  agreed  with  the  ruling  in 
Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026,  that  time  spent 
teaching  under  an  emergency  permit  cannot  be  counted  toward  accruing  tenure  as  a 
permanent  employee.  It  is  logical  to  conclude  that  such  service  also  should  not  count  for 
seniority  purposes.  This  conclusion  finds  support  in  Summerfield  —  although  the  teacher 
there  had  been  employed  under  an  emergency  permit  for  the  1997-1998  school  year  and  had 
been  classified  by  her  district  as  a  probationary  employee,  the  court  referred  to  “her  first 
probationary  year”  as  the  1998-1999  school  year,  when  she  was  first  employed  as  a 
probationary  employee  under  a  preliminary  credential. 

  

?  Although  the  parties  referred  to  “Margarita  Martinez  De  Madrid,”  this  may  not  be  the  correct 

name.  The  District’s  list  of  temporary  teachers  (Exhibit  7)  includes  no  teacher  by  this  name  but  does 
include  a  teacher  by  the  name  of  Margarita  Martinez  De  Miguel.  There  is  another  temporary  teacher  by 
the  name  of  Jeffrey  Madrid,  so  this  might  have  caused  some  confusion. 

>  Section  44915  provides  that:  “Governing  boards  of  school  districts  shall  classify  as  proba- 
tionary  employees,  those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications  for  the 
school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified  as  permanent  employees  or  as  substitute  employees.”

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained 

by  the  District  to  perform  services  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955, 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  change  the  seniority  date  of  respondent  Dolores  Erickson  from 

August  1,  2000  to  July  26,  1999. 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  accusations  against  respondents  Mark  Hurtado  and 

Pat  Lamson. 

4. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  all  respondents  except  Mark  Hurtado  and 
Pat  Lamson  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  The  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
section  44949. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  District  shall  change  the  seniority  date  of  respondent  Dolores  Erickson 

from  August  1,  2000  to  July  26,  1999. 

2. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  all  respondents  except  Mark  Hurtado  and  Pat  Lamson 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction 
or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

The  accusations  against  respondents  Mark  Hurtado  and  Pat  Lamson  are 

dismissed. 

DATED:  Wits 

j  Dov  YY 

Ptrwny (errr 

RASMUSSEN 
NANCY  I 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

    

RESPONDENTS 

Stephanie  Andrews-Garcia 
Brian  Barnes 
James  Carlile 
Nella  Cockerham 
Farrah  Davies 
Diana  Degering 
Dolores  Erickson 
Benjamin  Fong 
Neil  Gardiner 
Cecile  Henderson 
Mark  Hurtado 
Megan  Keesling 
Chrishan  King 
Pat  Lamson 
Sonia  Manuel 
David  Price 
Carolyn  Roberts 
Cynthia  Rodemich 
Nicole  Sanders 
Damian  Ting 
Wendy  Troxell 
Staci  Webb 
James  Wolley 

” 

Appendix  A

