BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
SAN  JUAN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Layoff): 

PROPOSED  REDUCTION  OR 
ELIMINATION  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS 
OF  SERVICES  BY  278.17  FULL  TIME 
EQUIVALENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2004030113 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  21  and  22,  2004,  in  Sacramento,  California,  Leonard  L.  Scott, 

Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this 
matter. 

. 

Diana  D.  Halpenny,  General  Counsel,  represented  the  San  Juan  Unified  School 

District  (School  District). 

Joan  Maredyth,  Attorney  at  Law,  assisted  by  her  Paralegal  Robin  Thompson, 

represented  all  of  the  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  record  was  left  open  until  April  26,  2004,  for  the 

receipt  of  written  closing  arguments.  The  School  District’s  written  closing  argument  was 
received  on  April  26,  2004  and  was  marked  for  identification  as  School  District’s  Exhibit  22. 
Respondent’s  written  closing  argument  was  received  on  April  26,  2004,  and  was  marked  for 
identification  as  Respondent’s  Exhibit  G.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  on  April  26,  2004.  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  Dianna  R.  Garcia  (Garcia),  Assistant 

Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  of  the  School  District,  sent  a  written  recommendation 
to  the  Board  of  Education  (Board)  of  the  School  District  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation 
of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  Garcia  served  on  respondents  written  notices  of 

the  recommendation  to  the  Board  that  respondents’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  due  to  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
(PKS).  The  notices  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation,  as  required  by  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

Attached  to  the  notices  were  blank  Request  for  Hearing  forms. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  the  recommendation  was  placed  on  the  agenda 
of  the  Board.  During  that  meeting,  the  Board  found  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
the  particular  kinds  of  services  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  School  District  and  the  students 
due  to  the  need  to  reduce  expenditures  because  of  the  uncertainty  in  the  amount  of  revenue 
the  School  District  would  receive  from  the  State  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

At  that  meeting,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2299  reducing  or  discontinuing 

particular  kinds  of  services  and  thus  eliminating  278.17  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year. 

The  Resolution  provided  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  following 

particular  kinds  of  services: 

A. 

SCHOOLS  AND  PROGRAMS 

ADMINISTRATORS 

; 

Middle  school  vice  principals 
High  school  vice  principals 

Sub-total 

8.00  FTE 

  

NON-ADMINISTRATIVE  CERTIFICATED  SERVICES 
K-6  Teachers 
Special  Education  Pilot  Program 
Counselors  K-12 
Elementary  Specialists 
English  7-12 
Math  7-12 
Social  Science  7-12 

FTE 

3.00 
5.00 

90.00 
2.00 
10.00 
75.31 
10.60 
8.00 
8.00

  

  
  
  

@ 

Science  7-12 
Physical  Education  7-12 
Foreign  Language  7-12 
Industrial  Arts  7-12 
Fine  Arts  7-12 

B. 

GRANTS  AND  CATEGORICAL  CERTIFICATED  SERVICES 

Sub-total 

221.71  FTE 

ADMINISTRATORS 
Title  I  Elementary  Vice  Principal 

Sub-total 

0.50  FTE 

NON-ADMINISTRATIVE  CERTIFICATED  SERVICES 
215"  Century  Community  Policing 

Nurse 

Counselor 

Comprehensive  School  Reform  Demonstration  Program 

Teacher  —  Resource 

General  Bilingual 

@ 

Teacher  —  Language  Specialist 
Teacher  —  ELD 

Healthy  Start  Nurse 
IV/USP 

. 
Counselor 
Teacher 
Teacher  —  Resource 

Indian  Education 

Teacher  —  Resource 

Teacher-Consulting 

PAR/BTSA 

Parent  Institute 

Teacher  —  Adult  Education 

Traveling  Music  Teacher 
Traveling  PE  Teacher 

SIP 

Title  I 

Counselor 
Librarian 

Nurses 

© 

Teacher 
Teacher  —  Reading  Specialist 
Teacher  —  Resource 

5.30 
5.30 
2.60 
2.00 
2.60 

0.50 

0.40 
0.40 

1.60 

1.00 
1.00 
1.35 

1.00 
4.16 
0.55 

1.00 

3.00 

0.20 

0.05 
0.13 

2.35 
0.30 
1.55 
18.19 
0.60 
6.64 

 

Title  II 

. 

Visual  Performing  Arts/IMF/Staff  Development 

Teacher  —  Resource 

Teacher  —  Resource 

TOTAL  REDUCTION  OR  ELIMINATION  OF 
PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 

Sub-total 

2.00 

0.50 

47.96  FTE 

a 
278.17  FTE 

At  the  same  meeting,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  2300,  which  established 

criteria  to  break  ties  among  certificated  staff  (teachers)  with  the  same  date  of  hire.  The 
Governing  Board  based  the  criteria  upon  the  needs  of  the  School  District  and  of  its  students, 
and  acted  within  its  discretion  in  creating  the  tie  breaking  criteria. 

4. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  to  determine  whether  there  is 

cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year  pursuant  to  Educatien  Code 
section  44949(b). 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  2299,  on  April  5,  2004,  Garcia  signed  and  had 

timely  served  upon  respondents  the  Accusation.  Garcia  acted  in  her  official  capacity. 

6. 

Respondents  timely  signed  and  served  Notices  of  Defense  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44949(c)(1)  and  Government  Code  section  11506. 

Thereafter,  the  matter  was  set  for  hearing. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  School  District. 

7. 

8. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  _ 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

9. 

Tenure  is  the  relationship  between  a  teacher  and  the  School  District  which 

gives  the  teacher  greater  job  security. 

Seniority  is  the  relationship  between  the  teachers  within  a  School  District.  Among  the 
teachers  credentialed  to  provide  a  given  service,  greater  seniority  in  the  School  District  gives 
a  greater  legal  entitlement  to  a  position,  see  Ferner  v.  Harris  (1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  363. 

A  teacher  who  serves  over  75  percent  of  the  regular  school  year  either  as  a  temporary 

or  in  one  position  replacing  one  teacher  partially  as  a  long  term  substitute  and  partially  as  a 
temporary,  receives  credit  toward  tenure  for  the  whole  school  year.  In  either  instance,  the 
teacher  receives  credit  toward  seniority  from  the  start  of  service  as  a  temporary  if  rehired  at 
the  start  of  the  ensuing  school  year  without  a  break  in  service.  If  there  is  a  break  in  service, 

  

   

even  of  one  day,  then  seniority  starts  after  the  break  in  service,  see  Education  Code  section 
44909  and  Kamin  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  72  Cal.  App.3d  1014. 

Thus,  if  there  is  a  break  in  service  between  the  qualifying  service  for  working  over  75 
percent  of  a  school  year  and  the  start  of  service  in  the  next  school  year,  whether  the  break  is 
at  the  end  of  the  one  school  year  or  at  the  start  of  the  next  school  year,  then  the  teacher  is 
given  credit  toward  tenure  for  the  earlier  school  year  but  credit  toward  seniority  starts  with 
the  first  day  of  paid  service  of  the  later  school  year. 

The  School  District  correctly  applied  these  rules  in  determining  the  tenure  date  and 

date  of  hire  (seniority)  for  the  teachers  affected  by  this  layoff. 

10. 

The  School  District  offered  an  early  retirement  incentive  program  through  the 
Public  Agency  Retirement  Systems  (PARS)  to  all  qualified  certificated  employees  and  took 
into  account  the  resulting  attrition,  thereby  reducing  the  number  of  layoffs  in  like  amount, 
when  sending  notices  for  this  layoff. 

As  a  result  of  the  PARS  program,  48  management  employees,  some  of  whom  may 

have  been  non-certificated  employees,  and  208  certificated  non-management  employees  will 
retire  at  the  end  of  the  current  school  year  because  they  elected  to  participate  in  the  early 
retirement  incentive  program. 

Although  the  School  District  is  not  legally  required  to  consider  positively  assured 
attrition  when  reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services,  it  did  in  this  case.  The 
School  District  factored  the  positively  assured  attrition  due  to  retirements  under  PARS  into 
the  layoff  and  identified  the  particular  assignments  and  FTE’s  of  the  PARS  participants  and 
offset  that  attrition  against  the  reductions  or  eliminations  of  PKS  authorized  in  the  Board’s 
Resolution. 

11. 

In  category  A  of  the  Resolution,  there  were  generally  less  retirements  than  the 

number  of  authorized  PKS  reductions  or  eliminations,  so  the  difference  between  the  two 
numbers  is,  in  most  instances,  the  number  to  be  laid  off.  However,  in  some  of  the  subject 
areas,  the  number  of  retirees  and  their  FTE  positions  exceeded  the  authorized  reductions  in 
FTEs  in  certain  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  thus,  there  were  vacancies  identified. 

After  the  Resolution,  the  School  District  decided  not  to  reduce  or  eliminate 

Elementary  Specialists,  so  that  reduction  of  75.31  FTE  was  not  taken,  which  reduced  the  total 
FTE  to  be  eliminated  from  278.17  to  202.86. 

In  addition,  due  to  a  severe  shortage  of  special  education  teachers,  no  FTE  were 

reduced  in  the  special  education  area.  The  School  District  justified  retaining  these  teachers 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955(d)(1)  to  meet  special  needs  for  which  they  have 
special  credentials  and  competence.

  

As  a  result  of  the  application  of  the  PARS-related  positively  assured  attrition  and 
other  known  attrition,  the  following  number  of  FTE  in  Category  A  are  subject  to  layoff: 

All  of  the  other  reductions  in  category  A  are  being  absorbed  through  attrition  created 

by  PARS. 

12. 

As  aresult  of  application  of  the  positively  assured  attrition,  vacancies  were 

actually  generated  in  certain  categories.  Those  vacancies  were  as  follows: 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

High  School  vice-principal 
K-6  teachers 
Math  7-12 
Science 

Subtotal  —  Category  A 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 

Counselors 
English 
Social  Science 
PE 
Foreign  Language 
Industrial  Arts 
Fine  Arts 

1.00 
26.60 
2.60 
1.30 

31.50  FTE 

1.40 
6.87 
0.40 
3.40 
4.20 
2.60 
5.80 

13. 

. 

Category  B  involves  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  a  total  of  47.96  FTE,  so 

the  combined  total  FTE  from  Category  A  and  B  was  79.46,  at  this  stage. 

The  elementary  bump  occurred  by  taking  the  90.00  FTE  identified  in  the  PKS 
resolution,  and  subtracting  63.40  PARS  participants,  leaving  a  remainder  of  26.60  FTE  to  be 
reduced. 

The  second  application  of  the  PKS  reduction  was  in  Math,  for  2.60  FTE.  However, 

due  to  a  shortage  of  math  teachers,  the  two  individuals  who  possess  Math  credential 
authorizations  were  not  sent  layoff  notices.  The  School  District  justified  retaining  these  two 
teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955(d)(1)  to  meet  a  special  need  for  which 
they  have  special  credentials  and  competence. 

The  other  two  teachers  affected  by  the  Math  cut,  Gregory  Snyder  and  Todd  Cardoso, 
do  not  have  math  authorizations  and  were  laid  off.  There  is  no  one  less  senior  than  either  of 
these  two  respondents  who  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  either  respondent  is 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render. 

With  respect  to  the  Science  reduction,  1.3  FTE  least  senior  probationary  employees 
teaching  Science  were  identified  on  the  Science  seniority  list  as  Jason  Sare,  1.0  FTE,  who 
resigned  prior  to  the  hearing,  and  Timothy  Cunningham,  0.3  FTE.  Due  to  a  shortage  of 

  

  
  
 

© 

science  teachers,  Mr.  Cunningham  was  retained.  The  School  District  justified  retaining  this 
teacher  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955(d)(1)  to  meet  a  special  need  for  which  he 
has  special  credentials  and  competence. 

The  Category  B  cuts  include  a  0.50  FTE  in  the  elementary  Title  I  funded  vice 

principals.  The  person  occupying  this  position,  Karen  Adicoff,  bumped  Michael  Doerr,  a 
middle  school  vice  principal,  but  he  was  not  laid  off  due  to  a  PARS  retirement. 

The  remaining  programs  had  the  specific  individuals  identified  and  the  portion  of  the 

person’s  assignment  that  came  from  the  funding  source  being  reduced.  If  the  person  was 
credentialed  to  teach  in  one  of  the  areas  identified  as  having  a  vacancy,  the  person  was  put 
into  the  vacancy  rather  than  bumping  a  less  senior  employee.  When  the  vacancies  for  each 
subject  area  were  exhausted,  then  those  remaining  whose  positions  were  affected  by  the  cuts 
in  category  B  moved  into  the  bumping  process  and,  depending  on  seniority,  credentials  and 
competence,  bumped  into  the  assignments  of  those  less  senior. 

14.  _  Before  the  hearing  it  was  discovered  that  the  number  of  PARS  participants  at 

the  elementary  level  was  65.5  FTE  rather  than  63.40  FTE,  a  difference  of  2.10  FTE.  This 
reduced  the  number  of  elementary  reductions  needed  from  26.60  FTE  to  24.50  FTE.  Thus 
there  was  an  over-noticing  of  elementary  teachers  by  2.10  FTE,  which  was  corrected  during 
the  hearing. 

Specifically,  the  School  District  corrected  the  seniority  list  to  change  the  status  of  two 
respondents,  Ellen  Brown  (Brown)  and  Sara  Ferris  (Ferris),  from  probationary  to  permanent. 
The  School  District  then  dismissed  the  Accusation  against  Brown  and  Ferris  because  it  had 
retained  two  probationary  employees  to  teach  classes  that  Brown  and  Ferris  are  credentialed 
and  competent  to  teach.  Their  retention  partially  offset  the  over  noticing  of  elementary 
teachers. 

During  the  bumping  process,  the  last  bump  into  an  elementary  position  was  for  0.12 

FTE  against  Theresa  Altieri.  The  School  District  used  the  remaining  0.1  FTE  left  over  from 
the  over  noticing  and  dismissed  the  Accusation  against  her,  the  most  senior  elementary 
teacher  on  the  list  for  layoff. 

15. 

At  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  School  District  corrected  the  seniority  list  to 

change  the  date  of  hire  also  referred  to  as  DOH  (seniority  date)  of  Abigail  Jacinto  from  June 
9,  2003  to  November  22,  2002. 

16. 

At  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  School  District  dismissed  the  Accusation  against 

Timothy  Baucom  (Baucom),  date  of  hire  October  1,  2002,  because  it  had  retained  a  less 
senior  employee  to  teach  a  class  that  Baucom  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

17. 

The  above  modifications  and  corrections  in  those  to  be  laid  off  do  not  affect 

the  total  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  nor  the  total  number  of  FTE  certificated  

  

positions  subject  to  the  layoff  but  they  do  reduce  the  number  of  respondents  subject  to  the 
layoff  to  the  following  FTE’s: 

@ 

Category  B 
As  stated  in  Exhibit  A  to  the  Resolution 

Subtotal 

25.0  FTE 

Combined  Total 

47.96  FTE 
72.96  FTE 

The  number  of  respondents  originally  noticed  for  layoff  was  forty-five  (45).  Of  those, 

the  following  individuals  were  restored: 

Category  A 
High  school  vice  principal 
Elementary  Teachers 
Math 

Science 

Lori  Hansen 
Sara  Ferris 
Ellen  Brown 
Theresa  Altieri 
Timothy  Baucom 

1.0  FTE 

24.0 
0.0 
0.0 

1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

Therefore,  the  number  of  respondents  still  subject  to  layoff  is  forty  (40).  Clearly,  the 
number  is  far  less  than  what  is  authorized  in  the  original  PKS,  and  substantially  less  than  the 
remaining  reductions  once  all  the  various  adjustments  are  made. 

During  the  process,  the  PARS  program  resulted  in  additional  positively  assured 
attrition  totaling  24.67  FTE.  Subtracting  this  24.67  from  the  number  of  FTEs  still  to  be  laid 
off  of  72.96  reduces  the  total  subject  to  layoff  to  48.29  FTE  certificated  employees,  which 
exceeds  the  number  of  respondents  still  subject  to  layoff. 

18. 

In  late  December  of  2003,  the  School  District  sent  individual  letters  to  each 

credentialed  employee  soliciting  input  regarding:  their  address;  first  date  of  paid  service; 
credentials;  and  other  relevant  information.  The  School  District  asked  that  they  respond  to 
Human  Resources  on  the  form  provided  by  February  5,  2004,  and  that  they  sign  the  form. 
Damon  Smith  (Smith)  a  teacher  with  the  School  District  received  the  letter  and  responded  to 
it. 

Human  Resources  incorporated  any  new  or  changed  information  received  on  the 

forms  into  its  records  and  the  seniority  list. 
It  applied  the  tie  breaking  criteria  to  those  with 
the  same  date  of  hire  (first  date  of  paid  service  without  a  break  in  service)  to  determine  their 
individual  ranking  on  the  list  and  then  produced  an  updated  the  seniority  list.  The  application 
of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  was  fair  and  appropriate. 

© 

@ 

   

  

  

The  School  District  posted  copies  of  the  Seniority  List  in  two  formats:  one  in 
alphabetical  order  and  one  by  date  of  hire  (i.e.  seniority)  to  allow  teachers  to  point  out  any 
inaccuracies. 

The  School  District  relied  upon  the  teachers’  addresses,  as  updated  in  response  to  the 

December  2003  letter,  when  it  sent  out  the  various  notices.  Specifically,  when  Human 
Resources  mailed  the  March  12  notices  to  the  teachers,  it  sent  Smith’s  notice  by  certified 
mail  to  the  address  on  file  with  Human  Resources.  However,  Smith  had  moved  soon  after 
responding  to  the  letter  and  then  failed  to  provide  written  notice  of  the  new  address  to  Human 
Resources,  so  the  notice  was  sent  to  Smith’s  prior  address.  Fortunately  for  Smith, 
respondents’  attorney  Maredyth  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  and  a  Notice  of  Defense  on 
behalf  of  respondents,  Smith  was  one  of  that  group  and  is  thus  a  respondent  in  this  hearing. 

19. 

To  determine  which  teachers  would  be  affected  by  the  layoff,  the  School 

District  first  bumped  those  teachers  in  temporary  or  provisional  positions,  then  worked  its 
way  up  the  seniority  list.  The  School  District  is  not  required  to  bump  and  re-bump  to  save  a 
particular  teacher  nor  is  it  required  to  do  bumping  in  any  particular  way.  Nor  does  it  have  to 
make  assignments  and  reassignments  to  transfer  more  senior  employees  to  other  positions  in 
order  to  retain  more  junior  employees.  Thus,  the  School  District  has  the  discretion  to 
determine  how  it  carries  out  the  bumping  process  and  so  long  as  it  does  not  act  arbitrarily  or 
capriciously,  the  process  is  valid. 

Deborah  Koerner,  date  of  hire  February  9,  1987,  has  both  a  multi-subject  credential 

and  an  art  supplementary  credential.  It  was  within  the  School  District’s  discretion  to  use  her 
elementary  credential  rather  than  her  art  credential  in  the  bumping,  especially  since  she  is 
currently  assigned  at  the  elementary  school  level  and  her  art  credential  would  only  allow  her 
to  teach  through  the  ninth  grade  curriculum.  This  choice  was  not  an  abuse  of  discretion. 

20. 

Martha  Gutierrez  is  a  school  district  intern  who  was  hired  on  August  21,  2001. 

In  the  bumping  process,  she  bumped a less  senior  probationary  teacher  who  is  fully 
credentialed.  Under  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  law,  interns,  like  fully  credentialed 
teachers,  are  deemed  to  be  “highly  qualified  teachers.”  Her  intern  credential  authorizes  her  to 
render  the  service  she  will  provide  next  year. 

Specifically,  Education  Code  section  44325  authorized  the  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing  to  issue  “district  intern  credentials,”  section  44326  defines  the  scope  of  such 
credential  and  section  44326(b)  authorizes  the  holder  of  a  district  intern  credential  to  teach  in 
grades  kindergarten  to  8,  in  a  self-contained  classroom  if  certain  criteria  are  met.  There  was 
no  evidence  that  Ms.  Gutierrez  failed  to  meet  those  criteria. 

Education  Code  section  44830.3  sets  forth  the  requirements  for  a  school  district  intern 

program  and  section  44885.5  requires  districts  to  classify  as  probationary  employee  any 

person  employed  as  a  school  district  intern  pursuant  to  section  44830.3.  

  

The  appellate  court  in  Welch  v.  Oakland  Unified  School  District  (2001),  91 

@ 

Cal.App.4th  1421,  interpreted  Education  Code  sections  44450  et  seq,  which  deal  with 
university  interns,  and  44830.3(a),  which  deals  with  school  district  interns.  The  court  noted 
an  important  distinction  between  the  two  types  of  interns;  school  district  interns  are 
probationary  employees  pursuant  to  the  statutes  but  university  interns  are  not. 

As  a  school  district  intern,  Gutierrez  is  a  probationary  employee  of  the  School 

District,  accrues  seniority  and  can  bump  those  less  senior. 

21. 

At  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  parties  provided  argument  and  evidence  on  the 
issue  of  whether  regular  School  District  employees  could  bump  into  the  Adult  School,  and 
the  Administrative  Law  Judge  ruled  on  the  issue. 

The  School  District  operates  an  adult  education  program,  also  referred  to  as  night 
school  in  the  statutes.  It  is  established  as  a  statutorily  separate  program  from  the  regular 
school  K-12  program,  is  funded  separately,  has  a  separate  tenure  track  and  a  different  salary 
schedule  than  the  regular  schools.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44929.25,  adult 
school  teachers  employed  0.6  FTE  or  less  are  classified  as  temporary  and  do  not  become 
probationary  or  tenured.  If  an  adult  school  teacher  is  eligible  for  tenure  in  both  the  adult 
school  and  the  regular  school,  also  referred  to  as  day  school  in  the  statutes,  that  teacher  must 
choose  in  which  program  to  be  tenured  and  cannot  be  tenured  in  both,  Education  Code 
section  44926.26.  Service  in  adult  (night)  school  does  not  count  toward  tenure  in  regular 
. 
(day)  school,  section  44929.26. 

Therefore,  adult  school  teachers  do  not  have  tenure  or  seniority  in  regular  school  and 

cannot  bump  into  it  and  regular  school  teachers  do  not  have  tenure  or  seniority  in  adult 
school  and  cannot  bump  into  it,  see  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d 
167  and  Kamin  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  72  Cal.App.3d  1014. 

22. 

At  the  start  of  the  hearing,  the  parties  provided  argument  and  evidence  on  the 
issue  of  whether  regular  School  District  employees  could  bump  into  the  Head  Start  Program, 
and  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  ruled  on  the  issue. 

The  District  employs  two  nurses,  one  probationary  and  the  other  temporary,  in  its 

Head  Start  program  and  did  not  notice  either  of  those  nurses  as  part  of  this  layoff. 

The  Head  Start  Program  is  one  of  several  programs  in  the  federal  Early  Childhood 

Education  (ECE)  Program.  It  is  a  federally  funded  and  operates  subject  to  the  requirements 
of  federal  laws  and  regulations.  Pursuant  to  federal  requirements  parents  participate  in  the 
management  and  operation  of  the  Head  Start  Program,  see  45  Code  of  Federal  Regulations 
(CFR)  section  1304.50,  which  is  entitled  “Program  Governance.”  It  creates  a  “Policy 
Council”  and  “Policy  Committees”  and  requires  that  at  least  fifty-one  percent  of  the  members 
of  the  Council  and  the  Committee  be  parents  of  students  enrolled  in  the  Head  Start  Program, 
see  subsection  1304.50(b)(2).  The  Council  and  the  Committee  are  known  collectively  as  the 
“Policy  Groups.”  Section  1304.50(c)  provides  that  “[a]t  a  minimum,  the  policy  groups  must 

10 

 

© 

  
  

be  charged  with  the  responsibilities  described  in  paragraphs  (4),  (£),  (g),  and  (h)  of  this 
section  and  repeated  in  appendix  A  of  this  section.”  Paragraph  (d)(xi)  requires  that  the 
Policy  Groups  be  involved  in:  “Decisions  to  hire  or  terminate  any  person  who  works 
primarily  for  the  Early  Head  Start  or  Head  Start  program  of  the  grantee  or  delegate  agency.” 

Thus,  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  above  Federal  Regulations,  the  Policy 
Groups  are  involved  in  and  must  approve  the  hiring  and  termination  of  employees  in  the 
Head  Start  Program  and  the  School  District  cannot  unilaterally  make  such  decisions. 
Consequently,  regular  school  employees  cannot  bump  into  the  Head  Start  program. 

Based  upon  this  ruling,  the  School  District  dismissed  the  Accusation  against  the  nurse 

in  the  Head  Start  program  Lori  Hansen. 

23. 

The  School  District  is  the  chartering  agency  for  four  charter  schools.  Two  of 

the  charter  schools,  Visions  for  Education  and  Choices  Charter  School,  contract  with  the 
School  District  for  certain  administrative  services,  but  do  their  own  hiring,  although  the 
hirees  are  submitted  to  the  district’s  board  for  approval.  While  the  original  charters  for 
Visions  and  Choices  provide  return  rights  for  teachers  who  left  district  employment  to  teach 
at  them,  those  charters  will  expire  on  June  30,  2004.  The  proposed  new  charters  that  have 
been  submitted,  which  will  take  effect  this  coming  school  year,  do  not  provide  any  return 
rights.  Therefore,  employees  who  wish  to  work  in  either  of  these  charter  schools  will  have  to 
resign  their  employment  with  the  district  in  order  to  become  employed  in  the  charter  school. 

The  other  two  charter  schools,  Options  for  Youth  and  Humane  Education  Learning 

Center  (HELC),  are  entirely  independent  of  School  District  operations,  do  not  contract  with 
the  district  for  services,  their  employees  do  not  have  any  employment  rights  in  the  district, 
and  their  hiring  decisions  are  not  subject  to  approval  by  the  School  District’s  Board  of 
Education. 

The  teachers  hired  by  the  charter  schools  are  not  on  the  tenure  track  with  the  School 

District  and  do  not  have  probationary  or  permanent  status;  instead  all  are  “at-will” 
employees.  They  are  not  part  of  the  district’s  teacher  bargaining  unit  and  they  are  not  paid 
the  same  rate  as  School  District  teachers  because  the  charter  schools  establish  their  own 
salary  schedules.  In  addition,  the  School  District  cannot  involuntarily  assign  teachers  to  a 
charter  school,  see  Education  Code  section  47605(e). 

Thus,  the  charter  schools  are  separate  and  distinct  from  the  School  District  and  School 

District  employees  cannot  bump  into  charter  schools. 

24. 

Education  Code  section  44865  states  in  relevant  part: 

A  valid  teaching  credential,  based  on  a  bachelor’s  degree,  student 

teaching,  and  special  fitness  to  perform,  shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for 
assignment  as a  teacher  in  the  following  assignments,  provided  that  the 
assignment  of  a  teacher  to  a  position  for  which  qualifications  are  prescribed  by 

11

this  section  shall  be  made  only  with  the  consent  of  the  teacher:  . 
teacher.  . 
schools. 

.  (a)  Home 
.  (c)  Hospital  classes.  ..  .  (e)  Continuation  schools.  (f)  Alternative 

. 

. 

© 

Section  44865  permits  a  school  district,  with  the  teacher’s  consent,  to  assign  teachers 

to  teach  outside  their  normal  credential  authorization  in  small  programs  that  require 
flexibility,  but  does  not  create  a  bumping  right  into  that  program  based  strictly  on  seniority, 
especially  with  the  requirements  for  “highly  qualified  teachers”  under  the  federal  No  Child 
Left  Behind  statute. 

25. 

|  The  Independent  Study  High  School  (Independent  Study)  is  an  alternative  for 

high  school  students  who  voluntarily  transfer  into  the  program  for  a  variety  of  reasons  and 
who  qualify  for  admission  based  on  an  assessment  of  their  ability  to  learn  independently. 
Teachers  are  specifically  hired  to  teach  in  Independent  Study  based  on  the  needs  of  the 
program  and  the  teacher’s  special  qualifications. 

The  Independent  Study  High  School  is  accredited  by  the  Western  Association  of 
Schools  and  Colleges  (WASC)  and  has  its  own  California  Department  of  Education  code 
number.  The  students  are  subject  to  the  state  standardized  testing  program  and  the  High 
School  Exit  exam.  Like  all  schools,  Independent  Study  is  subject  to  the  highly  qualified 
teacher  requirements  of  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act,  also  known  as  NCLB  or 
nicklebee.  Teachers  are  hired  because  they  possess  credentials  in  the  specific  subject  areas  to 
be  taught. 

_Barbara  Kitz  (Kitz)  was  hired  on  October  15,  2002  for  a  new  Outreach  program  that 

assists  high  school  students  entering  school  during  the  midst  of  a  semester.  Kitz  has 
counselor  and  multi-subject  credentials.  She  works  half-time  as  a  counselor  at  San  Juan  High 
School  and  half-time  as  an  Outreach  teacher.  She  was  previously  employed  in  the 
Independent  Study  program  and  was  already  familiar  with  the  Independent  Study  paperwork. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  any  respondent  was  similarly  qualified  to  fill  this  part  time 
Independent  Study  position,  nor  that  any  had  consented  to  such  an  assignment  prior  to  March 
15. 

David  Wilson  (Wilson)  was  hired  on  September  3,  2002  and  holds  a  single  subject 

credential  in  Social  Science.  He  teaches  history  and  social  studies,  and  is  also  the  short-term 
independent  study  teacher.  He  travels  throughout  the  district  serving  students  who  will  be 
absent  from  class  for  short  periods  of  time,  so  the  district  can  capture  the  average  daily 
attendance  for  those  students.  Again,  there  was  no  evidence  that  any  respondent  was 
similarly  qualified  to  fill  this  Independent  Study  position,  nor  that  any  had  consented  to  such 
an  assignment  prior  to  March  15. 

The  District’s  Independent  Study  program  operates  as  a  separate  and  distinct 

alternative  education  program  for  students.  Education  Code  section  44865  permits  the 
district  to  assign  a  teacher  to  the  Independent  Study  program,  with  the  teacher’s  consent,  if 

© 

  

  

12

the  teacher  meets  the  requirements  of  section  44865,  including  having  a  special  fitness  to 
perform. 

None  of  the  respondents  consented  to  reassignment  to  the  Independent  Study  program 

prior  to  March  15,  so  the  School  District  could  not  have  bumped  them  into  the  Independent 
Study  program.  Respondents  are  estopped  from  asserting  that  the  School  District  should 
have  bumped  them  into  the  Independent  Study  program  because  they  failed  to  notify  the 
School  District  of  their  consent  to  reassignment  in  that  program  prior  to  the  March  15 
deadline  for  the  District  to  notice  employees  in  that  program  of  possible  layoff. 

26. 

|  The  School  District’s  Health  Services  Department  operates  the  Home  and 

Hospital  program  to  serve  students  who  are  temporarily  ill  or  injured  and  unable  to  attend  the 
regular  schools.  The  teachers  in  this  program  are  part-time,  hourly  employees  hired  to  fill 
special  needs  at  specific  times  as  needed,  and  only  for  as  long  as  needed. 

Many  of  the  teachers  in  the  Home  and  Hospital  program  teach  only  one  or  two 
students  at  a  time.  The  student  population  fluctuates  a  great  deal  and  peaks  at  the  end  of  each 
semester.  The  Home  and  Hospital  program  is  not  a  school;  rather  it  is  a  program  that 
supports  the  schools  by  helping  students  stay  current  in  their  assignments.  Students  range  in 
age  from  three  to  twenty-two,  may  be  special  education  or  regular  education  students,  may  be 
non-English  speaking  or  may  be  accelerated  academically.  Consequently,  the  Home  and 
Hospital  program  has  a  cadre  of  part-time  teachers  with  a  variety  of  special  skills  in  order  to 
meet  the  wide  range  of  needs  of  the  students. 

None  of  the  respondents  consented  to  reassignment  to  the  Home  and  Hospital 

program  prior  to  March  15,  so  the  School  District  could  not  have  bumped  them  into  the 
Home  and  Hospital  program.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  respondent  possessed  the 
special  qualifications  required  to  work  in  the  Home  and  Hospital  program.  In  addition,  it 
would  make  no  sense  to  order  the  District  to  bump  regular  teachers  into  the  Home  and 
Hospital  program  where  the  employees  have  no  assurance  that  they  will  work  any  specific 
the  number  of  hours  a  week. 

27. 

Elizabeth  Sibitz-Smith  (Sibitz-Smith)  is  credentialed  to  teach  English  and  has 

a  date  of  hire  of  September  3,  2002.  She  teaches  in  the  continuation  high  school.  The 
Education  Code  allows,  but  does  not  require,  the  district  to  assign  a  teacher,  with  the 
teacher’s  consent,  to  teach  outside  the  teachers  credential  authorization  in  a  continuation  high 
school;  but  the  School  District  only  assigns  teachers  in  the  continuation  high  school  to  teach 
within  their  credentials  authorization,  in  compliance  with  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind 
Act.  Therefore,  during  this  layoff,  no  teacher  was  bumped  into  an  assignment  for  which  they 
were  not  credentialed,  and  no  teacher  senior  to  Sibitz-Smith  is  being  laid  off  who  has  an 
English  credential. 

State  law  does  not  require  the  district  to  assign  teachers  to  teach  outside  their 
credential  area  as  part  of  the  bumping  process.  None  of  the  respondents  consented  to 

13  

reassignment  to  the  continuation  high  school  prior  to  March  15,  so  the  School  District  could 
not  have  bumped  them  into  it. 

28.' 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is 

being  retained  to  perform  a  service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Those  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  being  retained  will  provide 
services  which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

29. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  can  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and 
was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

30. 

The  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  the  resultant  reduction  in 
202.86  full  time  equivalent  certificated  positions  is  for  the  welfare  of  the  School  District  and 
the  pupils.  The  decision  was  made  because  of  a  variety  of  factors  affecting  the  School 
District  including  the  State  budget  crises  with  the  resultant  possible  loss  of  revenue  from  the 
State,  a  decline  in  enrollment  and  loss  of  funding  for  some  programs.  The  School  District 
will  save  money  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  reduction  in 
particular  kinds  of  services  is  the  sole  cause  for  not  re-employing  respondents. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  © 

1, 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 
board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case 
of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing 
board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and 
stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or  has 

waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor  shall  be 
confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in 
the  performance  of  duties.  However,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of 
confidentiality,  in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the 
validity  of  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in 
writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to 

  

   

14 

subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be 
less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If 
an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her 
failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.  The 
notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the  provisions  of 
this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be 
conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with 
Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Titie  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the 
governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all 
of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five  days 
after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be  notified  of  this 
five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code  shall  be 

available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service  of  the 
accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so 
indicate. 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall  prepare 
a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as  to  whether  the 
charges  sustained by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the 
pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and 
shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation 
as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as 
to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition.  None  of  the  findings, 
recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by 
the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive 
procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are 
prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing 
board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is 
commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the  administrative  law 
judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board.  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not  inconsistent 

with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate  this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in  person  to 

the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States 
registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the 
employee. 

. 

    

15

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continuance  is  granted 

pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the  dates  prescribed  in 
subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  and  the 
date  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of 
granting  the  continuance  shall  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the 
continuance. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 
than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947, 
inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of  a 
district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below 
the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the 
governing  board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following 
year  as  a  result  of  the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in 
Section  46304,  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment 
of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of 
these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding 
percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute, 
the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this 
section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 
In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this  section  for  a 
newly  formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school  of  the  district  shall  be 
deemed  to  have  been  a  school  of  the  newly  formed  or  reorganized  district  for  both  of 
the  two  previous  school  years. 

16          

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date, 
the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee 
whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in 
writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in 
accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each 
employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the 

governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining 
the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal 
right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be. 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the 
event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and 
for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the 
employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing 
board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the 
appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or 
course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44956(a)(1)  provides: 

(a)  Any  permanent  employee  whose  services  have  been  terminated  as  provided  in 

Section  44955  shall  have  the  following  rights: 

(1)  For  the  period  of  39  months  from  the  date  of  such  termination,  any  employee 
who  in  the  meantime  has  not  attained  the  age  of  65  years  shall  have  the  preferred  right 
to  reappointment,  in  the  order  of  original  employment  as  determined  by  the  board  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44831  to  44855,  inclusive,  if  the  number 
of  employees  is  increased  or  the  discontinued  service  is  reestablished,  with  no 
requirements  that  were  not  imposed  upon  other  employees  who  continued  in  service; 
provided,  that  no  probationary  or  other  employee  with  less  seniority  shall  be. 
employed  to  render  a  service  which  said  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  However,  prior  to  reappointing  any  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or 
she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or 

17

the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a 
subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

4. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular  kind  of 

service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another  manner,  see  Gallup  v. 
Board  of Trustees  (App.  4  Dist.  1996)  49  Cal.Rptr.2d  289;  41  Cal.App.4th  1571,  rehearing 
denied,  review  denied  and  California  Teachers  Ass'n  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of  Goleta  Union 
School  Dist.  (App.  2  Dist.  1982)  182  Cal.Rptr  754;  132  Cal.App.3d  32. 

5. 

In  the  course  of  reducing,  discontinuing  or  eliminating  a  particular  kind  of 
service,  the  Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondent/s  to 
perform  services  which  respondents  is/are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  see 
Moreland  Teachers  Ass’n  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648;  167  Cal.Rptr.  343,  and  Lewin 
v.  Board of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977;  133  Cal.Rptr  385. 

6. 

A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  statute  either  by 

determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the 
number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  Lacy 
v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be  given 
retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  . 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local. 
2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d 
831. 

In  doing  so,  the 

8. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

9. 

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of 

services  and  of  202.86  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004 
school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Therefore,  cause  exists 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2004-2005. 

  

   

18 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year,  2004-2005,  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

tet  Zan QS,  200 

4 

Dated 

7 

     

    

   
  

ON 

L. 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

SCO 

  

19 

