BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2004030075 

DAWN  MARIE  BRANNON,  et.  al. 

  
    
  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Timothy  S.  Thomas,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  23,  2004  at  Los  Angeles,  California. 

Kathleen  E.  Collins  and  Albert  C.  Nicholson,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  represented 

the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (hereinafter  the  District). 

Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  respondents. ' 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  22,  2003. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1,  Deborah  Hirsh,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  the  District,  filed  the 

Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2.  On  or  about  March  8,  2004  Roy  Romer,  Superintendent  of  Schools,  recommended 

to  the  Governing  Board  that  the  District  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 
provided  by  teachers  and  other  certificated  employees.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the 
competency  or  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or 
eliminated.  Rather,  the  State  of  California  has  indicated  to  the  District  that  funding  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year  will  be  significantly  less  than  a  balanced  budget  would  require  to 
maintain  the  current  year’s  services  and  class  size.  The  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  233- 
03/04  on  April  8,  2004,  adopting  Superintendent  Romer’s  recommendation  calling  for  the 
reduction  of  40  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  in  the  classification  of  psychiatric  social 
workers.  The  basis  for  the  proposed  layoffs  was  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 

  

"A  list  of  the  17  employees  designated  for  layoff  is  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  A.  All  were  in  attendance  at  the 
hearing  except  respondents  Dickerson,  Green,  Lewis,  Merrill  and  Raphael. 

 

particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS).  Of  the  40  positions  recommended  for  termination,  22 
were  thought  to  be  filled  by  non-permanent,  or  probationary  employees,  and  18  by 
permanent  employees.  Under  the  applicable  collective  bargaining  agreement,  probationary 
psychiatric  social  workers  are  subject  to  different  procedures  and  timelines  than  permanent 
workers  and  are  not  parties  to  this  action  brought  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955. 

3.  On  March  12,  2004,  the  District  served  upon  the  18  affected  employees,  by 
certified  mail,  written  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  effective  June  30,  2004. 
Each  written  notice  indicated  that  the  reason  for  the  recommendation  of  dismissal  was  that 
certain  services  will  be  reduced  or  discontinued  due  to  necessary  budget  reductions  and/or 
the  reallocation  of  funds.  All  respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 
if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4,  Subsequent  to  the  adoption  of  Board  Resolution  No.  233-03/04,  it  was  discovered 

that  one  of  the  psychiatric  social  workers  thought  to  be  permanent  was  actually  a 
probationary  employee.  Therefore,  on  April  14,  2004  the  District  notified  that  employee, 
Tali  Mariko  Sperber,  that  she  was  being  terminated  pursuant  to  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement’s  procedural  mechanism.  On  the  same  date,  Tami  Lee  Kitchen,  the  most  senior 
permanent  psychiatric  social  worker  who  had  been  notified  of  an  impending  layoff,  was 
advised  that  the  notice  as  to  her  was  rescinded.  Thus,  the  number  of  permanent  affected 
employees  was  reduced  to  17. 

5.  The  Superintendent’s  designee,  Deborah  Hirsh,  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer, 

made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against  the  employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The 
Accusation  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were 
timely  served  on  those  certificated  employees. 

6.  All  respondents  filed  Notices  of  Defense  in  a  timely  fashion. 

7.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 
District.  All  pre-hearing  and  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  satisfied  by  the  District. 

8.  The  services  set  forth  in  Board  Resolution  No.  233  —  03/04  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  may  be  reduced  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
decision  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  above  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Cause  for 
terminating  each  of  the  respondents  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  school  and  the  pupils 
thereof. 

9.  The  District  compiled  seniority  lists  that  contain  employees’  seniority  dates  (first 
date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and 
authorizations.  The  data  was  derived  from  the  employees’  personnel  files  and  from 
databases  maintained  by  the  State  of  California  and  the  County  of  Los  Angeles.  In  addition, 

the  District  sent  each  teacher  to  be  laid  off  a  letter  asking  for  confirmation  of  the  information  

gathered.  The  evidence  established  the  accuracy  of  the  District’s  seniority  list  and 
information. 

10.  The  District  determined  from  its  seniority  list  whether  any  less  senior  employees 

held  credentials  or  other  indicia  of  competence  entitling  them  to  "skip”  over  more  senior 
employees,  and,  conversely,  whether  any  more  senior  employee  was  credentialed  and 
competent  to  fill  a  position  being  held  by  a  junior  employee  being  retained.  By  this  process 
the  respondents  were  identified  for  layoff.  No  less  senior  employee  within  the  PKS  targeted 
for  reduction  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  that  respondents  are  credentialed  or 
competent  to  render, 

11.  However,  the  list  and  credential  information  also  enabled  the  District  to  determine 

that  11  of  the  17  affected  employees  have  “reassignment  rights”  to  another  classification 
within  the  District,  that  of  Child  Welfare/Attendance,  which  is  essentially  a  position  that 
deals  with  the  problem  of  truancy.” 

12.  The  District  adopted  a  system  to  break  ties  in  the  event  that  an  employee 
designated  for  layoff  shares  a  seniority  date  with  an  individual  not  scheduled  for  layoff  that 
is  entirely  random.’  As  no  employee  scheduled  for  layoff  shares  an  employment  starting 
date  with  any  employee  being  retained,  it  is  not  necessary  to  decide  the  legal  sufficiency  of 
the  tie-breaking  system. 

13.  Subsequent  to  the  passage  of  Board  Resolution  No.  233  —  03/04  a  psychiatric 
social  worker  senior  to  those  being  laid  off  retired.  The  District’s  Director  of  Employee 
Relations  testified  that  the  number  of  layoffs  was  calculated  taking  into  account  actual 
attrition  prior  to  March  15,  2004,  and  historical  data  used  to  predict  attrition  between  March 
15  and  May  15,  and  the  number  of  employees  in  the  involved  PKS  who  would  return  to  their 
jobs  for  the  2004-05  school  year,  so  that  the  single  retirement  experienced  after  March  15  has’ 
already  been  taken  into  account.  If  more  retirements  or  other  forms  of  attrition  render  the 
predictions  moot  in  favor  of  respondents,  the  District  representative  testified  that  a 
corresponding  number  of  respondents  will  be  retained. 

14.  There  are  numerous  senior  psychiatric  social  workers,  not  subject  to  layoff,  who 
possess  credentials,  certificates  and/or  special  authorities  to  serve  as  teachers  in  elementary 
grades,  to  teach  English,  French,  physical  education  or  speech,  or  to  serve  as  a  school  nurse. 
The  District  has  approximately  700  vacancies  in  the  elementary  school  teaching  ranks, 
although  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  there  will  be  openings  in  one  or  more  of  the  other 
disciplines  mentioned.  However,  none  of  the  17  respondents  has  a  credential,  certificate  or 

  

?  The  11  respondents  to  be  reassigned  are:  Tom,  Williams,  Vaquero,  Quezada,  Mizuno,  Dickerson,  Green,  Lewis, 
Finazzo,  Horowitz  and  Merrill.  The  remaining  six  employees  who  have  no  skipping,  bumping  or  reassignment 
rights  are  respondents  Cho,  Villaverde,  Garcia,  Raphael,  Dollinger  and  Brannon. 
°  The  system  establishes  a  “District  Seniority  Number”  for  each  employee,  beginning  with  the  first  date  of 
probationary  employment,  followed  by  a  five  digit  random  number  using  the  last  four  digits  of  the  employee’s  social 

security  number,  reversed,  and  the  sum  of  the  two  preceding  numbers  of  the  social  security  number.  

other  indicia  of  competence  to  be  considered  for  transfer  to  another  classification  other  than 
Child  Welfare/Attendance. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1,  Respondents  argue  that  the  most  senior  psychiatric  social  worker  subject  to  layoff 
ought  to  be  retained  due  to  the  resignation  since  the  enabling  Board  resolution  was  passed  of 
amore  senior  psychiatric  social  worker.  In  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Davis,  109 
Cal.  App.  3d  648  (1980),  the  appellate  court  reviewed  a  decision  of  the  school  district  to 
calculate  the  number  of  layoffs  based  upon  actual  attrition  known  as  of  March  15,  its 
deadline  to  notify  employees  subject  to  layoff.  That  district  experienced  two  additional 
resignations  between  March  15  and  May  15  that  it  did  not  subtract  from  the  number  of 
teachers  given  final  notice  as  of  May  15.  The  court  held  that  the  district  should  have  taken 
all  “positively  assured  attrition”  into  account  when  issuing  final  notices.  However,  the 
precedent  is  distinguishable  from  the  instant  matter  in  that  in  Moreland  there  was  no 
indication  that  the  district  had  based  its  calculation  on  historical  data  that  served  as  predictors 
of  attrition.  In  other  words,  the  Moreland  court  logically  concluded  that  there  was  no  reason 
not  to  subtract  for  known  attrition  as  of  May  15  just  because  it  was  not  known  on  March  15, 
whereas  LAUSD  will  not  be  able  until  May  15  to  compare  its  projections  against  actual 
attrition.  Should  its  projections  prove  overly  pessimistic,  then  the  District  should,  and 
indicates  it  will,  adjust  by  retaining  additional  employee(s)  otherwise  subject  to  layoff. 

2.  Next  respondents  assert  that  because  more  senior  psychiatric  social  workers,  not 

subject  to  layoff  because  of  their  seniority,  possess  qualifications  to  teach  or  occupy 
positions  where  there  are  vacancies,  the  District  should  be  required  to  reassign  those 
employees,  thus  freeing  up  positions  for  the  respondents.  The  Education  Code  contains  no 
directive  to  a  school  district  that  it  must  reassign  a  senior  employee  not  subject  to  layoff  to  a 
position  he  or  she  may  not  want  to  hold,  whether  that  other  position  contains  a  vacancy  or  a 
less  senior  employee  would  be  “bumped.”  Respondents  cite  Education  Code  section  44955 
as  requiring  assignments  and  reassignments  “in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be 
retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.” 
The  section  certainly  does  not  authorize,  and  respondents  do  not  urge,  bumping  rights  over 
more  senior  psychiatric  social  workers.  Nor  does  the  section,  on  its  face,  authorize  the 
forced  and  likely  unwanted  reassignment  of  a  senior  employee,  not  subject  to  layoff,  in  order 
to  accommodate  a  junior  employee  who  is  faced  with  termination. 

In  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District,  196  Cal.  App.  3d  555  (1987),  a  similar 

argument  was  made  by  a  teacher  about  to  be  terminated.  But  the  Duax  court  rejected  the 
suggestion  that  the  teacher  had  “inverse  bumping  rights.”  “What  Duax  proposes  is  the 
reassignment  of  a  senior  employee,  employee  A,  to  a  position  held  by  a  junior  employee, 
employee  B,  to  open  up  a  position  for  Duax  ...  [The  district’s]  obligation  to  make 
assignments  and  reassignments  as  provided  in  [the  Education  Code]  is  limited  to  attempting 
to  place  an  employee  who  would  otherwise  be  terminated  in  a  position  being  held  by  another 

employee  with  less  seniority.”  (Duax,  supra,  at  page  568  —  569.)  

3.  District  requests  an  order  that  the  eleven  respondents  who  are  to  be  reassigned  (see 
Finding  11)  are  nevertheless  legally  subject  to  layoff  pursuant  to  the  Board  resolution.  This 
Decision  declines  to  provide  such  an  order,  but  does  direct  that  they  be  reassigned  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44955. 

4.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 
the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  wit,  the  reduction  by  17 
FTE  of  the  number  of  psychiatric  social  workers. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  Cho,  Villaverde,  Garcia,  Raphael,  Dollinger 

and  Brannon  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2003-2004  school  year  because  of 
the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2.  Respondents  Tom,  Williams,  Vaquero,  Quezada,  Mizuno,  Dickerson,  Green, 

Lewis,  Finazzo,  Horowitz  and  Merrill  shall  be  reassigned  to  positions  in  the  Child 
Welfare/Attendance  category. 

3.  In  the  event  that  actual  attrition  known  prior  to  May  15,  2004  exceeds  the  number 

predicted  by  historical  analysis,  the  District  shall  retain  and/or  reassign  a  number  of 
respondents  listed  in  Order  No.  1,  above,  that  corresponds  to  the  number  of  positions  vacated 
by  the  attrition  experienced  over  and  above  the  attrition  predicted. 

DATED:  April  27,  2004 

  

TIMOTHY  S.  THOMAS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

