BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
JOHN  SWETT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

KAREN  PRICE 
CANDICE  HUTCHINSON 
JOANNE  CLARK 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2004030324 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  19,  2004,  in  Crockett,  California. 

Jason  Rabinowitz  and  Costa  Kerestenzis,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  John 

Swett  Unified  School  District. 

John  R.  Yeh  and  Neha  M.  Samput,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  all  of  the 

respondents. ! 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  record  left  open  for  the  submission  of  simultaneous 
briefs  on  or  before  April  19,  2004.  District’s  brief  was  marked  exhibit  6  and  respondents’ 
brief  was  marked  exhibit  C  and  each  was  made a part  of  the  record.  The  matter  was 
submitted  on  April  19,  2004. 

~  FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  John  Swett  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  provides  elementary, 

middle  schools  and  high  schools  in  the  District. 

2. 

Michael  Roth  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

  

‘  Two  other  teachers,  Dan  Auza  and  Noel  Peterson,  were  served  with  the  preliminary  notice  and  each,  through  coun- 
sel,  requested  a  hearing  and  filed  a  notice  of  defense  to  the  accusations  which  followed.  Neither  appeared  at  hearing 
to  contest  the  statutory  basis  for  the  issuance  of  the  final  notice.

  

3. 
District. 

Respondents  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

4. 

On  March  3,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 
No.  (03-04)  21.  The  resolution  directed  the  Superintendent  to  give  notices  to  respondents 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  resolution,  as 
amended,  proposed  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  6.4  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 
The  specific  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  were: 

1  section 

Self-contained  6  Grade  classes 
1  section 
High  School  French  - 
High  School  Art  - 
High  School  Social  Studies  —  1  section 
High  School  Science  —  1  section 
High  School  Keyboarding  —  2  sections 
High  School  Counselor 
High  School  Drama  —  1  section 
Self-contained  K  through  5"  grade  classes 

- 

Total  reductions: 

1.0  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.4  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
3.0  FTE 

6.4  FTE 

5. 

On  March  4,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  the  Governing 
Board  of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  school  year  2004-2005  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

6. 

On  or  about  March  12,  2004,  respondents  were  served  in  the  manner 

prescribed  by  law  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given 
them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2004-2005,  and 
stating  the  reasons  therefor.  Respondents  filed  a  timely  request  for  a  hearing  and  a  timely 
notice  of  defense  to  the  accusation  which  followed.” 

7. 

Respondents  Joanne  Clark  (Clark)  and  Candice  Hutchinson  (Hutchinson) 

began  employment  as  teachers  for  the  District  under  emergency  permits.  Clark’s  first  day  of 
employment  for  the  District  was  August  29,  2000.  She  obtained  her  Health  Science 
credential  on  January  28,  2004,  and  the  District  has  assigned  that  date  as  her  first  date  of  paid 
probationary  service  for  seniority  purposes.  Hutchinson’s  first  day  of  employment  for  the 
District  was  August  27,  2003.  She  obtained  her  Multiple  Subject  credential  on  October  2, 
2003,  and  District  has  assigned  that  date  as  her  first  date  of  paid  probationary  service  for 
seniority  purposes.’  The  evidence  did  not  establish  whether  a  new  contract  was  entered  into 
between  either  respondent  and  the  District  at  the  time  that  District  learned  of  the  acquisition 
of  the  respective  credentials  and  designated  the  teachers  as  probationary. 

  

?  The  parties  stipulated  that  the  District  met  all  jurisdictional  requirements  including  proper  service  of  required  no- 
tices. 
°  Each  respondent  also  holds  a  Cross-Cultural  Language  Acquisition  Development  (CLAD)  certificate. 

  

  

@  i

8. 

Respondent  Karen  Price  (Price)  is  a  counselor  at  John  Swett  High  School.  She 

was  given  notice  by  reason  of  the  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  one  FTE  high  school 
counseling  position.  She  is  the  only  high  school  counselor  and  the  least  senior  District 
counselor.  The  high  school  counselor’s  duties  include  helping  students  with  college 
applications  including  financial  aid  requests,  personal  and  social  counseling,  scheduling  of 
all  students  in  the  grades  9  to  12  high  school,  state  mandated  testing,  and  administration  of 
standard  college  entrance  examinations  including  the  PSAT  and  the  SAT.  The  District  does 
not  have  a  concrete  plan  for  the  provision  of  these  services  but  they  intend  to  provide  them 
by  other  means.  Among  ideas  that  the  District  is  considered  are  inviting  local  community 
colleges  and  universities  to  visit  the  high  school  campus  to  help  with  applications  for 
admission  and  financial  aid,  continuing  to  use  a  teacher  who  is  particularly  competent  in 
scholarship  applications,  assigning  administration  personnel  to  handle  class  scheduling 
responsibilities  now  done  by  the  counselor,  and  having  other  teachers  handle  some  personal 
counseling  and  test  administration  responsibilities.  The  District  will  retain  a  .6  FTE  more 
senior  counselor  to  work  with  District  special  education  students  whose  Individual 
Educational  Plans  require  counseling.  None  of  the  other  District  employees  who  may 
assume  Ms.  Price’s  duties  has  a  counseling  credential. 

9. 

Prior  to  the  issuance  of  the  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  (and  the  Board‘s 
resolution),  District  learned  that  a  number  of  certificated  employees  will  not  return  for  school 
year  2004/2005.  These  include  D’drea  Black,  a  counselor,  and  Rochelle  Onizuka,  an 
elementary  school  teacher,  who  both  resigned  before  March  15,  2004.  They  also  include 
Inez  Sorbe,  a  middle  school  teacher,  and  Michelle  McCurry,  an  elementary  school  teacher, 
each  of  whom  has  submitted  a  resignation  effective  June,  2004.  District,  when  determining 
which  particular  kinds  of  services  to  reduce  or  eliminate,  considered  the  resignations  of  the 
listed  counselor  and  teachers,  as  well  as  four  others.  In  essence,  they  determined  the 
reductions  and  eliminations  of  PKS  on  the  basis  of  the  “net”  positions  after  such  resignations 
were  considered.  They  did  not  begin  with  the  counseling  positions  and  courses  being  taught 
this  year  and  follow  a  two  part  process  by  which  they  first  identified  total  eliminations  and 
reductions  for  next  year  and  “resolved”  to  do  so,  and  then  subtracted  the  positively  assured 
attrition  to  determine  the  net  effect  of  such  changes.  For  example,  instead  of  beginning  with 
a  resolution  to  eliminate  two  counseling  positions  and  then  subtracting  the  vacancy  caused 
by  Black’s  resignation  to  provide  a  basis  for  noticing  one  FTE  counselor,  District  simply 
began  with  a  resolution  to  eliminate  one  counseling  position  and  gave  notice  to  Price,  the 
most  junior  remaining  counselor. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code* 

sections  44949  and  44955  were  met. 

  

*  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  indicated.

2. 

Respondents  raise  three  legal  contentions.  First,  respondents  Clark  and 

@ 

Hutchinson  contend  that  their  seniority  dates  should  be  the  first  date  on  which  each  was 
employed  by  the  District  under  an  emergency  credential.  Second,  respondents  contend  that 
the  method  District  used  to  determine  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  eliminated  or 
reduced  did  not  properly  account  for  positively  assured  attrition.  Third,  respondent  Price 
contends  that  the  District’s  plans  to  provide  counseling  services  by  others  demonstrates  that 
“such  services  are  not  being  reduced  or  eliminated.  For  the  reasons  set  out  below,  these 
contentions  are  rejected. 

Clark  and  Hutchinson  Seniority  Dates 

3. 

There  are  three  appellate  decisions  which  are  somewhat  helpful  in  resolving 
the  first  legal  issue  raised  by  respondents,  although  none  of  the  three  directly  dealt  with  the 
precise  issue  in  this  case.  Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95  Cal. 
App.4"  1026  involved  the  question  whether  teaching  under  an  emergency  credential  should 
be  counted  in  computing  an  employee’s  progress  toward  permanent  status.  The  court 
interpreted  section  44911  to  include  emergency  credentials  within  the  definition  of 
“provisional  credentials.”  The  pertinent  part  of  section  44911  states: 

Service  by  a  person  under a  provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in 
computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility 
to,  classification  as a permanent  employee  of  a  school  district. 

In  a  footnote,  the  court  observed,  “Although  a  District  employee  initially,  mistakenly, 

classified  Summerfield  as  a  probationary  employee  while  she  continued  to  work  under  an 
emergency  permit,  it  is  well  settled  that  the  two  —  year  probationary  period  for  teachers  is 
mandatory  and  may  not  be  shortened  by  the  advice  or  actions  of  a  school  district.  (citations 
omitted).  Summerfield  at  page  1035. 

4. 

California  Teachers’  Ass’n  v.  Governing  Bd.  of  Golden  Valley  Unified  School 

Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.  App.4"  369  involved  the  dismissal  of  a  teacher  for  cause  during  the 
school  year.  The  teacher  was  teaching  under  an  emergency  credential.  The  court,  relying 
primarily  upon  Education  Code  section  44915,  held  that  the  teacher  should  have  been 
classified  as  a  probationary  teacher  and  accorded  the  due  process  rights  to  which 
probationary  teachers  are  entitled.  Section  44915  states: 

Governing  boards  of  school  districts  shall  classify  as  probationary  employees, 
those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications  for 
the  school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified  as  permanent  employees  or  as 
substitute  employees. 

The  Golden  Valley  court  reasoned  that  since  those  who  teach  under  emergency 
credentials  are  neither  permanent  nor  substitute  employees,  they  must  be  classified  as

  

  
  

probationary  employees.  Golden  Valley  at  page  378.  The  court  acknowledged  the  holding  in 
Summerfield  and  the  footnote  cited  above,  but  characterized  the  statement  as  dicta. 

5. 

The  most  recent  in  the  triad  of  cases  is  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

Dist.  (2004)  116  Cal.  App.4™  1070.  This  case  involved  a  teacher  who  began  her  fourth  year 
of  teaching  under  an  emergency  credential  pursuant  to  a  contract  which  identified  her  as  a 
provisional  teacher.  She  received  her  credential  in  February  of  the  next  calendar  year  and 
presented  it  to  the  school  district.  The  district  offered  her  a  new  contract  identifying  her  as  a 
probationary  employee,  effective  on  a  specified  date  in  March.  The  credential  the  teacher 
received  stated  that  it  was  “valid”  from  August  27"  of  the  preceding  calendar  year.  The 
question  before  the  court  was  whether  Fine’s  probationary  period  began  on  August  27"  or  in 
February  of  the  next  calendar  year.  The  answer  determined  whether,  when  Fine  was  given 
notice  in  March  two  years  later  that  she  would  not  be  reemployed,  she  was  a  probationary  or 
permanent  employee.  The  court  determined  that  she  was  a  probationary  employee  declining 
to  give  retroactive  application  to  the  acquisition  of  her  credential  in  the  middle  of  the  school 
year.  The  court  discussed  both  the  holdings  in  Summerfield  and  Golden  Valley,  noting  that 
under  Golden  Valley,  “teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  [is]  entitled  to  the  benefits 
of  probationary  classification  (specifically  the  statutory  protections  governing  dismissal  of 
probationary  employees)  except  for  the  benefit  of  counting  that  service  toward  attaining 
permanent  service.”  (Parenthesis  original). 

6. 

Thus,  two  published  appellate  court  cases  have  held  that  teaching  under  an 

emergency  credential  does  not  “count”  toward  the  time  required  to  attain  permanent  status. 
The  third,  in  what  some  might  consider  as  questionable  logic,”  held  that  such  teachers  are 
nonetheless  entitled  to  the  due  process  rights  afforded  probationary  teachers.  It  is  true  that 
the  Golden  Valley  decision  rests  on  the  interpretation  of  a  generic  statute  dealing  with  the 
classification  of  teachers  and,  in  that  sense,  runs  contrary  to  the  holdings  in  both  Summerfield 
and  Fine.  In  other  words,  if  such  teachers  are  entitled  to  be  probationary  status,  that 
necessarily  implies  that  time  spent  as  such  should  qualify  in  the  acquisition  of  permanent 
status.  After  all,  that  is  the  purpose  of  probationary  periods  in  civil  service  positions.  The 
Golden  Valley  court  in  fact  suggested  that  but  for  the  language  in  44911  expressly 
prohibiting  credit  for  such  service,  it  would  be  counted  toward  the  acquisition  of  permanent 
status.  As  noted  above,  unfortunately  none  of  the  cases  dealt  with  a  lay-off  situation  but  the 
two  which  come  the  closest  are  those  which  deal  with  the  time  at  which  probation  begins  for 
tenure  purposes.  Therefore,  based  on  the  holding  (and  dicta)  in  Summerfield,  buttressed  by 
the  very  recent  holding  in  Fine,  it  is  determined  that  for  lay  off  purposes,  ordinarily  the  first 
paid  date  of  probationary  service  (senority  date),  should  coincide  with  the  date  on  which  the 
_  teacher  is  properly  classified  by  the  District  as  probationary  for  tenure  acquisition  purposes. 
Here,  while  the  evidence  did  not  establish  whether  the  District  actually  entered  into  a  new 
contract  with  respondents  Clark  and  Hutchinson,  District  acknowledged  by  stipulation  that 

  

>  The  conclusion  that  a  statute  enacted  decades  before  emergency  credentials  existed  should  be  interpreted  to  imply 
legislative  intent  to  classify  such  teachers  working  under  such  credentials  as  probationary  seems  a  logical  stretch.  In 
fact,  as  the  Golden  Valley  court  acknowledged,  the  legislature  did  specifically  exclude  such  service  for  tenure  acqui- 
sition  purposes.  Its  failure  to  address  similar  limitations  on  the  rights  of  such  teachers  in  the  context  of  a  mid  year 
dismissal  (or  a  layoff  proceeding)  is  more  likely  simply  an  oversight.

they  became  probationary  teachers  on  the  dates  that  they  acquired  their  respective 
credentials, 

Consideration  of Positively  Assured  Attrition 

7, 

Section  44955  reads,  in  pertinent  part: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of  a 
district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below  the 
corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing 
board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of 
the  termination  of  an  inter  district  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of 
curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have 
become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 
employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
(Emphasis  added) 

8. 

District  was  not  required  to  take  into  account  positively  assured  attrition  at  the 
time  that  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  eliminate  and/or  reduce  PKS.  Such  consideration 
is  limited  to  lay  off  cases  based  on  a  reduction in  ADA in  which  case  the  “corresponding 
percentage  of  employees  in  the  district”  who  may  be  given  notice  should  be  reduced  by 
attrition  known  to  the  District  before  March  15".  Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal. 
App.3d  977,  at  980-983. 

9. 

In  San  Jose  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627,  the  court  was  called  upon  to 

decide  whether  positively  assured  attrition  had  to  be  considered  in  a  PKS  layoff.  Holding 
that  attrition  need  not  be  considered,  the  court  reasoned: 

A  board’s  decision  as  to  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of 
service  is  not  tied  in  with  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  reduction  in  the 
number  of  students.  The  number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by  PKS 
reductions  depends  totally  upon  the  district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services 
to  reduce.  Put  another  way,  the  language  of  section  44955  that  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  “may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  said  district”  is  only 
applicable  to  ADA  terminations  based  upon  an  actual  reduction  in  attendance. 
Where  the  governing  board  determines  to  discontinue  or  reduce  a  particular 
kind  of  service,  there  is  no  way  to  calculate  a  “corresponding  percentage,” 

  

  
  

 

© 

hence  it  is  within  the  discretion  of  the  board  to  determine  the  amount  by  which 
it  will  reduce  a  particular  service. 

_..  in  PKS  cases  the  determination  of  the  amount  by  which  a  service  1s 
to  be  reduced  is  the  determination  of  the  number  of  positions  to  be  eliminated. 

...  In  making  a  final  decision  on  PKS  reductions,  the  extent  to  which 

the  services  are  reduced  inherently  determines  the  number  of  positions  to 
remain.  Ifa  service  is  to  be  eliminated,  for  example,  it  is  obvious  that  it  is 
unnecessary  to  consider  attrition  in  any  way.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v. 
Allen,  supra,  at  pp.  635-636. 

10. 

‘In  this  case,  the  District  knew,  before  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce 

or  eliminate  PKS,  that  certain  teachers  would  not  return  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  These 
departures  were  considered  when  the  level  of  services  to  be  reduced  was  considered  and 
resolved.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  any  positively  assured  attrition  following  the  March 
3,  2004,  resolution  which  might  have  obviated  the  need  for  a  layoff  notice  to  any  respondent. 
In  summary,  the  process  followed  by  the  District  did  not  violate  section  44955. 

Counseling  Services  Reduction 

11. 

This  issue  has  been  the  subject  of  a  number  of  appellate  cases,  one  of  the  most 
recent  of  which  was  Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Alta  Loma  School  District  (1996)  41 
Cal.  App.4"  1571.  The  Gallup  court  traced  the  history  of judicial  review  of  PKS  reductions 
and  reiterated  the  principle  that  PKS  reductions  may  legitimately  involve  the  anticipated 
performance  or  provision  of  the.service  in  a  different  manner.  The  differences  may  involve 
district  personnel  or  contract  providers.  Respondent  Price  relies  primarily  on  Santa  Clara 
Fed’n  of  Teachers  v.  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  Dist.  (1981)  116  Cal.  App.3d  831,  at  843- 
845  in  support  ofther  contention  that  counseling  services  are  not  being  reduced  by  the 
District.  Santa  Clara  involved  the  reduction  of  health  services  necessitating  the  lay  off  of 
nurses.  The  record  reflected  that  the  district  intended  to  use  other  employees  to  provide  first 
aid  assistance,  health  instruction  and  the  handling  of  child  abuse.  The  appellate  court 
affirmed  the  trial  court’s  findings  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  record  to  establish  that  there 
would  be a  difference  in  the  method  or  manner  of  providing  the  health  services.°  In  this 
case,  while  the  District  has  not  definitively  decided  which  services  will  be  continued  and  in 
what  manner,  the  tentative  plan  does  reflect  a  different  manner  of  providing  counseling 
services.  Under  the  tentative  plan,  class  scheduling  will  become  an  administrative  function. 
Teachers,  without  counseling  credentials,  will  administer  standard  tests  and  some  may 
provide  personal  “counseling”  to  students  with  whom  they  have  established  a  level  of  trust. 
At  least  one  teacher  will  assist  college  bound  students  with  financial  aid  applications.  The 
District  will  solicit  area  universities  and  community  colleges  for  help  in  college  admission 
and  financial  aid  applications.  In  summary,  the  District  will  not  continue  the  particular  kind 

  

°  The  judgment  was  reversed  and  the  matter  was  remanded  to  the  trial  court  on  other  grounds.

  

of  service  or  position  performed  by  respondent  Price.  For  the  most  part,  administrative 
personnel,  teachers  who  are  not  trained  counselors,  and  outside  volunteers  will  assume  some 
of  respondent  Price’s  current  tasks  although  it  may  be  reasonably  inferred  that  at  least  some 
of  her  services  will  no  longer  be  provided. 

Legal  Cause for  Notice 

12. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide  notice  to  respondents 
Karen  Price  (1.0  FTE),  Candice  Hutchinson  (.6  FTE)’,  and  Joanne  Clark  (1.0  FTE)  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Such  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  identified  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2004-2005  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

oun  Meg  7  de o 

oy 

  

       KARL  S,  ENGEMAN  [- 

Administrative  Law 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

e 

  

7 Hutchinson  will  “bump”  into  .4  FTE  of  Clark’s  position  at  the  District’s  continuation  school.

  

  

  
  
  

