BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SAN  MATEO  —  FOSTER  CITY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

C.  JEAN  FISHER  and  NANCY  SMITH, 

OAH  No.  N  2004030495 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Robert  Walker,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Mateo,  California,  on  April  13,  2004. 

Mary  K.  Raftery,  Deputy  County  Counsel,  County  of  San  Mateo,  represented  the  San 

Mateo  —  Foster  City  School  District. 

Sheila  K.  Sexton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  respondents,  C.  Jean  Fisher  and 

Nancy  Smith. 

employees. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents,  C.  Jean  Fisher  and  Nancy  Smith,  are  certificated  district 

2. 

Not  later  than  March  15,  2004,  in  accordance  with  sections  44949  and  44955 

of  the  Education  Code,’  the  superintendent  caused  the  governing  board  of  the  district  and 
respondents  to  be  notified  in  writing  that  it  was  recommended  that  respondents  be  notified 
that  the  district  would  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  notice 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to 
respondents’  competency. 

3. 

A  notice  was  delivered  to  each  respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by 

depositing  the  notice  in  the  United  States  mail,  registered,  postage  prepaid,  and  addressed  to 
respondent’s  last  known  address. 

  

'  All  references  to  the  Code  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified.

4. 

The  notice  advised  each  respondent  of  the  following:  He  or  she  had  a right  to  a 

hearing.  In  order  to  obtain  a  hearing,  he  or  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in 
writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice.  The  request  had  to  be  delivered  by  March  22,  2004, 
which  was  not  less  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served.  And  the 
failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

© 

3. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  accusation  was 
timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All 
prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

6. 

The  recommendation  was  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services, 
including  9  full  time  equivalent  positions  of  counselors.  Respondents  are  counselors.  Seven 
of  the  counselors  who  were  the  subject  of  the  recommendation  have  teaching  credentials  and 
can  bump,  that  is,  --  move  into  positions  held  by  —  other  employees.  Respondents,  however, 
do  not  hold  teaching  credentials  and,  therefore,  are  not  in  a  position  to  bump  into  other 
positions. 

7. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  superintendent  is  not  actually  recommending 

that  the  district  discontinue  counseling  services.  Respondents  contend  that  the 
superintendent  actually  plans  to  transfer  the  work  of  the  counselors  to  teachers  and 
administrators  or  to  outside  contractors  and  that,  therefore,  the  purported  recommendation  to 
discontinue  counseling  services  is  merely  a  subterfuge  in  order  to  get  rid  of  respondents.  The 
great  weight  of  the  evidence,  however,  is  that  the  recommendation  to  discontinue  the 
district’s  counseling  program  is  legitimate.  Counselors  are  not  the  only  people  in  a  school 
district  who  counsel.  Teachers  provide  counseling.  Administrators  provide  counseling. 
Some  of  the  counseling  that  counselors  provide  is  unique,  that  is,  not  provided  by  teachers  or 
administrators.  Some  of  the  counseling  that  counselors  provide,  on  the  other  hand,  is  similar 
to  some  of  the  counseling  that  teachers  and  administrators  provide.  The  fact  that  teachers 
and  administrators  will  continue  to  provide  counseling  does  not  mean  that  the 
recommendation  to  discontinue  the  counseling  program  is  disingenuous.  This  is  not  a  case 
of  getting  rid  of  the  employees  who  perform a certain  function  but  replacing  them  with 
employees  with  a  different  title.  Also,  respondent  presented  no  evidence  in  support  their 
argument  that  the  superintendent  intends  to  contract  out  the  counseling  work. 

8. 

Within  the  meaning  of  section  44955  of  the  Code,  the  services  are  “particular 

kinds  of  services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  recommendation  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of 
discretion. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  to  the 

welfare  of  the  district  and  its  students.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  is  necessary  in  order 
to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

@ 

  

 
  

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  of  the 

Education  Code.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were 
satisfied. 

2. 

Within  the  terms  of  sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code,  the 

district  has  cause  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  to  give  notices  to 
respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils. 

ORDER 

1. 

2. 

The  accusations  served  on  C.  Jean  Fisher  and  Nancy  Smith  are  sustained. 

Before  May  15,  2004,  the  district  may  give  notice  to  C.  Jean  Fisher  and  Nancy 

Smith  that  the  district  will  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Dated: 

Hata 

27  2004 

 

ROBERT  WALKER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

