BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MORENO  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

Certificated  Employees  Listed  in  Exhibit  A,  | OAH  No.  L2004030272 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Vallera  J.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Riverside,  California  on  April  21,  2004. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the 

Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

Marianne  Reinhold,  Esq.  of  Reich,  Adell,  Crost  &  Cvitan,  represented  Respondent 

Mary  Keaton. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2004.' 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

On  March  10,  2004,  Nicholas  D.  Ferguson,  Ed.D.,  Superintendent 

(Superintendent),  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  (District),  made  and  filed  the 
Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  listed  in  Exhibit  A  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

1. 

2. 

  

The  record  remained  open  for  the  parties  to  file  written  closing  argument  simultaneously.  The  documents 
' 
were  filed  on  April  26,  2004.  The  Superintendent’s  Closing  Argument  and  Post-Hearing  Brief  was  marked  Exhibit 
12.  Respondent  Mary  Keaton’s  Post-Hearing  Brief  was  marked  Exhibit  H.  On  that  date,  the  record  was  closed,  and 
the  matter  was  submitted.

Respondent  Stacy  Ivery  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing  and/or  Notice  of  Defense 

and  thereby  waived  her  right  to  hearing. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  on  the  District’s  Motion,  without  objection  by 
Respondents,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  dismissed  the  Accusation  against Respondents 
Darcel  Cannady-Jamerson,  Cecilia  Castino,  Gretchen  Daley,  Michelle  Gomez,  Christine 
McCoy,  Annie  Nguyen,  David  Patterson,  Bryn  Ann  Pearson,  Kristin  Shinley  and  Lisa 
Woodward. 

3, 

In  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  on 

February  24,  2004,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Moreno  Valley 
Unified  School  District  (Board)  and  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  that  he  recommended  that 
notice  be  given  to  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

On  March  9,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Amended  Board  Resolution  No.  2003-04-115, 
In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  or  Elimination  of  Certain  Particular  Kinds  of  Services  for  the 
2004-05  School  Year,  reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

On  or  before  March  11,  2004,  the  District  served  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  with 
written  notice,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949.  The  written  notice  of 
termination  stated  that  Respondent  Mary  Keaton’s  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
2004-05  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation 
that  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to  her 
competency  as  a  teacher.  In  addition,  the  notice  advised  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  of  her 
right  to  hearing,  that  the  request  for  hearing  must  be  delivered  to  the  Board  of  Education,  in 
care  of  Dr.  Nicolas  D.  Ferguson,  Superintendent,  on  or  before  March  31,  2004,  not  less  than 
seven  days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  upon  her,  and  that  the  failure  to 
request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

Respondent  Mary  Keaton  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense  to 

determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  year. 

An  Accusation  was  timely  served  on  Respondent  Mary  Keaton. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  satisfied. 

4. 

5. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of 

certificated  services  commencing  in  the  2004-05  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Magnet  School  Assistance  Program 
Coordinator 
Magnet  School  Assistance  Program  Teacher 

1.0  FTE 

2 

 

on  Assignment 
9  —  12  Keyboarding 
Fine  Arts 
Business 
Grant  Counselor  at  elementary  level 
Drug  Prevention  and  School  Safety  Specialist 

10.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
6.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  total  23.0  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

6. 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils  and  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District,  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

The  District  has  considered  all  known  attrition,  including  resignations  and 

retirements,  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to 
its  employees. 

9. 

Respondent  Mary  Keaton  contends  that  James  Long  (Long)  and  Linda 

Burkhart  (Burkhart)  are  junior  to  her  and  are  being  retained  to  perform  services  for  which 
she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7. 

8. 

Respondent  Mary  Keaton’s  first  date  of  paid  service  is  October  29,  1984.  She  holds  a 

Tillie  Soliz  (Soliz),  the  District’s  employee  who,  among  other  things, maintains 

Teaching  Credential  that  authorizes  her  to  teach  data  processing  limited  to  keypunch, 
clerical/office  occupations,  issued  June  13,  1984,  valid  for  life,  and  that  is  on  file  with  the 
District.  The  foregoing  credential  does  not  authorize  her  to  teach  computer  classes.  In 
addition,  she  holds  an  Instructor  Credential,  issued  June  29,  1979,  that  authorizes  her  to  teach 
computer  and  related  technologies,  office  services  and  related  technologies,  in  grades  11 
through  14. 
credentials  in  the  District’s  personnel  file,  testified  that  Respondent  Mary  Keaton’s 
Instructor’s  Credential  is  not  on  file  with  the  District.  She  explained  that,  if  the  Instructor’s 
Credential  had  been  on  file  with  the  District,  it  would  include  the  stamp  to  indicate  that  it  is 
registered  with  Riverside  County  Office  of  Education;  it  does  not.  Respondent  Mary Keaton 
did  not  remember  if  she  filed  this  credential  with  the  District.  Given  the  foregoing, 
insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  Respondent  Mary  Keaton’s  Instructor’s 
Credential  is  on  file  with  the  District. 

For  the  past  five  years,  at  Canyon  Springs  High  School,  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  has 

taught  a  computer  course;  the  title  has  changed  three  times;  initially  it  was  “Beginning 
Computers,”  thereafter  “Introduction  to  Computers”  and  finally  “Computer  Applications  1.” 
The  syllabus  states  that  the  course  includes  Keyboarding,  Microsoft  Word,  Microsoft  Access 
and  Microsoft  Excel.  At  no  time  did  any  District  administrator  personally  verify  the  course 

3 

 

content  but  relied  on  statements  from  the  site  administrators.  Despite  the  designation  of 
“Beginning  Computers,”  “Introduction  to  Computers”  or  “Computer  Applications  I”  on  the 
Master  Calendar  and  the  content  of  the  course  syllabus  for  the  past  five  years,  Soliz  testified 
that  she  believed  that  Respondent  Keaton  was  teaching  a  keyboarding  class. 

Since  April  2003,  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  has  been  on  medical  leave  and  has  not 

returned  to  work.  For  second  semester  of  the  2003-04  school  year,  an  administrator  at 
Canyon  Springs  High  School  assigned  her  to  teach  a  Web  Page  Design  class  and  requested 
that  she  prepare  the  syllabus  for  this  course;  she  did  so.  District  administrators  notified 
Canyon  Springs  High  School  administrators  that  her  credential  does  not  authorize  her  to 
Still  on  medical  leave,  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  has  not  returned  to  her 
teach  this  class. 
position,  did  not  teach  the  foregoing  class  and  a  substitute  teacher  has  been  teaching  this 
class. 

Long  is  being  retained  to  teach  “Computer  Applications  I”  (0.8  FTE).  His  first  date 

of  paid  service  is  August  28,  1996.  He  holds  a  Single  Subject,  Business  credential  that 
authorizes  him  to  teach  this  course.  Burkhart  is  being  retained  to  teach  “Computer 
Applications  I”  (0.2  FTE).  Her  first  day  of  paid  service  with  the  District  is  July  8,  2002,  and 
she  holds  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Credential  in  Business,  with  a  Supplemental 
Credential  in  Math  that  authorizes  her  to  teach  the  computer  course. 

The  District  is  only  required  to  consider  credentials  that  Respondent  Mary  Keaton  had 

on  file  by  the  time  of  the  March  15  notice  deadline.  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  of 
Wiseburn  School  District  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.  Insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to 
establish  that  Respondent  Mary  Keaton’s  Instructor’s  Credential  was  on  file  with  the  District 
on  or  before  March  15,  2004.  The  credential  that  she  had  on  file  does  not  authorize 
Respondent  Mary  Keaton  to  teach  the  computer  class.  Though  junior  to  respondent  Mary 
Keaton,  Long  and  Burkhart  are  not  being  retained  to  perform  services  for  which  she  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10. 

 Nocertificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  has  been  retained  to 

perform  any  services  that  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  vs.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Moreno 

Valley  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The 
cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  vs.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.  3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  vs.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393 
vs.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

5. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  against  respondents  Darcel  Cannady-Jamerson,  Cecilia 
Castino,  Gretchen  Daley,  Michelle  Gomez,  Christine  McCoy,  Annie  Nguyen,  David 
Patterson,  Bryn  Ann  Pearson,  Kristin  Shinley  and  Lisa  Woodward  is  dismissed. 

2. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Mary  Keaton  and  Stacy  Ivery  is 

sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  before  May  15,  2004  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  as  indicated. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: 

Hiey  b,  L00Y 

Uilltia-F-foee — 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings    

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

MORENO  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

EXHIBIT  “A” 

The  following  certificated  personnel  will  receive  a  layoff  notice: 

The  following  certificated  personnel  will  receive  a  precautionary  layoff  notice: 

Darcel  Cannady-Jamerson 
Gretchen  Daley 
Mary  Keaton 
Christine  McCoy 
Annie  Nguyen 

Cecilia  Castino 
Michelle  Gomez 
Stacy  Ivery 
David  Patterson 
Bryn  Ann  Pearson 
Kristen  Shinley 

 

