BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BAKERSFIELD  CITY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
KERN  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Non-reemployment 
Of  49  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees: 

OAH  No.  L2004030538 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  15,  16,  and  19,  2004,  in 
Bakersfield,  California. 

Bakersfield  City  School  District  was  represented  by  Jones  &  Matson, 

Attorneys  at  Law,  by  Urrea  C.  Jones,  Jr.,  and  Marcos  F.  Hernandez. 

Driscoll  &  Associates,  Attorneys  at  Law,  by  Thomas  J.  Driscoll,  Jr. 
represented  the  following  respondents:  Michelle  Alvarado,  Veronica  Artiaga,  Alex 
Ball,  Melissa  Banal,  Juliana  Barron,  Angela  Bluestone,  Kathy  Bryant,  Gloria  Burr, 
Wayne  Burris,  Elizabeth  Carde-Leipnik,  Salvador  Casillas,  Maria  Castro-Morales, 
Terri  Cline,  Jocelyn  Collins,  Bree  Davis,  Kathryn  DeLa  Roz,  Susana  Del  Toro,  Elvia 
Duenas,  Angela  Estrada,  Trent  Fussel,  Norma  Garcia,  Marianne  Gartenlaub,  Leah 
Giannini,  Bryan  Gridiron,  Maria  Hankins,  Melissa  Hansen,  Kathryn  Harper,  Stacy 
Helms,  Janice  Herda,  Ellen  Holfeld,  Roy  Hooks,  Linda  Hufstedler,  Kate  James,  Dana 
Johnson,  Gino  King,  Scott  Larsen,  Nichol  Lindsey,  Sandra  Lopez-Delgado,  Angelica 
Lopez-Montelongo,  Amanda  Madkins,  Dennis  Marquez,  Weston  Martin,  Kelly 
Maxwell,  Jennifer  McMahan,  Jodi  Moore,  Christy  Morasco,  April  Morphis,  Arianne 
Newman,  Ron  Parker,  Dayla  Parra,  Marianne  Perttula,  Wendy  Powell,  Fany  Ramos, 
Raul  T.  Rangel,  Elizabeth  Ratliff,  Bianca  Rizo,  Myrna  Rojas,  Oralia  Santos,  Jaime 
Simmons,  Lynn  Sonner,  Lorna  Tripp,  Meikim  Wah,  April  West,  and  Sara  Williams. 

Respondent  Terisa  McKinney  appeared  in  propia  persona. 

 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  record  was  left  open  to 

allow  the  parties  to  submit  written  closing  argument  and  post  hearing  briefs.  The 
District  submitted  “Proposed  Findings  of  Fact”  and  “Bakersfield  City  School 
District’s  Post  Hearing  Brief’  on  April  27,  2004.  Said  documents  were  marked 
collectively  as  exhibit  42.  Mr.  Driscoll,  on  behalf  of  his  clients,  submitted 
“Respondents’  Post  Hearing  Brief,  Closing  Arguments  and  Proposed  Factual  and 
Legal  Findings”  on  April  28,  2004.  Said  document  was  marked  as  exhibit  120. 
Respondent  McKinney  did  not  submit  written  closing  argument  or  a  post  hearing 
brief. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dennis  Patrick  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  Assistant 

Superintendent  of  Personnel  the  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (“District”). 

2.  Respondent  are  certified  probationary  employees  of  the  District. 

3.  On  March  10,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted 

Resolution  No.  VII  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services 
no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
Section  44955: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Physical  Education  Teachers  (Jr.  High/Middle  Schools) 

10.0 

Increase  Class  Size  in  Grades 
4-6  to  33.5;  Grades  7-8  to  31 

Supervisor  (Student  Services) 

Program  Specialists  (school  site/central  office) 

20.0 

1.0 

19.0 

4. 

As  a  result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services,  the  Governing 
Board  determined  that  50  full  time  equivalent  positions  could  be  reduced  as  set  forth 
above. 

5.  The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  position  (“Supervisor  —  Student 
Services”  does  not  require  the  termination  of  any  Respondent  herein  because  the 
District  decided  to  transfer  the  person  holding  said  position  to  another  supervisory  or 
administrative  position

6.  Board  Resolution  No.  VII  also  provided  that  the  services  of  certificated 

© 

employees  who  possessed  qualifications  needed  for  the  following  programs  would  be 
retained  regardless  of  seniority: 

Teachers  who  possess  credentials  in  the 
of  Industrial  Technology, 
subject 
areas 
Instrumental  Music, 
or 
Special  Education 

Science, 

Math, 

School  Nurse 

Speech  Therapists 

BCLAD  Certified  Teachers 

Federal  Class  Size  Reduction  Program  Teachers 

7.  The  district  is  only  required  to  offer  200  minutes  of  physical  education  each 

10  days.  Education  Code  section  51223.  The  District  does  not  intend  to  reduce 
physical  education  below  statutorily  mandated  minimum  required  level  by  law. 

@ 

8. 

On  March  10,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  VIII,  Criteria  for 
Determining  Order  of  Seniority  for  Those  Employees  with  the  Same  Date  of  First 
Paid  Service.  The  criteria  adopted  were: 

A. 

Experience’  to  teach  or  serve  in  a  particular  program  or 
provide  a  particular  service  of  need  by  the  District.  (family  life,  music, 
counselor,  guidance  spec.,  Miller-Unruh,  etc.) 

B. 

Experience”  to  teach  in  special  categorical  programs. 

(bilingual,  special  education,  speech  therapist,  school  nurse,  etc.) 

C. 

Experience’  previous  to  current  employment  as a  full- 
time,  credentialed  teacher  in  a  probationary/permanent,  K-12  teaching 
position  in  a  public  school. 

D. 

E. 

Number  of  supplementary  authorizations* 

Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials” 

  

=

 
n
w

 
e
A

One  point  per  year,  including  current. 
One  point  per  year,  including  current. 
One  point  per  year. 
One  point  per  supplementary  authorization,  Gen  Elementary/Secondary  credential,  CLAD/BCLAD  cert. 
One  point  per  credential. 

Earned  degrees  beyond  BA/BS  level 

6 

Multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  district  need’ 

H. 

Credit 

for 

Emergency, 

Preliminary 

or 

Clear/Life 

F, 

G. 

Credentials® 

9.  On  March  12,  2004,  Dennis  Patrick,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Personnel 
Services,  served  101  certificated  employees,  including  Respondents,  with  notice  of 
recommendation  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year  due  to  a  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  under  the 
provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44955  and  44949,  On  that  same  day,  Mr. 
Patrick  sent  notice  to  the  Superintendent,  the  Members  of  the  Governing  Board,  and 
the  President  of  the  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  identifying  the 
certificated  employees  who  had  been  served  with  the  notice  of  recommendation. 

10.  Respondents,  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Thirty-six 
certificated  employees  who  were  served  with  the  notice  of  recommendation  did  not 
request  a  hearing. 

11.  Following  Respondents’  request  for  hearing,  the  District  timely  served  an 
accusation,  notice  of  hearing,  and  notice  of  defense  form  on  each  of  the  Respondents, 
who  thereafter  timely  filed  notices  of  defense. 

12.  The  District  Served  a  Notice  of  Hearing  on  each  Respondent.  All  pre- 

hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

TEACHERS  CLASSIFIED  BY  THE  DISTRICT  AS  TEMPORARY 

13.  At  the  same  time  that  Mr.  Patrick  served  Respondents  with  notice  of 

recommendation  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year  due  to  a  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  he  also  served 
53  certificated  employees  classified  by  the  District  as  temporary  with  notices  that  they 
were  not  being  reemployed  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 
included  teachers  who  were  employed  under  emergency  permits,  pre-intern 
certificates,  or  internship  credentials  internships. 

These  53  employees 

14.  The  53  teachers  served  release  notices  by  Mr.  Patrick  were  classified  as 

temporary  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  types  of  credentials  they  hold,  including 
emergency  permits,  pre-intern  certificates,  or  internship  credentials. 

  

°  One  point  per  degree. 
”  One  point  for  Spanish,  if  credential  or  in  progress  (all  hirees  for  bilingual  from  1994-1885  in  progress) 
®  One  point  per  emergency  (other  than  30-day  sub),  two  points  per  preliminary,  three  points  per  clear. 

 

15.  Respondents  contend  that  the  notices  to  the  53  “temporary  employees” 

were  not  authorized  by  the  Governing  Board  under  Education  Code  Section  44954(b) 
and  are  therefore  null  and  void.  Respondents’  contention  is  not  persuasive. 
Evidence  Code  Section  664  states  in  pertinent  part:  “It  is  presumed  that  an  official 
duty  has  been  regularly  performed.”  Mr.  Patrick  in  his  official  capacity  as  Assistant 
Superintendent  was  charged  by  the  Governing  Board  to  perform  administrative  duties 
on  behalf  of  the  Board,  including  the  duty  to  give  notices  of  non-  reemployment.  It  is 
presumed  that  he  performed  this  duty  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Board.  Further,  no 
evidence  was  presented  proving  that  the  Governing  Board  took  any  action  to 
invalidate  Mr.  Patrick’s  actions  in  sending  out  the  notices. 

16.  The  53  teachers  served  release  notices  by  Mr.  Patrick  were  classified  as 

temporary  solely  on  the  basis  of  their  credentialing,  holding  emergency  permits,  pre- 
intern  certificates,  or  internship  credentials. 

17.  There  was  no  evidence  as  to  the  seniority  of  the  53  teachers  classified  as 
temporary.  With  the  exception  of  Kelly  Watson  and  Mark  Harrington,  none  of  these 
teachers  were  shown  in  the  District’s  seniority  list,  and  no  data  exists  in  the  record 
with  which  to  rank  these  employees.  There  is  no  way  to  determine  the  seniority  of  the 
other  51  teachers  classified  as  temporary. 

18.  Respondent  contends  that  53  teachers  classified  as  temporary  should  have 

been  classified  as  probationary  and  the  District  was  therefore  required  to  give  them 
layoff  notice  and  a  right  to  a  hearing  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

'  44955.  Respondents’  also  contend  that  since  these  teachers  were  terminated  because 
of  economic  reasons,  they  should  have  mandatory  rehire  rights.  Although  respondents 
raise  compelling  arguments  on  behalf  of  these  employees,  the  undersigned  has  no 
jurisdiction  to  decide  issues  relating  to  these  teachers  since  they  were  not  given  layoff 
notices,  were  not  the  subject  of  accusations  in  this  matter,  did  not  appear as  parties, 
and  were  not  represented  at  the  hearing.  As  a  result,  the  undersigned  is  precluded 
from  making  factual  finding  and  legal  conclusions  regarding  the  effect  of  the  seniority 
dates  of  these  employees  in  relation  to  respondents. 

19.  The  District  did  not  identify  the  certificated  employees  providing  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  authorized  for  reduction  by  the  Board.  The  District  did  not 
make  any  bumping  or  displacement  analysis  regarding  the  personnel  serving  in  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  authorized  for  reduction  by  the  Board.  There  was  no 
evidence  that  any  of  the  reductions  authorized  by  the  Board  resulted  in  the 
displacement  of  any  Respondent  or  junior  employee. 

20.  The  evidence  established  that  the  elimination  of  the  Supervisor  (Student 

Services)  1.0  FTE  position  would  result  in  the  occupant  of  that  position  being 
assigned  as  a  school  principal,  rather  than  being  returned  to  the  classroom.  This 
results  in  a  reduction  of  the  50.0  FTE  layoff  authorized  by  the  Board  to  49.0  FTE. 

5 

 

21. 

None  of  the  10.0  FTE  reductions  in  PE  requires  the  displacement  of 

any  teacher.  The  evidence  was  uncontradicted  that  the  reduction  in  PE  would  be 
accomplished  by  the  reduction  in  minutes  of  PE  instruction,  which  would  necessitate 
the  addition  of  an  equal  number  of  minutes  of  academic  instruction.  The  10  FTE  of 
PE  would  be  absorbed  entirely  by  10.0  former  PE  teachers  teaching  additional 
courses  added  at  their  school  sites,  in  which  each  was  credentialed  and  competent  to 
teach. 

22. 

District  did  not  identify  any  of  the  employees  performing  19.0  FTE 
Program  Specialist  services  authorized  for  reduction  by  the  Board.  District  did  not 
provide  any  bumping  or  displacement  analysis  regarding  the  Program  Specialist 
reductions.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  of  the  occupants  of  Program  Specialist 
positions  were  credentialed  or  qualified  to  take  the  position  of  any  less  senior 
° 
certificated  employee,  including  Respondents. 

23. 

District  did  not  identify  any  of  the  employees  occupying  any  of  the 

20.0  FTE  positions  being  eliminated  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  class  sizes  in  grades 
District  did  not  provide  any  bumping  or  displacement  analysis 
fourth  through  eighth. 
regarding  the  class  size  increases.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  of  the  occupants  of 
these  fourth  through  eighth  grade  positions  were  credentialed  or  qualified  to  take  the 
position  of  any  less  senior  certificated  employee,  including  Respondents. 

24. 

All  seventh  and  eighth  grade  classes  in  the  District  are 
departmentalized,  with  the  exception  of  perhaps  one  class,  according  to  Mr.  Patrick. 
There  was  no  evidence  regarding  which  departmentalized  seventh  and  eighth  grade 
classes  were  being  reduced  or  discontinued  as a  result  of  class  size  increases  in  those 
grades.  The  uncontradicted  testimony  was  that  the  seventh  and  eighth  grade 
departmentalized  reductions  accounted  for  6.5488  FTE  positions. 

25. 

The  testimony  established  positively  assured  attrition  regarding  18 

positions:  the  retirement  of  the  most  senior  PE  teacher,  the  non-reelection  of  seven 
teachers,  the  release  by  the  Board  of  three  temporary  teachers,  and  the  Board’s 
termination  of  seven  teachers. 

26. 
in  Music. 

Marie  Ono  and  Marianne  Perttula  hold  credentials  with  authorizations 

27. 

Laura  Rahe,  Filomeno  Perez,  and  Leah  Giannini  hold  credentials  with 

authorizations  in  Math. 

28. 

Kathryn  DeLaRoz,  Sandra  Lopez-Delgado,  Angela  Bluestone,  Dana 

Clow,  and  Linda  Hufstedler,  hold  special  education  credentials. 

29.  —  Kelly  Maxwell  holds  a  credential  qualifying  her  as  a  Speech  Therapist. 

   

  

30. 

Maria  Damas,  Rachel  Soto,  Rosemary  Duran,  Virginia  Gonzalez, 

Imelda  Loera,  Norma  Garcia,  and  Angelica  Lopez-Montelongo  hold  BCLAD 
certificates. 

31. 

Wayne  Burris,  Irasema  Fonseca,  Nicole  Harthorn,  Susana  Del  Toro, 

Dana  Johnson,  Gino  King,  Nichol  Lindsey,  Terri  Cline,  Bianca  Rizo,  Salvador 
Casillas,  Kate  James,  Gloria  Burr,  April  West,  Britta  Regan,  Shannon  McRoy,  Lynn 
Sonner,  Melissa  Hansen,  Timothy  Hook,  Elizabeth  Ratliff,  Jennifer  McMahan,  Jaime 
Simmons,  Trent  Fussel,  Myrna  Rojas,  Angela  Estrada,  Alex  Ball,  Dayla  Parra, 
Christy  Morasco,  Scott  Larsen,  and  Fany  Ramos,  all  possess  the  qualifications 
necessary  for  the  Federal  Class  Size  Reduction  Program  in  that  they  are  all  NCLB 
“highly  qualified”  teachers.  Madge  Magner  is  not  a  “highly  qualified”  teacher. 

32.  Numerous  Respondents  have  been  continuously  employed  by  the  District 
in  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications  for  months,  even  years,  prior  to  the 
“Start  Date”  shown  on  the  “Layoff  Seniority  List”  and  the  seniority  date  shown  on  the 
“BETA  Seniority  Listing.”  The  District  stipulated  that  these  Respondents  were 
classified  as  temporary  during  this  prior  employment  period  solely  on  the  basis  of 
holding  emergency  permits  and  district  credentials.  The  first  dates  of  paid  service  of 
these  Respondents  are  as  follows: 

Angela  Bluestone 

Gino  King 

Wayne  Burris 

. 

Susana  DelToro 
Kathy  Bryant 

Terri  Cline 

Linda  Hufstedler 

Juliana  Barron 

Oralia  Santos 

Roy  Hooks 

Bianca  Rizo 

Ron  Parker 
Nichol  Lindsey 

February  5,  1996 

August  20,  1996 

August  20,  1996 

October  28,  1996 

July  11,  1997 

August  19,  1997 

August  19,  1997 

August  25,  1998 

August  25,  1998 

August  25,  1998 

August  25,  1998 

September  28,  1998 

October  30,  1998 

Kathryn  DelaRoz 

Sandra  Lopez-Delgado 

Salvador  Casillas 

Maria  Castro-Morales 

Jocelyn  Collins 

January  4,  1999 

April  19,  1999 
August  20,  1999 

August  20,  1999 
August  20,  1999

‘ 

Marianne  Garenlaub 

August  18,  2000 

Dennis  Marquez 

January  2,  2001 

Amanda  Madkins 

October  29,  2001 

Leah  Giannini 
Melissa  Hansen 

August  15,  2002 
August  15,  2002 

33.  The  law  is  clear  that  seniority  is  based  on  the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a 

probationary  position  (Education  Code  section  44845).  Although  the  court  in  CTA 
v.  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4”  369,  did  not  address 
the  issue  of  whether  emergency  permit  holders  are  credited  with  seniority  rights  in 
layoff  proceedings,  it  held  that  under  Education  Code  Section  44915,  emergency 
permit  holders  are  entitled  to  be  classified  as  probationary  employees  when  hired  to 
fill  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications.  Further,  said  employees  are 
entitled  to  the  benefits  of  probationary  status  with  the  exception  their  service  under  an 
emergency  permit  cannot  be  counted  toward  attaining  permanent  status  (Golden 
Valley,  supra  at  p.  380;  Education  Code  Section  44911).  The  benefits  that  accrue  to 
emergency  permit  holders  include  mid  year  dismissal  rights  and  rights  under 
Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955.  According  to  relevant  statutes  and  case 
law,  the  above  respondents  should  be  considered  probationary  at  the  time  they  started 
work  under  their  emergency  credentials.  Further,  since  these  respondents  have  been 
properly  noticed  in  this  layoff  proceeding,  they  are  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  ALJ. 

34.  —  The  District  stipulated  that  all  certificated  employees  with  seniority 

dates  before  August  15,  2003,  were  retained  by  the  District  and  none  were  noticed  for 
lay-off  in  this  proceeding.  The  employees  named  in  finding  31  above,  with  the 
exception  of  Kathryn  Harper,  Arianne  Newman,  and  Ellen  Holfeld,  are  senior  to 
retained  certificated  employees  with  seniority  dates  of  November  28,  2002,  through 
August  15,  2003,  and  thereafter.  The  teachers  identified  in  finding  29  above  are 
credentialed  to  serve  in  the  same  areas  as  the  retained  employees  junior  to  them. 

35. 

The  District  staff  employed  the  criteria  set  forth  in  Board  Resolution 

No.  VIII  to  assign  points  to  the  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  having 
the  same  date  of  paid  service  as  the  Respondents.  The  District  staff  awarded  points 
based  on  information  in  the  District’s  records.  As  between  employees  with  the  same 
date  of  paid  service  and  the  same  number  of  points,  a  lottery  was  employed  to  break 
the  tie.  This  information  was  used  to  create  the  District’s  original  “Layoff  Seniority 
List”  which  was  attached  to  the  Accusation  and  listed  by  order  of  seniority  the  101 
employees  originally  served  with  the  notice  of  recommendation. 

HM 

H

36. 

The  District  modified  its  Layoff  Seniority  List  several  times  during  the 
course  of  the  hearing,  ultimately  offering  Exhibit  26b,  which  reflected  the  following 
changes  in  the  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  adopted  by  the  Board  as 
Resolution  No.  VIII: 

  

  

  

  

  

  

Black,  Tracy 

Carde-Leipnick, 
Elizabeth 
Casillas,  Salvador 

Casner,  Steven 

Castro-Morales, 
Maria 
Duenas,  Elvia 

Fonseca,  Iresma 

Haggard,  Misty 

Lopez- 
Montelongo, 
Angela 
Maxwell,  Kelly 

Criteria  B,  change  1  to  0  (total  points  decreased  from  5 
to  4) 
Criteria  D,  change  3  to  2  (total  points  decreased  from  7 
to  6) 
Criteria  B,  change  0  to  7  (total  points  increased  from  5  to 
12) 
Criteria  B,  change  2  to  4  (total  points  increased  from  8  to 
10) 
Criteria  B,  change  5  to  6  (total  points  increased  from  9  to 
10) 
Criteria  B,  change  3  to  4  (total  points  increased  from  8  to 
9) 
Criteria  E,  change  2  to  1  (total  points  decreased  from  23 
to  22) 
Criteria  G,  change  1  to  0  (total  points  decreased  from  9 
to  8) 
Criteria  C,  change  4  to  0 
Criteria  B,  change  1  to  5  (total  points  remain  at  11) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Rabe,  Laura 

Ono,  Marie 

Perttula,  Marianne 

     West,  April 
   
   Criteria  D,  change  1|  to  2  (total  points  increased  from  4  to 

Criteria  D,  change  1  to  0  (total  points  reduced  from  13  to 
12) 
Criteria  A&B,  change  to  0  (total  points  deceased  from  11 
to  5) 
Criteria  D,  change  1  to  3  (total  points  increased  from  5  to 
7) 
Criteria  D,  change  3  to  4  (total  points  increased  from  6  to 
7) 
Criteria  B,  change  2  to  6  (total  points  increased  from  7  to 
11) 
Criteria  F,  change  0  to  1  (total  points  increased  from  10 
to  11) 
Criteria  F,  change  |  to  0  (total  points  reduced  from  10  to 
9) 

Walker,  Kenneth 

Santos,  Oralia 

Tucker,  Linda 

  

  

  

5) 

37. 

| Among  the  changes  made  to  the  Layoff  Seniority  List  was  the  addition 

of  points  for  Oralia  Santos  on  the  basis  of  her  service  with  the  District  as  an 
Immersion  Teacher.  Numerous  other  Respondents  were  entitled  to  an  additional 
point  on  the  basis  of  having  served  as  Immersion  Teachers  during  the  2003-2004 
school  year,  but  were  not  properly  credited  for  this  service.  The  Respondents  entitled 
to  one  additional  tie-breaking  point  on  this  basis  are:  Meikim  Wah,  Amanda  Madkins, 
Gloria  Burr,  April  West,  Wendy  Powell,  Melissa  Hansen,  Myrna  Rojas,  Angela 
Estrada,  Norma  Garcia,  Veronica  Artiaga,  Michelle  Alvarado,  and  Fany  Ramos. 

38. 

Jodi  Moore  is  also  entitled  to  an  additional  3  tie-breaking  points  based 
on  her  three  years’  service  as  a  full-time,  credentialed  teacher  in  a  probationary  K-12 
position  in  the  Liberty  Public  Schools  District,  Missouri.  Contrary  to  the  District’s 
assertion,  there  is  no  requirement  in  the  District’s  resolution  that  teachers  be  “fully” 
credentialed  during  this  service  outside  of  the  District,  merely  that  they  be 
credentialed.  District’s  assertion  is  contradicted  by  its  admitted  policy  of  allowing 
credit  on  the  salary  schedule  for  such  service.  District  was  aware  of  Ms.  Moore’s 
Missouri  teaching  experience  as  of  January  2003  when  it  awarded  her  three  years’ 
salary  schedule  credit  for  such  service.  The  additional  3  points  awarded  Ms.  Moore, 
whose  seniority  date  is  August  15,  2003;  bring  her  to  a  total  of  6  points. 

39. 

District  stipulated  that  employees  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  15, 
2003,  who  scored  six  or  more  points  on  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  excluded  from 
layoff,  and  that  those  scoring  five  points  as  of  the  date  points  were  awarded  were 
subjected  to  a  lottery  to  determine  whether  they  were  to  be  included  in  this 
proceeding.  Respondents  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2003,  for  whom 
additional  points  were  demonstrated  in  this  proceeding  such  that  their  total  points 
became  five  or  more,  were  deprived  of  participation  in  the  lottery  for  their  point 
totals. 

40. 

|  Respondent  Linda  Hufstedler  was  an  out-of-state  teacher,  credentialed 
in  Alabama,  when  first  employed  by  the  District  for  the  1997-1998  school  year.  She 
worked  for  the  District  pursuant  to  an  emergency  permit  based  upon  her  Alabama 
credential,  obtaining  a  California  preliminary  multiple  subjects  credential  in  May 
1998.  Ms.  Hufstedler  has  worked  full-time  continuously  for  the  District  since  August 
19,  1997. 

41. 

Jocelyn  Collins  was  first  employed  by  the  District  under  a  probationary 

contract  with a  first  date  of  paid  service  of  August  20,  1999.  In  May  2000,  District 
advised  Ms.  Collins  that  she  was  retroactively  reclassified  as  temporary  for  the  1999- 
2000  school  year. 

. 

42. 

Raul  Rangel  is  a  second  year  probationary  employee  with  a  seniority 

date  of  August  15,  2002,  holding  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in 
Physical  Education.  Jorge  Apperti,  who  teaches  physical  education  at  the  same 
school  as  Mr.  Rangel  (Washington  Middle),  is  a  probationary  employee  junior  to  Mr. 

10 

 

Rangel.  Mr.  Apperti  has  not  been  noticed  for  lay-off.  Mr.  Apperti  cannot  be  retained 
to  teach  physical  education  at  Washington  Middle  School.  The  notices  of  involuntary 
reassignment,  required  under  the  teachers’  collective  bargaining  agreement,  were 
given  to  the  physical  education  teachers  as  a  result  of  Resolution  No.  VII  because  no 
physical  education  teachers’  school  site  would  change.  The  physical  education 
teachers  would  simply  be  moved  to  other  subject  assignments  to  fill  the  additional 
academic  minutes  created  by  the  loss  of  physical  education  minutes.  According  to  the 
District’s  seniority  listing,  the  only  physical  education  teachers  at  Washington  Middle 
School  are  Raul  Rangel,  Jorge  Apperti,  and  Jonathan  Freeling.  Mr.  Freehling  is  not 
credentialed  in  physical  education,  but  has  been  teaching  under  a  Board  resolution 
expiring  at  the  end  of  this  school  year.  As  of  March  15,  2004,  Mr.  Freeling  did  not 
have  a  credential  to  teach  physical  education  during  the  2004-2005  school  year.  The 
only  teacher  available  to  provide  the  minimum  statutory  physical  education  minutes 
at  Washington  Middle  School  is  Raul  Rangel. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

I. 

The  thirty-six  certificated  employees  served  with  a  notice  of 

recommendation  who  not  request  a  hearing  (Jennifer  Aborqui,  Tracey  Black,  Candace 
Brazier,  Alicia  Calkins,  Dana  Clow,  Jennifer  Crafton,  Maria  Damas,  Alicia  Dhain, 
Laurie  Dotson,  Rosemary  Duran,  Irasema  Fonseca,  Virginia  Gonzalez,  Misty 
Haggard,  Nicole  Harthorn,  Timothy  Hook,  Kathryn  Irwin,  Imelda  Loera,  Clarissa 
Lynch,  Madge  Magner,  Nichole  Mailer,  Shannon  McRoy,  Mary  Morton,  Aimee 
Nielsen,  Marie  Ono,  Filomeno  Perez,  Joan  Pfeffer,  Laura  Rahe,  Britta  Regan,  Tracie 
Sanders,  April  Smith,  Rachel  Soto,  Linda  Thompson,  Annette  Thompson,  Linda 
Tucker,  Errol  Van  Stralen,  and  Andrea  Young)  have  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing 
under  Education  Code  Section  44949(b). 

2. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  has  no  jurisdiction  over  the  53  teachers 

served  temporary  release  notices  by  the  Assistant  Superintendent. 

3.  The  certificated  employees  set  forth  in  finding  32  were  given  incorrect 

seniority  dates  because  they  were  not  given  credit  for  their  probationary  status  while 
working  under  emergency  permits  or  district  internships.  They  are  entitled  to  the 
seniority  dates  as  set  forth  in  finding  32.  Education  Code  provisions  regarding 
classification  (Sections  44852,  44917,  44918,  44919,  44920,  44921,  or  44986) 
contain  no  authorization  for  classifying  a  teacher  on  the  basis  of  credentialing,  but 
rather  on  the  basis  of  replacing  a  probationary  or  permanent  teacher  on  leave,  or  of 
teaching  a  temporary  class.  Temporary  classification  has  been  narrowly  construed  by 
the  Legislature  and  must  be  strictly  construed.  CTA  v.  Governing  Board  of the 
Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  36  held  that  emergency 
permit  holders  are  properly  classified  as  probationary  employees.  Therefore  these 
teachers  are  given  seniority  dates  consistent  with  their  first  date  of  paid  service  as 
required  under  Education  Code  section  44845. 

11 

 

4, 

Pursuant  to  Factual  Finding  33,  regarding  the  District’s  election  to  save 
all  employees  with  seniority  dates  prior  to  August  15,  2003,  the  teachers  identified  in 
finding  32  through  and  including  Melissa  Hansen  are  retained.  The  District  has 
retained  in  employ  numerous  teachers  junior  to  the  teachers  through  and  including 
Ms.  Hansen.  These  junior  teachers  are  credentialed  to  serve  in  the  same  areas  as  the 
more  senior  Respondents  who  therefore  must  be  retained  under  Education  Code 
Section  44955. 

5. 

The  District  failed  to  prove  that  any  of  the  program  specialists  or  fourth 
through  eighth  grade  positions  cut  by  Resolution  No.  VII  requires  the  displacement  of 
any  less  senior  employees.  Section  44955  permits  a  layoff  occasioned  by  a  reduction 
of  particular  kinds  of  services,  but  only  if  such  cuts  necessitate  a  layoff,  and  only  after 
the  Board  has  made  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  an 
employee  is  retained  for  any  service  his  credentials  entitle  him  to  render.  The  District 
offered  no  evidence  of  bumping  or  displacement  from  which  these  determinations 
may  have  been  made  regarding  the  program  specialists  or  the  fourth  through  eighth 
grade  positions.  Therefore,  cause  does  not  exist  to  reduce  program  specialists  and 
fourth  through  eighth  grade  positions,  as  requested  in  the  Accusation 

6. 

The  personnel  reductions  for  seventh  and  eighth  grade  in  Resolution 

No.  VII  and  in  the  Accusation  were  not  specific  as  to  which  departmentalized  classes 
were  affected.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627 
requires  the  designation  of  particular  departments  or  subjects  when  reducing  services 
in  departmentalized  settings.  The  District  specification  in  the  enabling  resolution  and 
in  the  Accusation  of  fourth  through  eighth  grade  positions  is  insufficient  as  a  matter 
of  law  as  to  any  reduction  in  seventh  and  eighth  grade  positions.  Therefore,  cause 
does  not  exist  to  reduce  the  6.54  positions  in  seventh  and  eighth  grade. 

7. 

Positively  assured  attrition  reduces  the  necessity  for  the  layoff  as  to  18 

FTE:  the  retirement  of  the  most  senior  PE  teacher,  the  non-re-election  of  seven 
teachers,  the  release  by  the  Board  of  three  temporary  teachers,  and  the  Board’s 
termination  of  seven  teachers.  The  absorption  of  all  10  FTE  in  PE  by  additional 
classes  further  reduces  the  necessity  for  layoff  by  10  FTE.  The  dismissal  of  the 
Accusation  regarding  the  program  specialists  and  the  fourth  through  eighth  grade 
positions  further  reduces  the  necessity  for  layoff  by  39.  The  aggregate  total  of  these 
reductions  (67)  exceeds  the  totality  of  the  authorized  layoff. 

8. 

Cause  exists,  under  Resolution  No.  VI,  to  retain  certificated  employees 

who  possess  credentials  in  the  subject  area  of  Instrumental  Music.  Under  5  CCR 
80005,  the  area  of  Instrumental  Music  is  taught  by  the  holder  of  a  credential  with  an 
authorization  in  Music.  Marie  Ono  and  Marianne  Perttula  hold  credentials  with 
authorizations  in  Music  and  therefore  must  be  retained  regardless  of  seniority. 

12 

   

9. 

Cause  exists,  under  Resolution  No.  VII,  to  retain  certificated  employees 

who  possess  credentials  in  the  subject  area  of  Math.  Laura  Rahe,  Filomeno  Perez, 
and  Leah  Giannini  hold  credentials  with  authorizations  in  Math  and  therefore  must  be 
retained  regardless  of  seniority. 

10. 

|  Cause  exists,  under  Resolution  No.  VII,  to  retain  certificated  employees 

who  possess  credentials  in  the  subject  area  of  Special  Education.  Kathryn  DeLaRoz, 
Sandra  Lopez-Delgado,  Angela  Bluestone,  Dana  Clow,  and  Linda  Hufstedler,  hold 
special  education  credentials  and  therefore  must  be  retained  regardless  of  seniority. 

11. 

|  Cause  exists,  under  Resolution  No.  VII,  to  retain  certificated  employees 

who  possess  Speech  Therapist  credentials.  Kelly  Maxwell  holds  a  credential 
qualifying  her  as  a  Speech  Therapist  and  therefore  must  be  retained  regardless  of 
seniority. 

12. 

Cause  exists,  under  Resolution  No.  VII,  to  retain  certificated  employees 

who  possess  BCLAD  certificates.  Maria  Damas,  Rachel  Soto,  Rosemary  Duran, 
Virginia  Gonzalez,  Imelda  Loera,  Norma  Garcia,  and  Angelica  Lopez-Montelongo 
hold  BCLAD  certificates  and  therefore  must  be  retained  regardless  of  seniority. 

13. 

Cause  exists,  under  Resolution  No.  VII,  to  retain  certificated  employees 

who  possess  the  qualifications  necessary  for  service  in  the  Federal  Class  Size 
Reduction  Program.  The  Federal  Class  Size  Reduction  Program  has  been  eliminated, 
but  its  funding  was  placed  within  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  (NCLB),  Title  II,  Part 
A.  NCLB,  Title  II,  Part  A  permits  teachers  meeting  the  criteria  for  designation  as  a 
highly  qualified  teacher  to  be  hired  or  retained  with  its  funds  for  class  size  reduction, 
among  other  purposes.  Wayne  Burris,  Irasema  Fonseca,  Nicole  Harthorn,  Susana  Del 
Toro,  Dana  Johnson,  Gino  King,  Nichol  Lindsey,  Terri  Cline,  Bianca  Rizo,  Salvador 
Casillas,  Kate  James,  Gloria  Burr,  April  West,  Britta  Regan,  Shannon  McRoy,  Lynn 
Sonner,  Melissa  Hansen,  Timothy  Hook,  Elizabeth  Ratliff,  Jennifer  McMahan,  Jaime 
Simmons,  Trent  Fussel,  Myrna  Rojas,  Angela  Estrada,  Alex  Ball,  Dayla  Parra, 
Christy  Morasco,  Scott  Larsen,  and  Fany  Ramos,  all  possess  the  qualifications 
necessary  for  the  Federal  Class  Size  Reduction  Program  in  that  they  are  all  NCLB 
“highly  qualified”  teachers;  therefore  they  must  be  retained  regardless  of  seniority. 
Madge  Magner  is  not  a  “highly  qualified”  teacher  and  therefore  does  not  have  the 
qualifications  necessary  for  the  NCLB  Title  II,  Part  A,  Federal  Class  Size  Reduction 
Program,  so  she  may  not  be  retained  when  more  senior  employees  who,  in  fact,  are 
credentialed  and  competent  to  serve  in  her  position  are  terminated. 

Hf 

Hf 

   

13 

14. 

Jocelyn  Collins  was  wrongfully  deprived  of  prior  probationary  service. 

Her  first  date  of  paid  service  was  August  20,  1999,  under  a  probationary  contract. 
Under  Kavanaugh’s  enforcement  of  the  plain  language  of  Education  Code  Section 
44916,  the  District’s  attempted  revision  of  this  status  to  temporary  in  May  2000  was 
invalid.  Ms.  Collins  seniority  date  under  Education  Code  Section  44845  is  August 
20,  1999. 

15. 

The  classification  of  Respondent  Linda  Hufstedler  also  must  be 

corrected  from  probationary  to  permanent.  Respondent  Hufstedler  was  an  out-of- 
state  teacher,  credentialed  in  Alabama,  first  employed  by  the  District  for  the  1997- 
1998  school  year.  She  worked  for  the  District  pursuant  to  an  emergency  permit, 
obtaining  a  California  preliminary  multiple  subjects  credential  in  May  1998.  While 
the  District  classified  Ms.  Hufstedler  as  temporary  and  she  signed  a  temporary 
contract,  District  stipulated  that  the  sole  basis  for  that  temporary  classification  was 
her  emergency  permit.  Ms.  Hufstedler  was  properly  classified  as  probationary  under 
the  default  classification  provisions  of  Section  44915,  rights  under  which  her  conduct 
— 
could  not  waive.  (Education  Code  Section  44924.)  Therefore,  cause  exists  to  grant 
permanent  status,  and  to  grant  seniority  rights  to  Ms.  Hufstedler  as  of  August  19, 
1997. 

16. 

| Among  the  changes  made  to  the  Layoff  Seniority  List  was  the  addition 

of  points  for  Oralia  Santos  on  the  basis  of  her  service  the  District  as  an  Immersion 
teacher.  Numerous  other  Respondents  were  entitled  to  an  additional  point  on  the 
basis  of  having  served  as  an  Immersion  teacher  during  the  2003-2004  school  year,  as 
noted  in  the  District’s  Seniority  Listing,  Exhibit  18,  but  were  not  properly  credited  for 
this  service.  The  Respondents  entitled  to  one  additional  tie-breaking  point  on  this 
basis  are:  Meikim  Wah,  Amanda  Madkins,  Gloria  Burr,  April  West,  Wendy  Powell, 
Melissa  Hansen,  Myrna  Rojas,  Angela  Estrada,  Norma  Garcia,  Veronica  Artiaga, 
Michelle  Alvarado,  and  Fany  Ramos. 

17. 

Cause  exists  to  grant  Jodi  Moore  an  additional  6  tie-breaking  points 

based  on  finding  38.  The  District’s  admitted  policy  of  allowing  credit  on  the  salary 
schedule  for  such  service,  and  advancing  Ms.  Moore  three  steps  on  the  salary 
schedule  for  such  service  support  this  conclusion.  Since  District  stipulated  that  every 
teacher  with  six  points  and  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2003,  was  excluded  from 
these  proceedings,  Ms.  Moore  must  be  retained. 

18. 

Cause  exists  to  retain  Raul  Rangel  based  in  finding  42.  Since  the 

District  does  not  intend  any  net  loss  of  teachers  as  a  result  of  the  decrease  in  physical 
education  minutes,  and  since  Mr.  Rangel  will  be  needed  at  Washington  Middle 
School  to  meet  the  statutory  physical  education  minimums  at  that  site,  he  may  not  be 
laid-off  in  this  proceeding. 

14   

19,  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  Accusation  based  on  legal  conclusions  1 

through  18.  Further,  based  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence  in  this  case,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  set  forth  an  accurate  seniority  list. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  6,  2004. 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

15   

