BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GRIDLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  BUTTE,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

SIMEON  ALISON  and  SARAH 
MASINGALE, 

OAH  No.  N2004030339 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  Jaime  Rene  Roman,  Administrative 

Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Gridley,  California,  on  April  14,  2004. 

Clark  Redfield,  Superintendent  of  the  Gridley  Unified  School  District  (“the 

Superintendent”),  of  Butte  County,  State  of  California,  was  represented  by  Girard  &  Vinson, 
LLP,  Attorneys  at  Law,  by  Michelle  L.  Cannon,  Esq. 

Respondents  Simeon  Alison  and  Sarah  Masingale  (“respondents”)  were  represented 

by  A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Esq. 

Evidence  and  argument  were  received  and  the  matter  submitted  on  April  14,  2004.! 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Gridley  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  provides  elementary,  middle 

and  high  schools.” 

2. 

Clark  Redfield  is  the  District  Superintendent. 

  

'  Prior  to  the  receiving  of  evidence,  the  District  moved,  without  objection,  to  dismiss  an  Accusation  against  a 
respondent  Amber  Melton.  The  motion  was  granted. 
*  Education  Code  §83:  “A  unified  school  district  means  a  district  maintaining  grades  kindergarten  or  1  through  12.  A 
unified  district  may  comprise  territory  in  more  than  one  county.”

3. 

Respondents  are  probationary  certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  first 

rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  in  such  probationary  position  on  August  21,  2002.  Each 
respondent  possesses  a  multiple  subject’  credential  with  CLAD.’ 

4. 

On  February  11,  2004,  the  District  Superintendent,  following  an  Average 

Daily  Attendance  (“ADA”)  analysis  of  the  District,  gave  written  notice  of  his 
recommendation  to  the  District  Governing  Board  (“Board”)  that  3.0  full-time  equivalent 
(“FTE”)  positions  be  reduced  at  the  elementary  (1.0  FTE)  and  middle  school  (2.0  FTE) 
levels  for  the  ensuing  school  year;  and  categorical  programmed  particular  kinds  of  services 
(“PKS”)  be  further  reduced  by  .82  FTE  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore. 

5. 

On  February  18,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  BR-10-0304  establishing 

criteria  for  the  order  of  termination  among  personnel  who  have  the  same  date  of  hire.  The 
criteria  included  consideration  of:  credentialing,  experience,  education,  performance, 
certificates  and  service  to  the  school. 

6. 

On  March  3,  2004,  the  Board,  mindful  of  then-extant  positively  assured 

attrition  and  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  notice  be  provided  respondents, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§44949  and  44955,  adopted  Resolution  #1  1-0304  reducing  or 
discontinuing  3.82  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  of  the  District  as  a  result  ofa 
decline  in  the  District’s  ADA  with  a  concomitant  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services, 
and  directing  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  give  notices  to  affected  certificated 
employees  that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2004  —  2005, 
and  stating  the  reasons  therefore. 

7. 

On  March  8,  2004,  the  District  promulgated  a  seniority  list.  Nancy  Klaker, 

District  Personnel  Director,  was  responsible  in  consultation  with  the  District  Superintendent 
and  assigned  District  principals,  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff,  to 
include  preparation  and  promulgation  of  the  District  seniority  list.  Affected  employees  were 
notified  of  the  District’s  records  and  credentials,  and  encouraged  to  provide  additional 
documentation. 

8. 

The  District  employed  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 

“bumping”  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  or 
authorizations  entitling  such  employee  to  “bump”  another  employee.  To  determine  who 
would  be  identified  for  layoff  each  kind  of  service  to  be  reduced,  the  District  counted  the 
number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on 
incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

  

*  A  “teacher  authorized  for  multiple  subject  instruction  may  be  assigned,  with  his  consent,  to  teach  in  any  self- 
contained  classroom;  preschool;  kindergarten  and  grades  1  —  12,  inclusive;  or  in  classes  organized  primarily  for 
adults.”  Education  Code  §44258. 
*  CLAD  =  Cross-Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development.

  

9. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  timely  notice  to  respondents 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  2004  -  2005  school  year,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore. 

10. 

Each  respondent  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  2004  —  2005  school  year. 

11. 

|  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  respondent.  The 

Accusations,  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were 
timely  served  on  each  respondent. 

12. 

Respondents  filed  timely  Notices  of  Defense. 

13. 

|  While  respondents  submit  that  District  ADA  for  the  first  grade  is  higher  when 
compared  between  affected  academic  years;  the  overall  ADA  between  K  —  8  and  high  school 
demonstrates  an  overall  marked  ADA  decrease  in  K  —  8  vis-a-vis  an  overall  marked  ADA 
increase  at  the  high  school  level;  effectively  belying  the  import  of  respondents’  submission.” 
The  services  rendered  by  respondents  in  the  Board’s  Resolution  were  the  kinds  of  services 
that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  §44949.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion.  Further,  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  these  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  overall  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils.  Despite  respondents  further  argument  that  extant  attrition  is  not 
properly  foreseen;  within  the  limits  of  what  is  positively  assured  District  attrition  by 
announced  resignation  or  earlier  retirement,  the  District  has  acted  both  responsibly  and 
properly.  In  sum,  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  kinds  of  services  rendered  by 
respondents  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  District  certificated  employees  as 
properly  determined  by  the  Board. 

14. 

Respondent  Simeon  Alison,  possessing  a  shared  date  of  hire  with  other 

teachers,  challenges  the  application  of  the  Board’s  tie-breaker  criteria  in  determining  the 
District’s  order  of  seniority.  Mindful  of  the  curriculum  developed  for  its  secondary  students; 
as  it  pertains  to  respondent,  he  clearly  lacks  the  professional  credential  that  would  permit  him 
to  teach  at  a  District  high  school.  Left  to  teach  in  either  District  elementary  or  middle 
schools,  respondent’s  seniority,  when  measured  against  his  peers,°  was  determined  as 
follows: 

  

°  Respondents  further  contention  that  the  District  errs  in  pursuing  the  ADA  layoff  course  vis-a-vis  a  PKS  layoff 
course  is  readily  misplaced.  In  San  Jose  Teacher  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal-App.3d  627,  638  —  639,  the  appellate 
court  reposed  discretion  in  a  District  to  choose  its  course. 
°  Valadez,  LaViolette,  King  and  Masingale  all  share  the  same  date  of  hire  by  the  District.

Seniority  No. 

Add’]  Credentials/Certificates 

Experience 

Add’!  Education 

Service’ 

48a  (Valadez) 
48b  (LaViolette) 
48c  (King) 
48d  (Masingale) 
48e  (Alison) 

CLAD/Reading 
CLAD/Math 
CLAD/Bus 
CLAD 
CLAD® 

8  yrs 
2  yrs 
2  yrs 
2  yrs 
2  yrs  ++ 

75+ 

75+ 

48 

45  MA  in  progress 

coach/dance 

70  MA  in  progress 

coach 

The  evident  difficulty  posed  by  respondent’s  contention  that  he  should  be  senior  to 

Valadez  lies  in  his  failure  to  articulate  any  objective  criteria  other  than  his  opinion. 
Regardless,  in  reviewing  the  criteria  imposed  by  the  Board  and  applied  by  the  District,  no 
abuse  of  discretion  or  evidence  of  capriciousness  or  arbitrary  exercise  is  competently 
demonstrated  by  respondent.’  Indeed,  in  a  milieu  where  credentials  and  certificates  broaden 
the  value  and  capacity  of  a  teacher’s  utilization  by  a  District,  it  becomes  apparent  that  as 
among  Valadez  (48a),  LaViolette  (48b)  and  King  (48c),  respondent’s  contention  that  would 
place  him  before  Valadez  in  seniority  is  specious  at  best.  Respondent  is  reduced  to  a  contest 
between  himself  and  Masingale—a  respondent  herein.’  While,  admittedly,  both  respondent 
and  Masingale  are  respondents  and  both  affected  by  the  instant  proceeding,  it  would  appear, 
at  first  blush,  that  a  determination  of  who  is  senior  to  whom  would  not  be  dispositive; 
however,  inverse  order  of  seniority  may  determine,  in  the  event  of  further  District  attrition 
who  does  or  does  not  become  eligible  for  rehire.  Accordingly,  the  issue  of  respondent’s 
seniority  vis-a-vis  Ms.  Masingale  requires  determination.  To  that  end,  respondent  has 
proffered  no  evidence  other  than  his  CLAD’s  issuance.  Balancing,  however,  Ms. 
Masingale’s  additional  education  toward  a  Master’s  degree  against  respondent’s  service  as  a 
coach,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  District  abuses  its  discretion  in  giving  more  value  to  the 
pursuit  of  a  master’s  degree  (a  non-compensated  District  activity)  against  one  whose 
additional  service  lies  in  coaching—a  District  compensated  activity.  Accordingly,  lacking 
competent  credible  evidence  challenging  the  District’s  discretion,  respondent  Alison’s  claim 
as  against  his  remaining  peer,  Ms.  Masingale,  fails. 

15. 

| No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  §§44949  and 

44955. 

  

— 

’  Inasmuch  as  all  respondent  Alison’s  peers,  including  himself,  were  rated  “equal”  in  “performance”,  the  criteria  has 
been  disregarded  in  this  finding. 
*  On  March  8,  2004,  respondent  did  not  ostensibly  receive  credit  for  his  CLAD.  Having  established  its  issuance,  the 
undersigned  has  reflected  it  in  the  findings  herein. 
°  4.B.C.  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  A.B.C.  Unified  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  75  Cal.App.3d  332;  El  Dorado  Union  High 
School  Dist.  v.  City  of Placerville  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  123. 
'°  Inasmuch  as  both  respondent  and  Masingale  are  respondents  and  both  affected  by  the  instant  proceeding,  a 
determination  of  who  is  senior  to  whom  will  not  be  dispositive;  accordingly,  respondent  Alison’s  remaining 
contention  is  dismissed  as  moot.

  

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  §44955  to  give  notice  to  District  certificated  employees  in  2.0  full-time 
equivalent  certificated  employee  positions  as  set  out  in  Findings  1  —  15.  Such  cause  relates 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
§44949, 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusations  are  sustained  as  to  respondents  Simeon  Alison,  and  Sarah 

Masingale. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  each  of  their  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  2004  —  2005  School  Year  because  of  the  District’s  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notices  shall  be  given  to  respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated: 

  

  JAIME  RENE  ROMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

