BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
FORTUNA  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT  _ 
COUNTY  OF  HUMBOLDT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation 
Against: 

HEATHER  BROWN,  SARA  DIXON, 
BRUCE  JOHNSON,  KIM  PETERSON 
AND  GLEN  SENESTRARO, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2004030657 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Administrative  Law  Judge  Jonathan  Lew,  State  of 
California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  on  April  29,  2004,  in  Eureka,  California. 

Richard  Smith,  Esq.,  represented  the  Fortuna  Union  High  School  District. 

Anne  M.  Randolph,  Esq.,  represented  respondents,  who  were  also  present. 

The  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  29,  2004.’ 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dennis  J.  Hanson  is  the  Superintendent  for  the  Fortuna  Union  High  School 

District  (District).  He  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  such  public 
officer,  and  not  otherwise. 

Respondents  Heather  Brown, Sara  Dixon,  Bruce  Johnson,  Kim  Peterson  and 

Glen  Senestraro  have  been  employed  by  the  District  as  certificated  employees. 

In  March  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District 

(Governing  Board)  written  notice,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of 
his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  by  the  Governing  Board  that  their 

2. 

3. 

  

'  By  letter  dated  April  30,  2004,  respondent  Kim  Peterson  submitted  documents  from  his  teacher  file.  These  were 
marked  as  Exhibit  F  for  identification  only. 

,

services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year.  Such  letter  stated  the 
reasons  for  such  recommendation. 

4. 

Respondents  duly  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.”  Accusations  were  served  on  respondents 
and  they  filed  timely  Notices  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were 
satisfied. 

5. 

On  February  24,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  a  resolution  (Resolution  No. 

366)  reflecting  its  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  certain 
particular  kinds  of  services.  The  resolution  provided  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
certificated  services  would  be  reduced/eliminated  for  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

-  The  Century  Hall  Program  will  be  eliminated 
-  The  Metal  Shop/Small  Engines  Program  will  be  eliminated 
-  The  PAR  Program  will  be  eliminated 
-  The  Curriculum  Coordinator  Program  will  be  eliminated 
-  The  Art  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Music  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  English  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Foreign  Language  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Social  Science  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Math  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Science  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Physical  Education  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Independent  Study  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Crisis  and  Drug  Counseling  Program  will  be  reduced  by 
-  The  Theater  Arts  Classes  will  be  reduced  by 
-  East  High  School  Programs  will  be  reduced  by 

12  sections 
5  sections 
1  section 
1  section 
2  sections 
1  section 
2  sections 
1  section 
1  section 
6  sections 
5  sections 
1  section 
1  section 
6  sections 
2  sections 
2  sections 

The  proposed  reductions  of  49  sections  constitute  a  reduction  of  9.8  full-time 

equivalent  positions  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year.  As  of  the  date  of  hearing  the 
District  had  reduced  the  number  of  employees  identified  for  layoff  to  five.  The  services  set 
forth  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

6. 

The  proposed  reductions  were  prompted  by  anticipated  loss  of  revenue  for  the 

2004-2005  school  year. 

7. 

Bruce  Johnson.  Respondent  Johnson  is  assigned  to  Fortuna  High  School  where 

he  teaches  four  sections  of  wood  shop  and  one  section  of  music  (guitar).  He  holds  a  clear 

  

?  Additional  teachers  submitted  requests  for  hearings  but  their  individual  cases  were  resolved  prior  to  hearing. 
These  teachers  include  Laurel  Farnham,  Jennifer  Femenella,  Rachel  Heavilin,  Matthew  Kelley,  Errin  Odell,  Wayne 
Thompson  and  Gini  Wozny. 

  

  
  

© 

 

single  subject  credential  in  industrial  and  technology  education  and  a  supplementary 
credential  in  music.  Mr.  Johnson  has  taught  a  variety  of  industrial  arts  subjects  both  within 
and  outside  the  district.  He  has  taught  independent  study  in  all  core  subjects.  He  received  a 
Bachelor  of  Science  degree  from  the  University  of New  Mexico  and  at  one  time  minored  in 
art.  Mr.  Johnson  taught  at  the  court  and  community  schools  through  the  Humboldt  County 
Office  of  Education.  This  was  ten  to  eleven  years  ago  and  it  involved  work  with  at  risk 
students.  He  taught  independent  study  and  art  in  that  setting.  Mr.  Johnson  was  licensed  in 
New  Mexico  as  a  building  contractor  in  the  early  1980’s.  His  date  of  first  paid  service  with 
the  District  was  August  21,  1996.  As a  result  of  the  elimination  of  five  sections  of  Metal 
Shop/Small  Engines  Program  a  senior  teacher  will  be  bumping  into  Mr.  Johnson’s  four  wood 
shop  sections.  The  one  section  of  music  that  he  is  teaching  is  being  eliminated. 

Mr.  Johnson  contends  that  an  employee  junior  to  him,  Dan  Tangney,  is  being  retained 

to  teach  a  class  that  he  is  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach.  Dan  Tangney  is  assigned  to 
East  High  School  where  he  teaches  a  combined  art  and  industrial  arts  class.  His  date  of  first 
paid  service  with  the  District  was  March  3,  1997,  making  him  junior  to  Mr.  Johnson.  The 
identical  situation  arose  during  the  District’s  layoff  hearing  for  the  2000-2001  school  year.° 
The  District  demonstrated  at  that  time  that  it  had  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  at  East  High  and  that  Dan  Tangney  had  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course.  Mr.  Johnson  points  to  no  changes  in  his  credentials  or 
competency  to  teach  since  this  2000  decision  apart  from  his  having  four  more  years 
experience  teaching  wood  shop  at  Fortuna  High  School. 

East  High  School  is  a  special  situation  in  that  it  consists  of  a  single  large  classroom 
that  all  enrolled  students  attend  and  where  each  receives  individual  instruction  through  the 
course  of  the  day.  As a  result  of  that  format,  teachers  at  East  High  must  be  capable  and 
“certificated”  to  teach  a  variety  of  subjects  to  their  students.  The  District  earlier  determined 
that  Dan  Tangney  had  special  training  and  experience  to  teach  both  art  and  industrial  arts 
simultaneously.  He  has  offered  instruction  in  a  variety  of  art  subjects  including  digital 
photography,  ceramics,  murals,  painting,  drawing  and  other  art  projects.  Mr.  Johnson  has 
some  background  in  art  but  has  no  demonstrated  competence  to  teach  the  art  portion  of  this 
particular  course.  The  District  cannot  afford  to  have  two  separate  teachers  teach  art  and 
industrial  arts  simultaneously  at  East  High  School. 

For  these  reasons  the  District  has  reasonably  determined  that  Mr.  Johnson  is  not 
competent  to  teach  a  combination  of  industrial  arts  and  art  in  the  setting  of  East  High  School. 

8. 

Glen  Senestraro.  Respondent  Senestraro  is  assigned  to  Fortuna  High  School 

where  he  teaches  five  sections  in  mathematics.  His  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District 
was  August  25,  1998.  Mr.  Senestraro  holds  a  clear  single  subject  credential  in  mathematics. 
He  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  mathematics.  The  District  proposes  to  reduce  his 
position  to  two  math  sections. 

  

3  OAH  Case  No.  2000030360.  Upheld  on  appeal  to  the  Humboldt  County  Superior  Court  (Super.  Ct.  No. 
CV000435)  and  the  Court  of  Appeal,  First  Appellate  District,  Division  Four  (No.  A093854)  on  September  26,  2001. 

\

@ 

Mr.  Senestraro  contends  that  he  is  senior  to  another  math  teacher,  Eric  Helms,  who  is 
being  retained  by  the  District.  Eric  Helms  was  hired  by  the  District  on  January  20,  1998,  in 
a  temporary  position  to  cover  two  periods  per  day  for  another  teacher,  Pam  Barkdull,  who 
was  transferred  to  another  assignment  at  that  time.’  Richard  Tomasini  was  the  principal  at 
Fortuna  High  School  who  hired  Eric  Helms.  He  notes  that  the  assignment  was  for  Spring 
1998  only  and  that  the  position  was  intended  to  terminate  when  the  semester  ended.  It  did 
so.  When  two  new  mathematic  positions  opened  for  the  following  school  year,  Eric  Helms 
and  respondent  Senestraro  applied  and  they  were  both  hired.  The  two  math  positions  were 
publicly  advertised  and  Eric  Helms  and  respondent  Senestraro  went  through  the  normal 
hiring  and  interview  process.  Mr.  Tomasini  notes  that  if  Eric  Helms  had  been  a  “continuing 
employee”  he  would  not  have  had  to  interview  for  the  position.  It  appears  that  respondent 
Senestraro  and  Eric  Helms  should  have  the  same  District  date  of  hire,  August  25,  1998.  No 
tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied  to  the  two  because  January  29,  1998,  was  used  as  Eric 
Helms’  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the  District. 

It  was  established  that  Eric  Helms  and  respondent  Senestraro  have  the  same  first  date 

of  paid  service.  The  District  erred  by  failing  to  establish  or  apply  criteria  to  determine  an 
order  of  termination  between  them  prior  to  issuing  a  layoff  notice  to  respondent  Senestraro. 
Because  of  this  error  the  layoff  notice  to  him  should  be  rescinded. 

9. 

Heather  Brown’s  Assignment.  Respondent  Brown  is  assigned  to  East  High 

School  where  she  teaches  five  sections  math/science  class  in  a  self-contained  environment. 
The  District  proposes  to  reduce  her  position  to  four  sections.  She  is  a  probationary  employee 
whose  first  date  of  paid  service  was  August  19,  2003.  She  holds  a  professional  clear  single 
subject  credential  in  biological  sciences.  She  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  marine 
biology.  Respondents  Kim  Peterson  and  Sara  Dixon  are  senior  to  Respondent  Brown  and 
contend  that  they  are  certificated  and  competent  to  bump  into  her  position  at  East  High 
School.° 

The  District  Superintendent,  Dennis  Hanson,  also  serves  as  principal  at  East  High 

School.  He  notes  that  students  at  East  High  School  work  with  the  same  teacher  on  a  variety 
of  subjects  at  the  same  time.  Students  typically  select  a  study  subject  for  a  set  period  of  time 
—  sometimes  for  hours,  other  times  for  days  or  even  weeks.  Respondent  Brown  teaches  life 
science,  physical  science,  mathematics  through  algebra  and  economics.  Because  teachers  at 
East  High  are  expected  to  teach  multiple  subjects  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  feasible  to  split 
the  assignments  by  subject  matter  between  teachers.  Mr.  Hanson  finds  that  respondent 

  

*  Pam  Barkdull  left  her  assignment  to  begin  working  on  the  school’s  Century  Hall  program.  She  was  not  on  leave  of 
absence.  The  District  contends  that  because  Eric  Helms  was  not  hired  to  fill  a  position  of  a  regularly  employed 
person  “absent  from  service”  he  should  be  characterized  as  a  probationary  employee  from  January  20,  1998.  The 
clear  and  express  intent  of  the  District  was  to  hire  Eric  Helms  as  a  temporary  employee.  His  position  terminated  at 
semester’s  end,  a  de  facto  non-reelection,  and  a  wholly  new  hiring  process  was  followed  prior  to  him  being  hired 
into  the  new  math  position  on  August  25,  1998. 
5  Respondent  Glen  Senestraro  makes  a  similar  contention  but  given  the  determination  of  his  rights  with  respect  to 
Eric  Helms  it  is  not  necessary  to  include  him  in  this  discussion. 

    

  
 

© 

Brown  has  demonstrated  the  ability  to  teach  multiple  subjects  at  East  High  School  and  that 
based  upon  his  review  of  District  personnel  files  no  respondents  senior  to  her  were  retained 
who  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  service  she  provides.  He  also  notes  that 
respondent  Brown  holds  a  CLAD  certificate,  something  he  believes  is  particularly  useful  at 
East  High  School  where  he  estimates  there  are  twenty-two  Hispanic,  one  Southeast  Asian 
and  seven  English  learners  on  campus.  This  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  he  opted  to  retain 
her.  Respondent  Brown  is  fluent  in  Spanish  and  she  is  able  to  connect  well  with  students. 

Respondent  Kim  Peterson’s  date  of  first  paid  service  was  August  24,  1999.  He  is 

currently  assigned  to  Fortuna  High  School  where  he  teaches  mathematics  full  time. 
Proposed  reductions  in  the  Century  Hall  and  Math  Programs  will  result  in  a  more  senior 
teacher,  Pam  Barkdull,  bumping  into  his  position.  Respondent  Peterson  holds a  clear  single 
subject  credential  in  mathematics  and  a  clear  single  subject  credential  in  chemistry.  He  is 
enrolled  in  the  CLAD  Certificate  Program  and  expects  to  complete  it  later  this  summer.  He 
is  also  pursuing  graduate  studies  involving  mathematical  modeling.  Mr.  Hanson  does  not 
believe  that  respondent  Peterson  possesses  the  necessary  experience  or  competence  to  teach 
the  science  portion  of  the  East  High  School  assignment.  He  notes  that  chemistry  hardly  fits 
the  setting  at  East  High  School. 

Respondent  Sara  Dixon’s  date  of  first  paid  service  was  August  20,  2002.  She 
currently  teaches  five  sections  of  science  at  Fortuna  High  School.°  She  holds a  professional 
clear  single  subject  credential  in  life  sciences  and  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in 
biology.  Someone  more  senior  to  her  will  be  bumping  into  her  current  position,  She  does 
not  hold  a  math  credential  but  has  some  experience  teaching  math  in  a  junior  high  level 
remedial  math  program.  She  is  enrolled  in  a  CLAD  Certificate  Program  and  is  expected  to 
receive  her  certificate  by  month’s  end. 

10. 

East  High  School  is  structured  very  differently  from  more  traditional  settings 
such  as  Fortuna  High  School.  Some  of  the  toughest  and  most  at  risk  students  are  enrolled 
there.  Teachers  assigned  to  East  High  School  must  possess,  in  addition  to  necessary 
certifications,  special  training  and  experience  to  teach  multiple  subjects  in  a  self-contained 
venue.  Mr.  Hanson  is  both  District  Superintendent  and  East  High  School  Principal.  He 
is  well  positioned  to  evaluate  whether  teachers  possess  the  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  provide  classroom  instruction  in  such  a  setting.  He  does  not  believe  that 
respondent  Peterson’s  chemistry  and  other  science  background  qualify  him  to  provide  the 
type  of  hands  on  outdoor  education  life  science  curriculum  now  being  used.  In  contrast, 
respondent  Brown  has  a  marine  biology  background  with  prior  independent  study  outdoor 
and  teaching  experience  in  the  Florida  Keys  and  Monterey.  She  developed  a  curriculum 
based  on  these  experiences. 

  

*  Until  recently  she  taught  three  science  sections  and  proposed  layoffs  related  only  to  these  three  sections.  She 
picked  up  two  additional  sections  within  a  week  of  this  hearing.

Similarly,  Mr.  Hanson  does  not  believe  that  Ms.  Dixon  possesses  requisite  experience 

to  teach  a  combination  science,  math  and  economics  curriculum  based  on  a  review  of  her 
current  assignment  and  records  on  file  with  the  District. 

11. 

The  District  Superintendent  has  reasonably  determined  that  respondents  Kim 

Peterson  and  Sara  Dixon  do  not  possess  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to 
teach  the  course  taught  by  respondent  Brown  at  East  High  School. 

12. 

It  was  further  established  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 

kinds  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  students  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise 
of  discretion  of  the  Governing  Board. 

13. 

Except  as  provided  by  statute,  no  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondents  are 
certificated,  competent  and  legally  entitled  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have 
been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

The  accusation  against  respondent  Glen  Senestraro  is  dismissed  pursuant  to 

Finding  8.  Respondent  Glen  Senestraro  and  Eric  Helms  have  the  same  seniority  date.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44955  the  District  must  develop  and  apply  tie-breaking  criteria  to 
determine  the  order  of  termination  between  employees  with  the  same  date  of  hire. 
done  so  here. 

It  has  not 

3. 

The  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  while  any  proba- 

tionary  employee,  or  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which 
the  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Ed.  Code,  §44955,  subd. 
(b).)  Under  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  the  District  may  deviate  from 
terminating  employees  in  order  of  seniority  when  it  has  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for 
personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  and  that  the  retained  employee  has 
the  requisite  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  do  so.  (See  Brough  v.  Governing 
Board  (1981)  118  Cal.  App.3d  702,  715;  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1979)  89 
Cal.App.3d  648,  655.) 

The  District  has  reasonably  determined,  as  it  had  done  previously,  that  respondent 

Bruce  Johnson  is  not  competent  to  teach  the  combination  of  industrial  arts  and  art  in  the 
setting  of  East  High  School  currently  taught  by  Dan  Tangney.  (Finding  7.)  Similarly, 
the  District  reasonably  determined  that  respondents  Kim  Peterson  and  Sara  Dixon  do  not 

possess  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  the  course  currently  taught    

by  respondent  Heather  Brown  at  East  High  School.  (Findings  9  through  11.)  Respondents 
Bruce  Johnson,  Kim  Peterson  and  Sara  Dixon  are  not  entitled  to  bump  into  positions  held 
by  any  other  teachers.  The  District  may  properly  retain  the  services  of  Dan  Tangney  and 
Heather  Brown  to  provide  services  at  East  High  School. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Fortuna 

Union  High  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

The  accusation  against  respondent  Glen  Senestraro  is  dismissed. 

1. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  remaining  respondents  and  teachers  before  May  15, 

2004,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  4,  2004 

   

J@NATHAN  LEW 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

  

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

