BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GILROY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of: 

JURACIA  CARBAJAL,  TERESA  JOHNSON, 
ROSEMARY  RAMON,  MARTIN  BUKOVSKY,  and 
MARY  JO  STANLEY, 

OAH  No.  N2004030576 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  29  and  April  30,  2004,  in  Gilroy,  Santa  Clara  County,  California,  Perry  O. 
Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California, 
heard  this  matter. 

M.  Carol  Stevens,  Esq.,  with  Janae  H.  Novothy,  Esq.,  of  Kay  and  Stevens,  Attorneys 
at  Law,  545  Middlefield  Road,  Suite  180,  Menlo  Park,  California,  94025,  (“Superintendent’s 
Counsel”)  represented  Edwin  Diaz,  Superintendent,  Gilroy  Unified  School  District. 

Michelle  A.  Welsh,  Esq.,  of  Stoner,  Welsh  and  Schmidt,  Attorneys  at  Law,  413  Forest 

Avenue,  Pacific  Grove,  California  93950-0656,  (“Respondents’  attorney”)  represented 
Respondents  herein.  Also,  Respondents’  attorneys  represented  Ms  Teresa  Johnson,  who  is  a 
credentialed  teacher,  but  who  hold  a  position  with  the  District  as  a  temporary  employee. 

The  record  was  held  open  to  afford  Respondents  the  opportunity  to  file  written 

closing  arguments  with  OAH.  On  Wednesday,  May  5,  2004,  OAH  received,  via 
telefacsimile  transmission,  from  Respondents’  attorney  a  document  titled  “Respondents’  Post 
Hearing  Brief,”  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  “P”  and  was  received  as  argument.  Also,  on 
May  5,  2004,  OAH  received,  by  telefax,  from  Superintendent’s  attorneys  a  written  argument 
titled  “Closing  Argument  and  Post  Hearing  Brief,”  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  “34,”  and 
was  received  as  argument. 

On  May  5  2004,  the  parties  were  deemed  to  have  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record 

closed.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l, 

On  April  8,  2004,  Edwin  Diaz,  Superintendent  (“the  Superintendent”)  for  the 

Gilroy  Unified  School  District  (“the  District”),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against 
Respondents  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  Juracia  Carbajal,  Rosemary  Ramon,  Martin  Bukovsky  and  Mary 

Jo  Stanley  (“Respondents”)  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 
District. 

3. 

Ms  Teresa  Johnson  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  declare  either  that  the  status  of 

temporary  employee  is  improper,  or  that  despite  the  District’s  imposition  upon  her  of  the 
status  of  temporary  employee,  the  District  is  obligated  to  offer  her  employment  for  the 
ensuring  school  year.  However,  based  on  facts  set  forth  herein  below,  Ms  Teresa  Johnson,  a 
university  intern,  is  not  deemed  as  a  Respondent,  who  has  standing  to  contest  the  District’s 
prospective  lay-off  action. 

4, 

On  or  before  March  9,  2004,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s 

Governing  Board  a  recommendation!  in  the  form  of  written  memorandum  that  the  District 
give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of  services,  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  eliminated 
by  the  District  for  the  ensuing  school  year  (that  is,  the  term  of  2004-2005). 

5. 

On  March  9,  2003,  with  six  affirmative  votes”  and  one  Board  member  absent’ 

the  District’s  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  number  03/04-22. 

The  resolution  recites  that  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to 

discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year,  particular  kinds  of 
services  in  the  form  of  an  array  of  four  distinct  categories  in  the  sum  of  4.4  FTE  (full  time 
equivalent)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

1.0  FTE  positions  |  Reduce  the  number  of  Psychologists  from  5.5  FTE  to  4.5  FTE 
14FTE  “ 
“ 
10FTE 
“ 
LOFTE 

Reduce  the  number  of  Nurses  from  4.2  FTE  to  2.8  FTE 
Reduce  the  number  of  Counselors  from  4.0  FTE  to  3.0  FTE 
Eliminate  the  After  School  Programs  Facilitator  Position 

4.4  FTE 

Total  Number  of  Reduced  or  Eliminated  Certificated  Positions 

  

The  letter,  titled  “Notice  of  Recommendation  Not  to  Reemploy  Probationary  or  Permanent  Certificated 

' 
Employees,”  which  sought  to  reduce  or  discontinue  4.4  FTE  certificated  position,  by  Edwin  Diaz,  Superintendent, 
bears  a  date  of  “March  11,  2004.”  However,  as  Respondent  made  no  objection  to  the  date  of  the  letter,  it  is 
reasonably  inferred  that  the  Superintendent  presented  the  Governing  Board  with  the  letter  before  Resolution  #03/04- 
22,  which  bears  as  a  date  of  “9" 

day  of  March  2004.” 

Bundros,  Gurich,  McRae,  Owens,  Rogers  and  Russo. 

3 

Kraemer.

  

  
  
  

6. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  11,  2004,  the  District’s  Superintendent 
dispatched,  via  certified  mail,  preliminary  notices*  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders, 
including  each  respondent,  who  had  status  as  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee. 
The 
letter  stated  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  discontinue 
the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the 
prospective  elimination  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of 
the  recipient  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named  individuals  in 
the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked. 

The  letter,  dated  March  11,  2003,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  District’s  resolution 

and  other  pertinent  documents’,  also  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no  certificated 
employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective  respondent  would  be 
retained  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  each  respondent  was  then 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency  criteria. 

7. 

Also,  by  another  letter,  dated  March  11,  2004,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

sent  a  number  of  preliminary  notices  to  FTE  position  holder  -  Ms  Teresa  Johnson  -  who  is  a 
temporary  certificated  employee  with  the  District  for  the  current  school  year  2003-2004. 
Although  Ms  Johnson,  as  a  temporary  certificated  employee  under  her  contract  of 
employment,  does  not  have  standing  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  a 
hearing  to  challenge  in  this  matter  on  questions  of  bumping  mechanism  or  skipping 
procedures,  the  District  informed  that  temporary  credentialed  employee  of  her  ability  to 
appear  at  the  hearing  to  challenge  the  propriety  of  being  deemed  a  temporary®  credentialed 
employee  assigned  as  an  intern  school  psychologist. 

© 

8. 

The  written  preliminary  notices,  to  each  respondent  and  to  the  District’s 

temporary  employee,  as  issued  from  the  District’s  Superintendent  and  the  governing  board’s 
resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s  governing  board’s  intent  to 
eliminate  the  positions  occupied  by  each  affected  respondent  and  affected  person  for  the 
current  school  year  of  2003-3004. 

9. 

Each  respondent,  and  other  affected  temporary  employee,  timely  requested  in 

writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each 
respondent,  or  affected  person,  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

10. 

The  District’s  Superintendent  caused  to  be  timely  served  upon  each  respondent 

the  Accusation,  dated  April  8,  2004,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent,  and  other 
affected  temporary  employee,  filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

  

“Notice  of  Recommendation  That  Services  Will  Not  be  Required.” 

Request  for  Hearing  form,  Proof  of  Service  document,  and  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal  4th  911.

‘ 

$ 

8 

44955. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

11. 

12. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  filed 

against  Respondent  Martin  Bukovsky.  By  its  withdrawal  of  the  Accusation  in  that  limited 
scope,  the  District  will  retain  the  services  of  Martin  Bukovsky. 

13. 

The  certificated  employee  -  Ms  Sandra  Ruehlow  -  who  held  the  position  of 

Categorical  After  School  Programs  coordinator  did  not  request  a  hearing,  and  is  not  a 
respondent  in  this  proceeding. 

14. 

District  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  Ms  Linda  Piceno 

(“Assistant  Superintendent”)  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  to  provide credible  and 
persuasive  evidence. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  is  responsible  for  advising  the  District’s  governing 
board  on  pertinent  aspects  of  the  district’s  practices  and  procedures  for  personnel  issues, 
hiring  procedures,  credentialing  considerations,  and  the  respective  status  of  employees  in 
certificated  positions.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  is  charged  by  the  Governing  Board  with 
contract  management  for  the  certificated  units.  In  addition  to  the  foregoing,  the  Assistant 
Superintendent,  as  part  of  the  Superintendent’s  executive  team,  is  vested  with  knowledge, 
expertise,  and  experience  to  offer  competent  and  reliable  evidence  regarding  the  basis  for  the 
proposed  lay-off  action  that  will  take  effect  for  the  ensuing  school  term. 

® 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  in  her  official  capacity  was  reasonable  in  her  exercise  of 

discretion  in  executing  the  procedures  associated  with  the  lay-off  action  as  required  by  the 
Board’s  resolution.  The  District  governing  board’s  subject  designee  was  not  arbitrary, 
capricious  nor  fraudulent  in  carrying  out  the  District’s  Resolution  03/04-22. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

15. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  lay-off  action  will  result  in  school 

programs  -  pertaining  to  student  counseling,  nurse  services,  and  psychologist  assistance  -  not 
to  be  in  compliance  with  state  and  federal  law  on  the  matter  of  statutorily  mandated  services 
for  students  in  the  District.  Respondents  aver  that  the  proposed  District  lay-off  action 
purportedly  may  result  in  impermissible  cuts  in  District  personnel  that  are  arbitrary  and 
illegal. 

In  particular,  respondents  aver  that  the  District’s  lay  off  action  pertaining  to 
psychologist  services  will  prevent  the  District  from  meeting  the  needs  of  special  education 
students  who  receive  educational  services  under  IEPs  (“individual  educational  plans”). 
As 
to  counselor  services,  respondents  argue  that  reducing  counseling  services  will  not  serve  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  pupils  of  the  District.  Regarding  nursing  services,  respondents 
contend  that  the  District’s  administration  has  made  assumptions  regarding  the  provision  of 
nursing  services  that  are  erroneous  and  that  the  proposed  lay-off  action  will  thrust  the  District 

  

 
  

below  state  mandated  levels  for  staffing  ratios  of  nurses  to  students  for  the  effective  delivery 
of  necessary  nursing  services. 

Ms  Teresa  Johnson  argues  that  the  District’s  action  to  eliminate  the  position  held  by 
her  is  improper  because:  (a)  the  District’s  position  regarding  her  status  is  not  legally  sound 
even  though  she  is  a  university  intern,  who  serves  the  District  under  a  temporary  employee 
contract.  She  advances  that  she  has  standing  as  a  probationary  employee  to  contest  the 
District’s  proposed  lay-off  action;  (b)  the  District’s  view  is  not  correct  that  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  she  has  no  “rehire  rights,”  even  if  she  is  a  university  intern;  and,  (c)  the  District 
should  be  equitably  estopped  from  denying  her  an  employment  position  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  because  a  District  “agent”  offered  her  a  job  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Respondents’  various  and  respective  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Claims  of Individual  Certificated  Employees  at  the  Hearing  of this  Matter 

a. 

School  Counselor  -  Respondent  Rosemary  Ramon 

16. 

For  the  current  school  year,  the  District  has  4.0  FTE  counselors.  Two  schools 
-  Mount  Madonna  Continuation  High  School  and  Solarsano  Middle  School  -  share  1.0  FTE 
counselor  position.  The  District  has  assigned  1.0  FTE  counselor  position  to  Brownell 
Academy,  while  South  Valley  Middle  School  is  assigned  1.0  FTE  counselor  position.  And, 
Brownell  Academy  and  South  Valley  Middle  School  share  1.0  FTE  counselor  position. 

For  the  school  year  2004-2005,  the  District’s  administration  plans  to  assign  2.0  FTE 

counselor  positions  to  overlap  Brownell  Academy  and  South  Valley  Middle  School.  And  no 
change  will  occur  with  Mount  Madonna  Continuation  High  School  and  Solarsano  Middle 
School  arrangement  with  the  sharing  of  1.0  FTE  counselor  position. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  established  that  Respondent  Rosemary  Ramon  divides 

her  1.0  FTE  counselor  position  between  Brownell  Academy  and  South  Valley  Middle 
School. 
counselor  position  that  will  be  retained  at  each  site. 
conflict  resolution,  as  provided  by  Respondent  Ramon  are  not  mandated  by  California  or 
federal  law. 

The  position  of  her  counseling  services  is  additional  to  the  contemplated  1.0  FTE 
The  counseling  services,  in  the  way  of 

Respondent  Ramon,  as  a  counselor,  can  not  offer  counseling  or  instructional  services 

to  students  with  IEPs  (Individual  Education  Plans)  in  the  special  education  program  as 
offered  by  the  District.  Respondent  Ramon  is  not  a  certificated  psychologist  so  as  to  offer 
services  to  special  education  students. 

17.  |  Respondent  Rosemary  Ramon  (“Respondent  Ramon”)  appeared  at  the  hearing 

to  offer  evidence  under  oath.

    

During  the  current  school  year,  Respondent  Ramon  has  worked  for  the  District  as  a 
August  18,  2003,  is  her  first  day  of  paid  service  with  the  District.  Respondent 

counselor. 
Ramon  occupies  the  status  of  probationary  certificated  employee  with  the  District. 

@ 

Respondent  Ramon  holds  a  clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential  as  issued  by  the 

State  of  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (“CTC”).  Under  the  credential, 
Respondent  Ramon  is  only  authorized  to  provide  service  as  a  counselor  for  the  District’s 
students.  She  does  not  hold  a  teacher’s  credential. 

Respondent  Ramon  splits  the  time  under  her  1.0  FTE  between  Browell  Academy  and 
South  Valley  Middle  School.  She  devotes  most  of  her  time  through  counseling  among  small 
groups  of  students  in  the  context  of  conflict  resolution. 

Respondent  Ramon  points  to  no  statutorily  or  regulatory  authority  that  requires  the 

District  to  provide  counseling  services  at  the  optimum  level  argued  by  respondents.  No 
authority  is  offered  to  show  that  the  governing  board’s  decision  to  eliminate  conflict 
resolution  services  at  Browell  Academy  and  South  Valley  Middle  School  violates  a 
requirement  for  mandated  services  to  students. 

Respondent  Ramon  offers  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  will  be  unable  to 

provide  statutorily  mandated  counseling  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year  by  reducing  one 
full  time  equivalent  position  of  counselor  from  the  current  number  of  four  counselors  to  next 
year’s  three  FTE  counselor  positions. 

Moreover,  Respondent  Ramon  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 
retained  any  faculty  member  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Ramon  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
competent  to  teach  or  to  provide  service  to  the  District’s  students. 

b. 

School  Nurses  -  Respondent  Juracia  Carbajal  and  Respondent  Mary  Jo  Stanley 

Respondent  Mary  Jo  Stanley 

to  offer  evidence  under  oath. 

18.  |  Respondent  Mary  Jo  Stanley  (“Respondent  Stanley”)  appeared  at  the  hearing 

During  the  current  school  year,  Respondent  Stanley  has  worked  for  the  District  as  a 

school  nurse.  She  is  a  registered  nurse  and  has  also  acquired  a  public  health  certificate. 
first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  February  26,  2001’.  Respondent  Stanley 
occupies  the  status  of  permanent  certificated  employee  with  the  District.  However, 
Respondent  offers  that  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  currently 

Her 

  

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  parties  stipulated  to  the  first  date  of  paid  service  for  Respondent  Stanley. 

7 
The  District  corrected  the  seniority  date  on  the  Certificated  Order  of  Employment  with  regard  to  Respondent 
Stanley. 

@ 

  
 

recognizes  her  as  having  “a  temporary  school  nurse  credential”  because  she  has  not 
completed  a  Master’s  Degree  program. 

During  the  current  school  year,  Respondent  Stanley  occupied  a  0.8  FTE  position  with 

the  District. 

19.  |  Respondent  Stanley  is  a  compelling  witness  who  projects  superb  commitment 

to  excellence  and  devotion  to  provision  of  services  to  students  of  the  District.  But, 
Respondent  Stanley  does  not  show  that  she  possesses  the  training,  skill  and  experience  of  a 
statistician  or  accountant  so  as  to  offer  reliable  and  trustworthy  evidence  on  the  extent  and 
scope  of  the  District’s  prospective  delivery  of  nurse  or  medical-oriented  services  to  district 
students.  Nor,  does  Ms  Stanley  show  that  she  possesses  an  ability  to  offered  competent 
evidence  regarding  claims  that  the  District’s  contemplated  lay-off  action  will  violate  state  or 
federal  law  for  the  provision  of  mandated  health  care  services  to  students  of  the  District. 

Respondent  Stanley  does  not  establish  that  a  document  that  consists  of  panels  from  a 

“Power  Point”  software  program  presentation  contains  reliable  and  trustworthy  data  upon 
which  the  governing  board  may  make  a  decision  that  would  set  aside  the  proposed  lay-off 
action.  The  presentation  includes  panels  that  reflect  references  to  “mandates  and  standards” 
which  are  not  in  fact  mandatory  services  for  which  the  District  is  bound  to  offer.  The 
presentation  reflects  inaccuracies  that  cast  doubt  upon  the  reliability  of  the  data  and  renders 
Respondent  Stanley  as  not  credible  on  the  matter  of  mandated  health  care  delivery  services 
that  may  be  affected  by  the  District’s  proposed  lay  off  action. 

Moreover,  Respondent  Stanley  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  nurse  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Stanley  possesses  a  credential  and  is  competent 
to  provide  service  to  the  District’s  students. 

Respondent  Juracia  Carbajal 

to  offer  evidence  under  oath. 

20. 

Respondent  Juracia  Carbajal  (“Respondent  Carbajal”)  appeared  at  the  hearing 

Respondent  Carbajal  has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  December  2, 

1999.  She  holds  a  preliminary  school  nurse  services  credential.  Respondent  Carbajal  works 
Her  nurse  services 
in  only  part  of  a  full  time  equivalent  position  that  is  defined  as  0.60  FTE. 
position  is  categorically  funded;  but,  the  Superintendent  stipulates  and  agrees  that 
Respondent  Carbajal  currently  holds  permanent  employee  status  with  the  District. 

Respondent  Carbajal  offered  no  competent  evidence  that  extends  credibility  to,  or 

greater  reliability  for,  the  PowerPoint  presentation  given  by  Respondent  Stanley  at  the 
hearing. 

 

Respondent  Carbajal  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

© 

any  nurse  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Carbajal  possesses  a  credential  and  is  competent  to 
provide  service  to  the  District’s  students. 

C. 

School  Psychologist  —  Ms  Teresa  Marie  Ponticello  Johnson 

21. 

Ms  Teresa  Marie  Ponticello  Johnson  (“Ms  Johnson”)  appeared  at  the  hearing 

to  offer  evidence  under  oath  (“Respondent  Johnson”). 

During  the  current  school  year,  Ms  Johnson  has  worked  for  the  District  as  a  university 

She  began  her  employment  relationship  with 
intern  under  a  temporary  employee  contract. 
the  District  effective  on  August  18,  2003.  Ms  Johnson  has  worked  full  time,  but  under  her 
contract  with  the  District,  she  has  been  paid  one-half  the  rate  of  the  compensation  earned  by 
a  credentialed  full-time  psychologist  for  the  District. 

As  a  university  intern,  Ms  Johnson  has  completed  the  academic  requirements  and 
passed  her  national  examination,  but  she  must  report  the  hours  she  has  logged  in  her  past 
year’s  experience  with  the  District  before  she  can  acquire  a  credential.  Ms  Johnson  asserts 
that  on  or  about  June  12,  2004,  she  will  be  eligible  for  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing  to  issue  her  a  credential  as  a  school  psychologist.  But,  she  has  not  yet  received 
a  preliminary  or  clear  credential. 

Ms  Johnson  offers  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  she  has  status  as  a 
probationary  or  tenured  teacher  with  the  district.  Ms  Johnson  lacks  standing  to  engage  in  a 
contest  of  the  District’s  prospective  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  may  result  in  the  loss  of  the  position  occupied  by  her. 

Moreover,  Ms  Johnson  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  faculty  member  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Johnson  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
competent  to  teach  or  to  provide  service  to  the  District’s  students.  The  evidence  shows  that 
Ms  Johnson  is  the  junior  psychologist  now  employed  by  the  District. 

22. 

Ms  Johnson  is  not  persuasive  that  the  District,  through  an  authorized  agent, 

offered  her  an  employment  position  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Ms  Johnson  declares  that  Mr.  Joe  Guzicki  (“Mr.  Guzicki”),  a  junior  school 
administrator,  first  asked  her  if  she  were  interested  in  working  for  the  District  next  year  in 
position  of  school  psychologist,  and  that  on  or  about  April  22,  2004,  she  accepted  his  offer  of 
employment  for  next  year.  First,  Ms  Johnson  did  not  call  Mr.  Guzicki  as  a  witness  to  the 
hearing  to  offer  evidence  as  to  (i)  the  circumstances  and  particulars  of  the  offer  he  made  to 
Ms  Johnson,  (ii)  the  authority  that  the  governing  board  had  vested  in  him  to  contractually 
bind  the  District  to  an  employment  contract  with  Ms  Johnson,  and  (iii)  the  essence  of  the 
governing  board’s  ratification  of  the  claimed  job  offer  to  Ms  Johnson  in  light  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendation,  dated  March  9,  2004,  that  led  to  the  governing  board’s 
Resolution  number  03/04-22  as  adopted  on  March  9,  2004. 

  

  
 

@ 

Assuming  for  argument  sake  that  Mr.  Guzicki  actually  voiced  an  interest  in  extending 

a  job  to  Ms  Johnson  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  respondents,  on  behalf  of  Ms  Johnson,  did 
not  establish  that  Mr.  Guzicki  had  authority  from  the  District  or  the  Superintendent  to  make  a 
valid  offer  of  employment  to  Ms  Johnson  so  as  to  consummate  a  binding  contractual 
obligation  for  the  District.  Nor,  did  respondents  demonstrate  that  Ms  Johnson,  or  any 
witness  for  respondents,  possesses  the  qualification,  experience  or  knowledge  of  District 
employment  practices  so  as  to  render  competent  testimony  regarding  current  controlling 
District  policy  on  steps  necessary  to  prefect  contracts  for  the  employment  of  a  certificated 
employee. 

Further  assuming  that  Mr.  Guzicki  made  the  unauthorized  offer  to  Ms  Johnson  of  an 
employment  position  for  the  next  school  year,  respondents  do  not  provide  evidence  that  Ms 
Johnson’s  reliance  upon  the  representations  by  Mr.  Guzicki  resulted  in  her  change  of 
positions  that  involved  circumstances  that  inured  to  her  detriment,  or  that  Ms  Johnson  altered 
her  position  so  as  to  perfect  the  elements  that  comprise  the  doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel.  © 

Unpersuasive  Representations  and  Claims  by  Respondents’  Witnesses. 

23. 

Respondents  called  four  witnesses  to  offer  evidence  in  an  effort  to  show  the 
District’s  supposed  unreasonable  or  faulty  basis  for  the  prospective  lay-off  action.  Those 
witnesses,  though  sincere  and  committed  to  retaining  the  services  of  the  individuals  affected 
by  Governing  Board  Resolution  number  03/04-22,  are  not  persuasive. 

a. 

Ms  Pamela  Rogers 

24. 

|  Ms  Pamela  Rogers  is  a  school  psychologist  with  the  District.  She  has  a  clear 

professional  pupil  student  services  credential.  She  has  been  employed  by  the  District  for 
eight  years;  but,  for  25  years  she  served  as  a  school  psychologist  in  the  State  of 
Massachusetts. 

Ms  Rogers  believes  that  the  District’s  school  psychologists  attend  about  fifty  percent 

of  the  total  number  of  meetings  of  District  staff  who  prepare  Individual  Educational  Plans 
(IEPs)  for  students  with  developmental  disabilities  or  pronounced  learning  disabilities. 
Rogers  notes  that  30%  of  the  time  of  a  psychologist  is  devoted  to  optional  meetings.  Ms 
Rogers  confirms  that  a  psychologist  is  not  required  by  law  to  administer  the  “GATE”  tests 
for  talented  or  gifted  students;  but,  a  psychologist’s  supervision  of  that  test  would  “be 
valuable.” 

Ms 

But,  Ms  Rogers  has  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  District’s  plans  and  policies  for  the 

provision  of  services  by  psychologists  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Although  Ms  Rogers  claims  that  she  was  present  when  District  administration-level 

employee  —  Dr.  Guzicki  —  asked  School  Psychology  Teresa  Johnson  whether  she  were 
interested  in  holding  an  employment  position  with  the  District  for  next  school  term,  Ms 

  

 

Rogers  has  no  knowledge  of  the  authority  given  Mr.  Guzicki  to  contractually  bind  the 
District.  And,  Ms  Rogers  has  no  personal  knowledge  regarding  the  governing  board  having 
actually  presented  Ms  Johnson  with  an  offer  of  employment  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

b. 

Ms  Michelle  Nelson 

matter. 

25. 

|  Ms  Marguerite  Michelle  Nelson  (“Ms  Nelson”)  offered  evidence  in  this 

Although  Ms  Nelson  holds  tenured  employee  status  as  a  certificated  science  teacher 

with  the  District,  she  is  now  on  “leave  of  absence”  so  as  to  devote  full  time  to  duties  and 
tasks  of  President  of  the  Gilroy  Teachers’  Association,  which  is  the  labor  union  for  the . 
District’s  affected  certificated  employees  herein. 

Ms  Nelson  is  not  persuasive  that  the  governing  board’s  decisions  made  in  the  year 

2003  regarding  the  employment  status  of  an  intern  have  a  binding  or  precedential  effect  upon 
the  District’s  current  designation  and  treatment  of  Ms  Johnson  as  a  university  intern. 

Ms  Nelson  is  not  credible  that  she  has  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  decision-making 

processes  and  policies  of  Superintendent  and  other  executive  administrators  of  District  so  as 
to  offer  competent  evidence  at  this  hearing  that  the  District,  in  the  past  year,  granted  interns 
certain  employment  standing  or  rights  so  as  to  enable  a  university  intern  to  claim 
probationary  employee  status  in  the  instant  lay-off  proceeding.  Ms  Nelson  offers  no- 
competent  evidence  that  a  claimed  “historical”  instances  of  one  intern  employee  during  the 
past  school  years  in  some  manner  establishes  a  fixed  or  concrete  policy  determination  of  the 
District  that  vests  Ms  Johnson  with  probationary  employee  status,  or  extends  “rehire  rights” 
to  that  university  intern,  a  temporary  employee  of  the  District. 

C. 

Ms  Eileen  Obata 

26. 

Ms  Eileen  Obata  (“Ms  Obata”)  offered  evidence  in  this  matter. 

Ms  Obata  holds  the  designation  of  District  Nurse.  She  claims  that  she  has  been  an 
employee  of  the  District  for  26  years.  She  has  been  the  District  Nurse  for  a  term  of  eight 
years. 

Ms  Obata  is  the  supervisor  of  Respondent  Carbajal  and  Respondent  Stanley.  Ms 

Obata  is  familiar  with  the  work  of  Respondents  in  the  context  of  the  District’s  provision  of 
nursing  services  to  students  in  the  District. 

But,  Ms  Obata  is  not  a  District  administrator. 

Yet,  Ms  Obata  is  a  member  of  the  Teachers’  Bargaining  Unit.  As  an  active  union 

leader,  Ms  Obata  shows a  bias  towards  the  claims  of  the  respondent  nurses  to  secure 
employment  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

  

     

10 

Ms  Obata  does  not  show  that  she  has  personal  knowledge  of  the  District’s  plans  and 

policies  for  the  provision  of  services  by  nursing  personnel  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Ms  Obata  offered  at  the  hearing  certain  data  for  which  she  had  prompted  district 

employees  -  health  cares  and  school  nurses  —  to  gather  the  raw  information  that  was 
eventually  purportedly  assembled  or  prepared  by  the  secretary  to  Ms  Obata. 
The  material  is 
not  shown  to  be  trustworthy  or  reliable  as  the  persons  who  actually  gathered  and  prepared  the 
questionable  data  were  not  made  available  for  cross-examination  by  the  Superintendent’s 
counsel. 

Ms  Obata  provided  the  record  with  conflicting  and  contradictory  material.  A  record 

offered  by  respondent  and  titled  “State  Mandated  Health  Screens  Performed  by  School 
Nurses,”  was  shown  to  be  misleading  and  not  accurate.  Respondent’s  supposed  mandated 
services  have  been,  and  lawfully  may  be,  performed  by  health  clerks,  who  are  not  registered 
nurses  or  holders  of  certificated  employee  status. 
Moreover,  the  supposed  mandated 
services  are  in  reality  discretionary  services  as  provided  by  the  District  for  its  students. 

Respondents,  through  Ms  Obata,  sought  to  offer  an  unreliable  document  titled,  in  part 

“Student  Health  Statistics,”®  as  well  as  other  compilation  of  mass  records  and  logs’.  The 
data  is  questionable  in  that  respondents’  methods  of  gathering  and  analyzing  the  records 
were  not  established  at  the  hearing.  Moreover,  respondents  called  no  expert  witness  in  the 
person  of  a  statistician  or  accountant  to  establish  the  efficacy  of  the  production  of  the 
information  or  the  comprehensiveness  and  accurate  nature  of  assembling  the  documents 
submitted  on  behalf  of  respondents.  Ms  Obata  is  not  credible  that  she  has  personal 
knowledge  regarding  the  underlying  contents  of  records  upon  which  the  supposed  summaries 
of  District  services,  which  respondents  sought  to  offer  as  evidence  upon  which  the  governing 
board  could  made  findings  of  fact  for  this  decision. 

Ms  Obata  is  not  a  school  administrator.  She  had  no  duty  to  record  accurately  in 

contemporaneously  prepared  memoranda  regarding  acts,  events  or  occurrences  that  would 
warrant  the  writings,  offered  at  hearing  through  Ms  Obata,  to  meet  the  statutory  requirements 
for  application  of  the  “government  employee’s”'?  exception  to  the  hearsay  rule.  Ms  Obata’s 
written  statement  for  presentation  to  the  governing  board’s  meeting  that  led  to  adoption  its 
Resolution  03/04-22  is  not  proper  evidence  upon  which  factual  findings  can  be  made  for  the 
agency  decision  in  this  matter 

Ms  Obata  offers  no  evidence  with  regard  to  the  District  proposed  lay-off  action  being 

defective  due  to  less  senior  employees  being  retained  by  the  district  to  the  detriment  of 
respondents’  prospective  employment  status. 

  

®  Respondent’s  exhibit  “F.” 

° 

Exhibit  “G,”  titled  “Daily  Log  Count  (Children  Seen  in  Nurses’  Office)  and  Medication  given  Daily  ....” 

'°  California  Evidence  Code  section  1280. 

  

11

d. 

Maureen  Romac 

27. 

|  Ms  Maureen  Romac  (“Ms  Romac”)  offered  evidence  in  this  matter. 

Ms  Romac  is  a  program  specialist  in  the  District’s  Special  Education  program.  She 

has  been  employed  by  the  District  for  21  years;  but,  for  six  years  she  has  occupied  a  District 
position  as  Special  Education  Coordinator. 

Ms  Romac  shows  that  District  has  about  25  to  30  students,  who  are  schooled  under 

IEPs,  and  who  require  counseling  by  District  psychologists.  But,  her  knowledge  is  acquired 
from  review  of  the  District’s  Management  Information  System  (“MIS”).  And,  she  confirms 
that  no  District  counselor  engages  in  counseling  of  students  with  IEPs. 

Ms  Romac  has  held  the  offices  of  president,  vice-president  and  other  offices  of  the 
She  manifests  a  bias  in 

labor  union  that  represents  the  District’s  certificated  employees. 
favor  of  respondents  in  their  quest  to  retain  a  respective  employment  position  with  the 
District  for  the  next  school  year.  Ms  Romac  shows  no  objectivity  or  concern  towards  the 
rationale  of  the  District’s  proposed  lay  off  action  to  be  due  to  limited  or  non  existent  funding 
sources  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Ms  Romac  offers  no  evidence  with  regard  to  the  District  proposed  lay-off  action  as 

being  defective  due  to  less  senior  employees  being  retained  by  the  district  to  the  detriment  of 
respondents’  employment  status. 

Respondents,  generally 

28. 

Respondents  do  not  offer  competent  evidence  that  the  District  did  not  treat 

respondents  fairly.  Evidence  is  not  offered  to  support  respondents’  general  argument  that  the 
District  failed  to  engage  in  an  intelligent  and  rational  process  in  deciding  which  employee  to 
retain  and  which  employees  to  discharge.  No  competent  evidence  shows  the  District 
knowingly  set  out  to  distort  data  or  statistical  information  to  reach  the  preliminary  decision  in 
this  matter. 
inaccurate  as  to  render  as  fatally  flawed  this  lay-off  action. 

The  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent’s  findings  and  conclusions  are  not  so 

The  weight  of  evidence  shows  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  the  Superintendent 

were  not  arbitrary,  capricious  or  fraudulent  in  their  respective  reasonable  use  of  discretion  to 
reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  next  academic  year. 

The  District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

29. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  to  offer 

credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

12 

     

The  Assistant  Superintendent  is  directly  involved  and  knowledgeable  on  the  details 

many  administrative  matters  pertaining  to  certificated  employees.  The  Assistant 
Superintendent  provided  expert  witness  opinions  on  the  District  policies  and  practices  of 
matter,  including  but  not  limited  to:  credential  standing  of  employees;  hire  dates  for 
temporary  employees  hired  to  replace  a  permanent  teacher  on  leave  and  for  emergency 
credentialed  teachers;  seniority  dates  for  permanent  and  probationary  teachers;  as  well  as  the 
array  of  services,  academic  offerings  and  programs  by  the  District  for  its  students. 

Upon  learning  that  the  District  was  required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  teacher 

employees  of  the  District,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  other  employees  of  the  District 
effected  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the  District’s 
teachers. 

Assistant  Superintendent  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  service 

position  holder  who  was  properly  designated  as  a  temporary  employee.  Also,  she  studied 
and  set  forth  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  probationary  and  permanent  employees,  the 
dates  that  established  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  by  the  permanent  and 
probationary  employees,  who  have  standing  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955. 

30. 

The  only  services,  as  mandated  by  law,  that  the  District  must  provide  through 

services  performed  by  a  school  nurse  involve  (i)  the  supervision  of  individual  health  care 
plans  developed  for  students  only  under  Section  504  of  the  Rehabilitation  Act  of  1973  and 
(ii)  performing  or  supervising  the  performance  of  specialized  health  care  services  for  (special 
education)  students  identified  with  exceptional  needs  under  the  Individuals  with  Disabilities 
Education  Act  (“IDEA”). 

School  nurses  are  one  of  the  authorized  providers  for  the  other  health  care  services  the 

District  is  required  by  law  to  provide  —  vision  and  hearing  testing,  scoliosis  screening,  and 
assistance  with  administering  students’  prescribed  medications. 

31. 

All  other  services  that  have  been  provided  by  the  District’s  nurses  or  could  be 
provided  by  the  nurses  are  delivered  solely  at  the  District’s  discretion,  and  the  District  may 
exercise  its  discretion  to  eliminate  them  or  not  provide  them  in  the  first  place.  These 
discretionary  services,  include,  but  are  not  limited  to: 

e 

13  

Conduct  immunization  programs  and  ensure  that  every  pupil’s  immunization 
status  is  in  compliance  with  the  law.  (Education  Code  Section  49425); 
Assess  and  evaluate  the  health  and  developmental  status  of  pupils  to  identify 
.  specific  physical  disorders  and  other  factors  relating  to  the  learning  process, 

communicate  with  the  primary  care  provider.  (Education  Code  Section 
49425); 
Design  and  implement  a  health  maintenance  plan  to  meet  the  individual  health 
needs  of  the  students.  (Education  Code  Section  49425); 

@ 

Refer  the  pupil  and  his  or  her  parent  or  guardian  to  appropriate  community 
resources  for  necessary  services.  (Education  Code  Section  49425); 
Maintain  communication  with  parents  and  all  involved  community 
practitioners  and  agencies  to  promote  needed  treatment.  (Education  Code 
Section  49425); 
Interpret  medical  and  nursing  findings  appropriate  to  the  student’s  individual 
educational  plan  and  make  recommendations  to  professional  personnel. 
(Education  Code  Section  49425); 
Consult  with,  conduct  in-service  training  to,  and  serve  as  a  resource  person  to 
teachers  and  administrators.  (Education  Code  Section  49425); 
Counsel  pupils  and  parents.  (Education  Code  Section  49425); 
Provide  dental  health  programs  for  students.  (See  Health  &  Safety  Code 
Section  104775); 
Provide  sexual  health  education  instruction.  (Education  Code  Section  51933); 
Provide  CPR  training  to  employees  and/or  students.  (Education  Code  Section 
49413); 
Provide  emergency  epinephrine  auto-injectors  to  trained  personnel  who  may 
use  them  to  provide  emergency  medical  aid  to  persons  suffering  from  an 
anaphylactic  reaction.  (Education  Code  Section  49414);  and, 
In  the  absence  of  a  credentialed  school  nurse,  provide  school  personnel  with 
voluntary  emergency  medical  training  or  provide  emergency  medical 
assistance  to  pupils  with  diabetes  suffering  from  severe  hypoglycemia, 
(Education  Code  Section  49414.5). 

32. 

Regardless  of  the  inherent  value  of  the  nurse  services  offered  to  some  of  the 

District’s  students,  the  discretionary  services  are  not  mandated  by  law.  The  District’s 
delivers  the  bulk  of  the  nurses’  services  for  its  students  at  its  discretion;  so  that  the  District 
may  eliminate  or  reduce  such  services 

33. 

Although  the  District  based  its  calculations  of  the  amount  of  nursing  time  that 
will  not  be  needed  by  reducing  or  eliminating  particular  services  on  information  provided  by 
District  Nurse  Obata,  many  discrepancies  exist  between  the  District’s  estimates  and 
Respondents’  estimates.  Neither  a  resolution  of  these  discrepancies  or  a  credible 
determination  about  this  evidence  is  necessary  to  conclude  that  the  District  may  reduce  or 
eliminate  nursing  services  and  still  provide  the  minimum  level  of  mandated  services  with  2.8 
FTE  nurses  because  the  District  has  established  that,  if  necessary,  it  will  eliminate  every 
service  provided  by  nurses  that  is  not  mandated  to  be  provided  by  nurses.  At  the  bare-bones 
level  and  using  Respondents’  own  time  estimates,  2.8  FTE  nurses  will  be  able  to  perform  the 
minimum  mandated  services,  as  well  as  additional  mandated  nurses  services  or  discretionary 
services  that  the  District  may  choose  to  have  them  provide. 

34. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District  plans  to  transfer  mandated  nursing 

services  from  the  certificated  nurses  to  classified  employees  (for  example,  health  clerks).  No 
competent  evidence  exists  to  establish  that  the  District  has  such  a  plan.  In  response  to 

  

  
  

414

respondents’  assertions,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  presented  credible  evidence  that  as  a 
result  of  the  pending  layoff  action  the  District  will  not  expand  health  clerk  duties,  employ 
additional  health  clerks,  or  increase  the  workload  of  health  clerks. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  is  credible  in  offering  evidence  that  with  the  exception 
of  services  eliminated  by  the  proposed  layoff  action,  health  clerks  will  continue  to  perform 
the  duties  specified  in  their  classified  job  description  services  as  they  have  in  the  past. 
To 
the  extent  that  the  District  eliminates  nurses’  services,  health  clerk  duties  may  be  reduced. 

35. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  Linda  Piceno  offered 
persuasive  and  credible  evidence  that  the  District  Governing  Board  has  not  approved  an 
employment  contract  between  the  District  and  Ms  Teresa  Johnson  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year. 

Ultimate  Findings 

36. 

California  state  law  mandated  that  school  districts  provide  specialized 
But, 

services  to  students  being  educated  under  individual  educational  plans  (“IEPs”). 
evidence  in  this  matter  does  not  show  that  mandated  services  in  the  District  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  are  in  jeopardy  of  being  reduced  below  the  level  required  by  law.  (California 
Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132  Cal.App.  3d  32,  34-35;  Rutherford  v.  Board 
of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.  App.  3d  167;  Degner  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.  App.  3d 
689.) 

37.  |  The  recommendation  of  the  District’s  Superintendent  and  the  governing 

board’s  preliminary  decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  4.4  FTE  positions,  including  the 
positions  held  by  each  respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the 
superintendent’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise 
of  the  District’s  discretion. 

38. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

39. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

40.  | Nocompetent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed 

elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents  herein,  the 
District  will  retain  any  certificated  employee  who  is  junior  to  such  respondents  to  perform 
services  for  which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in 
such  FTE  positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

15

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1  through  11. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 

duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been  regularly 
performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the  District  has 
properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non  reemployment  of 
respondents. 

4. 

Judgments  entered  by  a  tribunal  on  the  stipulation  of  the  parties  have  the  same 

effect  as  acts  tried  on  the  merits.  John  Siebel  Associates  v.  Keele  (1986)  188  Cal.  App.  3d 
560,  565. 

The  District  stipulates  to  withdraw  the  Accusation  against  the  certificated  employee 

named  in  Factual  Finding  12.  The  stipulation  is  binding  on  the  parties. 

5. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  vs.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

As  to  Ms  Teresa  Marie  Ponticello  Johnson 

6. 

Respondents,  on  behalf  of  Ms  Teresa  M.  P.  Johnson,  argue  the  law  applies 

hereto  as  expressed  in  the  Kavanaugh'’.  The  facts  in  this  matter  do  not  fit  within  the  scope 
of  Kavanaugh.  Respondents  do  not  show a  reasonable  basis  for  the  District  to  alter 
classification  status  of  “temporary  employees”  to  first  year  probationary  employee,  namely 
Ms  Johnson.  The  District  did  not  err  to  a  degree  of  blameworthiness  as  to  justify  on 
equitable  theories  the  reclassification  of  Ms  Johnson  as  a  respondent.  An  employee,  who  is 
working  under  a  university  intern  permits,  works  for  the  District  under  contracts  that  make 
her  a  provisional  or  temporary  employee,  who  has  no  standing  on  the  seniority  list  of  the 
District. 

  

'!  Kavanaugh  v  West  Sonoma  County  High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911. 

  

16 

       

The  Education  Code  permits  a  certificated  employee  to  be  classified  as  a  temporary 

employee  under  numerous  circumstances.'”  Specifically,  the  Education  Code  allows  school 
districts  to  hire  on  a  temporary  basis  teachers  who  have  not  met  all  the  state  standards  and 
qualifications  for  a  preliminary  or  clear  credential. 

The  District  properly  classified  Ms  Johnson  as  a  temporary  teacher  because  she  did 
not  hold  a  preliminary  or  clear  credential.  The  District  made  this  classification  before  Ms 
Johnson  began  her  employment.  The  District  provided  Ms  Johnson  with  a  written  contract 
clearly  identifying  the  temporary  nature  of  her  employment  and  the  duration  of  the 
temporary  employment  as  required  by  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High 
School  District.'?  Ms  Johnson’s  employment  contract  with  the  District  explicitly  classified 
her  as  a  temporary  employee;  the  contract  states  that  a  university  intern  “does  not  acquire 
tenure  while  serving  on  an  internship  credential”  and  “you  may  be  released  from  District 
employment  as  a  temporary  certificated  employee.  . 
.  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section 
44954.” 

Like  other  teachers  who  do  not  hold  preliminary  or  clear  credentials,  university 

interns  are  generally  treated  as  temporary  teachers  because  the  law  prohibits  granting 
probationary  rights  to  university  interns,  prohibits  university  interns  from  acquiring  tenure 
while  serving  as  interns,  and  explicitly  states  that  the  layoff  provisions  do  not  apply  to 
university  interns.  University  interns  are  governed  by  Education  Code  Sections  44450- 
44467.  Education  Code  Section  44464  states,  “the  rights  provided  by  Sections  44948  and 
44949  shall  not  be  afforded  to  [university]  interns.”  Section  44948  establishes  mid-year 
dismissal  rights  of  probationary  teachers,  and  Section  44949  establishes  certificated 
employee  layoff  rights. 

A  recent  court  of  appeal  decision  discussed  the  differences  between  district  interns 

and  university  interns.  Welch  v.  Oakland  Unified  School  District’*  held  that  although  district 
interns  have  probationary  status  from  the  beginning  of  their  service,  university  interns  are  not 
entitled  to  probationary  status.  Because  they  cannot  be  probationary,  university  interns  are 
properly  classified  as  temporary. 

Because  she  is  a  temporary  employee  and  not  entitled  to  layoff  rights,  the  District  can 

release  Ms  Johnson  under  Education  Code  Section  44954  by  simply  providing  her with  a 
release  for  next  year. 

  

"?  Long-term  substitute,  §§  44917,  44918;  temporary  leave  replacement,  §§  44920,  44918;  categorical  or  contract 
program,  §§  44909,  44918;  provisional  or  emergency  credential/permit,  §  44911;  temporary  pending  basic  skills 
test,  §§  44830(c)(1),  44918;  class  size  reduction  temporary  pending  basic  skills  test,  §§  44830(c)(2),  44918;  retired 
temporary,  §§  24216.5,  24216.6,  24214;  short-term  temporary,  §  44919(a);  high  school,  §  44921;  temporary 
replacement  for  permanent  teacher  on  STRS  disability,  §  44986(b)(1);  short-term  temporary,  §  44919(c);  pre-intern, 
§§  44305,  44308;  university  intern,  §§  44450-44467;  district  intern,  §§  44885.5,  44830.3,  44325. 

'?  Kavanaugh  v,  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911,  129  Cal.Rptr.2d  811. 

'*  Welch  v.  Oakland  Unified  School  District  (2001)  91  Cal.App.4th  1421,  1427-1431,  111  Cal.Rptr.2d  374,  378-381. 

17

    

The  affected  employee  -  Ms  Johnson  -  a  District  temporary  employee,  is  not 

persuasive  that  Education  Code  section  44916"  is  applicable  to  the  fact  of  this  matter. 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44955  establishes,  in  part,  that  the  order  of  teacher 

layoff  must  occur  “in  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  [the  certificated  employees]  were 
employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  [Education  Code 
section]  ...  44845....” 
probationary  or  permanent  employee  employed  ...  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed 
on  the  date  upon  which  [s]he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.” 
[Emphasis  added. | 

And,  Education  Code  section  44845,  in  part,  states:  “[e]very 

Education  Code  section  44911  sets  out:  “[s]ervice  by  a  person  under  a  provisional 

credential  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to 
attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a  school  district.” 
[Emphasis  added.| 

Respondents  assert  that  the  Golden  Valley’®  appellate  decision  supports  the  notion 

that  a  university  employee’s  service  constitutes  service  to  the  District  as  a  probationary 
employee.  Respondents,  on  behalf  of  Ms  Johnson,  contend  that  an  employee  who  obtains  a 
qualifications  for  a  credential  during  the  school  year  should  be  given a first  day  of  paid 
probationary  service  pegged  to  such  employee’s  first  date  of  service  to  the  District  under  an 
temporary  contract,  as  opposed  to  the  later  date  that  corresponds  to  the  first  day  of  service 
under  the  clear  credential.  Respondents  are  not  correct. 

The  Golden  Valley  decision  pertained  to  a  teacher’s  mid-year  dismissal  rights  under 

Education  Code  section  44948.3.  That  appellate  court  opinion  does  not  address  an  aspect  of 
layoff  procedures  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

Also,  Education  Code  section  44911  set  out:  “Service  by  a  person  under  a 
provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a 
prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a 
school  district.”  [Emphasis  added.] 

Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.  App.  4t  1026,  states: 

“the  numerous  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  expressing  the  legislative  preference  for 

  

Education  Code  section  44916  prescribes  that:  “The  classification  shall  be  made  at  the  time  of  employment  and 

'S 
thereafter  in  the  month  of  July  of  each  school  year.  At  the  time  of  initial  employment  during  each  academic  year, 
each  new  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall  receive  a  written  statement  indicating  his  employment 
status  and  the  salary  that  he  is  to  be  paid.  If  a  school  district  hires  a  certificated  person  as  a  temporary  employee,  the 
written  statement  shall  clearly  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of  the  employment  and  the  length  of  time  for  which  the 
person  is  being  employed.  /fa  written  statement  does  not  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of the  employment,  the 
certificated  employee  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  probationary  employee  of the  school  district,  unless  employed  with 
permanent  status.  [Emphasis  added.]} 

'S 

California  Teachers  Association  v.  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.  App.4th  369. 

18

  
  
  

fully  credentialed  teachers  and  the  goal  of  reducing  the  number  of  teachers  employed  under 
temporary  or  emergency  credentials.”  Summerfield  shows  that  an  emergency  credential 
does  not  accrue  time  in  service  for  the  attainment  by  such a  classified  teacher  of  permanent 
status.  Summerfield  cites  Education  Code  section  45023.1,  subdivision  (a)(1)  (which  limits 
salary  increases  to  credentialed  teachers  but  not  such  increases  for  those  holding  emergency 
credentials),  and  Education  Code  section  44225.7,  subdivision  (c)  (which  directs  assignment 
of  interns  to  classrooms  so  as  to  diminish  a  District’s  reliance  on  teachers  on  emergency 
permits). 

The  scheme  devised  by  the  California  Legislature  would  be  violated,  and  grave 
wrongs  visited  upon  earlier  credentialed  teachers  with  a  later  hire  date  than  the  subject 
provisional  or  emergency  credentialed  teachers,  under  the  arrangement  sought  by 
respondents,  on  behalf  of  Ms  Johnson,  who  gained  fully  credentialed  status  in  the  mist  of  the 
school  year. 
employment  of  a  teacher  who  secures  a  clear  credential  during  the  school  year  after  an  initial 
contract  is  executed  by  the  teacher  in  a  status  other  than  probationary. 

Probationary  status  is  not  retroactively  conferred  to  the  beginning  of 

8. 

A  District  employee  who  accepts  a  contract  as  a  temporary  employee  is 

estopped  to  claim  probationary  status,  absent  a  clear  statutory  mandate  that  warrants  the 
contract  be  abrogated.  (Santa  Barbara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Santa  Barbara  High  Sch. 
Dist.  (1977)  76  Cal.  App.  3d  223,  227-228;  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District 
(2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  1079.) 

The  temporary  employee  -  Ms  Teresa  Johnson  -  who  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this 

matter  offered  no  competent  evidence  to  refute  the  District’s  position  that  she  holds  status  as 
an  employee  position  under  a  temporary  contract  with  the  District.  Hence  Ms  Johnson  has 
no  standing  as  a  Respondent  to  contest  the  District’s  lay-off  action. 

The  very  recent  appellate  court  decision  of  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District'’  explains: 

“_,.  a  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  continues  to 
serve  under  that  permit,  and  under  the  contract  to  which  she 
agreed,  until  the  teacher  is  issued  a  credential  and  registers  it 
with  the  District.  Otherwise  stated,  the  District  has  no  duty  to 
classify  a  teacher  as  probationary  retroactive  to  the  date  of  her 
credential.” 

9. 

Temporary  teachers  who  served  75%  of  a  school  year  have  reemployment 

rights  under  Education  Code  section  44918. 
an  employee  is  (a)  certified  to  teach,  and  (b)  qualified  to  service,  the  temporary  teacher  who 
has  served  75%  of  the  preceding  school  year  may  be  reemployed  as  a  probationary 

Ifa  vacant  position  becomes  available  for  such 

  

'’  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  1078. 

19

But,  the  procedures  under 
employee.  (Royster  v.  Cushman  (1989)  213  Cal.  App.  3d  65.) 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  do  not  call  for  the  decision  from  administrative 
adjudication  proceeding  to  result  in  an  Order  that  prescribes  rehire  rights  for  a  laid  off 
temporary  employees,  who  has  no  standing  in  the  matter. 
on  behalf  of  Ms  Teresa  M.  P.  Johnson,  to  require  the  District  to  bestow  specific  rehire  or 
“call  back”  rights  upon  Ms  Johnson,  as  a  temporary  employee  of  the  District,  can  not  be 
granted. 

Respondents’  motion  for  an  order, 

@ 

10. 

In  this  matter  Ms  Johnson,  who  held  a  contractual  position  as  a  temporary 

employee,  did  not  present  competent  evidence  to  establish  a  basis  for  the  application  of  the 
doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel.  The  facts  in  this  matter  do  not  present  the  elements  necessary 
for  the  District’s  lay-off  action  to  be  set  aside  as  to  Ms  Johnson  -  the  complaining  temporary 
employees.  (Shoban  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Desert  Center  Unified  School  District  (1969) 
376  Cal.App.2d  534,  544-546.)  No  competent  and  credible  evidence  shows  that  Ms  Johnson 
reasonably  relied  upon  information  or  guidance  from  responsible  and  duly  authorized 
personnel  of  the  District  that  misled  her,  as  a  temporary  employee,  to  her  detriment. 

11. 

Also,  in  the  matter  of  Ms  Johnson’s  assertion  that  a  junior  administrator 

offered  her  job  for  the  ensuring  school  year,  school  district  administrators  simply  recommend 
employment  candidates  for  a  governing  board’s  approval.  For  example,  Education  Code 
Section  44830  states: 

“The  governing  board  of a  school  district  shall  employ  for 
positions  requiring  certification  qualifications,  only  persons  who 
possess  the  qualifications  therefore  prescribed  by  law.  It  is 
contrary  to  the  public  policy  of  this  state for  any  person  or 
persons  charged,  by  the  governing  boards,  with  the 
responsibility  of recommending  persons for  employment  by  the 
boards  to  refuse  or  to  fail  to  do  so  for  reasons  of  race,  color, 
religious  creed,  sex,  or  national  origin  of  the  applicants  for  that 
employment.” 

An  early  case  held  that  a  contract  with  a  teacher  was  invalid  when  it  was  agreed  to  by 

two  individual  members  of  the  governing  board,  but  the  full  board  never  officially  acted  to 
approve  the  contract.'* 
This  interpretation  is  consistent  with  a  non-employment  case,  Santa 
Monica  Unified  School  District  v.  Persh  (1970)  5  Cal.App.3d  945,  which  held  that  a  contract 
entered  into  by  a  school  administrator  was  invalid  if  not  ratified  by  the  school  board. 
Education  Code  Section  17604  explicitly  states: 

“Wherever  in  this  code  the  power  to  contract  is  invested  in  the 
governing  board  of  the  school  district.  . 
.,  the  power  may  by  a 
majority  vote  of  the  board  be  delegated  to  its  district 
superintendent.  ...  However,  no  contract  made  pursuant  to  the 

  

'§  Barnhard  v.  Gray  (1936)  12  Cal.App.2d  717. 

  

  
  
  

20

delegation  and  authorization  shall  be  valid  or  constitute  an 
enforceable  obligation  against  the  district  unless  and  until  the 
same  shall  have  been  approved  or  ratified  by  the  governing 
board...  .” 

Santa  Monica  Unified  School  District  v.  Persh  held  that  under  this  code  section,  a 
contract  is  unenforceable  if  it  was  never  approved  or  ratified  by  the  governing  board,  even 
when  a  party  detrimentally  relied  on  promises  from  district  administrators. 

The  District’s  governing  board  has  not  approved  an  employment  contract  with  Ms 

Johnson  for  the  2004-2005  school  year,  and  no  employment  contract  can  be  created  without 
governing  board  approval.  As  a  university  intern,  Ms  Johnson  is  a  temporary  employee  and 
can  be  released  under  Education  Code  Section  44954.  Ms  Johnson  is  not  entitled  to  the 
layoff  proceedings  required  by  Education  Code  Sections  44955  and  44949.  Even  if  Ms 
Johnson  can  demonstrate  that  she  is  a  probationary  employee,  the  District  has  the  right  to 
terminate  her  because  Ms  Johnson’s  particular  kind  of  service  (psychologist)  is  being 
reduced  or  discontinued,  and  Ms  Johnson  is  the  least  senior  psychologist  in  the  District. 

As  to  Respondent  Rosemary  Ramon 

12. 

Education  Code  section  49600  establishes  that  counseling  services  offered  in  a 
school  district  are  discretionary  services  as  opposed  to  being  mandatory  services.  The  statute 
sets  forth,  in  part:  “[t]he  governing  board  of  any  school  district  may  provide  a  comprehensive 
educational  counseling  program  for  all  pupils  enrolled  in  the  schools  of  the  district  ....  “ 
[Emphasis  added.] 
position  will  not  eliminate  mandatory  services. 

The  governing  board’s  reduction  of  one  full  time  equivalent  counseling 

As  to  Respondents  Stanley  and  Carbajal 

13. 

A  particular  kind  of  service  may  be  eliminated  or  reduced  even  though  a 

The  District  will  eliminate  entirely  some  services  provided  by  nurses,  and 
eliminate  or  reduce  other  particular  kinds  of  services  by  changing  the  method  by  which  it 
provides  services. 
service  continues  to  be  performed  or  provided  in  a  different  manner.  The  California 
Supreme  Court  established  this  principle  in  1935.  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  District'”  held 
that  a  school  district  could  lay  off  traveling  art  teachers,  and  instead  assign  regular  classroom 
teachers  to  teach  art  to  students.  (See  also  Fuller  v.  Berkeley  School  District  (1935)  2  Cal.2d 
152,  159.) 

This  principle  has  been  repeatedly  reaffirmed  by  courts  over  the  years.  For  example, 
Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott’®  upheld  the  district’s  layoff  of  nurses, 
counselors,  psychologists,  and  other  specialists,  explaining: 

  

"°  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  District  (1935)  2  Cal.2d  770. 
©  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796. 

21

[Citation  omitted.] 

.  and  yet  continue 
“,..  a  district  may  not  dismiss  an  employee.  . 
the  identical  kind  of  service  and  position  held  by  the  terminated 
employee. 
But  the  particular  kind  of 
service  of  the  employee  may  be  eliminated  even  though  a 
a  different 
service  continues  to  be 
[Citing  Davis,  supra,  Fuller,  supra,  and 
manner  by  the  district. 
apparently 
other  cases. 
contemplated 
in  the 
particular  kind  of  service  in  teaching  a  subject,  there  was  a 
discontinuance  of  the  former  particular  kind  of  service.””! 

... 
here, 
a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching  or 

performed  or  provided  in 

Where, 

district 

the 

as 

Even  though  a  service  must  continue  to  be  performed  in 

a  school  district, 

the 

particular  kind  of  service  provided  by  the  employee  may  be  eliminated. 

Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  upheld  a  school  district’s  decision  to  reduce  nursing 
services,  stating,  “even  though  a  service  must  continue  to  be  performed  in  a  school  district, 
the  particular  kind  of  service  of  the  employee  may  be  eliminated.”””  The  court  explained  that 
districts  may  reduce  services  by  eliminating  the  service  entirely,  or: 

‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  preferred  services 
be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made 

“may 
shall 
available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.” 

The  District  plans  to  reduce  the  total  amount  of  services  currently  provided  by  nurses, 

and  also  will  change  the  method  and  manner  in  which  it  provides  the  remaining  services. 
The  District’s  planned  elimination  and  changed  methods  of  providing  services  are  reasonably 
and  clearly  summarized  on  the  charts  in  the  record  as  District  Exhibits  24  and  29. 

14. 

Respondent  nurses  are  not  persuasive  when  they  cite  Education  Code  Section 

49400  to  support  an  argument  that  the  District  cannot  reduce  nursing  services.  Section 
49400  states,  in  its  entirety:  “[t]he  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  give  diligent 
care  to  the  health  and  physical  development  of  pupils,  and  may  employ  properly  certified 
persons  to  do  the  work.”  This  language  or  substantially  similar  language  has  been  in 
California  law  since  approximately  1907.4  In  the  nearly  100  years  of  its  existence,  this 
statutory  language  apparently  has  been  cited  in  only  two  school  district  cases  and  three 
Attorney  General  opinions.  In  all  but  one  instance,  this  language  was  cited  solely  as  a  source 
of  authority  for  a  school  district  governing  board  to  take  some  action  not  specifically 
authorized  elsewhere  in  statutes.”  Respondents  have  not  and  cannot  point  to  any  case 

  

al  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott,  supra;  see  also  Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  (2002)  98 
Cal.  App.4th  838,  853,  120  Cal.Rptr.2d  615. 

*2  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  177;  134  Cal.Rptr.  290. 

3  Id.,  64  Cal.App.3d  at  pp.  178-179. 

*4  See  discussion  of  precursor  of  this  statute  in  Beard  v.  Webb  (1917)  35  Cal.App.  332. 

**  Beard  v.  Webb,  supra  (authority  to  employ  and  pay  an  optometrist);  Kern  County  Union  School  District  v. 
McDonald  (1919)  180  C.  7  (authority  to  condemn  land  and  build  a  gymnasium);  31  Ops.Atty.Gen  27  (1958) 

  

  
  
  

22

interpreting  Section  49400  as  defining  a  particular  level  of  required  “diligent  care  to  the 
health”  of  pupils.  On  its  face,  Section  49400  neither  requires  or  recommends  any  specific 
services  a  school  district  should  or  may  provide  to  “give  diligent  care  to  the  health  and 
physical  development  of  pupils.”  More  specific  and  more  recent  statutes  provide  the  only 
framework  for  defining  the  health  care  services  a  school  district  is  required  to  provide  for 
students  and  the  additional  levels  of  health  care  a  school  district  may  choose,  solely  in  its 
discretion,  to  provide. 

15. 

Respondent  nurses  represent  that  they  are  obligated  to  comply  with 

But,  the  Nursing  Practices  Act  provides  a  code  of  ethics  for 

unspecified  Nursing  Practices  Act”°  standards  that  sometimes  conflict  with  also  unspecified 
Education  Code  standards. 
nurses.  The  Nursing  Practices  Act  does  not  address  mandated  student  health  care  services,  or 
the  responsibilities  of  school  districts  in  any  way,  and  there  are  no  provisions  in  the  Act  that 
even  remotely  address  the  responsibilities  of  school  districts  and  school  nurses. 
Consequently,  the  Nursing  Practices  Act  does  not  restrict  the  District’s  ability  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  discretionary  services  and  services  that  the  District  is  not  required  to  provide 
through  school  nurses. 

As  to  Respondents  Carbajal,  Ramon,  and  Stanley 

_ 

16. 

The  services  being  reduced  or  discontinued  by  the  District  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  (Degner  v.  Governing 
Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689). 

Ultimate  Conclusions 

17. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Gilroy 
Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for 
the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to  the  welfare 
of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

18. 

The  District’s  lay-off  action  is  necessary.  The  District’s-proposed  action  is 
consistent  with  the  law.  And,  the  District’s  contemplated  lay-off  action  is  reasonable  in  its 
execution. 

  

(authority  to  approve  and  pay  for  preventive  inoculations  for  employees  or  pupils);  62  Ops.Atty.Gen.  344  (1979) 
(authority  to  require  random  drug  tests  for  student  athletes);  and  67  Ops.Atty.Gen.  55  (1984)  (basis  for  determining 
that  leased  facilities  meet  the  Field  Act  test  of  being  used  “for  elementary  or  secondary  school  purposes”). 

26  Business  and  Professions  Code  Section  2700,  et  seq. 

23

    

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Juracia  Carbajal,  Rosemary  Ramon,  and  Mary 

Jo  Stanley,  along  with  temporary  employee  Ms  Teresa  Johnson,  is  sustained,  except  that  the 
Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondent  Martin  Bukovsky. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Juracia  Carbajal,  Rosemary  Ramon,  and  Mary 
Jo  Stanley,  along  with  temporary  employee  Ms  Teresa  Johnson,  before  May  15,  2003  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as  indicated  in  Resolution  number  03/04-22. 

DATED:  May  7,  2004 

ek safe 

  

PERRY.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

24 

   

