BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
JEFFERSON  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  Accusation  Against: 

ANN  AGUIRRE  and  various  other 

certificated  employees  of  the  District, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N  2004030162 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ruth  S.  Astle,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Daly  City,  California  on  April  14,  2004. 

Namita  S.  Brown,  Attorney  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith,  represented  Governing  Board  of 

the  Jefferson  School  District. 

Mercado  and  Martinez. 

the  remaining  respondents. 

Sheila  K.  Sexton,  Attorney  at  Law,  Beeson,  Tayer  &  Bodine,  represented  respondents 

Stewart  Weinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  Weinberg,  Roger  &  Rosenfeld,  represented  all 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  14,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dr.  Barbara  Wilson  made  this  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Jefferson  School  District  and  not  otherwise. 

2. 

Each  of  the  named  respondents  was  at  all  times  mentioned  herein,  and  now  is, 

a  certificated  employee  of  the  Jefferson  School  District. 

3. 

On  February  25,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Jefferson  School  District 

adopted  Resolution  No.  04  02  25  as  set  forth  below,  directing  the  Superintendent  or  her 
designee  to  give  notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2004-2005  school  year.

The  programs  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  are  as  follows: 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4, 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 

|  Elementary  Assistant  Principal 

Reduction  in  Kindergarten 
Reduction  in  First  Grade 
Reduction  in  Second  Grade 
Reduction  in  Third  Grade 
Reduction  in  Fourth  Grade 
Reduction  in  Fifth  Grade 
Reduction  in  Sixth  Grade 
Elementary  Glee  Teacher 
Elementary  Art  Teacher 

15  FTE 
15  FTE 
15  FTE 
15  FTE 
2  FTE 
2  FTE 
2  FTE 
1  FTE 
FTE 
1  FTE 
0.35  FTE 
2  FTE 
2  FTE 
3  FTE 
BTSA  Provider 
0.60  FTE 
Reading  Coordinator 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
Director  of  Special  Education 
Assistant  Superintendent-Human  Resources  1  FTE 
1  FTE 
Director  of  Curriculum  and  Instruction 
1  FTE 
2  FTE 

Preschool  Coordinator 

Librarians 

|  Math  Noyce  Administrator 
|  Elementary  Principal 

| Newcomer  Program  Reduction 

—_  Intermediate  Music  Program 

_ 

For  a  total  of  83.95  FTE 

@ 

4, 

On  March  12,  2004,  respondents  and  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Jefferson  School 

District  were  given  written  notice  by  certified  mail  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  Notice  be 
given  respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  setting  the  reasons  therefor.  The  parties 
stipulated  that  Kristen  Ugrin  was  not  properly  noticed  and  the  layoff  notice  was  rescinded  by  the 
district.  The  remaining  issues  concerning  the  March  15"  Notice  will  be  discussed  below. 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  respondents,  in  writing,  duly  required 

a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for 

not  reemploying  respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Governing 
Board,  it  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  on 
account  of  the  above  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services.  As  a  consequence,  the  Board  has 
determined  that  the  services  of  a  corresponding  number  or  less’  of  the  certificated  employees  of 
the  District  shall  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  2003-2004  school  year. 

  

"There  is  a  possibility  that  there  will  be  five  more  certificated  employees  leaving  District  employment.  The  District 
has  indicated  that  if  this  occurs  a  corresponding  number  of  layoff  notices  will  be  rescinded. 

  

  

@

  

7. 

The  Governing  Board  has  further  determined  that,  as  between  employees  who 

first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date,  the  order  of  termination  listed  on  the  corrected 
seniority  list”  has  been  based  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students 
thereof. 

8. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being 

retained  to  render  a  service,  which  the  respondents,  or  any  of  them,  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

9. 

The  cause  for  not  reemploying  respondents  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 

schools  in  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

10. 

11. 

It  was  stipulated  by  the  parties  that  Jeanne  Conroy  retains  a  .05  FTE 

It  was  stipulated  by  the  parties  that  the  notices  issued  to  Mercado,  Mattos 

(transferred  to  middle  school),  Dzwonek  (special  education  ),  Cohan  (transferred  to  middle 
school)  and  Wilson  (changed  seniority  date)  are  rescinded. 

12. 

Friedberg  did  not  get  her  March  12"  Notice  until  March  19,  2004.  It  was 

established  by  the  District  that  the  Notice  was  mailed  by  certified  mail  on  March  12,  2004. 
Therefore,  the  District  met  the  Notice  requirement  under  Education  Code  section  44949. 

13. 

Several  respondents’  did  not  receive  an  accusation  package.  However,  they  were 

represented  by  counsel  and  had  a  full  and  fair  opportunity  to  present  any  issues  of  relevance  to 
their  layoff.  This  constitutes  a  non-substantial  procedural  error. 

14.‘ 

The  greatest  number  of  reductions  or  eliminations  in  particular  kinds  of  service  is 

a  result  of  increasing  class  size  in  grades  K  through  6.  The  respondents  claim  that  this  violates 
the  collective  bargaining  agreement.’  That  is  irrelevant  to  these  proceedings. 

15. 

Ifthe  Math  Noyce  program  that  is  funded  by  a  special  grant  is  retained,  the  Math 

Noyce  administrator  (Borda)  will  also  be  retained. 

16.  |  The  respondents  expressed  concern  that  music  might  be  taught  as  part  of  the 

classroom  program  or  that  the  music  program  might  be  contracted-out.  The  district  can  deliver 
services  to  their  students  in  a  different  manner  should  they  decide  to  do  so  as  long  as  no 
permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is  retained  or  hired  to  render 
a  service  which  any  of  the  respondents  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

  

*  The  seniority  list  was  corrected  on  the  record  and  was  entered  as  Exhibit  #  4.  Mizzi,  Matelli,  Draper,  Benson, 
Spusta,  Hirshhorn,  Dressler,  Koerinch,  Bower,  Mercado,  Iwanga,  Nicora,  Sancchez  Forbes,and  M.  Pon  had 
corrected  dates. 
3  Price,  Domine  and  Mogannam 
*  The  agreement  with  the  union  provides  that  the  district  will  provide  the  best  instructional  program  possible  within 
the  financial  limitations  of  the  district.  This  issue  will  have  to  be  determined  in  a  different  forum.

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Cause  for  the  termination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  service  listed  in  Finding  3  and  the 

corresponding  positions  exists  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955.  It  is  determined  that  the  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their 
pupils. 

, 

ORDER 

Except  as  set  forth  above,  and  in  accordance  with  the  seniority  list,  Notice  may  be 
given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

DATED: Cyt?  ;  Loot 

  

  

RUTH  S.  ASTLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

