BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
WASHINGTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No,  N2004030663 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

Thelma  Olson,  Ruth  Anne  Schroeder, 
Judith  Granada-Dewey,  Cheryl  Cain, 
Barley  Parrish,  Scott  Seffens,  Alex  Franco, 
Suzanna  Tapia,  Willow  Daykin,  Deanna 
Novoa,  Patrick  Cohen,  Shannon  Woods, 
Shelley  Alton,  Kendra  Moore,  Gretchen 
Dreeszen,  Ardelia  Koester,  Tim  Metros, 
Amy  Goldman,  Ronald  Galvan,  Ann 
Haines,  Christy  Aguer,  Erin  Cuarenta,  Erik 
Jones,  Mathew  Ainsworth,  Jenny  Riley, 
Sarah  Tutt,  Linday  Kuester,  Donald 
Stauffer,  Jennifer  Arnold,  Heather  Home, 
David  Baggs,  Gweneth  Branin,  Jill 
Crawford,  Deanea  Elfers,  Diane  Folks, 
Susan  Hocker,  Alice  Penrose,  Eugene 
Peters,  Grace  Robinson! 

    

Respondents 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Karl  S.  Engeman,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  West  Sacramento,  California,  on  April  26  and 
27,  2004. 

Pamela  A.  Demsey,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Washington  Unified  School 

District. 

Margaret  A.  Geddes,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  respondents. 

  

'  There  were  other  respondents  upon  whom  accusations  were  served  and  who  filed  a  notice  of  defense,  The  accusa- 
tions  against  them  were  dismissed  at  the  administrative  hearing.

    

Evidence  was  received  and  the  record  was  left  open  for  the  submission  of 
simultaneous  briefs.  District’s  brief  was  marked  exhibit  8  and  made  a  part  of  the  record. 
Respondents’  brief  was  marked  exhibit  I  and  made  a  part  of  the  record.  The  matter  was 
submitted  on  May  4,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

lL. 

Patrick  Campbell  made  the  accusations  in  his  official  capacity  as  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Washington  Unified  School  District  (District). 

2. 

On  March  4,  2004,  ,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  034-22  directing  the 

Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative  to  give  notices  to  certificated  employees  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

3. 

Prior  to  March  15,  2004,  respondents  were  served  with  written  notice  of  the 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Each  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  him/her  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  Board  has  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  services  of  the 

District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  school  year: 

4. 

5. 

FTE 

9 

FTE 

Elementary  (9) 

-  Classroom  Teaching 

Middle  School  (7.5) 

-  At-Risk 
-  English 
-  English  Second  Language  (ESL)  . 
-  Math 
-  Physical  Education 
-  Science 
-  Social  Studies 
-  Counseling 

High  School  (16.5) 

FTE

  
  
  

  

@ 

@ 

-  English 
-  English  Second  Language  (ESL) 
-  Home  Economics 
-  Math 
-  Physical  Education 
-  Science 
-  Social  Studies 
-  Spanish 
-  Auto/Metal  shop 
-  Counseling  Services 

Yolo  (5) 

-  Independent  Study 
-  High  School 
-  Home  Hospital 
-  Opportunity 
-  Counseling  Services 
-  Psychologist 

Administration  (5) 

-  Vice  Principal 
-  Coordinator,  Student  Services 
-  Dean  of  Discipline,  Elementary 
-  Dean  of  Discipline,  Secondary 
-  Program  Specialist,  Secondary 

 
e
e
R

 
e
e
r
P

 
e
e

re) 

FTE 

FTE 

 
e
R

 
e
r
e

 
i
Q

Total: 

43 

FTE 

6. 

On  January  26,  2004,  the  District  distributed  to  all  probationary  and  permanent 
certificated  employees  a  document  describing  their  listed  credentials,  dates  of  hire  and  status. 
Based  upon  information  received  back  from  employees,  the  initial  seniority  list  was  updated 
and  corrected. 

RESPONDENT  BARLEY  PARRISH 

© 

7. 

Respondent  Barley  Parrish  is  a  counselor  at  Yolo  High  School,  the  District’s 

continuation/opportunity/independent  study  school.  She  holds  a  Master’s  Degree  in

    

counseling  and  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential  authorizing  her  to  do  counseling  work. 
Her  first  day  of  paid  probationary  service  (seniority  date)  is  August  16,  2000.  Although  she 
holds  no  special  certificate  reflecting  special  skills  in  working  with  students  whose  primary 
language  is  not  English,  such  as  a  Cross-Cultural  Language  Acquisition  Development 
(CLAD)  or  a  Bilingual  Cross-Cultural  Language  Acquisition  Development  (BCLAD), 
Parrish  is  fluent  in  both  the  reading  and  writing  of  Spanish.  There  are  a  high  percentage  of 
students  at  Yolo  High  School  whose  first  language  is  Spanish.  Parrish  acts  as  an  interpreter 
at  Student  Success  Team  meetings  involving  at  risk  students.  She  also  acts  as  an  interpreter 
when  parents  are  called  to  tell  them  that  their  child  is  being  sent  home  or  when  graduation 
requirements  must  be  explained  to  them.  She  also  interprets  at  Individual  Education 
Program  meetings  for  special  education  students  and  their  parents  or  guardians. 

8. 

In  or  about  June  of  2003,  District  produced  a  flyer  advertising  for  a 

“Elementary  School  Counselor-Bilingual,  Spanish  Westfield  Elementary  School.”  The  flyer 
was  “posted”  in  accordance  with  standard  procedures  although  the  precise  locations  of  the 
posting  were  not  established.  The  listed  qualifications  included  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services 
Credential  authorizing  service  as  a  counselor  or  participation  in  such  a  program  with  the 
expectation  of  the  issuance  of  a  credential  within  two  years.  The  qualifications  also 
included,  “Knowledge  and  experience  with  ‘at  risk’  youth.”  No  CLAD  or  BCLAD 
certificate  was  required.  The  District  hired  respondent  Ronald  Galvan  whose  seniority  date 
is  May  23,  2003.  Mr.  Galvan  holds  a  Master’s  Degree  in  counseling  and  a  Ryan  Pupil 
Personnel  Services  credential.  He  is  bilingual  including  Spanish.  District  wishes  to  “skip” 
Galvan  on  the  asserted  ground  that  he  possesses  unique  skills  which  other  more  senior 
teachers  do  not  possess  i.e.  fluency  in  Spanish  and  experience  teaching  at  risk  students. 
While  administrative  personnel  at  Yolo  High  School  no  doubt  knew  that  Parrish  speaks  and 
reads  Spanish,  it  was  apparent  that  those  involved  in  making  decisions  to  reassign  senior 
teachers  affected  by  the  service  reductions  were  not  aware  of  her  fluency  in  Spanish.  Parrish 
did  not  know  about  the  posting  for  the  bilingual  counseling  position  at  the  time  that  Galvan 
was  hired.  Parrish  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to  “bump”  into  the  position  held  by 
junior  counselor  Galvan. 

RESPONDENT  LINDSAY  KUESTER 

9. 

Respondent  Lindsay  Kuester  began  her  employment  with  the  District  at 

District’s  Golden  State  High  School  in  the  fall  of  2002  as  a  long  term  substitute.  She  taught 
for  more  than  75%  of  the  2002-03  school  year  under  an  emergency  credential.  She  obtained 
her  Multi-subject  Self  Contained  credential  on  July  17,  2003.  Her  first  date  of  paid 
probationary  service  as  a  credentialed  probationary  teacher  was  August  5,  2003,  her 
designated  seniority  date.  She  teaches  social  sciences  in  grades  7  and  8.  Kuester  contends 
that  her  seniority  date  should  be  October  8,  2002,  the  day  on  which  she  began  her 
employment  for  the  District  using  an  emergency  credential. 

© 

  
 

  

RESPONDENT  CHERYL  CAIN 

10. 

Respondent  Cheryl  Cain  is  a  counselor  at  River  City  High  School.  Her 

seniority  date  is  August  10,  2000.  She  holds  a  Master’s  Degree  in  counseling  and  a  Pupil 
Personnel  Services  credential  authorizing  her  to  act  as  a  counselor.  Chris  Tyler  was 
employed  by  the  District  in  1972  and  her  seniority  date  is  August  30,  1972.  She  holds  a 
Standard  Secondary:  Physical  Education  and  Sociology  credential  and  a  Standard  Pupil 
Services:  School  Counseling  credential.  She  earned  the  latter  credential  on  a  date  not 
specifically  established  by  the  evidence  but  sometime  after  respondent  Cain  obtained  her 
Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential.  Respondent  Cain  contends  that,  at  least  for  layoff 
purposes,  Tyler,  who  was  not  noticed,  should  be  given  a  seniority  date  which  coincides  with 
the  beginning  of  her  counseling  assignment.  If  such  a  date  was  given  Tyler,  respondent  Cain 
would  be  senior  to  her  and  able  to  bump  into  her  position  by  virtue  of  her  credential  and 
competence.” 

— 

RESPONDENT RUTH ANNE  SCHROEDER 

11.  |  Respondent  Ruth  Anne  Schroeder’s  seniority  date  is  August  27,  1992.  She 
holds  a  Single  Subject:  Home  Economics  credential  with  a  Supplementary  Credential  in 
Introductory  Business,  and  a  CLAD.  She  teaches  .8  FTE  high  school  home  economics  and 
.2  FTE  ROP  in  conjunction  with  the  Sacramento  County  of  Education.  Nancy  Bruce,  who 
was  not  noticed,  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  25,  1998.  Bruce  holds  a  Master’s  Degree 
and  a  Standard  Secondary:  Home  Economics  and  Political  Science  credential.  She  teaches. 
at  the  Yolo  High  School,  including  at  least  one  class  in  home  economics.  Schroeder  is 
credentialed  and  competent  to  “bump”  into  Bruce’s  assignment  and  she  expressed  her 
consent  to  teach  in  an  alternative  high  school  during  her  testimony  at  the  administrative 
hearing.  District  had  not  previously  inquired  if  she  would  consent  to  do  so. 

_  Respondents  Amy  Goldman,  Susan  Hocker  and  Alice  Penrose 

12. 

Respondent  Patrick  Cohen  was  hired  by  the  District  as  a  teacher.  His  seniority 

date  is  August  27,  2001.  Cohen  holds  a  Single  Subject:  English  credential  and  a  Master’s 
Degree.  After  teaching  one  year,  he  became  an  administrator  and  this  school  year  he  is 
responsible  for  coordination  of  student  services.  District  intends  to  reassign  Cohen  to  the 
classroom  in  school  year  2004-05  teaching  high  school  English.  Respondent  Amy 
Goldman’s  seniority  date  is  November  18,  2002.  She  teaches  high  school  English  under  a 
Single  Subject:  English  credential.  Respondent  Susan  Hocker’s  seniority  date  is  August  5, 
2003.  She  teaches  high  school  English  under  a  Single  Subject:  English  credential. 

_ 

  

©  2  Respondent  Cain’s  contention  becomes  academic  with  the  conclusion  that  Galvan  may  not  be  skipped  and  the 

resulting  rescission  of  her  notice.  See  footnote  4.

  

Respondent  Alice  Penrose’s  seniority  date  is  August  11,  2003.  She  teaches  high  school 
English  under  a  Single  Subject:  English  credential  as  well. 

@ 

RESPONDENTS  GWYNETH  BRANIN AND  DAVID  BAGGS 

13. 

|  Respondent  Gwyneth  Branin  teaches a  third  grade  bilingual  class.  Her 

seniority  date  is  August  11,  2003.  She  holds  a  Multi-Subject  credential  and  a  Single  Subject: 
English  credential.  She  also  has  a  BCLAD:  Spanish  certificate.  Respondent  David  Baggs’ 
seniority  date  is  August  8,  2003.  He  teaches  the  same  kind  of  class  utilizing  a  Multiple 
Subject/Supplementary:  Spanish  credential  and  a  BCLAD:  Spanish  credential.  The  Board’s 
resolution  for  elementary  school  PKS  reductions  simply  identifies  9  FTE  positions  without 
reference  to  specific  elementary  classes.  Neither  party  presented  evidence  relating  to  the 
ability  of  the  District  to  provide  bilingual  elementary  classes  if  the  layoffs  contemplated  are 
implemented. 

SENIORITY  LIST  ISSUES 

14. 

At  least  five  probationary  and/or  permanent  District  employees  were  omitted 

from  the  seniority  list  initially  compiled  by  the  District  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the 
preliminary  notices  to  respondents.  With  additional  information,  the  seniority  list  has  been 
corrected  and  augmented.  Where  teachers  were  omitted  who  were  junior  to  those  who  were 
initially  targeted  for  notice,  such  notices  were  rescinded.  Respondents  established  no 
prejudice  which  resulted  from  the  District’s  correction  of  the  initial  incorrect  and  incomplete 
seniority  list. 

@ 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

All  notice  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code 

sections  44944  and  44955  were  met. 

No  cause  for  issuance  of  a  notice  to  respondents  Barley  Parrish  (.50  FTE)’ 

Ruth  Anne  Schroeder,  or  Cheryl  Cain  was  established  by  reason  of  section  44955(b) 
pursuant  to  Factual  Findings  8,  9  and  12. 

3, 

Respondent  Cheryl  Cain  failed  to  establish  that  she  is  senior  to  Chris  Tyler, 

another  counselor  in  the  District.  Section  44845  reads: 

  

>  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  indicated. 
*  The  net  effect  of  the  conclusion  that  the  District  may  not  skip  Galvan  who  holds  a  1.0  FTE  position  in  counseling 
is  the  rescission  of  the  .50  FTE  notice  to  respondent  Cheryl  Cain  and  the  reduction  of  the  1.00  FTE  notice  to  respon- 
dent  Barley  Parrish  to  .50  FTE,  thereby  making  up  the  1.50  FTE  total  counseling  PKS  reductions.

  

© 

  

  

Every  probationary  or  permanent  employee  employed  after  June  30, 
1947,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed  on  the  date  upon  which 
he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position. 

Section  44845  does  not  refer  to  the  credentials  held  by  a  teacher  or  the  kind  of 
teaching  or  counseling  services  provided  and  there  is  obviously  nothing  in  the  statute  which 
provides  for  a  new  or  different  seniority  date  upon  the  acquisition  of  additional  credentials  or 
a  change  in  assignment  from  teaching  to  counseling.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  only 
requires  that  no  senior  teacher  be  noticed  when  “any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.”  Respondent  Cain  simply  asserts  that  Tyler  should  have  been  given  a  new  seniority 
date  when  she  began  counseling.  No  legal  support  is  cited  for  this  proposition  and  it  runs 
counter  to  established  case  law.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d 
627,  640;  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  656. 

4, 

Respondent  Lindsay  Kuester’s  seniority  date  of  August  5,  2003,  is  correct. 

Section  44918(a)  reads: 

(a)  Any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee,  who  serves 
during  one  school  year  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular 
schools  of  the  district  were  maintained  in  that  school  year  and  has  performed 
the  duties  normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district, 
shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete  school  year  as  a  probationary 
employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  for  the  following  school 
year. 

Section  44911  reads,  in  pertinent  part: 

Service  by  a  person  under  a  provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in 
computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility 
to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a  school  district. 

_  Read  together,  sections  44911  and  44918(a)  provide  that  only  service  by  a  teacher 
holding  an  actual  credential  (as  opposed  to  an  emergency  or  “provisional”  credential)  in  a 
temporary  or  substitute  position  qualifies  as  probationary  service  when  that  teacher  is  hired 
the  next  year  as  a  probationary  employee.  Therefore,  respondent  Kuester  was  not  entitled  to 
retroactive  credit  for  the  year  in  which  she  served  as  a  long  term  substitute  under  an 
emergency  credential.” 

  

*  While  respondents  referred  to  California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Governing  Bd.  of  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  Dist. 
(2002)  98  Cal.  App.4®  369  during  the  hearing,  it  was  not  cited  in  respondents’  post  hearing  brief  in  support  of  an 
earlier  seniority  date  for  respondent  Kuester.  District  did  cite  and  discuss  the  case  along  with  Summerfield  v.  Win- 
Neither  party  cited  Fine  v.Los  Angeles  Unified  School  Dist. 
dsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95  Cal.  App.4"  1026. 
(2004)  116  Cal. App.4®  1070.  None  of  these  cases  dealt  with  the  proper  seniority  date  for  a  teacher  employed  with 
an  emergency  credential,  in  a  layoff  context.  Golden  Valley,  which  accorded  an  emergency  credentialed  teacher  the 
due  process  rights  of  a  probationary  employee  in  a  midyear  dismissal,  should  be  limited  to  that  context.  So  limited,

5. 

Respondents  Amy  Goldman,  Susan  Hocker,  and  Alice  Penrose  failed  to 

establish  that  they  are  senior  to  Patrick  Cohen  who  is  being  reassigned  from  his 
administrative  position  to  teach  high  school  English  in  2004-05.  Their  contention  rests  upon 
the  assertion  that  Mr.  Cohen’s  seniority  date  of  August  27,  2001,  is  incorrect  because  he 
should  not  be  credited  with  the  time  that  he  served  as  an  administrator.  Respondents 
Goldman,  Hocker  and  Penrose  cite  section  44956.6  which  reads: 

For  a  certificated  employee  initially  employed  in  an  administrative  position  on 
or  after  July  1,  1983,  who  transfers  to  a  teaching  position,  the  period  of 
employment  in  the  administrative  position  shall  not  be  included  in  determining 
seniority  for  purposes  of  Sections  44955  and  44956,  except  for  school  site 
administrators  who  shall  earn  up  to  a  maximum  of  three  years  seniority  while 
serving  as  site  administrators. 

As  is  apparent,  this  section  does  not  apply  to  Cohen  who  was  initially  employed  as  a 
teacher,  not  in  an  administrative  position.  Respondents  cite  no  authority  for  the  proposition 
that  a  person  initially  hired  as  a  teacher  who  later  becomes  an  administrator  is  not  entitled  to 
seniority  credit  for  service  as  an  administrator. 

6. 

District’s  resolution  identifying  9  FTE  reductions  in  elementary  “Classroom 

Teaching”  was  sufficiently  specific  to  authorize  the  issuance  of.a  notice  to  respondents 
Gwyneth  Branin  and  David  Baggs.  The  reduction  of  elementary  classroom  teachers  has  been 
found  to  be  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of Trustees  of the 
Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32;  Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  of 
Ferndale  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4™  838.  These  decisions  consistently 
recognize  that,  at  the  elernentary  school  level,  classroom  teaching  is  a  particular  kind  of 
service.  Unlike  middle  school  and  high  school,  where  a  teacher  instructs  in  a  particular 
subject  or  subjects,  elementary  school  classes  are  multi-subject.  Respondents  Branin  and 
Baggs  have  also  failed  to  establish  that  their  layoff  will  result  in  the  District’s  inability  to 
provide  state  mandated  bilingual  classes  to  eligible  students. 

7. 

No  respondent  has  established  any  prejudice  by  reason  of  the  District’s 

corrections  of  and  additions  to  the  seniority  list,  even  after  the  preliminary  notices  were  sent 
respondents.  District  acknowledged  that  employees  who  are  junior  to  teachers  served  with  a 
preliminary  notice  were  omitted  from  the  first  seniority  list.  When  they  became  aware  of  the 
oversight,  those  affected  senior  employees’  notices  were  rescinded. 

© 

8. 

Although  not  strictly  required  (Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal. 

  

App.3d  977,  at  980-983;  San  Jose  at  p.  635),  the  Superintendent  (or  his  designee)  did  take 

the  case  does  not  conflict  with  the  holdings  of  Summerfield  and  Fine  that  emergency  credentialed  teachers  do  not 
attain  probationary  status  until  the  District  learns  that  the  teacher  has  earned  his  or  her  credential.

  

  
  

@ 

into  account  resignations  of  which  they  were  aware  when  PKS  reductions  were  proposed  to  . 
the  Board,  as  well  as  projected  additional  resignations.  Projected  student  enrollments  were 
included  as  well.  Respondents  established  no  violation  of  section  44949  or  44955  in  the 
manner  by  which  the  Board  resolved  to  reduce  PKS. 

9. 

Except  as  previously  indicated,  no  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondents,  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10.  |  Mandated  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year  are  not  being  reduced  beyond 

the  level  required  by  law. 

11. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

12. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  providing  notices  to 

respondents,  except  respondents  Cheryl  Cain,  Ruth  Anne  Schroeder,  Barley  Parrish  (.50 
FTE),  Thelma  Olson,  Scott  Seffens,  Suzanna  Tapia,  and  Ann  Haines®,  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  the  remaining  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 

required  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

paren,  Hawe  7,  200y 

  

  KARL  S.  ENGENAN | 
Administrative  La 
ge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

@ 

°  District  conceded  that  there  is  no  cause  for  issuance  of  a  notice  to  respondents  Thelma  Olson,  Scott  Seffens,  Suz- 
anna  Tapia  and  Ann  Haines.  Respondent  Kendra  Moore  is  to  noticed  for  .40  FTE  only.

  

  

