BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE 
BERKELEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of the  Accusation  Against: 

BARBARA  BEAL,  CRISTI  BILLIU, 
STEPHEN  CHANG,  ELISABETH 
SANDBERG  and  SUSAN  WERD, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N2004030325 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  27,  2004,  in  Berkeley,  California. 

Paul  A.  Loya,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  5776  Stoneridge  Mall 

Road,  Suite  200,  Pleasanton,  California  94588  represented  the  Berkeley  Unified  School 
District. 

Stewart  Weinberg,  Esq.,  Van  Bourg,  Weinberg,  Roger  &  Rosenfeld,  180  Grand 

Avenue,  Suite  1400,  Oakland,  California  94612  represented  all  of  the  respondents  except 
Cristi  Billiu.  Respondent  Billiu  was  not  present  or  otherwise  represented  at  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  27,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Michele  Lawrence  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents  in  her 

official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  Berkeley  Unified  School 
District  (District). 

2. 

Respondents  are  all  certificated  employees  of  District. 

3. 

On  February  18,  2004,  the  Board  of  Education  of  District  adopted  a  resolution 
finding  it  was  necessary  to  terminate  certain  employees  due  to  a  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year:

Counseling 
Art  Teacher 
Vocational  Education  Teacher 
Administrator 

7.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 

Total 

10.0  F.T.E. 

The  resolution  also  authorized  the  Superintendent  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all 

employees  affected  by  the  reduction. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to 

respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  her  recommendation 
that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school 
year.  The  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

5. 

All  respondents  except  Cristi  Billiu  made  a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a 
hearing  to  determine  if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year.  Billiu  did  not  request  a  hearing. ' 

6. 

Accusations  were  timely  served  on  those  respondents  who  requested  a  hearing 

and  each  such  respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

7. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

During  the  2003-2004  school  year  District  employed  12  counselors,  three  of 
whom  were  temporary  employees.  District  proposes  to  reduce  counseling  services  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year  due  to  District  budgetary  constraints.  The  February  18,  2004,  board 
resolution  authorizes  release  of  all  counselors  who  are  temporary  employees  and  layoff  of 
7.0  F.T.E  counselors  who  are  regular  employees.”  At  hearing  Patricia  Calvert,  Director  of 
Certificated  Personnel,  testified  District  has  released  the  three  counselors  who  were 
temporary  employees  and  one  counselor  has  resigned.  In  addition,  District  has  been  able  to 
identify  some  categorical  funding  for  counselors,  therefore  only  the  three  most  junior 
permanent  or  probationary  counselors  will  be  laid  off. 

9. 

Respondent  Susan  Werd  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  (PPS)  credential  in 
counseling.  District  currently  employs  Werd  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  senior  high  school  counselor  at 
Berkeley  High  School.  District  has  assigned  Werd  a  seniority  date  of  August  14,  2000. 
Werd  is  a  permanent  employee. 

  

'  Billiu  holds  the  art  teacher  position  that  is  being  eliminated. 

>  The  resolution  provides  that  reduction  of  certificated  staff  is  to  be  “effected  by  termination  of  regular  employees, 
and  that  temporary  and  substitute  employees  also  be  released  from  employment,  and  that  the  reductions  be  in 
addition  to  attrition  due  to  resignations  and  retirements.” 

  

     

Respondent  Elisabeth  Sandburg  holds  a  PPS  credential  in  counseling.  District 
currently  employs  Sandberg  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  senior  high  school  counselor  at  Berkeley  High 
School.  District  has  assigned  Sandberg a  seniority  date  of  August  16,  2001.  Sandberg  is  a 
permanent  employee. 

Respondent  Stephen  Chang  holds  a  PPS  credential  in  counseling.  District  currently 

employs  Chang  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  senior  high  school  counselor  at  Berkeley  High  School. 
District  has  assigned  Chang  a  seniority  date  of  March  11,  2003.  Chang  is  a  probationary 
-employee.  Chang,  Werd  and  Sandberg  are  the  three  most  junior  counselors  at  District. 

10. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  authorizes  the  governing  board 
of  a  school  district  to  terminate  the  services  of  certificated  employees  at  the  end  of  the  school 
year  whenever  it  determines a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year.  Respondents  argue  that  District  is  not 
actually  reducing  at  least  one  of  three  counseling  positions  slated  for  elimination  in  2004- 
2005.  At  hearing  respondent  Werd  testified  that  approximately  a  week  earlier  she 
participated  in  an  informal  interview  of  an  individual  who  was  seeking  a  counseling  position 
for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Respondents  contend  that  since  District  is  currently 
interviewing  counselors  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  it  is  clear  District  does  not  really 
intend  to  eliminate  three  counseling  positions. 

District  denies  it  is  currently  hiring  counselors  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  and 

suggests  that  any  interviewing  of  potential  counselors  is  simply  part  of  District’s  planning 
process  in  case  categorical  funding  for  additional  counselors  is  obtained.  District 
acknowledges  that  any  counselor  laid  off  pursuant  to  this  proceeding  will  have  priority  for 
rehire  over  any  new  counselor.  District’s  actions  appear  reasonable.  Respondents  have 
failed  to  establish  that  District  does  not  currently  intend  to  eliminate  the  three  counseling 
positions  held  by  Chang,  Werd  and  Sandberg. 

11. 

Respondent  Barbara  Beal  holds  a  Designated  Special  Subject  Vocational 
Credential  in  food  service  and  a  Child  Development  Center  (CDC)  permit.  District  has 
assigned  Beal  a  seniority  date  of  September  1,  1982.  District  employs  Beal  as  a  1.0  F.T-E. 
teacher  at  Berkeley  High  School.  She  teaches  food  preparation  skills  to  students  enrolled  in 
the  Good  Food  Café  training  program.  Beal  primarily  serves  special  needs  students.  District 
plans  to  eliminate  the  Good  Food  Café  training  program. 

Beal  has  also  served  as  substitute  teacher  at  District’s  child  daycare  center  pursuant  to 

her  CDC  permit.  Beal  is  more  senior  than  several  teachers  at  the  child  daycare  center. 
However,  District  does  not  allow  bumping  into  child  daycare  programs  by  Kindergarten 
through  12th  grade  teachers.  In  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board 
(1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  849,  the  court  held  that  certificated  employees  cannot  bump  a 
children’s  center  employee  because  the  statutory  grounds  permitting  termination  of  the  two 
are  different.  District  therefore  acted  properly  in  prohibiting  Beal  from  bumping  into  a 

childcare  teaching  position.  

12. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the 

ensuing  school  year. 

13. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

14. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3  is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Barbara  Beal,  Cristi  Billiu,  Stephen  Chang, 
Elisabeth  Sandberg  and  Susan  Werd  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005 
school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

6/3/04 

t   

Pl 

    
SMPKIN 
Adminis 
aw  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

    

   

  

  

  

     

