BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PLAINSBURG  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
Certificated  Employee: 

MARITA  DIETZ, 

OAH  No.  N2004030680 

  

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  J.  Smith,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  at  the  Merced  County  Office  of  Education,  Merced, 
California  on  April  29,  2004. 

Todd  A.  Goluba,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Plainsburg  Union  Elementary 

School  District. 

appeared. 

Wesley  T.  Green,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Marita  Dietz,  who 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent  Marita  Dietz  is  and  was  at  all  times  relevant  to  this  Decision  a 
certificated  employee  of  the  Plainsburg  Union  Elementary  School  District  (hereafter  “the 
District’).  Ms.  Dietz’  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  August  20,  1997.  Ms. 
Dietz  currently  serves  the  District  as  the  teacher  of  the  combined  1“  and  2"  grade  class. 

2. 

The  District  consists  of  one  elementary  K-8  school.  The  District  has  104 

students  enrolled  in  the  current  school  year.  The  District’s  Average  Daily  Attendance 
(“ADA”)  was  98  at  its  second  interim  report  for  school  year  2003-2004.  The  District 
employs  5  certificated  personnel.  The  Superintendent  “wears  three  hats”.  He  teaches  a  1.00 
Full  Time  Equivalent  (“FTE”)  of junior  high  school  self  contained  classroom  (grades  6,  7 
and  8).  He  is  also  principal  of  the  single  District  school  and  Superintendent  of  the  District.

The  Superintendent  performs  his  administrative  duties  after  class,  on  breaks,  evenings, 
weekends,  and  during  times  school  is  not  in  session. 

3. 

The  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  in  writing  on 

March  13,  2004  that  the  Governing  Board  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  currently  being 
offered  in  the  District  for  the  upcoming  school  year  2004-2005. 

4, 

The  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  031304/4  on  March  13,  2004.  The 
Resolution  recited  that  the  Governing  Board  determined  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  District  to 
reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  upcoming  school  year 
2003-2004.  The  Resolution  authorized  the  Superintendent  to  decrease  a  corresponding 
number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
services.  The  Resolution  set  forth  the  following  particular  kind  of  service  of  the  District  that 
will  be  reduced  or  discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

Reduction  of  K-5  Elementary  Teaching  Services,  resulting  in  the  loss  of  1  Full  Time 
Equivalent  (FTE)  position. 

5. 

The  Resolution  resolved  that  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the 

2003/2004  school  year  the  employment  of  one  FTE  certificated  employee  of  the  District  as  a 
result  of  the  reduction  of  services.  The  Resolution  authorized  the  Superintendent  to  send  a 
notice  of  non-reemployment  to  any  employees  whose  services  will  be  terminated  or  affected 
by  the  Resolution. 

6. 

The  Superintendent  personally  served  Ms.  Dietz  a  notice  of  non-reemployment 

(hereafter  “preliminary  notice”)  on  March  15,  2004.  The  written  preliminary  notice  of  non- 
reemployment  advised  Ms.  Dietz  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming 
school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation;  that  the  District  had 
determined  to  eliminate  1.0  FTE  of  K-5  Elementary  teaching  services,  resulting  in  the  loss  of 
one  full  time  equivalent  teaching  position. 

7. 

Ms.  Dietz  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was 

cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

8. 

Vernon  Snodderly,  Superintendent  of  the  Plainsburg  Union  Elementary  School 
District,  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  only,  as  the  Superintendent  of 
the  District.  The  Accusation was  timely  served  on  respondent  Ms.  Dietz  on  March  29,  2003. 
Ms.  Dietz  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense  in  response  to  the  Accusation,  requesting  an 
evidentiary  hearing  on  the  propriety  of  the  District’s  proposed  action.  All  prehearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  by  the  District.  There  are  no  jurisdictional  issues 
pending  or  remaining.  The  allegations  of  the  Accusation  have  nothing  whatsoever  to  do  with 
Ms.  Dietz’s  skills  and  competence  as  a  teacher. 

     

9. 

The  District  served  17  students  in  school  year  2003-2004  in  a  combined  first 

and  second  grade  classroom  taught  by  respondent  Ms.  Dietz.  The  District  had  15 
kindergarteners  in  the  current  school  year.  The  District’s  proposed  reduction  in  particular 
kinds  of  services  targets  the  elimination  of  Ms.  Dietz’s  combined  first-second  grade 
classroom  and  the  distribution  of  the  students  expected  to  occupy  that  classroom  in  the 
upcoming  school  year  to  other  classrooms.  Presently  Ms.  Maloney  teaches  kindergarten.  In 
the  upcoming  school  year,  the  District  proposes  that  Ms.  Maloney  will  teach  a  combined  K- 
1  grade  classroom,  taking  the  fifteen  present  kindergarteners  as  first  graders,  along  with  the 
five  confirmed  enrolled  for  kindergarten  for  the  upcoming  school  year,  for  a  total  class  size 
of  20.  Mr.  Tesone  is  teaching  thirteen  3™  graders  and  ten  4"  graders  in  the  current  school 
year.  In  the  upcoming  school  year,  the  District  proposes  that  he  will  teach  a  combined  2" 
and  3™  grade  class  and  take  lower  ability  4"  graders  in  a  combined  classroom.  He  is  slated  to 
take  the  ten  first  graders  becoming  second  graders  Ms.  Dietz  would  have  taught,  plus  the  six 
3"  graders  and  four  lower  ability  4"  graders  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  Ms.  Fishman 
would  take  the  remaining  eight  higher  ability  4"  graders,  along  with  her  expected  sixteen 
total  expected  5"  and  6"  graders. 

10. 

The  District’s  certificated  employee  seniority  list  has  five  entries.  Ms.  Dietz’s 

first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  August  20,  1999.  She  has  a  multiple  subject 
credential  and  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  in  a  self  contained  classroom  from 
preschool  to  adult.  There  was  no  dispute  that  Ms.  Dietz  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
teach  the  combined  6",  7"  and  8"  grade  class  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  Ms.  Dietz  does 
not  have  an  administrative  services  credential.  She  did  not  contend  she  was  certificated  and 
competent  to  perform  any  administrative  duties. 

11. 

|  Mr.  Snodderly,  the  Superintendent,  principal  and  6",  7"  and  8"  grade 

combined  classroom  teacher,  has  the  least  seniority  of  any  certificated  employee  in  the 
District.  His  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  July  1,  2003.  Mr.  Snodderly  has  a 
multiple  subjects  credential,  an  administrative  services  credential,  and  a  single  subject 
authorization  in  social  science. 

12. 

Before  Mr.  Snodderly  was  hired,  Mr.  Tesone,  the  3 

and  4"  grade  combined 
class  teacher,  was  also  the  Superintendent  and  principal,  as  well  as  teaching a  full  1.0  FTE. 
Mr.  Tesone  has  an  administrative  services  credential,  as  well  as  a  standard  elementary 
subjects  credential  and  an  authorization  in  social  sciences.  Mr.  Tesone  is  slated  to  continue 
teaching  the  3  and  4™  grade  classes  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  He  provided  assistance, 
support  and  back  up  to  Mr.  Snodderly,  and  served  as  the  vice  principal  in  the  present  school 
year.  It  is  anticipated  he  will  serve  in  the  same  capacities  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

13. 

The  District  is  in  sound  shape  financially,  in  large  part  due  to  the  fiscal  care 
taken  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District’s  finances,  Mr.  Tesone’s  past  management  of 
the  District’s  finances  and  Mr.  Snodderly’s  effective  continuation  of  prudent  fiscal 
management.  The  District  recently  received  a  three  year  positive  certification  from  the  State 

-  of  California  Department  of  Education  following  an  audit  of  the  District’s  financial

condition.  The  District  has  significant  general  cash  reserves,  as  well  as  some  targeted 
reserves.  The  District  is  spending  more  than  its  revenue  receipts  in  the  current  school  year, 
and  is  expected  to  do  so  again  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  District  balanced  its  budget 
by  taking  approximately  $30,000  from  its  approximately  $300,000  in  cash  reserves,  and  is 
expected  to  do  the  same  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  if  the  proposed  reduction  in  services  1s 
not  made.  The  proposed  reduction,  if  enrollment  is  as  expected,  will  approximately  balance 
the  budget  without  resort  to  reserves. 

@ 

14. 

The  Superintendent’s  revenue  projections  for  the  upcoming  school  year  are 
conservative,  reflective  of  the  fiscal  prudence  with  which  the  District  has  been  managed. 
Current  enrollment  is  104  students.  Eleven  8"  graders  will  leave  via  graduation,  and  there 
are  presently  9  seventh  graders  to  replace  them.  Two  seventh  graders  and  one  5"  grader 
have  confirmed  they  will  not  reenroll  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  Ten  less  kindergarteners 
are  slated  to  enroll  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Superintendent  aggressively  advertised 
for  new  kindergarten  enrollees,  and  was  discouraged  that  only  five  have  confirmed 
enrollment  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  total  confirmed  loss  of  enrollment  for  the 
upcoming  school  year  is  13,  as  of  the  date  of  the  March  15  notice.  More  than  one-third  of 
the  District’s  current  year  enrollment  is  composed  of  interdistrict  transfer  students,  who  can 
return  to  their  home  districts  at  will.  The  Superintendent’s  projections  for  the  upcoming 
school  year  enrollment  have  accounted  for  the  loss  of  the  students  known  that  are  not 
returning,  but  a  lingering  concern  remains  that  more  such  students  will  decide  not  to  return  in 
the  fall.  Two  of  the  five  incoming  kindergarteners  are  interdistrict  transfer  students.  There 
are  no  other  interdistrict  students  who  have  confirmed  as  of  the  March  15  notice  deadline 
that  they  will  not  return  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  There  is  no  other  student  known  to  the 
Superintendent  currently  enrolled  in  another  District  who  seeks  to  enroll  in  the  District  for 
the  upcoming  school  year.  The  District  has  four  or  five  students  with  learning  disabilities 
and  there  is  an  outstanding  issue  about  the  adequacy  of  the  District’s  ability  to  meet  these 
students’  educational  needs.  The  Superintendent’s  action  to  recommend  the  reduction  is 
powerfully  influenced  by  these  significant  uncertainties. 

15. 

|  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  by  discontinuance  the  combined  1“ 

and  2™  grade  classroom  currently  taught  by  Ms.  Dietz  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Governing  Board’s  discretion.  Elimination  of  the 
combined  classroom  was  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  of  the  District. 
The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  manage  the  District  conservatively  and  not  overspend  its 
budget  and  raid  its  reserves  to  balance  its  budget  in  the  upcoming  school  year  is  prudent. 
There  was  no  evidence  the  Superintendent’s  enrollment  and  staffing  projections  were 
unreasonable  or  not  based  upon  the  best  and  most  sound  information  available.  The  District 
is  not  reducing  any  service  below  State  or  federally  mandated  minimums.  The  District  is  not 
required  to  overspend  its  budget  to  retain  a  service,  when  that  service  can  be  offered  in  a 
different  manner  in  the  upcoming  school  year  while  protecting  the  integrity  of  the  District’s 
budget. 

© 

  

 
  
  

16. 

The  District  proposes  to  retain  a  certificated  employee,  Mr.  Snodderly,  the 

Superintendent,  principal  and  the  combined  6",  7  and  8"  grade  teacher,  to  perform  a  service 
that  a  more  senior  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  Ms.  Dietz  is  both  certificated  and 
competent  to  teach.  Mr.  Snodderly  performs  a  full  1.0  FTE  of  classroom  teaching,  a  service 
Ms.  Dietz  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach.  The  District  contends  it  is  entitled  to  “skip” 
Mr.  Snodderly  and  retain  him  to  both  teach  the  class  and  perform  his  administrative  duties  in 
a  combined  position,  and  that  Ms.  Dietz  is  not  entitled  to  “bump”  Mr.  Snodderly  because  she 
lacks  the  administrative  credentials  to  perform  the  duties  of  Superintendent  and  principal. 
The  District’s  contentions  have  merit  only  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  Superintendent’s  position 
is  indivisible  due  to  the  combination  of  administrative  and  classroom  teaching  duties  in  the 
single  position.  There  was  no  legal  authority  advanced  in  support  of  the  contention  that  the 
District  can  skip  Mr.  Snodderly  and  shield  the  teaching  portion  of  Mr.  Snodderly’s  position 
from  a  more  senior  teacher’s  right  to  bump  into  it  by  combining  it  with  administrative 
responsibilities.  Ms. Diet  does  not  seek  to  bump  into  the  administrative  portion  of  Mr. 
Snodderly’s  position,  and  acknowledges  she  does  not  have  the  credentials  to  do  so. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955.  All  required  notices  were  given  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those 
sections  were  met. 

Legal  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for 

the  Plainsburg  Union  Elementary  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  1.0  FTE  K-5 
Elementary  Teaching  Services.  The  District  determined  that  the  combination  of  students  that 
would  have  been  taught  in  the  combined  1 
and  2"4  grade  combined  classroom  can  be  taught 
and  accommodated  by  dividing  them  between  the  existing  teachers  who  will  return  for  the 
upcoming  school  year.  The  District  expects  a  slight  decline  in  enrollment  and  is 
overspending  its  revenues,  requiring  dips  into  its  reserves  to  meet  its  financial  obligations.  It 
has  been  held  that  a  District  may  reduce  or  discontinue  services  and  lay  off  certificated 
personnel  when  the  reductions  are  caused  by  being  required  to  spend  its  reserves  to  balance 
its  budget.’  “Reserves  are  a  necessary  component  of  school  district  budgeting,  enabling  it  to 
pay  expenses  pending  receipt  of  tax  money,  and  the  provision  for  the  same  is  within  the 
powers  of  the  Board...  .””  A  District  is  not  required  to  spend  its  reserves  to  preserve 
certificated  positions  and  absent  an  abuse  of  discretion,  shown  by  retaining  an  unreasonably 
large  reserve  under  the  circumstances,  the  District  may  elect  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
services  rather  than  spend  down  its  reserves.’  The  evidence  does  not  support  a  conclusion 
that  the  District’s  reserves  are  unusually  large,  and  are  presently  subject  to  modest  reduction 

2. 

    

2  Td.,  note  3. 
3  Id.

  

I  California  School  Employees  Association  v.  Pasadena  Unified  School  District  (1977)  71  Cal.  App.  3d  318,  322. 

to  meet  current  budget  needs.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

© 

3. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year...a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced 

or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,...and  when  in  the 
opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of 
any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of 
the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of 
the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which 
said permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render...” 

ee 

23 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 

that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for 
which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s 
major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall 
require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 

or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

4. 

The  District  proposes  to  skip  its  less  senior  Superintendent/principal/6",  7” 

and  8"  grade  teacher  and  terminate  the  more  senior  Ms.  Dietz.  Section  44955 (b)  requires  the 
District  to  retain  the  more  senior  teacher  where  the  more  senior  teacher  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  teach  the  proposed  class.  Ms.  Dietz  is  undisputedly  competent  and  credentialed 
to  teach  the  6",  7  and  8"  grade  class.  “Once  the  school  district  has  determined  a  need  to 
effect  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  permanent  employees,  it  must  then  comply  with  the 
procedures  set  forth  in  section  44955,  which  requires  among  other  things  that  the  school 
district  must  effect  such  termination  in  order  of  seniority....  Section  44955  applies  to 
reassignments  only  after  the  school  board  has  determined  to  terminate  the  services  of  a 

@ 

  

*  Education  Code  section  44955,  in  pertinent  parts  (italics  added). 

  

  
  

 

permanent  employee  pursuant  to  section  44955  and  then  only  to  assure  that  that  employee,  if 
entitled  so  by  seniority  and  qualifications,  be  reassigned  rather  than  terminated.” 

5. 

The  legal  standard  set  forth  in  section  44955(b)  requires  that  Ms.  Dietz  be 

retained,  regardless  of  the  reduction  in  services,  unless  the  District  demonstrates  a  special 
need  or  requirement  that  permits  skipping  Mr.  Snodderly.  The  District  has  the  burden  of 
proving  those  special  circumstances,  as  required  by  section  44955(d).  The  District  failed  in 
that  burden,  and  failed  to  prove  any  specific  need  to  have  Mr.  Snodderly  teach  the  combined 
6",  7"  and  8"  grade  combined  class  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  only  evidence  offered 
on  why  the  teaching  position  occupied  by  Mr.  Snodderly  must  be  combined  with  his 
administrative  duties  was  Mr.  Snodderly’s  comment  in  his  testimony  that  he  “did  not  think” 
the  District  could  afford  a  full  time  administrator.  There  was  no  showing  that  keeping  the 
position  combined  was  essential  to  the  health  and  welfare  of  the  District  or  the  welfare  of  the 
pupils.  It  is  wise,  responsible  managerially  and  fiscally  prudent  to  operate  as  the 
Superintendent  proposes.  But  that  proposal  hits  head  first  into  the  seniority  principle,  and  no 
authority  was  presented  that  would  demonstrate  a  legal  basis  to  override  this  strong  and  oft 
reaffirmed  legal  requirement  that  the  most  senior  teacher  be  retained  if  there  is  a  service 
being  offered  in  the  upcoming  school  year  that  the  teacher  being  slated  for  layoff  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform.  There  is  no  doubt  this  is  the  case  for  the  District  in 
the  upcoming  school  year.  The  District  may  not  shield  the  1.0  FTE  classroom  teaching 
portion  of  Mr.  Snodderly’s  position  from  the  statutory  rights  of  Ms.  Dietz  to  bump  into  the 
position  by  combining  the  classroom  teaching  with  his  administrative  duties. 

6. 

Mr.  Snodderly  did  not  receive  a  notice,  so  he  is  retained  for  the  upcoming 
school  year.  Ms.  Dietz  must  be  retained.  The  District  is  entitled  to  make  the  reduction  it 
proposed  in  the  Governing  Board’s  Resolution,  but  if  it  effectuates  the  reduction,  Ms.  Dietz 
must  be  permitted  to  bump  into  Mr.  Snodderly’s  combined  6"-7"-8"  grade  classroom  . 
teaching  assignment.  Mr.  Snodderly  would  become  a part  or  full  time  administrator,  or 
could  take  on  some  additional  teaching  assignment  as  he  and  the  Governing  Board  decide. 
Or  the  District  could  operate  as  it  did  in  the  current  year.  Nothing  in  this  Decision  requires 
the  District  to  make  the  reduction  in  services  that  was  found  permissible  by  this  Decision. 
The  Decision  is  limited  to  concluding  that  there  is  a  legal  and  factual  basis  for  the  District’s 
proposed  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  specified  in  the 
Resolution,  and  that  the  District  may  not  lay  off  or  give  Ms.  Dietz  a  Final  Notice  that  her 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

ORDER 

The  Plainsburg  Union  Elementary  School  District  may  reduce  or  eliminate  1.0  FTE  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  as  specified  in  Resolution  No.  031304/4  of  the  Governing  Board 
of  the  Plainsburg  Union  Elementary  School  District.  The  District  may  not  lay  off  certificated 
employee  Marita  Dietz,  and  the  District’s  Notice  of  Recommendation  that  her  services  will 

  

>  Black  v.  Board  of Trustees  (1996)  46  Cal.  App.  4th  493,  500.

  

not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  is  set  aside  and  dismissed.  Final  notice  may 
not  be  given  to  Ms.  Dietz  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year, 
for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  the  Legal  Conclusions.  The  Accusation  against  Ms.  Deitz  is 
DISMISSED. 

Dated:  |  My  Me,  L004 

STEPHEN  J.  SWATH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

       

  

