BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LA  CANADA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004030306 

Teachers  of  the  La  Cafiada  Unified  School 
District 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ralph  B.  Dash,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  12,  2004,  at  La  Canada,  California. 

James  C.  Romo,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  La  Cafiada  Unified  School  District 

(hereinafter  “District”). 

Glenn  Rothner,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents  Karen  Rose,  Katharine 
Budde,  Kimberlee  Kimes,  Mandy  Emory,  Kathy  Kaze,  Laurie  Hopkins,  Shannon  Burke, 
Brittany  Barker,  James  Padilla,  Monique  Saenz-Willshire,  Daniel  Yoder,  Joseph  Lee,  Linda 
Matchie 

Francis  X.  Flynn,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Tonya  Johnson. 

Respondents  Jennifer  Harrison-Lee  and  Karen  Stattler  elected  to  represent 

themselves,  but  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing. 

The  record  remained  open  until  April  26,  2004  to  permit  counsel  to  file  closing  briefs. 

The  same  were  timely  filed  and  the  matter  was  deemed  submitted  on  that  date. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  the  matter  submitted,  the 

Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Finding  of  Facts. 

*  kK  KO 

1.  Sue  Leabo,  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acting  in  her  official  capacity,  caused  all 

pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served  upon  Respondents  pursuant  to  the

provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955.  At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the 
parties  stipulated,  in  writing,  that  the  facts  contained  in  Findings  2  through  6  below  are  true 
and  are  deemed  established  without  the  necessity  of  providing  further  evidence  thereon. 

2.  On  March  4,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  La  Cafiada  Unified  School  District 

adopted  a  resolution  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  certificated 
services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

1.Kindergarten  through  6"  Grade  Classroom  Teaching 

2. 

7.0  FTE 

Services 
Kindergarten  through  6"  Grade  Elementary  Teacher 
2.2  FTE 
Specialist  Services 
K-6"  Learning  Resource  Specialist  Services 
.6  FTE 
9""  Grade  English/Language  Arts  Teaching  Services  3.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
9"  Grade  Math  Teaching  Services 
1.0  FTE 
7-12"  Grade  Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
1.0  FTE 
7-12"  Grade  Science  Teaching  Services 
1.0  FTE 
12"  Grade  Spanish  Teaching  Services 
7" - 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9,  7-12"  Art  Teaching  Services 

10.  7  -  12"  Grade  Counseling  Services 
11.  7"-  12"  Grade  Physical  Education  Teaching  Services 

1.0  FTE 

12.  Itinerant  Elementary  Music  Teaching  Services 

13.  ROP  -  Culinary  Art  Teaching  Services 

.8  FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

1.0 

1.0 

i) 

3.  The  Governing  Board  further  determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  by  reason  of 
said  reductions  or  discontinuances  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  the 
close  of  the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions, 
and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  proceed  accordingly  by  notifying  the  appropriate 
employees  to  implement  the  Governing  Board’s  determination.  The  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  positions  to  be  reduced  is  21.1. 

4.  On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  and  prior  to  notification  to  employees  who  are  the 

above-  named  Respondents,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school 
year,  the  Governing  Board  was  given  the  names  of  those  employees  by  the  Superintendent. 

5.  On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  and  after  notification  to  the  Governing  Board,  the 
Superintendent  caused  to  be  served  on  said  named  Respondents  a  written  notice  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6.  Those  employees  who  returned  a  Request  for  Hearing  form  (all  Respondents 
named  herein)  were  then  served  with  a  Notice  of  Accusation,  Accusation,  appropriate  copies

of  Government  and  Education  Code  Sections,  and  a  Notice  of  Defense  with  instructions  to 
return  that  form. 

7.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

8.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

9.  The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements, 
deaths  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices 
to  be  delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2003.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v. 
Allen,  144  Cal.App.  3d  627  at  636  (1983).! 

10.  Respondents  contend  that  the  Notice  referred  to  in  Finding  5  was  deficient  and, 

under  the  holding  in  Karbach  v.  Board  of Education,  (1974)  39  Cal.  App.  3d  355,  the 
Accusation  should  be  dismissed.  The  deficiency  complained  of  is  a  follows:  The  Notices, 
dated  March  10,  2004,  contained  the  following  language: 

You  are  hereby  notified  that  it  has  been  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board 
of  the  La  Cafiada  Unified  School  District  that  you  be  given  notice  your 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year. 

This  notice  provided  to  you  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Sections  44949  and 
44955  of  the  Education  Code.  The  reason  for  this  recommendation  is  that  the 
Governing  Board  has  decided  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services 
of  this  District,  as  described  in  the  resolution  accompanying  this  notice, 
beginning  not  later  than  the  commencement  of  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

As  a  result  of  this  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service,  the  Governing 
Board  has  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  reduce  the  certificated  staff 
by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions.  It  has  been 
determined  that  you  are  one  of  those  employees  whose  services  will  therefore 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year.  (emphasis  added) 

The  parties  stipulated  that  the  resolution  referred  to  in  the  notice,  which  contains  the 

information  set  forth  in  Findings  2  and  3  above,  was  not  included  with  the  notices  sent  to  any 
Respondent.  The  reason  for  this  failure  to  include  a  copy  of  the  resolution  with  the  notice 

  

'  All  layoffs  were  for  particular  kinds  of  service  and  not  “average  daily  attendance”  which  might  require  positively 
assured  attrition  to  be  considered  through  May  15.

was  not  established  by  the  evidence.  The  parties  presumed  it  was  a  clerical  error.  There  was 
no  evidence  to  indicate  the  omission  of  the  resolution  was  intentional. 

11.  Respondents  contend  the  notice  was  defective,  because  although  it  did  notify 

Respondents  that  particular  kinds  of  services  were  being  reduced,  by  failure  to  include  the 
resolution,  the  notice  did  not  specify  which  services  were  being  reduced  and  how  many 
positions  would  be  lost.  Citing  Karbach,  supra,  Respondents  argue  they  were  not  given 
sufficient  notice  so  as  to  be  able  to  “reasonably  assess  the  probability  [they]  will  not  be 
reemployed”.  Karbach  at  page  362.  Respondents’  reliance  on  Karbach,  particularly  under 
the  facts  of  this  case,  is  misplaced.  In  Karbach,  the  school  board  had  given  notice  that 
reduction  in  force  was  required  because  of  a  drop  in  average  daily  attendance,  one  of  the  two 
statutory  grounds  for  dismissal  in  these  types  of  proceedings.  See  Education  Code  Section 
44955(b).  The  court  found  prejudice  to  the  teachers  in  that  case  when  at  trial,  the  district 
attempted  to  offer  evidence  that  reduction  in  force  was  necessary  because  of  a  reduction  in 
particular  kinds  of  service,  the  other  statutory  ground  for  dismissal,  a  ground  not  contained  in 
the  notice. 

12. 

In  this  case,  the  Notice  actually  stated  that  the  reduction  in  force  was  due  to  a 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  service,  and  that  is  sufficient.”  See  Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Assn  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.  App.  3d  796.  While  the  Notice  did  not  specify  which 
services  were  to  be  reduced,  the  logical  inference  is  that  it  was,  or  might  be,  the  type  of 
service  performed  by  the  teacher  who  received  the  Notice.  Before  the  Notices  were  sent  out, 
the  Superintendent  met  with  each  of  the  affected  teachers  during  the  first  week  of  March, 
2004,  and  told  him  or  her  specifically  that  he  or  she  would  be  receiving  a  layoff  notice 
because  of  a  reduction  of  services  in  each  one’s  particular  field.  Each  teacher  thus  had 
actual  notice  of  the  pending  layoff,  and  the  reasons  therefor,  before  March  15,  2004. 
Furthermore,  there  was  no  evidence  that  any  teacher  suffered  prejudice  as  a  result  of  the 
resolution  not  being  included  in  the  notice.  The  District  did  not  attempt  to  introduce 
evidence  that  was  not  related  to  the  statutory  ground  specified  in  its  Notice. 

13.  Respondents  next  seek  dismissal  of  the  Accusation  on  the  ground  that  the  District 
improperly  “skipped”  (that  is,  retained  a  teacher  with  less  seniority)  certain  teachers  because 
he  or  she  had  a  CLAD?  certification.  This  certificate,  with  certain  exceptions,  is  needed 
before  a  teacher  can  teach  students  designated  as  “english  language  learners”  (ELL). 
Students  are  determined  to  be  ELL  if  english  is  not  the  primary  language  spoken  in  the  home 
and  testing  shows  the  student’s  language  abilities  are  such  as  to  require  teachers  with  special 
training  to  properly  teach  them.  The  students  are  tested  each  year,  and  as  their  english  skills 
get  better,  they  lose  the  ELL  designation.  Approximately  2.3  %  of  the  District’s  students 
require  ELL  services,  a  very  low  rate  compared  with  most  other  districts  in  this  state.  This 
percentage  has  remained  “fairly  consistent”  over  the  years.  The  District  has  had  no  problem 

  

*  The  teachers  were  aware,  as  early  as  December,  2003,  that  those  who  had  CLAD  certification,  discussed  infra, 
would  be  “skipped”.  This  prompted  many  of  the  Respondents  to  immediately  begin  the  process  of  obtaining  this 
certification. 
3  Cross-cultural  Language  and  Academic Development.

  

in  accommodating  student  needs.  Over  60  per  cent  of  the  District’s  teachers  are  now 
certified  to  teach  ELL  students.’  Currently,  there  is  only  one  ELL  kindergartener  in  the 
District,  and  at  least  three  CLAD  certified  teachers  available  for  this  student.’  All  new  hires 
for  the  past  two  years  have  been  required  to  obtain  CLAD  certification  as  a  condition  of 
becoming  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District.  In  addition,  most  Respondents  are  currently 
in  CLAD  training  and  could  teach  ELL  students  with  the  District’s  permission  (see  footnote 
4). 

14.  Education  Code  Section  44955(d)(1)  provides  in  pertinent  part  as  follows: 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 
personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study... 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for 

Respondents  argue  that  the  decision  by  ALJ  Engeman  in  his  2003  Travis  Unified  School 
District  decision  gave  a  correct  analysis  of  the  meaning  of  this  statute  (statute  requires  a  clear 
showing  by  a  District  of  a  specific  need  for  CLAD  certificated  teachers  before  they  are 
“skipped”),  and  that  his  analysis  should  be  followed  here.®  Complainant  argues  that  virtually 
all  other  ALJs  who  issued  decisions  on  this  issue  in  2003  allowed  skipping  of  CLAD 
certificated  teachers.  Complainant  is  correct.  However,  review  of  the  decisions  referenced 
by  Complainant  in  the  closing  letter  brief  shows  that  in  their  Proposed  Decisions,  the  ALJs, 
while  not  doing  a  lengthy  statutory  analysis,’  made  very  specific  findings  of  the  needs  of 
each  district  to  skip  the  specially  certificated  teachers.  A  few  examples,  from  the  decisions 
actually  cited  by  Complainant,  are  sufficiently  demonstrative  of  this  point: 

A.  From  Judge  Anderson’s  Proposed  Decision  in  the  Mt.  Diablo  School  District 

matter: 

Sufficient  qualified  teachers  to  teach  pupils  who  are  not  proficient  in  English 
have  been  a  continuing  problem  for  the  District.  For  example,  94%  of  the 
kindergartens  through  5th  grades  currently  have  ELL.  The  District  is  out  of 

  

*  There  are  certifications  other  than  CLAD  which  permit  teachers  to  teach  ELL.  In  addition,  a  teacher  in  training  for 
CLAD  can  also  teach  ELL,  provided  certain  very  easy  ministerial  steps  are  taken  by  the  District.  All  that  need  be 
done  is  for  the  District  to  add  the  names  of  these  teachers  in  training  to  the  “Proposed  Resolution  of  Noncompliance 
Findings  (Exhibit  5),  noting  that  they  are  in  training  for  the  certification. 
°  The  Superintendent  testified  the  District  needed  to  have  all  teachers  be  CLAD  certified  so  that  ELL  students 
“could  have  access  to  all  teachers”.  However,  the  District’s  own  policy  with  respect  to  its  middle  school  shows  this 
not  to  be  true. 
Students  of  one  house  are  taught  only  by  a  member  of  their  teaching  team,  and  have  no  access  to  teachers  from  the 
other  house. 
*  After  a  long  statutory  analysis,  Judge  Engeman  held  there  was  no  showing  by  the  school  district  of  a  need,  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Section  44955(d),  to  skip  the  CLAD  or  BCLAD  (Bi-lingual  Cross  Cultural...) 
certificated  teachers. 
”  Nothing  contained  in  this  Proposed  Decision  should  be  construed  as  either  adopting  or  rejecting  Judge  Engeman’s 
statutory  analysis. 

In  the  middle  school,  students  are  divided  into  two  “houses”.  Each  has  its  own  “teaching  team”. 

 

° 

© 

compliance  with  state  requirements  for  instruction  of  these  pupils.  The  law 
requires  that  teachers  with  ELL  must  have  a  CLAD  certificate  or  equivalent. 
As  the  District  has  exceeded  three  years  in  non-compliance,  it  may  soon  be 
subject  to  financial  sanctions.  In  addition,  the  need  is  growing  as  the  numbers 
of  non-English  speaking  pupils  have  been  increasing  exponentially. 
Accordingly,  the  District  determined  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  interests 
of  its  pupils  to  reduce  the  number  of  teachers  so  qualified.  It  resolved  to 
exempt  those  teachers  from  layoff. 

B.  From  Judge  Tompkin’s  Proposed  Decision  in  the  Sausalito-Marin  City  School 

District  matter: 

Previously,  Marin  City  was  almost  100  percent  African-American.  Now  it  is 
approximately  48  percent  African-American  with  a  growing  population  of 
Spanish,  Eastern  European  and  Vietnamese  immigrants,  many  of  whom  are 
English  language  learners.  Currently  District  has  English  language  learners  at 
every  grade  level  and  anticipates  that  these  students  will  continue  their 
education  in  District.  During a  self-study  conducted  by  District  during  the 
2001-2002  school  year  the  need  for  teachers  with  SDAIE,  CLAD  and  BCLAD 
certificates  became  very  evident.  A  subsequent  State  Certification 
Compliance  review  during  the  2002-2003  school  year  underscored  this  need. 
District  was  advised  by  the  State  that  in  order  to  be  found  in  compliance  with 
State  requirements,  District  would  have  to  agree  to  have  all  of  its  teachers 
obtain  a  CLAD  within  two  years. 

C.  From  Judge  Adler’s  Proposed  Decision  in  the  El  Centro  Elementary  School 

District  matter: 

The  District  has  about  6,000  students,  and  there  is  only  one  classroom  in  the 
District  with  no  ELL  students.  In  addition,  324  ELL  students  were  not 
receiving  instruction  from  ELL  certified  teachers,  and  the  District  is  required 
to  make  good  faith  efforts  to  ensure  that  all  ELL  students  are  being  taught  by 
teachers  with  ELL  certifications.  There  was  also  evidence  that  in  2005,  the 
law  will  require  all  ELL  students  be  taught  by  those  with  ELL  certifications. 
The  District’s  need  to  retain  certificated  employees  with  ELL  certification  was 
clearly  established. 

. 

15.  The  District  did  not  make  a  sufficient  showing  that  it  needed  to  skip  CLAD 
certificated  teachers  for  the  benefit  of  its  students.  While  the  District  was  noted  to  be  “out  of 
compliance”  by  the  Department  of  Education  in  its  2000-2001  Compliance  Review,  it  had 
prepared  a  plan  of  correction  and  followed  it.  There  was  no  showing  this  plan  of  correction 
did  not  address  the  needs  of  the  District  or  the  Department  of  Education.  In  fact,  the 
evidence  was  to  the  contrary.  If  there  was  any  doubt,  the  District  could  have  included  the 

@ 

 

names  of  Respondents  who  were  in  CLAD  training  before  March  15,  2004  (virtually  all  of 
them)  to  its  plan.  This  would  have  permitted  Respondents  to  teach  ELL,  even  though  they 
had  not  yet  been  CLAD  certified.  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  the  District  improperly 
skipped  Respondents  who  are  senior  employees  without  CLAD  certification.  Thus,  with  two 
exceptions  discussed  in  Finding  17  below,  the  District’s  seniority  list  is  incorrect. 
Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  services  provided  by  more  junior 
teachers  who  were  retained. 

16.  Respondents’  last  contention  is  that  even  if  CLAD  certification  justified  skipping 

certain  teachers  (which  it  does  not),  the  District  improperly  skipped  two  teachers  (Cartnal 
and  Robinson)  who  had  completed  CLAD  training  but  had  not  yet  received  their  certification 
from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  Respondents’  contention  is  correct.  The 
certification  must  actually  be  issued  and  on  file  with  the  District  and  with  the  Board  of 
Education  before  these  teachers  may  be  considered  CLAD  certified.  See,  Fine  v.  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  District,  116  Cal.  App.  4"  1070  (2004)  where  the  court  stated,  at 
page  1079: 

[Education  Code]  Section  44330  governs  the  ‘[e]ffect  of  registration’  of  a 
teaching  credential,  and  strongly  suggests  the  registration  of  a  credential 
operates  to  authorize  the  teacher’s  service  under  that  credential,  rather  than  the 
validity  date  of  the  credential.  Section  44330  authorizes  a  county  board  of 
education  to  provide  for  the  registration  of  any  certification  or  other  document 
authorizing  its  holder  to  serve  in  a  position  requiring  certification 
qualifications,  such  as  Fine’s  [Multiple  Subject  (Exam)--Preliminary].  It  also 
states, 

‘Such  registration  shall  authorize  the  service  of  the  holder  as  an 
employee...in  the  capacity  in  which  and  for  the  period  of  time  for 
which  the  certification  or  other  document  is  valid.’ 

Therefore,  registration  is,  by  statute,  the  sine  qua  non  for  a  teacher’s  service 
under  a  credential.  Without  registration  of  the  credential,  service  is  not 
authorized. 

While  this  matter  is  factually  distinguishable  from  Fine,  the  holding  in  that  case  is  quite 
clear.  The  two  teachers  in  question  here  were  not  yet  CLAD  certified,  but  were  nevertheless 
skipped  based  on  their  application  for  certification.  This  is  not  sufficient.  The  certification 
must  first  be  issued  and  registered  before  it  becomes  effective.  However,  just  as  with 
Respondents,  the  District  could  have  added  the  names  of  these  two  teachers  to  the  plan  of 
correction  which  would  enable  them  to  teach  ELL. 

17.  Respondent  Yoder  holds  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Social  Sciences  credential. 

The  District  hired  him  on  August  27,  2003.  He  is  not  qualified  to  teach  any  of  the  subjects 
(music,  math,  Special  Education)  that  his  three  more  junior  colleagues  now  teach.  The 
reduction  in  force  is  proper  as  to  him.  Respondent  Matchie  is  a  high  school  counselor.  Her 
hire  date  is  August  20,  2003.  She  holds  five  different  credentials.  However,  none  of  her

  

credentials  permit  her  to  teach  the  classes  now  taught  by  less  senior  retained  teachers  and  the 
reduction  in  force  is  proper  as  to  her. 

Conclusions  of  Law 

1.  Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections 

44949  and  44955. 

2.  The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  2  are  particular  kinds  of  service  which  may  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  A  District  may 
reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (b), 
“either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179. 

3.  Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  to  reduce  the 

District's  teaching  positions  by  21.1  Full  Time  Equivalents.  However,  the  District 
improperly  determined  the  order  of  seniority  of  the  teachers  to  be  laid  off,  by  reason  of 
Findings  13  through  16,  thereby  violating  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Section 
44954(b)  which  provides  in  part: 

Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Accordingly,  except  as  set  forth  in  Conclusion  4,  the  District  must  retain  all  Respondents. 
The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

Hf 

HM 

H/ 

H 

H 

i 

Hf  

4.  The  District  need  not  retain  the  services  of  Respondents  Yoder  and  Matchie,  by 

reason  of  Finding  17. 

ORDER 

As  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  teachers  Daniel 

Yoder  and  Linda  Matchie  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year.  The  District  must  retain  all  other  Respondents. 

Dated:  May  3,  2004 

  

RALPH  B.  DASH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

