BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
OF  THE 
CALEXICO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  for  Layoff 
Against: 

HERB  COFFER, 
JOSE  JAIME, 
BERTHA  ROMANDIA, 
DAVID  COLE, 
SONDRA  MENDOZA, 

Respondents, 

  

  

OAH  Case  No.  L2004030636 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  26,  2004,  Steven  V.  Adler,  Presiding  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Calexico,  California. 

Clifford  D.  Weiler,  Esq.  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo  represented  the 

Calexico  Unified  School  District. 

Jon  Vanderpool,  Esq.  of  Tosdal,  Levine,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax  represented 

respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2004,  at  7:00  p.m. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Calexico  Unified  School  District’ 

The  District  is  mid-size,  with  about  8,600  students.  Calexico  is  a  city  located 

in  the  Imperial  Valley,  directly  across  the  border  from  Mexicali,  Baja  California  Norte, 

1. 

  

Official  notice  is  taken  of  the  Proposed  Decision  in  OAH  Case  No.  L-2003030718,  In  the  Matter  of  the 
' 
Accusation  for  Layoff of  Certificated  Employees  of  Calexico  Unified  School  District,  for  some  of  the  background 
information  in  Paragraph  1  of  this  Proposed  Decision.

  

  

Mexico.  Were  it  not  for  the  border,  the  two  cities  would  be  one.  The  District  is  isolated  in 
that  it  does  not  have  any  significant  urban  area  within  100  miles  (San  Diego  is  120  miles 
away).  The  District  employs  about  1,000  persons,  including  about  500 certificated 
employees.  It  has  10  schools:  6  elementary  schools  (grades  K-6),  two  junior  high  schools 
(grades  7-9),  one  high  school  with  about  1,800  pupils  and  one  continuation  high  school  with 
around  200  pupils.  Ninety-eight  percent  (98%)  of  the  students  are  of  Mexican  or  Hispanic 
heritage,  and  more  than  80%  are  English  language  learners. 

The  District  is  academically  ranked  among  the  lowest  in  California.  It  is  trying  to 

improve  and  reform  with  the  assistance  of  various  organizations  and  San  Diego  State 
University.  However,  the  Imperial  Valley  is  and  continues  to  be  a  predominantly 
agricultural  area.  Although  there  is  some  increase  in  income  from  import/export  business, 
the  general  lack  of  opportunity  in  the  valley  makes  it  difficult  for  the  District  to  find  funds  to 
improve  its  services.  The  median  income  in  the  District  is  far  below  the  State  median 
income;  the  number  of  students  eligible  for  free  lunches  also  exceeds  the  state  average. 

2. 

Calexico  High  School’s  academic  standing  is  the  current  focus  of  the  District’s 
attention.  Last  year,  the  school  was  in  the  third  year  of  “Program  Improvement  Status”  with 
the  State  of  California.  This  means  that  unless  graduation  rates  and  test  scores  improve,  the 
school  would  be  taken  over  by  the  state,  or  “re-constituted.”  There  was  an  improvement  last 
year,  so  Calexico  High  was  “promoted”  to  second  year  level  of  “Program  Improvement 
Status.”  If  the  school  does  not  continue  to  improve,  however,  it  will  again  be  danger  of 
being  re-constituted.  “Re-constituted”  means  that  the  District  is  taken  over  by  the  state  and 
the  local  Board  loses  control. 

There  was  convincing  evidence  to  prove  the  dire  academic  straits  in  which  the 

District  finds  itself.  Among  sophomores  at  the  school,  39%  score  “below  basic”  or  “far 
below  basic”  in  English,  and  52%  score  “below  basic”  or  “far  below  basic”  in  math.  Juniors 
fare  worse:  52%  have  below  basic  scores  in  English,  and  65%  fall  below  basic  level  in  math. 
Last  year,  about  110  graduating  seniors  did  not  meet  the  requirement  that  they  pass  an 
Algebra  I  class.  They  were  graduated  because  the  District  received  a  waiver  from  the  state. 

Just  under  20%  of  the  students  in  the  graduating  class  are  in  danger  of  failing  to  meet 

minimum  high  school  graduation  requirements.  In  addition,  the  University  of  California 
Chancellor’s  Office  has  notified  the  District  that  there  has  been  a  steep  decline  in  the  number 
of  Calexico  High  graduates  eligible  for  entry  into  the  U.C.  system. 

The  administration  has  met  with  the  “core  curriculum”  departments 

(English/language  arts,  mathematics,  social  sciences,  and  science)  and  concluded  that  many 
of  the  District’s  high  school  students  need  to  take  extended  math  and  English  courses  of  one 
and  one-half  to  two  years  duration  in  order  to  pass  the  courses  and  the  state  examinations. 
Those  departments  simply  do  not  have  enough  staff  to  meet  the  student  demand  for  their 
courses  and  current  course  enrollments  are  at  maximum  levels.  Similarly,  these  departments 
lack  sufficient  staff  to  offer  the  longer-duration  courses  that  would  be  most  effective.  This 
evidence  was  uncontradicted  and  convincing. 

.

3. 

On  April  1,  2004,  David  Groesbeck,  Assistant  Superintendent  and  Director  of 

Personnel  of  the  Calexico  Unified  School  District  (District  or  CUSD),  made  and  filed  the 
accusations  against  respondents  in  his  official  capacity. 

4, 

5. 

All  respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

Before  March  15,  2003,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,”  the  Superintendent’s  designee  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  of  his 
recommendation  that  respondents  be  notified  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year.  The  notification  to  the  Board  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2003,  each  respondent  was  given  written  notice  by  the 

Superintendent  as  follows:  that  it  has  been  recommended  notice  be  given  to  respondents, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

7. 

Each  respondent  timely  made  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if 
there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him/her  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Accusations  were 
timely  served  on  respondents.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre- 
hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8. 

The  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  of  the  District  took  action  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Full  Time  Equivalent 
Positions 

Discontinue  all  ROP  Medical  Assistant 
Teaching  Services 

.  Discontinue  all  ROP  Law  Enforcement 

Teaching  Services 

Discontinue  all  ROP Business  Teaching 
Services 

0.6 

0.6 

1.2 

Subtotal  of  services  discontinued: 

2.4  FTE 

  

2 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

3

Reduce  business  education  high  school  regular 
program  teaching  services  (Microsoft  office 
courses) 

Subtotal  of  services  reduced: 

TOTAL  SERVICES: 

2.4 

2:4  FTE 

4.8  FTE 

The  services  set  forth  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Section  44955.  Although  complainant  alleged  that  the 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a 
proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion,  respondents  challenged  this  claim.  The 
reasonableness  of  the  cuts  proposed  by  the  District  will  be  discussed  below. 

9. 

Complainant  asserted  that  no  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent 

was  retained  to  perform  services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Respondents  challenged  this  assertion.  This  issue  will  likewise  be  discussed  below. 

10. 

It  is  claimed  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board.  The  need  to  decrease 
services  as  resolved  by  the  Board  will  be  discussed  below. 

11. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition  including  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees;  the  parties  entered  into  a  stipulation  to  establish  these  facts. 

12. 

Respondent  David  Cole’s  first  date  of  paid  service  was  August  29,  1988.  He 

has  a  clear,  designated  subject  credential  in  Police  Science,  an  emergency  single  subject 
credential  in  social  sciences  and  a  30-day  substitute  credential.  He  is  teaching  Police  Science 
in  the  Regional  Occupational  Program  (ROP)  for  four  periods  a  day  and  U.S.  History  for  one 
period.  Cole  is  listed  on  the  seniority  list  as  a  temporary  employee.  As  to  his  Police  Science 
teaching  position,  it  was  not  established  that  Cole  is  a  senior  employee  entitled  to  “bumping” 
rights  or  that  his  services  should  be  retained  over  more  senior  employees  certificated  and 
competent  to  provide  teaching  services  being  continued  by  the  District.  However,  the 
propriety  of  the  decision  to  discontinue  this  particular  kind  of  service  will  be  discussed 
below. 

The  District  considers  that  Cole  is  not  subject  to  this  layoff  proceeding  because  he  is 
an  ROP  teacher  and  not  protected  by  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  This 
argument  will  be  discussed  below. 

13. 

Respondent  Jose  A.  Jaime’s  first  date  of  paid  service  was  August  25,  1994. 

He  has  a  clear,  designated  subject  credential  in  vocational  education  and  computer 

4

occupations.  He  is  teaching  ROP  Computer  Occupations,  ROP  Desktop  Publishing  and 
Keyboarding  at  the  Aurora  Continuation  High  School. 

Jaime  is  listed  on  the  seniority  list  as  a  permanent  employee.  There  was  no  evidence 

that  this  employee  received  notification  that  his  present  position  was  temporary. 

It  was  not  established  that  Jaime  is  a  senior  employee  entitled  to  “bumping”  rights  or 
that  his  services  should  be  retained  over  more  senior  employees  certificated  and  competent  to 
provide  services  being  continued  by  the  District.  However,  the  propriety  of  the  decision  to 
discontinue  this  particular  kind  of  service  will  be  discussed  below. 

14. 

Respondent  Herb  Coffer’s  first  date  of  paid  service  was  August  31,  1992.  He 

is  teaching  Microsoft  Office  and  Academic  Support  in  Technology.  He  has  a clear,  single 
subject  credential  in  Industrial  and  Technical  Education.  He  is  listed  as  a  permanent 
employee  on  the  seniority  list.  There  was  no  evidence  that  this  employee  received 
notification  that  his  present  position  was  temporary. 

With  the  exception  discussed  below,  it  was  not  established  that  Coffer  is  a  senior 
employee  entitled  to  “bumping”  rights  or  that  his  services  should  be  retained  over  more 
senior  employees  certificated  and  competent  to  provide  services  being  continued  by  the 
District.  However,  the  propriety  of  the  decision  to  discontinue  this  particular  kind  of  service 
will  be  discussed  below. 

15. 

Respondent  Bertha  Romandia’s  first  date  of  paid  service  was  November  16, 

1999.  She  teaches  Nursing  in  the  ROP  and  has a  clear,  designated  subject  credential  in 
vocational  nursing.  She  is  designated  as  a  permanent  employee  on  the  District’s  seniority 
list.  There  was  no  evidence  that  this  employee  received  notification  that  her  present  position 
was  temporary. 

, 

It  was  not  established  that  Romandia  is  a  senior  employee  entitled  to  “bumping” 
rights  or  that  her  services  should  be  retained  over  more  senior  employees  certificated  and 
competent  to  provide  services  being  continued  by  the  District.  However,  the  propriety  of  the 
decision  to  discontinue  this  particular  kind  of  service  will  be  discussed  below. 

The  District  considers  that  Romandia  is  not  subject  to  this  layoff  proceeding  because 
she  is  an  ROP  teacher  and  not  protected  by  the  provisions  of  section  44955.  This  argument 
will  be  discussed  below. 

16. 

|  Respondent  Sondra  Mendoza’s  first  date  of  paid  service  was  October  10, 

1994.  She  is  teaching  Accounting,  Business  English  and  Academic  Support  and  has a clear, 
single  subject  credential  in  business.  She  is  designated  as  a  permanent  employee  on  the 
District’s  seniority  list.  There  was  no  evidence  that  this  employee  received  notification  that 
her  present  position  was  temporary. 

It  was  not  established  that  Mendoza  is  a  senior  employee  entitled  to  “bumping”  rights 

or  that  her  services  should  be  retained  over  more  senior  employees  certificated  and 

5

  

competent  to  provide  services  being  continued  by  the  District.  However,  the  propriety  of  the 
decision  to  discontinue  this  particular  kind  of  service  will  be  discussed  below. 

The  District  considers  that  Mendoza  is  not  subject  to  this  layoff  proceeding  because 
she  is  an  ROP  teacher  and  not  protected  by  the  provisions  of  section  44955.  This  argument 
will  be  discussed  below. 

17. 

Evidence  was  received  regarding  the  Imperial  County  Regional  Occupational 
Program.  All  respondents  and  Mr.  Groesbeck  provided  some  information  about  the  program 
and  its  Director,  Mary  Ann  Camacho,  described  the  ROP. 

The  Imperial  County  ROP  is  a  joint  powers  authority,  not  associated  with  any  District 
or  with  the  County  Office  of  Education.  The  ROP  receives  money  from  various  sources  and 
distributes  it  to  the  participating  school  districts  based  on  average  daily  attendance  (ADA). 

ADA  in  ROP  classes  is  generally  down  in  the  county;  Calexico  is  no  exception.  In 

Calexico,  ROP  classes  are  offered  both  at  the  regular  high  school  and  at  Aurora  Continuation 
High  School.  ROP  classes  enable  students  to  obtain  certifications  or  accreditations.  These 
certifications  are  often  job  requirements  for  the  occupations  or  professions  that  graduates 
enter. 

If  ROP  courses  are  not  offered  in  one  district  and  are  offered  in  another,  ROP  is 
funded  to  provide  transportation  to  wherever  the  course  is  offered.  So,  for  example,  if  ROP 
nursing  is  eliminated  in  Calexico,  the  students  can  take  the  classes  in  Brawley  where  they 
will  still  be  offered.  ROP  will  transport  Calexico  students  to  Brawley  to  take  the  nursing 
classes. 

All  ROP  courses  are  electives.  Students  get  credit  for  taking  the  courses,  but  none  are 

“A-G”  courses’  required  for  admission  into  the  University  of  California/California  State 
University  systems. 

When  enrollments  in  ROP  courses  fall  around  the  state,  teachers  are  let  go. 

Calexico  is  considering  opening  a  vocational  charter  school  in  December,  2005, 
where  some  or  all  of  the  ROP  courses  now  being  eliminated  might  be  offered.  The  District 
Superintendent  has  been  giving  presentations  on  these  plans  at  some  board  meetings  and 
around  the  community.  This  school  would  be  focused  on  career  training  and  preparation, 
rather  than  on  academics.  However,  the  charter  school  is  still  in  the  planning  stages.  The 
proposed  charter  school  had  no  part  in  the  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

18. 

There  was  conflicting  evidence  regarding  student  interest  in  ROP  classes. 

Apparently,  there  have  been  surveys  of  student  interest  in  various  classes  in  years  past.  Such 

  

The  University  of  California  (UC)  supplies  a  list  of  courses  required  for  entrance.  This  list  apparently 
3 
bears  the  letters  “A-G”  and  these  letters  are  used  as  shorthand  to  refer  to  courses  required  by  UC  for  entrance. 

6

surveys  were  not  done  this  year  for  ROP  classes.  There  was  evidence  regarding  the  level  of 
student  interest  in  the  ROP  classes  selected  for  elimination  by  the  Board.  Generally,  it 
appears  that  enrollment  in  those  classes  is  somewhat  lower  than  in  past  years. 

-

 

There  was  also  suggestion  by  some  witnesses  that  the  administration  was  somehow 

involved  in  reducing  student  interest  in  ROP  courses  and/or  reducing  class  size.  The 
evidence  was  conflicting,  the  persons  who  so  testified  did  not  provide  substantial  testimony 
about  how  they  learned  these  alleged  facts,  and  this  testimony  is  given  little  weight. 

19. 

The  District  is  in  severe  academic  difficulty.  Because  of  this  and  because  the 

Board  concluded  that  additional  classes  needed  to  be  offered  in  core  curriculum  subjects, 
most  ROP  classes  were  selected  for  elimination.  Physical  education  classes  were  considered 
for  elimination  but  rejected  because  studies  have  established  that  those  classes  strengthen 
student  ties  to  school.  In  Calexico,  where  student  dropout  is  a  problem,  keeping  students  in 
school  is  a  high  priority. 

The  District  also  considered  eliminating  fine  arts  classes,  but  decided  against  that 
option.  Fine  arts  are  among  the  “A-G”  subjects  required  by  the  University  of California 
system  for  admission. 

The  District  concluded  that  there  was  simply  no  other  area  to  cut  in  order  to  get 

additional  funds  to  increase  classes  in  core  curriculum  subjects. 

20. 

Respondent  Herb  Coffer  testified  at  the  hearing.  He  had  originally  been  hired 

to  teach  wood  shop  and  drafting,  and  has  been  a  teacher  for  12  years.  He  was  never 
informed  that  he  was  a  temporary  teacher  after  he  worked  his  first  two  years.  He  recited  a 
number  of  employment  documents  that  list  his  status  as  permanent.  It  was  established  that 
he  was  not  informed  that  his  work  as  an  ROP  teacher  did  not  qualify  to  move  him  towards 
permanent  status. 

Mr.  Coffer  testified  that  there  was  a  great  deal  of  student  interest  in,  and  demand  for 

his  Microsoft  Office  course,  as  well  as  his  two  courses  in  computer  graphics  and  one  in 
academic  support.  He  feels  that  he  is  competent  to  teach  math,  although  he  does  not  have  a 
California  credential  to  teach  that  subject.  He  is  credentialed  to  teach  some  courses  being 
offered  in  the  junior  high  schools. 

It  was  established  that  Mr.  Coffer  was  a  competent  and  valuable  teacher,  well-_ 

qualified  to  teach  the  courses  that  were  being  eliminated. 

21. 

|  Respondent  Sondra  Mendoza  also  testified  at  the  hearing.  She  works  at 
Calexico  High  School  and  teaches  three  periods  of  banking  and  finance,  one  period  of 
accounting,  and  one  period  of  academic  support.  She  feels  that  her  class  generates 
$36,000.00  in  ADA  revenue  from  ROP  for  the  District,  and  that  it  does  not  make  economic 
sense  to  eliminate  her  position.  She  is  credentialed  to  teach  some  courses  being  offered  in 

the  junior  high  schools.  

Ms.  Mendoza  feels  that  ROP  courses  were  not  being  promoted  by  the  District;  they 

were  left  out  of  the  course  catalog  for  this  school  year.  She  is  working  on  a  multiple  subject 
elementary  school  credential,  and  will  receive  it  in  July  2004. 

It  was  established  that  Ms.  Mendoza  was  a  competent  and  valuable  teacher,  well- 

qualified  to  teach  the  courses  that  were  being  eliminated. 

22. 

Respondent  Jose  Alex  Jaime  testified  at  the  hearing.  He  will  have  taught  for 
the  District  for  ten  years  this  June.  He  teaches  ROP  Computer  Occupations,  ROP  Desktop 
Publishing  and  keyboarding  classes.  He  teaches  0.8  FTE  ROP  classes  and  0.2  FTE  at  Aurora 
Continuation  School. 

Mr.  Jaime  has  proven  his  capabilities  and  his  value  to  the  District  and  the  community 
in  many  ways.  This  year,  he  received  the  Golden  Apple  award  from  the  state  as  the  Teacher 
of  the  Year  in  District  8.  He  has  provided  computer  training  to  staff  at  other  schools,  at  the 
college  level,  and  has  trained  the  Human  Resources  staff  of  the  District.  He  was originally 
hired  by  the  District  as  a  non-ROP  teacher,  then  moved  into  ROP  classes. 

Many  students  are  interested  in  his  classes;  they  are  full  with  waiting  lists.  Students 

have  told  him  that  his  courses  are  the  only  thing  keeping  them  in  school.  His  classes  provide 
them  with  the  practical  skills  they  need  after  they  leave  school. 

It  was  established  that  Mr.  Jaime  was  a  competent  and  valuable  teacher,  well- 
qualified  to  teach  the  courses  that  were  being  eliminated.  He  has  received  a  “Golden  Apple” 
award:  objective  evidence  that  he  is  an  outstanding  teacher  and  a  valuable  District  employee. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  as  set  forth  in  these  Factual 
Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof within 
the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

3. 

Section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 
than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947, 
inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)...  [W]henever  a  particular  kind  of service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of 
later  than  the  beginning  of the following  school  year  . 

. 

8

  

@ 

@ 

. 

.  to  decrease  the 

the  governing  board  of the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  . 
number  of permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate 
the  services  of not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of the  certificated 
employees  of the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render...  As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the 
same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of termination  solely  on  the 
basis  of needs  of the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of any 
employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall 
furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing 
held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking 
each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the 
governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of reasons  for  determining 
the  order  of termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal 
right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of such  termination  of services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of such  employees  shall  be 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the 
event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a  right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed 
for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any 
service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render. .  .

 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of seniority for  either  of the following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 
or  course  of study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  or  course  of study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of the  laws. 

@ 

4. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  layoffs  are  arbitrary  and  capricious. 

Layoffs  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955  must  be  reasonable  and  may  not  be  fraudulent, 
arbitrary  and  capricious.  The  decision  to  lay  off  certificated  employees  must  be  measured  by 

9

the  standard  set  by  reason  and  reasonable  people,  bearing  in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may 
permit  a  difference  of  opinion  on  the  same  subject.  Arthur  v.  Oceanside-Carlsbad  Junior 
College  Dist.  (1963)  216  Cal.App.2d  656,  663  (Arthur).  The  decision  must  not  be  arbitrary, 
arrived  at  through  the  exercise  of  mere  caprice,  but  rather  should  be  a  decision  supported  by 
a  fair  and  substantial  reason.  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  808  (Campbell). 

Measured  by  the  standards  set  in  Arthur  and  Campbell,  the  decision  to  lay  off  the  five 

ROP  teachers  is  not  arbitrary  and  capricious.  There  was  uncontradicted  evidence  that  the 
District  needs  to  strengthen  its  instructional  program  in  the  “A-G”  subjects,  and  that  ROP  is 
one  place  to  find  the  funds  to  offer  longer  courses  needed  by  the  District’s  students.  This 
constitutes  a  fair  and  substantial  reason  for  the  decision  made  by  the  District.  Although  there 
may  be  other  places  to  make  cuts,  the  decision  regarding  where  to  cut  is  the  District’s  to 
make.  The  preponderance  of  evidence  establishes  that  cutting  most  ROP  offered  in  the 
District  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious. 

5. 

The  District  argues  that  the  teachers  identified  as  “Precautionary 

Respondents,”  Ms.  Romandia,  Mr.  Cole  and  Ms.  Mendoza,  are  not  protected  by  the 
provisions  of  section  44955.  It  bases  the  contention  on  section  44910,  which  provides: 

Service  by  a  person  as  an  instructor  in  classes  conducted  at  regional  occupational 
centers  or  programs,  as  authorized pursuant  to  Section  52301,  shall  not  be  included 
in  computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to, 
classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of a  school  district. 

This  section  shall  not  be  construed  to  apply  to  any  regularly  credentialed  teacher 
who  has  been  employed  to  teach  in  the  regular  educational  programs  of the  school 
district  and  subsequently  assigned  as  an  instructor  in  regional  occupational  centers 
or  programs,  nor  shall  it  affect  the  status  of regional  occupational  center  teachers 
classified  as  permanent  or  probationary  at  the  time  this  section  becomes effective. 

Section  44910  became  effective  on  April  30,  1977.’  There  was  no  evidence  that  any 

“Precautionary  Respondent”  was  classified  as  permanent  or  probationary  at  that  time. 

Among  the  respondents  and  precautionary  respondents,  only  one,  Mr.  Cole,  is  listed 

on  the  District’s  seniority  list  as  “temporary.”  All  others  are  listed  as  “permanent.” 
Respondents  apparently  contend  that  this  categorization  estops  the  District  from  applying  the 
provisions  of  Education  Code  section  44910.  The  argument  is  rejected.  The  respondents  did 
not  explain  nor  provide  authority  for  the  proposition  that  an  apparent  mistake  on  the  seniority 
list  binds  the  District  and  requires  that  it  ignore  the  plain  command  of  law.  The  Court  of 
Appeal  has  found  that  a  similar  mistake  did  not  bind a  district  in  Summerfield  v.  Windsor 
Unified  School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4™  1026,  1035,  n.  6. 

  

Section  44910  was  signed  by  the  Governor  as  Statutes  1977,  Chapter  1010,  §2,  and  became  operative  on 

4 
April  30,  1977. 

10

The  fact  that  the  District  mistakenly  listed  respondents  Romandia  and  Espinoza  as 

“permanent”  does  not  entitle  them  to  the  protections  of  section  44955  because  ROP  teachers 
cannot  become  permanent. 

It  is  also  argued  that  the  District  should  have  notified  the  ROP  teachers  of  the 

provisions  of  section  44910  and  admonished  them  that  they  could  not  be  probationary  or 
permanent  as  long  as  they  taught  only  ROP  classes.  It  certainly  would  have  been  preferable 
for  the  District  to  categorize  these  employees  properly  on  its  seniority  list  and  make  it  clear 
that  they  were  temporary.  For  example,  the  teachers  could  have  been  initially  informed  in 
writing  that  ROP  positions  are  temporary,  and  the  teacher  only  had a  right  to  return  if  the 
position  and  its  funding  were  both  renewed.  The  teachers  could  have  been  given  notices  that 
they  were  being  fired  at  the  end  of  each  school  year,  and  hired  at  the  beginning  of  the  next 
school  year. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  District  did  any  of  these  things.  However,  the  District’s 

failure  to  communicate  well  with  the  ROP  teachers  does  not  change  the  clear  command  of 
section  44910.  No  matter  what  a  District  does,  ROP  teachers  cannot  become  permanent 
employees  unless  they  leave  ROP  and  teach  in  some  other  part  of  the  school  program. 

6. 

Respondents  presented  evidence  that  some  computer  and  business  classes 
were  still  to  be  taught  in  the  District’s  junior  high  schools  by  teachers  with  less  seniority. 
Although  the  evidence  was  somewhat  confusing,  the  argument  appears  to  be  that  teachers 
with  less  seniority  than  some  respondents  are  teaching  one  period  each  of  some  sort  of 
computer  class  as  well  as  core  curriculum  subjects.  The  teachers  identified  by  respondents 
are  Lucio  Padilla,  Jr.,°  David  Gastelum,°  and  Fernando  L. Arguelles.’ 

Mr.  Groesbeck  testified  that  respondent  Coffer  (#  176  on  the  seniority  list)  is  senior  to 
Padilla,  Gastelum  and  Arguelles.  Mr.  Coffer  is  credentialed  to  teach  one  period  of  Computer 
7  currently  being  taught  by  Mr.  Padilla;  he  is  not  credentialed  to  teach  the  balance  of  classes 
taught  by  Padilla.  Mr.  Groesbeck  pointed  out  that  the  District  prefers  that  Padilla  teach  the 
computer  course  for  “continuity  of  programming.”  However,  the  computer  course  isa7™ 
grade  course  and  the  balance  of  Mr.  Padilla’s  work  is  with  9"  graders.  “Continuity  of 
programming”  was  not  explained,  and  does  not  make  sense  given  Padilla’s  assignments. 

Mr.  Gastelum  teaches  in  a  resource  position  which  focuses  on  integrating  computers 
into  language  arts  teaching.  It  was  not  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that 
the  District  was  seeking  to  lay  off  any  more  senior  teacher  credentialed  to  teach  his  classes. 

  

Padilla,  number  246  on  the  seniority  list,  is  a  permanent  teacher  with  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential.  He 

, 
teaches  one  period  of  “Computer  7”  as  well  as  language  arts,  English  and  “HSEE”  at  a  junior  high  school. 

Gastelum,  number  252  on  the  seniority  list,  is  a  permanent  teacher  with  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential. 

6 
He  teaches  “computer  technology/resource  technology”  at  a  junior  high  school. 

Arguelles,  number  284  on  the  seniority  list,  is  a  permanent  teacher  with  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential. 

7 
He  teaches  “reading  tech  8/computers”  at  a  junior  high  school. 

11

  

The  contrary  testimony  by  Mr.  Coffer  is  rejected  because  there  was  insufficient  foundation  to 
support  his  assertion  that  his  credential  permits  him  to  teach  Mr.  Gastelum’s  class. 

Mr.  Arguelles  is  teaching  “reading  tech  8/computers.”  Mr.  Coffer  is  credentialed  to 

teach  the  “computers”  portion  of  the  teaching  load  carried  by  Arguelles,  and  is  senior  to 
Arguelles. 

A  preponderance  of  evidence  established  that  Mr.  Coffer  is  credentialed  to  teach  0.4 
FTE  consisting  of  one  period  currently  being  taught  by  Mr.  Padilla  and  one  period  currently 
being  taught  by  Mr.  Arguelles.  Accordingly,  sections  44955(b)  and  (c)  require  that  Mr. 
Coffer  be  retained  to  the  extent  of  0.4  FTE. 

7. 

With  the  exception  discussed  above,  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence 

sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the  Accusations  against  all  certificated  employees  against 
whom  Accusations  were  neither  dismissed  nor  withdrawn. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  respondent  Jose  Jaime  is  sustained.  The Accusation 

served  on  respondent  Herb  Coffer  is  sustained  as  to  0.6  FTE.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  each 
respondent  before  May  15,  2004  that  his/her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05 
school  year  pursuant  to  the  Board’s  resolution  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

2. 

The  Accusations  served  on  respondents  Bertha  Mendoza,  David  Cole  and 

Sondra  Mendoza  are  dismissed;  these  respondents  are  employed  as  ROP  teachers  and  are  not 
entitled  to  the  protections  afforded  by  sections  44949  and  44955. 

3. 

The  Accusation  served  on  respondent  Herb  Coffer  is  not  sustained  by  the 

evidence  to  the  extent  of  0.4  FTE,  and  the  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Mr.  Coffer  to  that 
extent.  The  evidence  established  that  Mr.  Coffer  is  credentialed  to  teach  0.4  FTE  in  courses 
currently  being  taught  by  teachers  junior  to  him. 

DATED: MAY  5, ,  2004 

| 

   

  STEVEN  V.  ADLER ! 
Presiding  Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

12

