BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
RIALTO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004030278 

All  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Rialto 
Unified  School  District  Receiving 
Preliminary  Layoff  Notices  for  the  2004- 
2005  School  Year, 

Respondents. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Placentia,  California,  on  April  16,  2003. 

Sherry  G.  Gordon,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Rialto  Unified  School  District. 

Paul  Crost,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  the  certificated  teachers  employed  by  the 

Rialto  Unified  School  District  who  received  preliminary  layoff  notices  for  the  2004-2005 
school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2003. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Rialto  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Rialto  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  Rialto,  between 

the  cities  of  Fontana  and  San  Bernardino.  It  serves  the  community  of  Rialto  and  other 
communities  and  unincorporated  areas  within  the  District. 

The  District  provides  educational  services  at  17  elementary  schools,  five  middle 
schools,  two  comprehensive  high  schools,  an  adult  continuation  school  and  through  an 
independent  studies  program.  The  District  serves  the  educational  needs  of  about  30,000 
students  from  Kindergarten  through  12  Grade.

The  elementary  schools  have  four  year-round  tracks.  The  secondary  schools  have 

traditional  school  schedules. 

The  District  employs  approximately  3,900  persons,  about  2,300  of  whom  are 
certificated  employees.  The  certificated  employees  provide  direct  educational  services  and 
supports  to  the  District’s  students. 

2. 

Board). 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five  member  Board  of  Education  (the 

Edna  D.  Herring  (Superintendent  Herring)  is  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  the 

Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer. 

Joseph  G.  Davis,  Ed.D.  (Assistant  Superintendent  Davis)  is  an Assistant 

Superintendent  of  Schools  and  serves  as  the  District’s  Personnel  Officer. 

The  Economic  Layoff 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education.  Since  the  passage  of 
Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to 
other  governmental  entities  for  necessary  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 
state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  the  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops. 

_ 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than 
March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority. 

4. 

On  March  10,  2004,  Superintendent  Herring  advised  the  Board  in  writing  of 

her  recommendation  that  particular  kinds  of  services  being  provided  by  the  District  be 
reduced  or  eliminated. 

Superintendent  Herring  recommended  190  full-time  equivalent  (F.T.E.)  positions 
filled  by  certificated  employees  be  reduced  or  eliminated  and  that  the  certificated  employees 
potentially  affected  by  the  proposed  reduction  in  services  be  given  notice  as  required  by  law.

  

Board  Resolution  No.  03-04-40 

5. 

On  March  20,  2004,  Board  Resolution  No.  03-04-40  was  adopted.  Board 

Resolution  No.  03-04-40  provided: 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Rialto  Unified  School  District  has  determined 

that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  herein  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the  aforementioned  reason,  it  is 
in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  that  the  number  of  regular  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  services  of  regular  certificated 
employees  based  upon  the  reduction  of  average  daily  attendance  during  the  past  two  years. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Rialto 

Unified  School  District  as  follows: 

A.  That  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  below  be  reduced  or  eliminated 

commencing  in  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

  

  

Elementary  Classroom  Teachers 
Counselors 
Middle  School  P.E. 
High  School  Business 
High  School  Home  Economics 
TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES 

177  E.T.E. 
5  FE.T.E. 
5  F.T.E. 
2  F.T.E. 
1LF,T.E. 
190  F.T.E. 

  

  

  

B. 

That  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  the  legal 
number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  be  terminated  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  section  44955. 

C. 

That  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  be  affected  by  the  termination  of  regular 
employees  and  not  by  terminating  temporary  or  substitute  employees. 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  at  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Board  of  education  held  on 

March  10,  2004. 

AYES 
NOES: 
ABSENT:  l

 
l
o
l
o

Joanne  T.  Gilbert 
President 
Board  of  Education 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

6. 

On  March  12,  2004,  a  Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services  Will  Not  Be 

Required,  a  Notice  of  Accusation,  an  Accusation,  (blank)  Notice  of  Defense  and  Request  for

Hearing,  copies  of  pertinent  Education  Code  sections  and  a  Notice  of  Hearing  were  served 
by  mail  on  approximately  175  certificated  employees  who  were  determined  by  the  District’s 
administrative  staff  to  be  the  most  junior  employees  performing  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  were  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination. 

7. 

On  March  15,  2004,  a  Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services  Will  Not  Be 

Required,  a  Notice  of  Accusation,  an  Accusation,  (blank)  Notice  of  Defense  and  Request  for 
Hearing,  copies  of  pertinent  Education  Code  sections  and  a  Notice  of  Hearing  were  served 
by  mail  sent  to  Tami  Butler,  a  certificated  employee  determined  by  the  District’s 
administrative  staff  to  be  a  junior  certificated  employees  who  was  performing  particular 
kinds  of  services  that  were  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination. 

8. 

9. 

Fifty-seven  of  the  certificated  employees  who  were  served  with  the 

aforementioned  jurisdictional  documents  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

Those  certificated  employees  timely  filing  a  Notice  of  Defense  were  served 

with  an  Amended  Notice  of  Hearing. 

10. 

On  April  16,  2004,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented.  Counsel  for  the  District  gave  an  opening 
statement.  Respondents  were  represented  by  Paul  Crost,  who  waived  the  giving  of  an 
opening  statement.  Stipulations  were  recited.  Sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence 
was  received. 

Counsel  for  Respondents  requested  the  parties  be  permitted  to  filing  written  closing 

arguments.  The  parties  were  directed  to  file  written  closing  arguments  by  the  close  of 
business  on  April  23,  2004. 

On  April  26,  2004,  following  the  filing  of  the  written  closing  arguments,  the  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

Documentary  Evidence 

|  Respondents  stipulated  to  the  admission  of  Exhibits  1  through  12,  without 

stipulating  to  the  accuracy  of  some  of  those  documents  including  the  accuracy  of  the 
District’s  seniority  list  (Exhibit  6),  the  District’s  bumping  analysis  (Exhibit  7),  the  Board’s 
tie-breaking  criteria  (Exhibit  9)  and  the  District’s  proposed  final  layoff  list  (Exhibit  11). 

Assistant  Superintendent  Davis,  the  District’s  Personnel  Officer,  has  been 

employed  by  the  District  for  12  years.  Assistant  Superintendent  Davis  was  in  charge  of  the 
District’s  layoff  proceedings  relating  to  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

The  District  developed  a  2003-2004  Certificated  Employee  Seniority  List  (Exhibit  6). 
The  seniority  list  contained  the  names  of  the  District’s  1,526  certificated  employees.  The  list 

The  Testimony 

4

11. 

    

12. 

contained  an  employee  ranking  number  (from  most  senior  to  most  junior),  a  seniority  date,'  a 
hire  date,”  each  employee’s  name,  the  school  site  where  the  employee  provided  educational 
services  in  the  2003-004  school  year,  the  employee’s  assignment,  the  employee’s  status  (e.g., 
Tenured,  Prob.  2,  Prob.  1,  Intern,  Emergency,  Pre-Intern,  or  Temporary),  and  the  teaching 
credential(s)  held. 

The  seniority  list  was  38  pages  long.  Those  employees  whose  names  were 

highlighted  in  yellow  were  given  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

13. 

The  District  prepared  a  seven  page  “bump  analysis”  which  contained  a  brief 
description  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  were  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination 
under  the  Board’s  resolution,’  the  names  of  the  credentialed  employees  providing  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  (ranked  in  order  from  the  employee  with  the  least  seniority  to  the 
employee  with  the  most  seniority  for  those  employees  who  might  be  subject  to  layoff),  the 
employee’s  status,  the  employee’s  first  date  of  service,  the  employee’s  credential,  whether 
the  employee  could  “bump”  a  more  junior  employee,  whether  positive  attrition  (resignation, 
termination,  death)  affected  the  number  of  employees  required  to  be  laid  off  and  some  other 
notes.  — 

Those  employees  whose  names  were  highlighted  in  yellow  were  proposed  to  be  given 

preliminary  layoff  notices.  Those  employees  who  names  were  highlighted  in  orange  were 
proposed  to  be  given  precautionary  notices.  The  “bump  analysis”  set  forth  the  name  of  the 
junior  employee  (and  seniority  rank)  who  was  bumped. 

Bumping 

14. 

15. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44955(c),  employees  must  be  “retained  to 

render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.” 

The  term  “bumping”  relates  to  the  right  of  a  senior  employee  to  displace  a 

more  junior  employee  who  is  rendering a  particular  kind  of  service  the  senior  employee  can 
competently  provide.* 

  

The  “seniority  date”  was  the  first  date  on  which  an  employee  provided  service  to  the  District  under  a  full 

! 
credential. 

A  “hire  date”  was  the  first  date  on  which  an  employee  provided  service  to  the  District  under  a  temporary 
2 
permit  or  university  intern  credential.  An  employee’s  “seniority  date”  and  “hire  date”  often  are  the  same,  but  an 
employee  cannot  have  an  earlier  “seniority  date”  than  his  or  her  “hire  date.” 

An  employee  is  not  entitled  to  a  seniority  date  until  he  or  she  holds  a  proper  credential,  according  to 

Assistant  Superintendent  Davis. 

Board  Resolution  No.  03-04-40  required  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  170  Elementary  Classroom 

3 
Teacher  F.T.E.s,  five  Counselor  F.T.E.s,  five  Middle  School  P.E.  F.T.E.s,  two  High  School  Business  F.T.E.s,  and 
one  High  School  Economics  F.T.E. 

Upon  determining  a  need  for  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  permanent  employees,  a  school  district  must 

‘ 
comply  with  the  layoff  procedures  enumerated  in  Education  Code  section  44955.  Seniority  determines  the  order  of 

5

  

16. 

Counselors:  One  counselor  resigned,  requiring  final  layoff  notices  to  be  given 

to  four  certificated  employees  providing  counseling  services  —  Fatima  Aguirre  (#1279), 
Dorothy  Robinson  (#1167),  Katrina  Patterson  (#1121),  and  Rachel  Conner  (#1048). 
Robinson,  Patterson  and  Conner  are  tenured  employees. 

17. 

Middle  School  P.E.  Teachers:  Two  middle  school  physical  education  teachers 
resigned.  The  District  correctly  determined  Mary  Margaret  Hamner  (#1193),  was  entitled  by 
her  seniority  and  credential  to  bump  Jason  Van  Heerde  (#1399),  who  was  a  high  school 
physical  education  teacher,  and  Kenya  Quiros  (#1184)  could  bump  Daniel  Williams  (#1318), 
who  was  also  a  high  school  physical  education  teacher. 

Only  one  certificated  employee  providing  services  as  a  middle  school  physical 
education  teacher  —  Della  Foster  (#1474),  who  was  an  intern  —  will  be  given a  final  layoff 
notice. 

18. 

High  School  Home  Economics:  There  was  no  positive  attrition  in  the  area, 

requiring a  final  layoff  notice  to  be  given  to  one  certificated  employee  providing  services  as 
a  high  school  home  economics  teacher  —  Patricia  Ivins  (#1480),  an  intern. 

19. 

High  School  Business  Education:  There  was  no  positive  attrition  in  the  area. 

One  certificated  employee  providing  services  as  a  high  school  business  teacher,  Carla  De 
Frates  (#1126),  who  was  tenured,  had  sufficient  seniority  and  credentials  to  bump  Edward 
Schrier  (#1215),  a  middle  school  teacher;  however,  the  remaining  certificated  employee 
providing  services  as  a  high  school  business  teacher  —  Richard  Borman  (#1214),  a 
probationary  employee  — will  be  given a  final  layoff  notice. 

20. 

Elementary  School  Teachers:  Numerous  certificated  employees  providing 

services  as  elementary  school  teachers  either  resigned  or  their  contracts  were  not  renewed.” 

Fifteen  certificated  employees  providing  services  as  elementary  school  teachers  were 
given  “precautionary”  notices.  One  hundred  fifty  elementary  school  teachers  were  going  to 
be  given  final  notice  under  the  District’s  bump  analysis. 

  

dismissals  and  between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on 
the  “basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will  not  be 
terminated  if  there  are  junior  employees  retained  who  render  services  which  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render.  Conversely,  a  district  may  move  upward  from  the  bottom  of  the  seniority  list,  “skipping”  over 
and  retaining  junior  employees  who  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  which  more  senior  employees 
are  not.  Seniority  is  not  an  inherent  or  constitutional  right.  Seniority  itself  confers  no  rights  on  employees  but 
entitles  them  to  preferential  treatment  only  to  the  extent  that  a  statute  or  collective  bargaining  agreement  so 
provides.  Seniority  rights  may  be  limited  by  subsequent  legislation.  (See,  Ozsogomonyan,  Teacher  Layoffs  in 
California:  An  Update  (1979)  30  Hastings  L.J.  1727.) 

Employees  who  did  not  obtain  a  credential  in  a  timely  fashion  or  who  did  not  show  progress  towards  the 
5 
completion  of  their  credential  in  accordance  with  their  agreement  with  the  District  did  not  have  their  employment 
contracts  renewed.  Each  employee  was  regularly  counseled  concerning  the  effect  of  his  or  her  lack  of 

credential/lack  of  progress  and  its  adverse  impact  on  his  or  her  employment  status.  

The  District  correctly  determined  Kelly  Hardwick  (#1375)  was  entitled  by  her 
seniority  and  credential  to  bump  Came  Vein  (#1451),  Zsa  Zsa  Greenland  (#1360)  was 
entitled  by  her  seniority  and  credential  to  bump  William  Cardosi  (#1498),  William  Cardosi 
(#1498)  was  entitled  by  his  seniority  and  credential  to  take  the  position  of  a  high  school 
social  science  teacher  who  resigned,  Sandra  Webster  (#1275)  was  entitled  by  her  seniority 
and  credential  to  take  a  vacant  middle  school  English  Department  position,  Laurie  Hicks 
(#1263)  was  entitled  by  her  seniority  and  credential  to  take  a  vacant  middle  school  English 
Department  position,  Katherine  DeStefano  (#1252)  was  entitled  by  her  seniority  and 
credential  to  bump  Michelle  Autrey  (#1504),  Johanna  Cueller  (#1229)  was  entitled  by  her 
seniority  and  credential  to  take  a  position  held  by  Elizabeth  Odell  (#15515)  a  7"  Grade 
English  teacher  who  resigned,  Patricia  Ortega  (#1219)  was  entitled  by  her  seniority  and 
credential  to  take  the  position  of  Ana  Centeno  (#1520),  a  middle  school  English  teacher  who 
resigned,  and  Alma  Razo  (#1178)  was  entitled  to  bump  Kevin  Hennessy  (#1183)  to  fill  a 
vacant  middle  school  math  position.  The  District  also  correctly  determined  Luis  Motta 
(#1177),  Teresa  Macias  #1175),  K.  Jeffrey  Whisman  (1174),  Ann  Snavely  (#1165),  James 
Nava  (#1164),  Kira  Shearer  (#1160),  Krista  Woodgrift  (#1156),  Julie  Navarro  (#1154),  Elsa 
Flores-Guiles  (#1151),  Elizabeth  Jay  (1120)  and  Patricia  Fuerte  Miranda  (#1119)  had 
bumping  rights  and  more  junior  certificated  employees  Deborah  McCain  (#1186),  John 
Deeney  (#1202),  Robert  Daughters  (#1220),  Michelle  Russell  (#1276),  Kevin  Ibanez 
(#1280),  Kristine  Mundt  (#1281),  Liddy  Adams  (#1285),  Erica  Bouffard  (#1294),  Clotilde 
Dvoran  (#1302),  Erica  King  and  Canda  Lofts  (#1304)  were  bumped  and  should  be  given 
notice. 

None  of  the  persons  providing  services  as  elementary  school  teachers  who  are  subject 

to  final  layoff  are  tenured. 

The  names  of  the  credentialed  employees  who  should  receive  final  layoff  notices  are 

set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  12  and  13. 

21. 
. 
employee.® 

The  District  did  not  “skip”  any  junior  employee  over  any  more  senior 

Skipping 

The  Tie-Breaking  Criteria 

22. 

The  Board  enacted  seniority  tie-breaking  criteria,  which  were  to  be  used  in  the 

event  it  became  necessary  to  determine  the  layoff  order  of  credentialed  employees  with  the 
same  seniority  date,  as  follows: 

  

Education  Code  section  44955(d)  sets  forth  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  that  the  services  of  a  senior 

6 
employee  must  be  retained  over  the  services  of  more  junior  employees.  This  exception  involves  “skipping”  a  junior 
employee  and  retaining  that  junior  employee’s  unique  and  necessary  services  over  a  more  senior  employee  who 
does  not  have  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  particular  course  of  study.

The  following  criteria  shall  be  applied  in  order,  one  step  at  time,  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  between 
credentialed  employees: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

 
W
N
N

8. 

No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  compliant  (i.e.,  highly  qualified  in  the  subject  areas  the  person 
is  presently  teaching). 
Possession  of  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  authorization  to  teach  English 
Language  Learners  (i.e.,  BCLAD,  CLAD,  etc.). 
Possession  of  additional  NCLB  compliant  credentials  or  authorizations  to  teach 
additional  subject  areas. 
Possession  of  a  Master’s  Degree  in  subject  area  being  taught  (earliest  date  prevails). 
Possession  of  a  University  Certificate  in  teaching  GATE  students. 
Current  assignment  includes  GATE  classes  or  Advanced  Placement  classes. 
Prior  full  time  teaching  experience  outside  the  district  (not  substitute  teaching)  as  verified 
by  documents  on  file  with  the  Personnel  office  (highest  number  of  verified  years 
prevails). 
Teaching  experience  in  different  grades  or  subject  areas. 

23. 

It  was  not  necessary  to  use  the  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria. 

The  District’s  Use  of Interns  and  Determination  of Seniority 

24. 

In  the  last  several  years,  when  the  District  was  growing  and  when  there  was  a 

shortage  of  credentialed  teachers,  the  District  hired  university  interns  to  provide  teaching 
services.  The  District  also  employed  persons  under  temporary  permits. 

25. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Davis,  the  District’s  Personnel  Officer,  testified  that 

all  district  interns,  probationary  teachers  and  tenured  teachers  had  a  “seniority”  date  that 
coincided  with  their  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Davis  testified  that  all  temporary,  pre-intern  and  emergency 

credentialed  teachers  had  a  date  of  hire  that  coincided  with  their  first  date  of  paid  service 
with  the  District,  but  that  date  did  not  constitute  a  “seniority”  date  because  those  persons  did 
not  hold  an  appropriate  credential. 

The  Temporary  Employee/Probationary  Status  Issue 

26. 

The  District  classified  some  persons  as  “temporary”  employees  because  those 

persons  provided  services  either  under  an  emergency  permit  or  a  pre-intern  certificate. 

27. 

Anargument  was  made  to  the  effect  that  those  persons  working  under 

emergency  permits  were  certificated  employees  and  holding  valid  credentials,  that 
emergency  permit  holders  are  generally  presumed  to  be  probationary  employees,  that  the 
employment  contracts  those  persons  signed  were  not  relevant  to  a  determination  of  their 
classification,  that  seniority  must  be  defined  by  an  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a 
probationary  position,  that  the  persons  described  by  the  District  as  “temporary  employees”

were  actually  probationary  employees  and  that  the  District’s  seniority  list  was  flawed  as  a 
result  of  these  alleged  errors.’ 

28.  |  An  argument  was  also  made  that  the  District’s  failure  to  produce  evidence 
related  to  the  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  should  preclude  its  use  in  any  layoff 
proceeding. 

29. 

The  District  argued  it  properly  denied  seniority  credit  for  services  provided  by 

persons  under  emergency  permits  or  pre-intern certificates.* 

30. 

The  District  argued  it  did  not  need  to  use  its  tie-breaking  criteria  and  no 

prejudice  was  established. 

31. 

As  outlined  in  Legal  Conclusions  3-9,  the  District  properly  classified 

emergency  permit  and  pre-intern  certificate  holders  as  “temporary  employees.” 

Other  Matters 

32. 

The  District  accepts  applications  for  employment  from  interested  persons  and 

keeps  them  on  file,  even  though  there  are  no  current  teaching  positions  available  in  those 
areas  where  there  is  a  reduction  in  force.  The  District  is  not  hiring  new  employees  in  those 
areas  where  there  is  a  proposed  reduction  in  force. 

The  District  actively  recruits  Mathematics  and  Special  Education  teachers,  since  there 

are  a  limited  number  of  properly  credentialed  persons  available  to  teach  in  those  areas. 

The  District  is  acting  prudently  in  both  instances. 

33. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 

requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices. 

34. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  senior  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

35. 

The  District’s  proposed  reduction  in  force  will  not  result  in  any  particular 

kinds  of  service  dropping  below  those  levels  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

  

7 
Unified  School  District  (2002)  998  Cal.App.4™  369 

To  support  this  legal  argument,  reference  was  made  primarily  to  CTA  v.  Governing  Board  of  Golden  Valley 

To  support  this  legal  argument,  reference  was  made  primarily  to  Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School 

8 
District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4"  369.

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction:  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  mandated  by  those  sections 
were  satisfied  as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  in  the  seniority  lists. 

2. 

Particular  Kinds  of Services:  A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  a 
reduction  in  the  number  of  students.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion,  subject  to  the  minimum 
level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  a  reduction  of  services  is  necessary 
and  proper  under  the  circumstances.  The  board’s  decision  is  made  at  the  time  of  the  final 
notice.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627. 

3. 

Credentialing:  The  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  issues 

teaching  credentials.  The  term  “credential”  encompasses  “a  credential,  certificate,  life 
document,  life  diploma,  certificate  of  clearance  or  waiver  issued  by  the  commission.” 
Education  Code  section  44002. 

A  school  district  may  employ  an  individual  under  an  emergency  teaching  permit.” 

Education  Code  section  44845  provides:  “Every  probationary  or  permanent 
employee  employed  after  June  30,  1947,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed  on  the  date 
upon  which  he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.” 

Education  Code  section  44929.21(b)  provides:  “Every  employee  of  a  school  district  . 

..  having  an  average  daily  attendance  of  250  or  more  who,  after  having  been  employed  by 
the  district  for  two  complete  consecutive  school  years  in  a  position  or  positions  requiring 
certification  qualifications,  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year  to  a  position 

  

Education  Code  section  44300  provides  “the  commission  may  issue  or  renew  emergency  teaching  or 

° 
specialist  permits  in  accordance  with  regulations  adopted  by  the  commission  . 
conditions  are  met: 

. 

.  provided  that  all  of  the  following 

(1)  The  applicant  possesses  a  baccalaureate  degree  conferred  by a  regionally  accredited  institution  of  higher 

education  and  has  fulfilled  the  subject  matter  requirements  of  Section  44301. 

(2)  The  applicant  passes  the  state  basic  skills  proficiency  test  as  provided  for  in  Section  44252. 

(3)  The  commission  approves  the  justification  for  the  emergency  permit  submitted  by  the  school  district  in  which 

the  applicant  is  to  be  employed.  The  justification  shall  include  ail  of  the  following: 

(A)  Annual  documentation  that  the  district  has  implemented  in  policy  and  practices  a  process  for  conducting  a 
.  but  has  been  unable  to  recruit  a  sufficient  number  of  certificated  teachers,  including  teacher 

diligent  search  . 
candidates  pursuing  full  certification  through  internship,  district  internship,  or  other  alternative  routes  established  by 
the  commission. 

. 

(B)  A  declaration  of  need  for  fully  qualified  educators  . 

. 

.  made  in  the  form  of  a  motion  adopted  by  the  governing 

board  of  the  district...” 

10

requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the  commencement  of  the  succeeding  school 
year  be  classified  as  and  become  a  permanent  employee  of  the district.”!° 

Under  Education  Code  section  44911  provides: 

“Service  by  a  person  under a  provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in 
computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to, 
classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a  school  district. 

This  section  shall  not  be  applicable  to  teachers  granted  a  one-year  emergency 
credential  under  the  conditions  specified  in  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44252  and 
subdivision  (h)  of  Section  44830.” 

4. 

California  Teachers  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Golden  Valley 

Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4"  369  stated  “teachers  serving  under  an 
emergency  permit  who  satisfy  the  requirements  of  section  44915  are  entitled  to  the  statutory 
protections  governing  the  dismissal  of  a  probationary  employee.” 

Golden  Valley  involved  a  mid-year  “for  cause”  termination  action  rather  than  an 
economic  layoff  action.  In  Golden  Valley,  the  written  contract  between  the  employee  and  the 
district  specifically  provided  the  employee  with  contingent  probationary  status. 

5. 

Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4"  1026 

involved  the  issue  of  whether  service  under  a  temporary  permit  should  count  toward 
completion  of  a  mandatory  two-year  probation  period. 

Summerfield  concluded  that  under  Education  Code  section  44911,  time  spent  teaching 

under  an  emergency  teaching  credential  may  not  be  counted  in  computing  progress  toward 
permanent  status  unless  the  employee  was  credentialed  in  another  state  and  demonstrated 
adequate  basic  skills  pending  successful  completion  of  the  California  Basic  Educational 
Skills  Test.  Summerfield  reasoned  that  the  plain  language  of  Education  Code  section  44911 
suggested  that  emergency  credentials  were  the  same  as  provisional  credentials,  or  are  at  least 
were  one  type  of  provisional  credential,  and  under  Education  Code  section  44911  service  by 
a  person  under  a  provisional  credential  could  not  be  included  in  computing  the  mandatory 
probationary  service. 

6. 

A  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  continues  to  serve  under  that 

permit  and  under  the  contract  to  which  they  agreed  until  the  teacher  is  issued  a  credential  and 
registers  it  with  the  district.  The  district  has  no  duty  to  classify  a  teacher  as  probationary 
employee  retroactive  to  the  validity  date  of  the  credential.  No  statutory  provision  suggests  a 
contrary  conclusion,  and  precedent  confirms  that  contract  terms  to  which  a  teacher  has 
agreed  should  not  be  abrogated  unless  the  statutory  mandate  is  clear.  Moreover,  this 
conclusion  comports  with  related  statutory  provisions,  as  well  as  considerations  of 

  

A  complete  school  year  for  purposes  of  seniority  is  attained  by  serving  at  least  75%  of  the  number  of  days 

10 
the  regular  schools  are  maintained.  Education  Code  section  44908. 

ll   

practicality  and  common  sense.  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  Dist.  (2004)  116 
Cal.App.4th  1070,  1078. 

7. 

No  person  who  was  characterized  by  the  District  as  a  “temporary  employee” 

presented  any  factual  argument  that  he  or  she  was  misled  by  his  or  her  employment  into 
believing  that  he  or  she  was  a  probationary  employee.  This  is  not  a  case  of  the  District’s 
manipulation  of  the  classification  system  to  any  temporary  employee’s  detriment;  if 
anything,  the  reverse  is  the  case.  See,  American  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Board  of 
Education  (1977)  77  Cal.App.3d  100,  109. 

. 

8. 

Within  the  context  of  this  economic  layoff  proceeding  —  as  opposed  to  a 

it  makes  little  sense  to  retain  a  teacher  who  does  not  have 
termination  for  cause  proceeding  — 
a  teaching  credential,  but  possesses  only  an  emergency  permit  which  can  only  be  issued  for 
one  year  on  an  emergency  basis  because  duly  credentialed  teachers  cannot  be  found,  over  a 
teacher  who  possesses  a  regular  teaching  credential.  The  economic  layoff  statutes  were 
designed  to  ensure  that  qualified  and  competent  senior  employees  will  be  retained  over  more 
junior  employees  and  that  permanent  employees  will  be  retained  over  probationary 
employees.  A  teacher  cannot  become  a  permanent  (tenured)  employee  without  serving  a 
mandatory  two  year  probationary  period  first,  and  a  teacher  cannot  attain  probationary  status  © 
under  a  temporary  permit. 

For  these  reasons,  and  based  on a  review  of  the  authority  cited  in  Legal  Conclusions 

3-8,  it  is  concluded  that  persons  serving  as  teachers  under  emergency  permits  were  not 
entitled  to  seniority  credit  in  this  layoff  proceeding. 

9. 

Pre-Intern  Certificates:  Pre-interns  are  teachers  who  have  a  baccalaureate  or 
higher  degree  from  an  accredited  institution,  but  who  have  not  taken  the  education  courses 
required  to  obtain  a  teaching  credential.  These  persons  receive  a  certificate  from  the 
California  Commission  on  Teaching  Credentialing,  not  a  credential.  The  next  step  in  the 
training  process  is  internship. 

Education  Code  section  44466  provides: 

“An  intern  shall  not  acquire  tenure  while  serving  on  an  internship  credential. 
A  person  who,  after  completing  a  teaching  internship  program  authorized  pursuant  to 
this  article,  is  employed  for  at  least  one  complete  school  year  in  a  position  requiring 
certification  qualifications  by  the  school  district  that  employed  the  person  as  an  intern 
during  the  immediately  preceding  school  year  and  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding 
school  year  to  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  succeeding  school  year,  acquire  tenure.” 

A  similar  provision  does  not  exist  for  service  under  a  pre-intern  certificate. 

10. 

Since  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  not  used,  no  issue  has  been  presented  for 

determination.  Should  the  tie-breaking  criteria  be  used  to  determine  the  order  of  any 

12

rehiring,  any  persons  adversely  affected  shall  have  the  right  to  seek  appropriate  legal  remedy 
to  rectify  any  inequity  arising  out  of  the  criteria  themselves  or  their  specific  application. 

11. 

Cause  exists  to  affirm  the  Board’s  reduction  of  190  full-time  equivalent 

positions.  The  Board’s  decision  was  not  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a 
valid  exercise  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  reduction  and  elimination  of  these  particular  kinds 
of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

12. 

Asaresult  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  service, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  the  following  employees  notice  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year:  Michael  Aril,  Lady 
Adams,  Shannon  Adcock,  Fatima  Aguirre,  Isabel  Alexander,  Ricky  Anderson,  Mary 
Andrade,  Elisa  Anthony,  Mary  Patricio,  Dirk  Apollonius,  Sandra  Arnold,  Dianne  Austin, 
Richard  Barman,  Erica  Buford,  Tyler  Brooders,  Jo  Anne  Brooks,  Karen  Butler,  Tami  Butler, 
Tamara  Carlson,  Teresa  Carrillo,  Jennifer  Carroll,  Laurel  Carter,  Theresa  Chandler,  Tara 
Cigarillo,  Sandra  Clemons,  Rachael  Conner,  Miguel  Contreras,  Patricia  Conyers-Ruskauff, 
Billie  Cox,  Joaquin  Cristales,  Angelo  Cunanan,  Gazelle  Dara,  Robert  Daughters,  Ida  Davila, 
John  Deeney,  Ada  Diaz,  Cheryl  Dietz,  Susan  Dix,  Amy  Dodd,  Roxie  Dominguez,  Clotilde 
Dvoran,  Michele  Endean,  Lauren  Erickson,  Elizabeth  Folden,  Della  Foster,  Steven  Funke, 
Delores  Garcia,  Diana  Gilbreath,  Jenna  Gillespie,  Frank  Gomez  II,  Haydee  Gomez,  Laura 
Gonzales-Reyderos,  Barbara  Gordin,  Graciela  Guardado,  Karla  Guzman,  Gina  Hall,  Katie 
Hamilton,  Shannon  Hanks-Grandia,  Patricia  Harris,  Couray  Hazim,  Angelica  Hernandez, 
Veronica  Hernandez,  Elsa  Hery,  Heidi  Hetzer,  Karen  Holguin,  Troy  Holland,  Lorena  Huizar, 
Kevin  Ibanez,  Patricia  Ivins,  Patricia  Jenkins,  Clorie  Jimmerson,  Terri  Jonhnson,  Carol 
Judson,  Steven  Kalapaca,  Erica  King,  Jennifer  Kral,  Natalie  Lewis,  Candra  Loftis,  Raquel 
Lule,  Jana  Luna,  Stephen  Magee,  Nora  Manuel,  Deborah  McCain,  Monica  McDonald, 
Catherine  McNair,  Autumn  Mena-Khellafi,  Emily  Mensik,  Mitzi  Moreland-Bodon,  Jennifer, 
Moretta,  Laura  Morrill,  Melody  Morton,  Timothy  Mullane,  Kristine  Mundt,  Donald  New, 
Louisa  Nies,  Eva  Ocegueda,  Sarah  Parker,  Katrina  Patterson,  Kenneth  Payne  Ill,  Nancy 
Payne  Melissa  Pazoas-Garcia,  Jacqueline  Pendery,  Charlene  Peterson,  Tina  Pham, Kelly 
Potter,  Maureen  Powers,  Pavinee  Prachachalerm,  Monica  Quiel,  Irma  Quintana-Hernandez, 
Jerald  Quintana,  Jo  Ralph,  Wallace  Rayford,  Lisa  Reidy-Carrick,  Michaeline  Rentz,  Yessica 
Reyes,  Claudia  Reynolds,  Barbara  Richardson,  Barbara  Robins,  Dorothy  Robinson,  Brenda 
Rodriguez,  Lisa  Rollins,  Own  Ross,  Rebecca  Rossi,  Michelle  Russell,  Debra  Rybak,  Karen 
Saldana,  Melissa  Sambrano,  Margarita  Santana,  Edward  Schrier,  Nina  Serena, Wendy 
Shewmake,  Melanie  Smith,  Tami  Smith,  Jose  Soriano,  June  Stampley,  Gabrirela  Thies, 
Michael  Toomey,  Dianne  Torres,  Maureen  Trainer,  Meghan  Turner,  Jason  Van  Heerde, 
Thomas  Vasta,  Ramon  Velasco,  Amber  Wade  Adam  Waggoner,  Lindsey  Wagner,  Ingrid 
Wahjudi,  Tammie  Welch,  Daniel  Williams,  Casey  Woodgrift,  Linda  Wren  and  Joni  Wright. 

13. 

 Asaresult  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  service, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  the  following  employees 
precautionary  notice  that  their  services  might  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year: 
Michelle  Autrey,  Tara  Bell,  Alison  Boggs,  April  Cairo,  Sue  Chan,  Cynthia  Flores,  Dustin 
Goode,  Alicia  Llamas-Perez,  Angela  Marion,  Monique  Means,  Roxanne  Medina, Angelica 

Moore,  Daniel  O’Brien  and  Maria  Rodriguez.  

14. 
Conclusions  1-11. 

Legal  Conclusions  12  and  13  are  based  on  Factual  Findings  1-35  and  Legal 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

Notice  shall  be  given  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  the  following 
employees  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year: 
Michael  Aril,  Lady  Adams,  Shannon  Adcock,  Fatima  Aguirre,  Isabel  Alexander,  Ricky 
Anderson,  Mary  Andrade,  Elisa  Anthony,  Mary  Patricio,  Dirk  Apollonius,  Sandra  Arnold, 
Dianne  Austin,  Richard  Barman,  Erica  Buford,  Tyler  Brooders,  Jo  Anne  Brooks,  Karen 
Butler,  Tami  Butler,  Tamara  Carlson,  Teresa  Carrillo,  Jennifer  Carroll,  Laurel  Carter, 
Theresa  Chandler,  Tara  Cigarillo,  Sandra  Clemons,  Rachael  Conner,  Miguel  Contreras, 
Patricia  Conyers-Ruskauff,  Billie  Cox,  Joaquin  Cristales,  Angelo  Cunanan,  Gazelle  Dara, 
Robert  Daughters,  Ida  Davila,  John  Deeney,  Ada  Diaz,  Cheryl  Dietz,  Susan  Dix,  Amy  Dodd, 
Roxie  Dominguez,  Clotilde  Dvoran,  Michele  Endean,  Lauren  Erickson,  Elizabeth  Folden, 
Della  Foster,  Steven  Funke,  Delores  Garcia,  Diana  Gilbreath,  Jenna  Gillespie,  Frank  Gomez 
II,  Haydee  Gomez,  Laura  Gonzales-Reyderos,  Barbara  Gordin,  Graciela  Guardado,  Karla 
Guzman,  Gina  Hall,  Katie  Hamilton,  Shannon  Hanks-Grandia,  Patricia  Harris,  Courtnay 
Hazim,  Angelica  Hernandez,  Veronica  Hernandez,  Elsa  Hery,  Heidi  Hetzer,  Karen  Holguin, 
Troy  Holland,  Lorena  Huizar,  Kevin  Ibanez,  Patricia  Ivins,  Patricia  Jenkins, Clorie 
Jimmerson,  Terri  Jonhnson,  Carol  Judson,  Steven  Kalapaca,  Erica  King,  Jennifer Kral, 
Natalie  Lewis,  Candra  Loftis,  Raquel  Lule,  Jana  Luna,  Stephen  Magee,  Nora  Manuel, 
Deborah  McCain,  Monica  McDonald,  Catherine  McNair,  Autumn  Mena-Khellafi,  Emily 
Mensik,  Mitzi  Moreland-Bodon,  Jennifer,  Moretta,  Laura  Morrill,  Melody  Morton,  Timothy 
Mullane,  Kristine  Mundt,  Donald  New,  Louisa  Nies,  Eva  Ocegueda,  Sarah  Parker,  Katrina 
Patterson,  Kenneth  Payne  III,  Nancy  Payne  Melissa  Pazoas-Garcia,  Jacqueline  Pendery, 
Charlene  Peterson,  Tina  Pham,  Kelly  Potter,  Maureen  Powers,  Pavinee  Prachachalerm, 
Monica  Quiel,  Irma  Quintana-Hernandez,  Jerald  Quintana,  Jo  Ralph,  Wallace  Rayford,  Lisa 
Reidy-Carrick,  Michaeline  Rentz,  Yessica  Reyes,  Claudia  Reynolds,  Barbara  Richardson, 
Barbara  Robins,  Dorothy  Robinson,  Brenda  Rodriguez,  Lisa  Rollins,  Own  Ross,  Rebecca 
Rossi,  Michelle  Russell,  Debra  Rybak,  Karen  Saldana,  Melissa  Sambrano,  Margarita 
Santana,  Edward  Schrier,  Nina  Serena,  Wendy  Shewmake,  Melanie  Smith,  Tami  Smith,  Jose 
Soriano,  June  Stampley,  Gabrirela  Thies,  Michael  Toomey,  Dianne  Torres,  Maureen  Trainer, 
Meghan  Turner,  Jason  Van  Heerde,  Thomas  Vasta,  Ramon  Velasco,  Amber  Wade  Adam 
Waggoner,  Lindsey  Wagner,  Ingrid  Wahjudi,  Tammie  Welch,  Daniel  Williams,  Casey 
Woodgrift,  Linda  Wren  and  Joni  Wright. 

14 

 

Precautionary  notice  shall  be  given  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  the 
following  employees  precautionary  notice  that  their  services  might  not  be  required  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year:  Michelle  Autrey,  Tara  Bell,  Alison  Boggs,  April  Cairo,  Sue  Chan, 
Cynthia  Flores,  Dustin  Goode,  Alicia  Llamas-Perez,  Angela  Marion,  Monique  Means, 
Roxanne  Medina,  Angelica  Moore,  Daniel  O’Brien  and  Maria  Rodriguez. 

DATED:  Lgitat. BO, d00%, 

ministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

15

  

