BEFORE  THE 
KINGS  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
KINGS  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

. 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

TRACY  BROWN 

OAH  No.  N  2004030847 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Muriel  Evens,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Hanford,  California,  on  April  20,  2004. 

Lozano  Smith,  Attorneys  at  Law,  by  Robert  Piacente,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 

the  Superintendent  of  Schools. 

Tuttle  &  McCloskey,  PC,  by  Wesley  Green,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  20,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Tamara  Ravalin,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  with  the 

Kings  County  Office  of  Education,  made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  her  official  capacity. 

Respondent is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  Kings  County  Office of 

Education  teaching  adaptive physical  education. 

3. 

On  March 2,  2004,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949  and . 
44955,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  notified  the  Superintendent  in 
writing  of  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  respondent  be  notified  that 
his  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Assistant  Superintendent 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  that  respondent  be 
terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to  his  competency  as  a  teacher.

lL. 

2. 

Tracy  Brown. 

     

4. 

On  March  3,  2004,  the  Superintendent  issued  Order  No.  030304A,  concurring 
with  the  recommendation  of  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  ordering  the  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  as  follows: 

a. 

b. 

C. 

d. 

e. 

Eliminate  three  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  teaching  positions  at 
the  Court  School. 

Eliminate  one  FTE  Resource  Specialist  Teacher  in  the  Special  Education 
Department. 

Eliminate  one  FTE  certificated  teaching  position  at  the  Community  School. 

Eliminate  one  FTE  certificated  Program  Specialist  in  the  Special  Education 
Department. 

Eliminate  one  FTE  certificated  Adaptive  Physical  Education  Teacher  in  the 
Special  Education  Department. 

5. 

On  or  about  March  8,  2004,  a  notice  of  termination  was  delivered  to 

respondent  by  personal  delivery. 

The  written  notices  of  termination  specifically  stated  that  respondent’s  services  would 

not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

Respondent  was  advised  of  his  right  to  a  hearing,  that  respondent  had  to  deliver  a 

request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination  by  March  19, 
2004,  which  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served,  and  that 
the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

6. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
was  cause  for  not  reemploying  respondent  for  the  ensuing  year.  Other  persons  notified  of 
their  termination  either  did  not  request  a  hearing  or  withdrew  their  request  prior  to  the 
hearing. 

7. 

An  Accusation  was  timely  served  on  respondent  thereafter.  Respondent  filed  a 

timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8. 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Superintendent’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

  

       

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  Office  of  Education  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees 
of  the  Office  as  determined  by  the  Superintendent. 

10. 

The  Superintendent  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  for  the  Kings 

County  Office  of  Education  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause 
for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the 
charges  set  forth  in  the  Accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Superintendent  give 
respondent  notice  before  May  15,  2003,  that  his  services  are  longer  be  required  by  the  Office. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  respondent  is  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 

respondent  before  May  15,  2003,  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

Dated:  Hay  6,  Z00Y 

Wiradbou. 

MURIEL  EVENS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

