BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
FALLBROOK  UNIFIED  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2004030421 

A  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEE, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  23,  2004,  in  Fallbrook,  California,  Alan  S.  Meth,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

William  Wood  Merrill,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Fallbrook  Unified  High 

School  District. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Attorney  At  Law,  represented  respondent  George  Kreutz. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  23,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

On  March  24,  2004,  Michael  J.  Millerick,  Director  of  Human  Resources  of  the 

Fallbrook  Unified  High  School  District  (hereafter,  “the  District”),  made  and  filed  the 
accusation  against  respondent  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  Mr.  Millerick  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  of  the  District 
Superintendent's  recommendation  that  respondent  and  one  other  certificated  employee  of  the 
District  be  notified  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 
Superintendent's  notification  to  the  Governing  Board  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

‘On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  respondent  was  given  written  notice  by 

Mr.  Millerick  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondent,  pursuant  to 

1

1. 

2. 

    

4. 

3. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year.  The  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

5. 

Respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 

for  not  reemploying  him  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  An  accusation  was  timely  served  on 
respondent,  and  respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 

following  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year: 

Agriculture 
Art 

1  full  time  equivalents 
1  full  time  equivalents 

The  services  set  forth  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of 
the  District's  discretion. 

7. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondent  is  retained  to  perform  services 

which  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

9. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District  with  a  seniority  date  of 
August  22,  2001.  He  has  a  Life  Standard  Secondary  credential  in  the  area  of  agricultural 
science  (academic). 

The  District  maintains  three  high  schools:  a  comprehensive  school 

(Fallbrook),  a  continuation  school  (Ivy),  and  an  alternative  school  (Oasis).  Respondent, 
during  the  2003-04  school  year,  was  one  of  three  agricultural  science  teachers  at  Fallbrook 
High  School.  He  taught  two  agricultural  science  1  classes,  and  taught  an  hour  a  day  at  the 
continuation  school.  He  is  the  most  junior  of  three.  He  has  taught  for  26  years. 

Respondent  testified  part  of  his  duties  included  recruiting  new  agricultural  science 

students  from  local  junior  high  schools.  He  had  learned  there  had  been a  decline  in  the 
number  of  agricultural  science  students  in  the  current  school  year,  even  though  the  recruiting 
efforts  had  been  successful.  He  testified  the  agricultural  science  teachers  had  again  recruited 
a  large  number  of  students  for  their  program  for  the  2004-05  school  year,  and  based  on  those 
projected  numbers,  he  believed  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  two  agricultural  science 

2

11. 

10. 

    

teachers  to  teach  all  of  those  students.  He  noted  that  because  of  the  decline  in  enrollment,  he 
taught  a  health  class  for  the  first  semester,  but  he  did  not  have  a  credential  to  teach  it. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondent  as  set  forth 
in  the  Factual  Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils 
thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

Respondent  challenges  the  wisdom  of  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to 

reduce  the  agriculture  program  by  one  full-time  equivalent  position  and  argues  the  one-year 
decline  in  enrollment  was  an  aberration.  That  decision,  however,  is  one  the  Governing 
Board  is  authorized  to  make  and  it  was  reasonable  for  the  Board  to  base  that  decision  on  a 
decline  in  enrollment  in  the  agriculture  program.  There  is  no  guarantee  all  the  recruited 
students  will  in  fact  register  for  agricultural  science  classes,  and  there  was  no  evidence  the 
District  would  otherwise  not  meet  the  students’  needs.  Agricultural  science  is  not  a 
mandated  course,  and  it  may  be  properly  reduced. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  George  Kreutz  is  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 
respondent  before  May  15,  2004  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school 
year  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

Y/e  9/0  S 

BLA 

ALAN  S.  METHY  ~ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

