BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
OROVILLE  CITY  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  BUTTE 
. 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004040004 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

LAURA  FILBECK, 
RONALD  HOTMER, 
MARY  JEPPSON, 
PATRICK  J.  JOHNSON,  JR., 
LISA  D.  KITCHEN, 
SHIRLEY  STUMBAUGH, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Catherine  B.  Frink,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Oroville,  California  on  April  26,  2004. 

Christian  M.  Kiener,  Attorney  at  Law,  Girard  &  Vinson,  1006  Fourth  Street,  Eighth 

Floor,  Sacramento,  CA  95814-3326,  represented  the  Oroville  City  Elementary  School 
District. 

Donald  A.  Selke,  Attorney  at  Law,  Wells,  Small,  Selke  &  Graham,  292  Hemsted 

Drive,  P.O.  Box  991828,  Redding,  CA  96099-1828,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Donald  Remley,  Ed.D.,  Superintendent  of  the  Oroville  City  Elementary 

School  District  (“District”),  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Laura  Filbeck,  Ronald  Hotmer,  Mary  Jeppson,  Patrick  J.  J ohnson,  Jr.,  Lisa  D. 
Kitchen  and  Shirley  Stumbaugh  (“respondents”)  were  at  all  times  mentioned  herein  and  now 
are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  10,  2004,  the  governing  board  of  the  District  (“Board”)  adopted 

Amended  Resolution  No.  03-04-12,  (“Amended  Resolution”)  in  which  the  Board  determined

  

that  there  had  been  a  decline  in  the  average  daily  attendance  (“ADA”)  in  the  District  for  the 
first  six  months  in  which  school  had  been  in  session  for  the  2003-04  school  year  below  the 
corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  two  previous  school  years,  resulting  in  the  need  to 
decrease  a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees,  and  resolved  to  reduce  8.0  full- 
time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  K-6  multiple  subject  (“MS”)  teachers,  District-wide.  The  Board 
further  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  (“PKS”) 
for  the  2004-2005  school  year  and  directed  the  superintendent  to  send  notice  to certificated 
employees  that  their  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year:' 

@ 

Choral  Music  Teacher,  Grades  K-8,  District-wide 
Librarian,  Central  Middle  School 
Counselor,  grades  K-8,  District-wide 
English/language  arts  teachers,  grades  7  and  8 
Mathematics  teacher,  grades  7  and  8 
Social  Studies  teacher,  grades  7  and  8 
Life  Science  teacher,  grades  7  and  8 

Total  Full-Time  Equivalent  Reduction 

1.00  FTE 
1.00 
1.00 
1.50 
0.50 
0.33 
0.17 

5.50  FTE 

4. 

The  services  identified in the  superintendent’s  recommendation  are  particular 
kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  decisions  were  based  on  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  and 

to  other  certificated  employees  of  the  District  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be 
given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  (“March 
11  Notice”).  Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  and  notices  of  defense.  The 
parties  stipulated  that  all  jurisdictional  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955  have  been  met. 

6. 

At  the  hearing,  the  district  rescinded  the  accusations  against  respondents 

Ronald  Hotmer,  Mary  Jeppson  and  Patrick  J.  Johnson,  Jr.,  all  of  whom  will  be  retained  for 
the  2004-05  school  year. 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44955(b)  states  in  part  that,  “[w]henever  in  any  school 

year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in 
which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the 
previous  two  school  years,  ...  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,...  and  when  in  the 

  

"On  February  25,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  #03-04-11,  Resolution  to  Adopt  Tie-Breaking  Criteria  in 
Reference  to  the  Reduction  of  Certificated  Personnel.  (“tiebreaker  criteria”).  The  tiebreaker  criteria  was  not  utilized 
in  determining  the  order  of  layoffs  in  this  proceeding.

  

  

@ 

opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of 
any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of 
the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of 
the  school  year....” 

8. 

With  respect  to  the  District’s  proposed  layoff  of  8.0  FTE  K-6  multiple  subject 

teachers  due  to  a  decline  in  ADA,  the  parties  agreed  that  the  District  had  experienced  a  6.7 
percent  decline  in  ADA,  as  compared  to  the  base  year  (2001-02)  ADA,  which  allowed  the 
District  to  reduce  the  base  year  certificated  staff by  up  to  9.96  FTE,  to  138.71  FTE.  After 
deducting  9.84  FTE  for  the  PKS  layoff  from  the  2002-03  school  year,  the  District is  able  to 
retain  128.87  FTE;  inasmuch  as  the  District  currently  employs  137.70  FTE  certificated 
employees,  this  resulted  in  a  maximum  possible  reduction  of  8.83  FTE  (137.70-128.87  FTE) 
due  to  a  decline  in  ADA. 

9. 

On  February  24,  2004,  prior  to  the  adoption  of  the  Amended  Resolution,  the 

District  received a letter  of  resignation  from  Cheryle  Brothers,  a  1.0  FTE  life  sciences 
teacher.  As  a  consequence  of  this  resignation,  the  District  was  not  required  to  lay  off  a 
certificated  employee  to  achieve  the  0.17  FTE  life  science  teacher  PKS  reduction  specified  in 
the  Amended  Resolution  (Finding  3).  The  remaining  0.83  FTE  attributable to  the  resignation 
of  Ms.  Brothers  permitted  the  District  to  reduce  the  number  of  FTE  positions  designated  for 
layoff  due  to  a  decline  in  ADA  from  8.83  FTE  to  8.0  FTE. 

10. 

The  District  prepared  a  “bumping  chart”  to  determine  the  employees  who 
would  be  given  layoff  notices  to  effectuate  the  reductions  or  eliminations  in  PKS  and  the 
reductions  due  to  a  decline  in  ADA  (District  Exhibit  L).  With  respect  to  the  8.0  FTE  ADA 
reductions,  the  District  issued  March  11  Notices  to  the  eight  least  senior  MS  credentialed 
teachers  who  did  not  have  other  specific  credentials  that  would  permit  them  to  be  retained,  or 
“skipped”  by  the  District. 

11. 

As  aresult  of  the  District’s  proposed  PKS  reduction  of  1.5  FTE 

English/language  arts,  the  District  identified  respondent  Shirley  Stumbaugh  (#161  on  the 
District’s  seniority  list)  1.0  FTE  English/language  arts  (ESL)  teacher  at  the  District’s  middle 
school,  and  Ronald  R.  Hotmer  (#145  on  the  seniority  list)  0.5  FTE  language  arts,  as  the  two 
certificated  employees  with  the  least  seniority  in  language  arts.  However,  Mr.  Hotmer  is  also 
credentialed  to  teach  mathematics,  among  other  subjects;  therefore,  Mr.  Hotmer  was  able  to 
“bump”  employee  Kori  Hosler  (#188  on  the  seniority  list)  }.  0  FTE  mathematics  teacher  at 
the  District’s  middle  school,  from  0.5  FTE  of  her  position.”  As  noted in  Finding  5,  the 
District  withdrew  the  accusation  against  Mr.  Hotmer  at  the  hearing. 

12. 

As  aresult  of  the  District’s  proposed  reduction  of  1.0  FTE  choral  music 
teacher,  the  District  sent  a  March  11  Notice  to  Rose  Manera  (#51  on  the  seniority  list). 

  

*  In  addition,  the  District  proposes  to  lay  off  Ms.  Hosler  for  the  remaining  0.5  FTE  of  her  1.0  FTE  position  due  to 
the  PKS  reduction  of  0.5  FTE  mathematics.

However,  Ms.  Manera  holds  a  MS  credential  and  has  sufficient  seniority  to  “bump” 
Kimberly  Dryden  (#171  on  the  seniority  list),  the  least  senior  MS  teacher  who  had  not  been 
previously  identified  for  layoff  due  to  the  ADA  reduction.  Ms.  Dryden  also  received  a 
March  11  Notice.  Neither  Ms.  Manera  nor  Ms.  Dryden  filed  requests  for  hearing.  However, 
the  District  intends  to  retain  Ms.  Manera  as  a  K-6  classroom  teacher  for  the  2004-05  school 
year. 

© 

13. 

Mary  Jeppson  (#42  on  the  seniority  list)  is  the  only  certificated  librarian  in  the 
District.  As  a  result  of  the  proposed  PKS  elimination  of  1.0  FTE  librarian,  Ms.  Jeppson  was 
issued  a  March  11  Notice.  However,  Ms.  Jeppson  holds  a  standard  secondary  teaching 
credential  in  English,  which  permits  her  to  teach  English/language  arts  at  the  District’s 
middle  school.  Therefore,  Ms.  Jeppson  “bumped”  Patrick  J.  Johnson,  Jr.,  (#107  on  the 
seniority  list)  an  English/language  arts  teacher  with  less  seniority  than  Ms.  Jeppson.  As 
noted  in  Finding  5,  the  District  withdrew  the  accusation  against  Ms.  Jeppson  at  the  hearing, 
and  she  will  be  retained  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

14. 

On  or  about  March  15,  2004,  the  District  received  the  letter  of  resignation  of 
Rebecca  Smith,  a  1.0  FTE  language  arts  teacher.  As  a  result  of  this  resignation,  the  District 
determined  that  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  lay  off  Mr.  Johnson,  the  next  most  senior 
certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff  (after  Ms.  Jeppson)  who  is  credentialed  to  teach 
English/language  arts.  As  noted  in  Finding  5,  the  District  withdrew  the  accusation  against 
Mr.  Johnson  at  the  hearing,  and  he  will  be  retained  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

15. 

Inearly  April  of  2004,  the  District  received  the  letter  of  resignation  of  Cynthia 
Pank,  a  1.0  FTE  K-6  MS  teacher.  As  a  result  of  this  resignation,  the  District  will  not  need  to 
lay  off  one  of  the  MS  credentialed  teachers  currently  designated  for  layoff  due  to  a  decline  in 
ADA.  Respondent  Laura  Filbeck  (#175  on  the  seniority  list)  is  the  most  senior  respondent 
holding  a  MS  credential.  However,  there  are  four  certificated  employees  holding  MS 
credentials  with  more  seniority  than  respondent  Filbeck  who  received  March  11  Notices, 
none  of  whom  filed  requests  for  hearing’.  The  District  shall  be  required  to  retain  the  most 
senior  MS  credentialed  teacher,  Kimberly  Dryden,  as  a  consequence  of  the  resignation  of 
Ms.  Pank. 

16. 

Respondents  contend  that  applicable  case  law  requires  that  the  8.83  FTE 

reduction  in  K-6  MS  teachers  due  to  the  decline  in  ADA  be  reduced  to  5.83  FTE  as a  result 
of  the  three  teacher  resignations.  Respondents  argue  that  this  “positively  assured  attrition” 
must  be  used  to  reduce  the  number  of  respondents  subject  to  termination  due  to  a  decline  in 
ADA.  The  District  contends  that  it  has  properly  accounted  for  attrition  in  determining  the 
employees  noticed  for  layoff. 

  

>  Kimberly  Dryden  (#171  on  the  seniority  list),  Victoria  Ann  Wonacott  (#172  on  the  seniority  list),  James  Allen 
Lewis  (#173  on  the  seniority  list),  and  Lisa  Marie  Leandro  (#174  on  the  seniority  list)  are  all  1.0  FTE  certificated 
employees. 

  

  
 

@ 

Case  law  has  established  that  “normal  attrition”  must  be  used  to  offset  layoffs  made 

possible  by  a  decline in  ADA  since  ignoring  such  attrition  “results in  a  reduction  of  force not 
necessarily  require  by  decline in  average  daily  attendance.”  Burgess  v.  Board  of Education.* 
Two  years  later,  citing  Burgess,  the  court  in  Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees”  held  that “[b]ecause 
the  number  of  employees  may  be  reduced  only  when  it  is  ‘necessary’  to  do  so,  the  governing 
board  must  consider  normal  attrition  in  the  work  force  as  a  part  of  any  reduction  in 
employment.”  But,  reasoning  that  “[bJoard  members  are  not  soothsayers,”  the  court  held  that 
only  “positively  assured attrition”  —that  known  to  the  board  by  the  time  of  its  final 
determination  on  May  15—and  not “potential  attrition” —expected  retirements  and 
resignations  occurring  up  to  the  start  of  the next  school  year—needed  to  be  considered.  See 
also,  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze.*  In  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen’, 
the  court  determined  that  positively  assured  attrition  need  not  be  considered in  a  PKS  layoff. 

Respondents’  contention  that  the  ADA  layoff  should  be  reduced  from  8.83  FTE  to 
5.83  FTE  due  to  “positively  assured  attrition”  of  3.0  FTE  is  not  persuasive.  As  previously 
set  forth,  the  District  properly  accounted  for  the  February  24,  2004  resignation  of  Ms.. 
Brothers  prior  to  sending  out  the  March  11  Notices  (Finding  8),  and  it  accounted  for  the 
March  15,  2004  resignation  of  Ms.  Smith  by  rescinding  the  accusation  against  Mr.  Johnson 
(Finding  13).  While  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  does  not  require  positively 
assured  attrition  to  be  considered  in  a  PKS  layoff,  neither  does  it  preclude  the  District  from 
considering  whether  it  is  necessary  to  lay  off  a  certificated  employee  to  achieve  the  necessary 
reduction  in  PKS  as a  result  of  a  resignation  after  the  Amended  Resolution  had  been  adopted. 
As  noted  in  Finding  14,  the  District  shall  be  required  to  reduce  the  ADA  layoff  by  1.0  FTE  as 
a  result  of  the  resignation  of  a  K-6  MS  credentialed  employee  in  April  of  2004.  However, 
for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  Finding  14,  this  will  not  result  in  the  retention  of  any  of  the 
respondents  herein. 

17. 

|  Megan  Neely  (#181  on  the  seniority  list)  possesses  a  MS  general  credential 

and  a  Bilingual,  Crosscultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (“BCLAD”) 
certificate.  She  is  employed  for  the  2003-04  school  year  as  a  bilingual  resource  teacher,  80 
percent  time,  and  a  fifth  grade  classroom  teacher,  20  percent  time  (one  day  per  week),  as  part 
of  a  jobsharing  arrangement  between  the  District  and  Jeanne  Albrecht  (#60  on  the  seniority 
list),  a  0.80  FTE  certificated  K-6  teacher.  The  District  proposes to  employ  Ms.  Neely  as  a 
1.0  FTE  bilingual  resource  teacher  for  the  2004-05  school  year.*  The  District  elected  to 
“skip”  Ms.  Neely  and  did  not  serve  her  with  a  March  11  Notice;  hence,  she  will  be  retained 
for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

° 

  

(1974)  41  Cal.App.3d  571,  at  579. 
(1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977,  at  980-983. 
(1980)  109  Cal.  App.3d  648,  at  654. 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627. 

* 
> 
® 
7 
®  The  District  provided  information  to  respondents  in  discovery  on  Friday,  April  23,  2004  concerning  the  proposed 
assignments  of  teachers  for  the  2004-05  school  year  that  indicated  that  Ms.  Neely  would  retain  her  current 
assignment,  i.e.  80  percent  bilingual  resource  teacher  and  20  percent  fifth  grade  classroom  teacher,  for  the  2004-05 
school  year.  However,  at  hearing,  the  District  Superintendent,  Dr.  Remley,  testified  persuasively  that  Ms.  Neely 
would  be  serving  in  a  1.0  FTE  bilingual  resource  teacher  position  in  2004-05.

  

18. 

Shirley  Stumbaugh  (#161  on  the  seniority  list)  possesses  a  single-subject 

credential  in  English  composition,  introductory  English  and  Social  Science,  with  a 
Crosscultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (“CLAD”)  emphasis.  Her  teaching 
assignment  for  the  2003-04  school  year  is  teaching  English  Language  Learners  (“ELL”)’. 
When  respondent  Stumbaugh  was  hired  by  the  District,  she  taught  eighth  grade  language 
arts,  seventh  grade  language  arts  and  U.S.  History.  In  her  current  assignment  teaching  ELL, 
she  replaced  a  teacher  who  was  not  bilingual.  Respondent  Stumbaugh  does  not  hold  a 
BCLAD  certification;  it  was  not  established  whether  respondent  Stumbaugh  is  bilingual. 
Respondent  Stumbaugh  contends  that  she  is  capable  of  teaching  the  bilingual  resource 
teacher  position  now  held  by  Ms.  Neely,  who  has  less  seniority  than  respondent  Stumbaugh. 

19. 

Education  Code  section  44955  states  in  pertinent  part  as  follows: 

ce 

ee 

“(b)...  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

“(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in 
the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845,  In  the 
event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a  right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

. 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 
that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught, 
and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the 
employee’s  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 
governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test 
in  the  appropriate  subject. 

  

°  According  to  Education  Code  section  306(a),  an  “English  learner”  means  “a  child  who  does  not  speak  English  or 
whose  native  language  is  not  English  and  who  is  not  currently  able  to  perform  ordinary  classroom  work  in  English, 
also  known  as  a  Limited  English  Proficiency  or  LEP  child.” 

  

   

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

“(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 
or  course  of  study,...  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...  which  others  with 
more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

ce 

3 

20. 

As  the  language  of  Education  Code  section  44955  reflects,  economic  layoffs 
are  generally  to  be  done  on  the  basis  of  seniority.  The  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation 
to  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior 
teachers  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such 
positions.  In  order  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic  layoff,  Education  Code  section 
44955(d)(1)  requires  the  District  to  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study...  and  that  the  certificated  employee  (to  be  skipped)  has 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  In  this  case,  the  bilingual  resource  teacher 
position  is  a  “specific  course,”  and  the  District  has  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for 
personnel  to  teach  said  course.  The  District  has  further  demonstrated  that  possession  of 
BCLAD  certification  is  a  necessary  qualification  for  the  bilingual  resource  teacher  position, 
and  that  Ms.  Neely  has  special  training  and  experience,  i.e.,  a  BCLAD  authorization  and 
bilingual  ability  in  Spanish,  which  others  with  more  seniority  (including  respondent 
Stumbaugh)  do  not  possess. 

| 

21. 

As  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  305,  subject  to  certain  exceptions,  “all 
children  in  California  public  schools  shall  be  taught  English  by  being  taught  in  English.  In 
particular,  this  shall  require  that  all  children  be  placed  in  English  language  classrooms. 
Children  who  are  English  learners  shall  be  educated  through  sheltered  English  immersion 
during  a  temporary  transition  period  not  normally  intended  to  exceed  one  year.  Local 
schools  shall  be  permitted  to  place  in  the  same  classroom  English  learners  of  different  ages 
but  whose  degree  of  English  proficiency  is  similar.  Local  schools  shall  be  encouraged  to  mix 
together  in  the  same  classroom  English  learners  from  different  native-language  groups  but 
with  the  same  degree  of  English  fluency.  Once  English  learners  have  acquired  a  good 
working  knowledge  of  English,  they  shall  be  transferred  to  English  language  mainstream 
classrooms.”  As  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  306(d),  “sheltered  English  immersion’ 
or  ‘structured  English  immersion’  means  an  English  language  acquisition  process  for  young 
children  in  which  nearly  all  classroom  instruction  is  in  English  but  with  the  curriculum  and 
presentation  designed  for  children  who  are  learning  the  language.”  Dr.  Remley  testified  that 
the  District  established  a  requirement  that  ELL  students  receive  30-45  minutes  of  ELL 
instruction  per  day. 

22. 

Respondent  Stumbaugh  testified  that,  as  a  result  of  her  layoff,  she  believes 

middle  school  ELL  students  will  be  placed  in  regular  language  arts  classes  for  the  2004-05

  

school  year.  She  believes  it  will  be  “difficult”  for  the  District  to  provide  30  minutes  of  ELL 
instruction  to  those  students,  given  the  45-minute  class  periods  and  the  fact  that  not  all 
middle  school  language  arts  teachers  have  CLAD  certifications.  The  evidence  provided  by 
respondents  was  insufficient  to  establish  that  the  District  will  be  unable  to  provide  mandated 
services  to  ELL  students  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

23. 

Respondents  contend  that,  if  Megan  Neely  is  retained  to  provide  20  percent  ~ 

FTE  elementary  classroom  instruction,  there  are  two  respondents,  Laura  Filbeck  (#175  on  the 
seniority  list)  and  Lisa  Kitchen  (#176  on  the  seniority  list)  who  have  greater  seniority  than 
Ms.  Neely  and  are  credentialed  and  qualified  to  fill  that  position.  As  noted in  Finding  17, 
footnote  8,  the  District  does  not  presently  intend  to  assign  Ms.  Neely  to  fill  that  20  percent 
FTE  classroom  teaching  position.  In  the  event  the  District  is  unable  to  assign  retained 
personnel  to  that  jobsharing  position,  it  will  be  obligated  to  retain  the  most  senior  MS 
credentialed  teacher  currently  designated  for  layoff  (See  Finding  15,  footnote  3). 
It  was  not 
established  that  either  respondent  Kitchen  or  respondent  Filbeck  would  be  the  teacher  with 
the  most  seniority  to  fill  that  position,  if  the  need  arises. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 
to  a  decline in  ADA  and  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  PKS.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

2. 

By  reason  of  Findings  15-16,  the  reduction  of  certificated  employees  due  to  a 
decline  in  ADA  shall  be  7.0  FTE  K-6  MS  teachers,  District-wide,  as  a  result  of  positively 
assured  attrition  as  of  the  date  of  hearing. 

3, 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Notice  may  be  given  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004- 

ORDER 

2005  school  year. 

DATED: 

4-3-04 

  

CATHERINE  B.  FRINK 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

© 

   

  
  

