© 

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SANTA  MONICA-MALIBU  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004030356 

Teachers  of  the  Santa  Monica-Malibu 
Unified  School  District 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ralph  B.  Dash,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  19,  2004,  at  Santa  Monica,  California. 

@ 

District  (hereinafter  “District”). 

James  Baca,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Santa  Monica-Malibu  Unified  School 

Lawrence  Trygstad,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents  Laura  Alexander, 

Julie  Bushman,  Maritess  Dolloso,  Thor  Evensen  and  Emily  Kariya,  certificated  employees 
(teachers)  of  the  District,  the  only  teachers  receiving  notices  of  layoff  that  filed  a  Notice  of 
Defense.  All  Respondents  except  Mr.  Evensen  were  present  at  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  the  matter  submitted,  the 

Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Finding  of  Facts. 

1. 

Joseph  Quarels,  Deputy  Superintendent-Chief  of  Staff  of  the  District,  acting  in 

his  official  capacity,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served 
upon  Respondents  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955. 
The  parties,  by  and  through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

2.  On  March  11,  2004,  the  District's  Governing  Board  adopted  a  Resolution  to  reduce 

and  discontinue  the  services  of  24.9  Full  Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  as 
follows: 

@ 

Woodshop 
Art 

2.0  FTE  

2  FTE 

  

English 
Industrial  Technology 
Music 
P.E. 
Spanish 
French 
Japanese 
Math 

7.0  FTE 
0.5  FTE 
1.2  FTE 
4.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
6.0FTE 

TOTAL  SERVICES  REDUCED  = 

24.9  FTE 

3.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

4.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

5.  The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements, 
deaths  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices 
to  be  delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2003.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v. 
Allen,  144  Cal.App.  3d  627  at  636  (1983).' 

6. 

The  District  created  two  separate  “seniority”  lists.  The  first  list  named  teachers 

who  were  temporary,  interns  or  emergency  permit  holders  by  hire  date  (Exhibit  19).  The 
second  list  named  all  probationary  and  permanent  teachers  in  order  of  each  one’s  first  date  of 
paid  service.  The  teachers  on  the  first  list  who  were  credentialed  to  teach  the  above 
described  services  have  not  been  re-employed  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  They  were  each 
given  all  notices  required  by  law.  Counsel  for  Respondents  stipulated  that  both  seniority  lists 
were  properly  drawn. 

Conclusions  of  Law 

1.  Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections 

44949  and  44955. 

2.  The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  2  are  particular  kinds  of  service  which  may  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  A  District  may 

  

'  All  layoffs  were  for  particular  kinds  of  service  and  not  “average  daily  attendance”  which  might  require  positively 
assured  attrition  to  be  considered  through  May  15.

  

reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (b), 
“either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179. 

3. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  to  reduce  the 
District's  teaching  positions  by  24.9  Full  Time  Equivalents  and  to  give  notice  to  the  affected 
teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955.  (Campbell  v.  Abbot  [1978]  76 
Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  [1977]  67  Cal.App.3d  689). 

4. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary 

nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

5. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

As  a  result  of  the  reductions  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  teachers  Laura 

Alexander,  Julie  Bushman,  Maritess  Dolloso,  Thor  Evensen  and  Emily  Kariya  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Dated:  April  28,  2004 

  

RALPH  B.  DASH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

