BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
MONTEREY  PENINSULA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Determination  of  Cause 
for  Non-Reemployment  of  31.0  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Certificated  Employees  for 
School  Year  2004-2005 

  

OAH  No.  N2004030294 

| 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Michael  C.  Cohn,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Monterey,  California  on  April  20,  2004. 

Melanie  A.  Petersen,  Attorney  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith,  450  S.  Melrose  Drive,  Suite 
100,  Vista,  California  92081,  represented  the  Monterey  Peninsula  Unified  School  District. 

Michelle  A.  Welsh,  Attorney  at  Law,  Stoner,  Welsh  &  Schmidt,  413  Forest  Avenue, 
Pacific  Grove,  California  93950  represented  respondents  Therese  Beaudry-Harvat,  Michael 
Blasheck,  Allison  Bohnen,  Melissa  Buschmann,  Sherry  de  Leuw,  Kendra  Dunnick,  Malinda 
Furtado,  Brenda  Hampton,  Stephanie  Hansen,  Karla  Hansen,  Denise  Hedlind,  Leisa  Hidas, 
Kristi  Hoffman,  David  Jones,  Amy  Karabensh,  Alison  Kaufman,  Deborah  Landon,  Liana 
Lingofelt,  Amy  Lloyd,  Marisela  Maldonado,  Jon  Martinez,  Victoria  Mitchell,  Lucia 
Navarrete,  Jennifer  Nix,  Pete  Noble,  Kristin  O’Hara,  Holly  Oppman,  Angela  Schiaffo, 
Melissa  Segond,  Melissa  Snyder,  Lula  Taylor  and  Kristin  Vernon. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondents  Elizabeth  Brashear  Jones, 

Anne  Congleton,  Barry  Covington,  Jennifer  Saxe,  Helayne  Frank,  Michael  Lubbes, 
Anneliese  Neitling,  Tiffany  Paluck,  Guadalupe  Perez,  Caryn  Pogojeff,  Jennifer  Saito,  Alison 
Scherling,  Briana  Tringali,  Ayala  Younger  or  Kimberly  Worth  Keefer. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  20,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  8,  2004,  the  governing  board  of  the  Monterey  Peninsula  Unified 
School  District  adopted  Resolution  No.  03/04-6,  in  which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  for  the  2004-2005  school  year 
and  directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  notice  to  certificated  employees  that 
their  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year:

Elementary  School  Classroom  Teachers  (K-5) 

21.0  FTE 

Middle  School  Teachers 

Core 
English 
Social  Studies 
Physical  Education 
Industrial  Technology 

High  School  Teachers 
English 
Social  Studies 
Physical  Education 
Industrial  Technology 
Music 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
10 
5.0 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
5.0 

Total  Full-Time  Equivalent  Reduction 

31.0  FTE 

2. 

On  March  12,  2004,  the  superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  that 
it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Respondents  are  all  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  requests  for 
hearing  and  notices  of  defense.  The  parties  stipulated  that  all  jurisdictional  requirements  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  have  been  met. 

@ 

3. 

At  or  before  the  hearing,  the  district  rescinded  the  accusations  against  the 

following  respondents,  all  of  whom  will  be  retained  for  the  2004-2005  school  year:  Therese 
Beaudry-Harvat,  Allison  Bohnen,  Kendra  Dunnick,  Brenda  Hampton,  David  Jones,  Amy 
Karabensh,  Alison  Kaufman,  Liana  Lingofelt,  Peter  Noble,  Holly  Oppman,  Tiffany  Paluck, 
Melissa  Segond,  Angela  Schiaffo,  Chrystal  Shakur,  and  Melissa  Snyder. 

4. 

At  the  March  8,  2004  meeting  at  which  the  board  adopted  the  PKS  resolution, 

it  also  adopted  resolutions  to  non-reelect  emergency  credentialed  employees  and  to  release 
temporary  employees.  Respondents  contend  that  the  release  of  these  employees  creates 
vacant  positions  into  which  respondents  are  entitled  to  be  placed,  therefore  obviating  the 
need  for  their  termination.  This  issue  was  resolved  in  the  district’s  favor  in  a  prehearing 
ruling  on  respondent’s  motion  to  dismiss  the  accusation.  The  release  of  those  employees 
does  not  create  vacancies  into  which  respondents  are  entitled  to  move. 

5. 

In  determining  which  permanent  and  probationary  employees  would  be 

subject  to  layoff  in  this  proceeding,  the  district  elected  to  “skip”  teachers  with  “hard  to  find 
credentials.”  Skipped  were  teachers  with  math,  science  and  special  education  credentials,  as 
well  as  teachers  possessing  Bilingual,  Crosscultural  Language  and  Academic  Development 
(BCLAD)  certificates.  Resolution  No.  03/04-6  contained  no  authorization  for  skipping  any 

@ 

  

  
  

 

employees.  Respondents  assert  they  first  learned  of  the  district’s  decision  to  skip  certain 
teachers  after  the  Education  Code  section  44949  “March  15”  notices  were  sent.  Citing 
Karbach  v.  Board  of Education’ ,  respondents  contend  their  due  process  rights  were  therefore 
violated. 

A  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  employees  in  strict  seniority  order  if  it 

demonstrates  a  specific  need  to  retain  junior  employees  possessing  training  or  experience 
that  more  senior  employees  do  not  have.  Education  Code  section  44955(d)  gives  the 
authority  for  making  these  skipping  determinations  to  the  district;  it  does  not  require  pre- 
March  15  board  action.  Thus,  that  the  board  resolution  contained  no  skipping  authorization 
is  irrelevant.  And  that  respondents  did  not  learn  of  the  district’s  skipping  determination  until 
after  they  received  their  layoff  notices  does  not  establish  a  due  process  violation.  Karbach 
held  that  the  purpose  of  the  section  44949  March  15  notice  is  to  insure  that  an  affected 
employee  “be  informed  of  facts  upon  which  he  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  he  will 
not  be  reemployed.”  The  court  went  on  to  find  that,  under  the  facts  of  that  case,  the  notice 
provided  “did  not  inform  many  of  the  [respondents]  that  their  jobs  were  in  jeopardy.”  Such 
is  not  the  case  here.  Respondents,  all  of  whom  fell  within  the  service  reductions  being  made, 
were  clearly  put  on  notice  that  their  jobs  were  in  jeopardy.  The  notices  did  not  violate  the 
Karbach  rule.  Nor  were  respondents’  due  process  rights  otherwise  violated;  although  they 
may  not  have  learned  of  the  district’s  skipping  determination  until  after  they  received  their 
layoff  notices,  they  were  not  deprived  of  the  opportunity  to  be  heard  on  that  issue,  raising  it 
at  this  hearing. 

6. 

The  district  has  an  unmet  need  for  teachers  qualified  to  teach  bilingual  classes. 

There  are  about  600  students  in  the  district  whose  parents  have  signed  the  waiver  necessary 
to  enroll  them  in  bilingual  classes.  However,  not  all  students  with  waivers  are  in  such  classes 
since  there  are  not  enough  qualified  teachers.  Teachers  with  BCLAD  certificates  are 
qualified  to  teach  bilingual  classes.  The  district  also  has  a  long-standing  “Plan  to  Remedy” 
under  which  teachers  who  have  demonstrated  a  proficiency  in  Spanish  and  who  are  working 
toward  their  BCLAD  certificates  are  assigned  to  teach  bilingual  classes.  The  district  intends 
to  skip  six  teachers  because  of  their  bilingual  abilities.  All  are  respondents  in  this 
proceeding.  Respondents  Maldonado,  Navarette,  and  Perez  all  have  BCLAD  certificates. 
Respondents  Furtado,  Pogojeff,  and  Vernon  are  all  Plan  to  Remedy  teachers.  All  six  are 
teaching  in  bilingual  classes.  All  six  will  be  assigned  to  bilingual  classes  in  the  2004-2005 
school  year.  All  six  respondents  are  appropriately  being  skipped. 

7. 

The  district  has  received  notification  that  a  number  of  certificated  employees 
will  resign  or  retire  effective  the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  Respondents  contend  that 
this  “positively  assured  attrition”  must  be  used  to  reduce  the  number  of  respondents  subject 
to  termination.  The  district,  citing  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen’,  contends  that 
attrition  need  not  be  considered  in  a  PKS  layoff. 

  

(1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355. 

(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.

* 

? 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  a  school  district  has 

experienced  a  decline  in  its  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  during  a  specified  computation 
period,  or  when  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated,  “and  when  ..  .  it 
shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  [either]  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number 
of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of 
not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district, 
permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.”  The  court  in  Burgess  v. 
Board  of Education’  held  that  “normal  attrition”  must  be  used  to  offset  layoffs  made  possible 
by  a  decline  in  ADA  since  ignoring  such  attrition  “results  in  a  reduction  in  force  not 
necessarily  require  by  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.”  Two  years  later,  citing  Burgess, 
the  court  in  Lewin  v.  Board  of Trustees*  held  that  “because  the  number  of  employees  may  be 
reduced  only  when  it  is  ‘necessary’  to  do  so,  the  governing  board  must  consider  normal 
attrition  in  the  work  force  as  a  part  of  any  reduction  in  employment.”  (Emphasis  added.) 
But,  reasoning  that  “[b]oard  members  are  not  soothsayers,”  the  court  held  that  only 
“positively  assured  attrition”—that  known  to  the  board  by  the  time  of  its  final  determination 
on  May  15—and  not  “potential  attrition”—expected  retirements  and  resignations  occurring 
up  to  the  start  of  the  next  school  year—needed  to  be  considered.  The  Lewin  holding  was 
expanded  upon  in  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze.’ 
In  an  ADA  case,  the  court 
wrote: 

Acknowledging  actual  attrition  occurring  between  March  15  and 
May  15  to  reduce  the  number  of  employees  to  be  laid  off  results 
in  no  prejudice  to  the  school  district,  while  sparing  that  number 
of  employees  unnecessary  termination  of  employment. 

...  We  see  no  legal  or  practical  impediment  to  revising 
downward  the  number  of  needed  terminations  resulting  from 
events  occurring  in  the  intervening  two  months.  On  the 
contrary,  there  is  sound  reason  to  do  so,  as  otherwise  the 
reduction  in  force  for  the  ensuing  school  year  would  be  greater 
than  that  necessitated  by  the  decline  in  attendance. 

In  San  Jose  v.  Allen,  the  case  relied  upon  by  the  district,  the  court  was  called 

upon  to  decide  what  it  described  as  “‘an  issue  of  first  impression:”  whether  positively  assured 
attrition  had  to  be  considered  in  a  PKS  layoff.°  Holding  that  attrition  need  not  be  considered, 
the  court  reasoned: 

  

(1974)  41  Cal.App.3d  571,  at  579. 

(1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977,  at  980-983. 

(1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  at  654. 

> 

* 

> 

°  Whether  it was  truly  a  case  of  first  impression  is  not  clear.  It  appears  that  the  service  reductions  in 
Lewin  were  for  both  ADA  and  PKA  reasons,  and  the  court  never  differentiated  between  attrition  in  one 
situation  versus  the  other. 

©

  

  
  

A  board’s  decision  as  to  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  not  tied  in  with  any  statistical 
computation,  such  as  reduction  in  the  number  of  students.  The 
number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by  PKS  reductions 
depends  totally  upon  the  district’s  decision  as  to  how  many 
services  to  reduce.  Put  another  way,  the  language  of  section 
44955  that  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  “may 
terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding 
percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  said  district”  is  only 
applicable  to  ADA  terminations  based  upon  an  actual  reduction 
in  attendance.  Where  the  governing  board  determines  to 
discontinue  or  reduce  a  particular  kind  of  service,  there  is  no 
way  to  calculate  a  “corresponding  percentage,”  hence  it  is 
within  the  discretion  of  the  board  to  determine  the  amount  by 
which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service. 

...  in  PKS  cases  the  determination  of  the  amount  by  which  a 
service  is  to  be  reduced  is  the  determination  of  the  number  of 
positions  to  be  eliminated. 

...  In  making  a  final  decision  on  PKS  reductions,  the  extent  to 
which  the  services  are  reduced  inherently  determines  the 
number  of  positions  to  remain.  Ifa  service  is  to  be  eliminated, 
for  example,  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  consider 
attrition  in  any  way.’ 

. 

As  the  San  Jose  court  stated,  there  is  no  “corresponding  percentage”  of 

employees  in  PKS  cases  as  there  is  in  ADA  cases.  But  another  principle  of  section  44955 
must  also  be  considered—that  employees’  services  may  be  terminated  only  when  made 
necessary  by  service  reductions.  In  PKS  cases,  one  must  distinguish  between  the  number  of 
positions  to  be  eliminated  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
and  the  number  of  employees  who  will  lose  their  jobs  as  a  result  of  those  cuts.  The  numbers 
are  rarely  the  same.  In  its  decision,  the  San  Jose  court  failed  to  make  that  distinction:  it 
focused  solely  on  the  number  of  positions  to  be  reduced  and  did  not  consider  whether  the 
loss  of  those  positions  would  require  the  termination  of  an  equal  number  of  employees.  This 
distinction  may  be  illustrated  as  follows:  Assume a  district  with  six  full-time  music  teachers 
decides  to  reduce  music  for  the  following  school  year  from  six  FTE  to  three  FTE.  Because 
of  that  reduction,  the  three  most  junior  music  teachers  would  be  laid  off. 
Jose  court  held,  that  the  reduction  from  six  to  three  positions  would  not  be  affected  in  any 
way  by,  for  example,  the  May  10  retirement  of  a  music  teacher;  for  the  following  school  year 
the  district  will  still  be  offering  only  half  as  many  music  courses  as  it  does  in  the  current 
school  year.  But  that  retirement  would  affect  the  number  of  employees  who  would  have  to 

It  is  true,  as  the  San 

  

” 

San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  at  pp.  635-636.

be  laid  off.  Because  of  the  retirement,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  terminate  three  teachers  to 
effect  the  service  reduction.  Only  two  junior  teachers  need  be  laid  off.  The  third  reduction 
would  be  accounted  for  by  attrition. 

Whether  in  ADA  or  PKS  reductions,  the  words  of  the  Moreland  court  hold 

true:  considering  attrition  occurring  between  March  15  and  May  15  results  in  no  prejudice  to 
the  district  and  spares  some  employees  from  unnecessary  termination,  and  not  to  consider 
such  attrition  would  result  in  a  greater  reduction  in  force  than  warranted  by  the  service  cuts. 
Thus,  it  is  found  that  in  determining  how  many  employees  may  be  terminated  as a  result  of 
the  planned  service  reductions,  the  district  must  consider  certain  kinds  of  positively  assured 
attrition.  First,  only  attrition  occurring  between  the  date  of  its  decision  to  reduce  services  (in 
this  case,  March  8)  and  the  date  of  the  board’s  final  action  on  or  before  May  15  may 
potentially  reduce  the  number  of  employees  to  be  terminated;  attrition  occurring  up  to  March 
8  will  not  reduce  the  number  of  employees  to  be  terminated  since  that  attrition  had  already 
been  factored  into  the  determination  of  how  many  positions  were  to  be  reduced.®  Second, 
the  only  attrition  that  must  be  considered  is  that  which  creates  vacancies  in  positions  in 
which  respondents  would  be  qualified  to  serve.  As  a  corollary  to  this,  the  resignation  or 
retirement  of  a  respondent  does  not  create  a  vacancy,  but  merely  allows  the  district  to  reduce 
a  service  without  having  to  lay  off  any  other  employees,  and  therefore  need  not  be 
considered. 

The  district  has  learned  that  14  elementary  school  teachers  that  will  be  retiring 

at  the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  Two  of  those  retirements  were  known  to  the  district 
before  March  8,  2004;  the  remainder  became  known  after  that  date.  Two  secondary  PE 
teachers  also  announced  their  retirements  after  March  8.  Two  secondary  English  teachers 
have  resigned,  one  before  March  8,  one  after.  Using  the  principles  set  forth  in  the  preceding 
paragraph,  the  number  of  elementary  school  teachers  who  may  be  terminated  in  this 
proceeding  must  be  reduced  by  12,  the  number  of  post-March  8  retirements.  (In  the  absence 
of  evidence  to  the  contrary  it  is  assumed  that  each  departing  employee  occupies  a  full-time 
position.)  No  reduction  is  required  for  the  two  elementary  retirements  or  the  one  secondary 
English  resignation  known  to  the  board  at  the  time  of  its  March  8  action.  As a  result  of  the 
post-March  8  retirement  of  two  secondary  PE  teachers,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  terminate 
the  services  of  any  respondent  in  order  to  effectuate  the  2.0  FTE  reduction  in  that  service. 
The  post-March  8  secondary  English  resignation  was  of  Barry  Covington,  a  respondent  in 
this  proceeding.  That  resignation  does  not  require  the  retention  of  any  other  respondent. 

8. 

On  March  8,  2004,  the  governing  board  of  the  district  adopted  Resolution  No. 

03/04-5,  which  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  used  to  determine  the  order  of 
termination  of  employees  having  the  same  seniority  date.  In  the  tie-breaking  process, 
employees  earn  points  in  five  specified  criteria.  If  ties  remain  after  all  five  criteria  are 
applied,  a  sixth  criterion  is  used.  These  same  tie-breaking  criteria  had  been  used  by  the 

  

® 

See  Moreland,  supra,  at  p.  648. 

  

     

district  previously,  and  had  been  established  in  an  unidentified  prior  year  through  an 
agreement  with  the  teachers’  bargaining  unit,  the  Monterey  Bay  Teachers  Association.  No 
bargaining  or  discussions  were  held  this  year  prior  to  the  adoption  of  the  criteria. 

9. 

Respondent  Karla  Hansen  holds  a  K-8  multiple  subject  credential  with  a 

supplemental  authorization  for  single  subject  English  up  to  grade  9.  She  currently  teaches 
middle  school  math  in  a  “limited  assignment.”  A  “limited  assignment”  in  the  district  appears 
to  be  like  an  emergency  credential.  Hansen  does  not  hold  a  math  credential,  but  she  testified 
she  is  one  course  away  from  qualifying  for  a  supplemental  authorization  in  math,  and  she 
expects  to  have  that  authorization  by  the  end  of  the  summer.  Hansen  asserts  her 
supplementary  authorization  in  English  renders  her  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  that 
subject.  The  district  apparently  takes  the  position  that  a  teacher  with  a  supplementary 
authorization  is  not  “highly  qualified”  in  that  subject  within  the  meaning  of  the  federal  No 
Child  Left  Behind  Act  and  is  therefore  not  entitled  to  be  retained  to  teach  that  subject. 

Supplementary  authorizations  are  issued  in  accordance  with  Education  Code 
section  44526.  Nothing  in  that  section  limits  a  teacher’s  ability  to  provide  instruction  in  the 
authorized  subject.  No  evidence  was  presented  to  show  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act 
diminished  the  value  of  a  supplementary  authorization.  Hansen  is  found  certificated  and 
competent  to  teach  secondary  English.  Although  she  may  be  only  one  course  away  from 
qualifying  for  a  supplementary  authorization  in  math,  until  she  actually  receives  the 
authorization  she  cannot  be  considered  certificated  and  competent  in  that  subject  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  Her  teaching  math  under  a  “limited  assignment” 
affords  her  no  right  to  be  retained  to  teach  it  again  next  year. 

Hansen  has  been  credited  with  16/72  points  on  the  tie-breaking  criteria.’  She 

seeks  credit  for  an  additional  four  points  for  the  sixth  criterion:  “One  (1)  point  for  every 
college/university  semester  unit  or  District  unit  (recognized  by  MPUSD)  earned  after 
bachelor’s  degree.”  Hansen  testified  she  completed  four  additional  units  last  semester  at 
Chapman  College,  but  that  neither  she  nor  the  district  has  yet  received  a  transcript  from  the 
college.  She  would  like  her  points  to  be  updated  when  the  transcript  is  received.  Adding 
points  to  Hansen’s  tie-breaking  score  will  not  affect  her  placement  on  the  seniority  list;  she  is 
already  ranked  the  “most  senior”  employee  within  her  seniority  date. 

The  tie-breaking  the  criteria  and  the  board’s  resolution  adopting  them  are 

silent  as  to  cut-off  dates  for  consideration  of  tie-breaking  points.  The  district  would  not  be 
prejudiced  by  allowing  consideration  of  additional  tie-breaking  points  up  until  May  15,  or 
any  earlier  date  when  the  board  renders  its  final  decision  on  layoffs.  Therefore,  Hansen  is 
entitled  to  have  her  tie-breaking  points  increased  for  additional  units  for  which  verification  is 
received  before  the  board  takes  final  action  in  this  matter. 

The  first  number  refers  to  the  points  earned  in  the  first  five  criteria.  The  second  number  refers  to  the 

  

* 
points  earned  in  the  sixth  criterion.

  

10.  |  Respondent  Deborah  Landon  has  been  credited  with  a  tie-breaking  score  of 

14/26.  She  seeks  credit  for  an  additional  four  points  in  Criterion  No.  5,  which  would 
increase  her  point  total  to  18/26  and  move  her  up  eight  positions  on  the  seniority  list. 
Criterion  No.  5  states: 

Professional  preparation,  i.e.,  advanced  degrees  (M.A.  or  Doctorate) 
(4-points  will  be  given  for  each  advanced  degree)  [Emphasis  in  original] 

Landon  holds a  certification  issued  by  the  National  Board  for  Teaching 

Standards.  In  order  to  obtain  such  a  certification,  a  teacher  must  have  at  least  three  years 

.  full-time  teaching  experience  and  must  complete  a  year-long  certification  process  that 

includes  a  rigorous  portfolio  review  and  a  board  testing  procedure.  Landon  is  one  of  only 
two  teachers  in  the  district  to  hold  this  national  certification.  She  believes  it  qualifies  as 
“professional  preparation”  equivalent  to  an  advanced  degree.  She  argues  that  the  wording  of 
the  criterion  allows  for  points  to  be  awarded  for  other  than  M.A.  and  doctorate  degrees  since 
the  “‘i.e.,”  in  the  criterion  shows  those  two  types  of  degrees  are  merely  examples  of  types  of 
professional  preparation  for  which  points  can  be  awarded,  they  are  not  the  sole  categories  in 
which  points  can  be  given. 

Respondent’s  assertion  is  rejected.  While  it  is  true  the  use  of  “i.e.,”  in  the 

criterion  is  somewhat  vague,  Landon’s  argument  ignores  the  second  line,  which  provides  that 
four  points  will  be  given  for  each  “advanced  degree.”  It  does  not  specify  what  points  would 
be  given  for  something  other  than  an  advanced  degree.  It  is  found  that  the  only  “professional 
preparation”  for  which  points  may  be  awarded  are  masters  or  doctorate  degrees. 

11.  | Respondent  Denise  Hedlind  holds  a  single  subject  music  credential.  She 

teaches  high  school  vocal  music.  Hedlind  has  been  employed  by  the  district  for  14  years, 
with  two  breaks  in  service.  Prior  to  1991,  she  was  a  full-time  employee  with  permanent 
status.  She  resigned  from  the  district  in  1991  when  her  son  was  born.  Hedlind  returned  to 
the  district  within  12  months  of  her  resignation  and  was  hired  into  a  0.5  FTE  position.  She 
retained  her  permanent  status.  Hedlind  remained  a  half-time  employee  until  2000,  when  she 
again  resigned.  She  again  returned  to  the  district  11  months  later.  On  December  20,  2001, 
Hedlind  again  signed  a  contract  accepting  an  offer  of  half-time  employment  as  a  permanent 
employee. 

Citing  Education  Code  section  44931  and  Dixon  v.  Board  of  Ti rustees’”, 
Hedlind  contends  that  she  is  entitled  to  the  status  of  a  full-time,  rather  than  a  half-time, 
permanent  employee.  Section  44931  provides  that  a  permanent  employee  who  resigns  and  is 
reemployed  within  39  months  is  entitled  to  have  restored  to  her  “all  of  the  rights,  benefits 
and  burdens  of  a  permanent  employee.”  Dixon  held  that  this  applied  “to  the  full  range”  of 
such  rights,  benefits  and  burdens,  including  placement  on  the  salary  schedule.'!  But  neither 

  

10 

1269. 
(1989)  216  Cal.App.3d 

'l  Td.  at  p.  1286. 

  

       

section  44931  nor  Dixon  support  respondent’s  claim.  Full-time  employment  is  not  one  of  the 
rights  or  benefits  of  permanent  status.  Hedlind,  who  has  voluntarily  accepted  half-time 
employment  for  more  than  a  decade,  is  not  now  entitled  to  status  as  a  1.0  FTE  employee. 

12. 

Respondent  Lula  Taylor  is  a  full-time  employee.  Her  only  credential  entitles 
her  to  teach  music  in  grades  K-12.  The  district  is  reducing  secondary  music  by  1.0  FTE.  It 
intends  to  accomplish  that  reduction  by  terminating  Denise  Hedlind  from  her  0.5  FTE  music 
position  and  by  reducing  Taylor,  who  is  senior  to  Hedlind,  from  a  1.0  to  a  0.5  FTE  position. 
Taylor  asserts  she  is  not  subject  to  a  reduction  in  her  position  because  Hedlind  should  be 
considered  a  1.0  FTE  employee,  and  should  therefore  absorb  the  full  brunt  of  the  music 
reduction.  As  set  forth  above,  Hedlind’s  claim  for  a  1.0  position  was  rejected.  Taylor’s 
assertion  is  also  therefore  rejected. 

. 

Taylor  is  not  in  a  music  position  for  the  current  school  year.  She  is  teaching 

various  core  and  reading  courses  instead.  She  does  not  have  a  credential  for  any  of  these 
classes,  but  is  teaching  under  an  emergency  credential.  Taylor  maintains  she  is  entitled  to  be 
reassigned  to  a  similar  position  for  the  next  school  year.  In  addition,  Taylor  is  completing 
training  for  her  Crosscultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  certificate  and 
will  take  the  test  for  that  certificate  on  May  8.  However,  none  of  these  facts  insulate  Taylor 
from  layoff  in  this  proceeding.  First,  emergency  credentials  are  valid  for  only  one  year, 
although  they  may  be  renewed  up  to  four  times.  They  may  be  issued  only  after  a  school 
district  files  a  declaration  of  need  with  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.”  Districts 
are  not  obligated  to  file  such  declarations  and  there  is  no  guarantee  that  a  current  holder  of  an 
emergency  credential  will  receive  a  renewed  emergency  credential.  In  other  words,  the 
district  is  not  required  to  obtain  an  emergency  credential  that  will  allow  Taylor  to  teach  a 
subject  outside  her  credential,  and  there  is  no  assurance  one  would  be  issued  in  any  case. 
Second,  unlike  the  BCLAD  certificate,  the  CLAD  certificate  does  not  authorize  teaching  in 
bilingual  classes.  Even  if  respondent  does  obtain  her  CLAD  certificate,  it  would  afford  her 
no  greater  rights  in  this  proceeding. 

13. 

Respondents  point  out  that  the  district  has  laid  off  teachers  three  times  since 

2000.  It  is  argued  that  these  actions  are  detrimental  to  the  district,  and  that  it  therefore 
cannot  be  found,  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44949,  that  “the  charges  sustained 
by  the  evidence  are  related to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.”  This 
argument  is  rejected.  The  district  seeks  to  reduce  services  in  an  effort  to  deal  with  a  budget 
deficit  of  approximately  2.2  million  dollars.  In  light  of  that,  and  in  the  absence  of  any 
evidence  showing  that  the  district  has  in  any  way  abused  its  discretion,  it  must  be  found  that 
the  service  reduction  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils. 

  

'2 

See  Education  Code  sections  44300  and  44251.

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  31.0  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  set  forth  below,  cause  further  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 
This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949, 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  3,  the  district  has  rescinded  the  accusations  filed 
against  the  following  respondents:  Therese  Beaudry-Harvat,  Allison  Bohnen,  Kendra 
Dunnick,  Brenda  Hampton,  David  Jones,  Amy  Karabensh,  Alison  Kaufman,  Liana  Lingofelt, 
Peter  Noble,  Holly  Oppman,  Tiffany  Paluck,  Melissa  Segond,  Angela  Schiaffo,  Chrystal 
Shakur,  and  Melissa  Snyder.  Accordingly,  notice  may  not  be  given  them  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  6,  the  district  has  appropriately  skipped  respondents 

Malinda  Furtado,  Marisela  Maldonado,  Lucia  Navarette,  Guadalupe  Perez,  Caryn  Pogojeff, 
and  Kristin  Vernon  because  they  will  be  continue  to  be  assigned  to  teach  bilingual  classes. 
Accordingly,  notice  shall  not  be  given  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year. 

4, 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  7,  the  district  is  required  to  use  12  elementary  school 

teacher  retirements  and  two  secondary  PE  teacher  retirements  to  reduce  the  number  of 
respondents  whose  employment  will  be  terminated.  In  accordance  with  the  principles  set 
forth  in  that  finding,  the  district  shall  also  consider  additional  positively  assured  attrition 
occurring  up  until  the  date  of  the  board’s  final  action  in  this  matter. 

5. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  9,  the  district  shall  consider  respondent  Karla  Hansen 
certificated  and  competent  to  teach  secondary  English.  The  district  shall  also  increase  her 
tie-breaking  point  for  additional  units  for  which  verification  is  received  prior  to  the  board’s 
final  action  in  this  matter. 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  10,  respondent  Deborah  Landon  is  not  entitled  to 

additional  tie-breaking  points. 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  11,  respondent  Denise  Hedlind  is  not  entitled  to  status 

as  a  1.0  FTE  employee. 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  12,  respondent  Lula  Taylor  is  subject  to  reduction  to  a 
0.5  FTE  position  by  virtue  of  the  PKS  reduction  in  music.  She  is  not  entitled  to  be  retained 
to  teach  any  other  subject. 

  

  
  

10

@ 

ORDER 

Except  as  limited  by  Legal  Conclusions  2,  3,  and  4,  notice  may  be  given  respondents 

that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

DATED:  tpl  2G.  200Y 

Mi Qaida  CCR 

MICHAEL  C.  COHN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

11  

