@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BENICIA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004020574 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

Brandon  M.  Andrews 
Claudia  K.  Bru 
Debbie  A.  Ewing 
Carol  L.  Garcia 
Nancy  I.  Garcia 
Mary  Kraybill 
Julie  A.  Nerland 
Deborah  L.  Thomas! 

    

Respondents 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Karl  S.  Engeman,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Benicia,  California,  on  April  29,  2004. 

Laurie  S.  Juengert,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Benicia  Unified  School  District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Esq.  represented  all  of  the  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Shalee  Cunningham,  Ph.D.  made  the  accusations  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Benicia  Unified  School  District  (District). 

  

© 

"  Barbara  Emminizer  and  Robin  Beckers  were  respondents  but  the  accusations  and  notices  were  dismissed  by  Dis- 
trict  at  the  beginning  of  the  administrative  hearing.  The  parties  stipulated  that  the  correct  date  of  first  paid  proba- 
tionary  service  for  Debbie  Ewing  is  August  28,  2000.

2. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  the  Governing 
Board  (Board)  of  the  District  of  her  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  respondents  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefor. 

@ 

3. 

On  March  11,  2004,  ,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  03-04-28  directing 

Superintendent  or  her  designated  representative  to  give  notices  to  certificated  employees  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 

4, 

On  March  12,  2004,  respondents  were  served  with  written  notice  of  the 

recommendation  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Each  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  him/her  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  Board  has  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  services  of  the 

District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  school  year: 

5. 

6. 

Reduction  K-5 
Reduction  Reading  Specialists 
Reduction  History  Teacher 

Total  Reductions 

5.00  FTE” 
3.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

9.00  FTE 

@ 

7. 

On  February  6,  2004,  the  District  distributed  to  all  probationary  and  permanent 

certificated  employees  a  memorandum  requesting  that  they  return  confirmation  of  their 
credentials,  dates  of  hire  and  status.  Based  upon  information  received,  credentialing  and 
dates  of  hire  were  updated.  Criteria  were  established  to  break  ties  among  employees  with  the 
same  hire  dates.  Points  were  assigned  for  each  criterion  applied.  The  District  met  with 
employee  representatives  to  resolve  ties.  The  District’s  seniority  list  was  then  established. 

8. 

Respondent  Deborah  Thomas  has a listed  first  date  of  paid  probationary 

_ 

service  (seniority  date)  of  August  26,  1999.  She  was  first  employed  by  the  District  as  a  long 
term  substitute  teacher  in  school  year  1997/1998  and  worked  approximately  88%  of  the 
school  year  in  that  position.  In  school  year  1998/1999,  she  continued  substitute  teaching  on 
an  as  needed  basis.  She  was  also  employed  by  the  District  as  a  Home/Hospital  teacher.  She 
visited  a  female  freshman  student  in  the  student’s  Grandmother’s  home  virtually  every 
school  day  for  approximately  one  hour.  She  prepared  lesson  plans,  made  assignments, 
graded  the  student’s  work  and  performed  all  the  customary  teaching  tasks  relating  to  the 
student’s  core  curriculum.  Her  pay  records  for  the  period  June  1,  1998,  through  June  30, 
1999,  show  a  total  of  138  hours  so  if  she  only  worked  with  one  student,  she  would  have 

| 

  

*  Full  Time  Equivalent.

  

  

  

worked  more  than  75%  of  the  school  days  which  the  parties  stipulated  as  135  for  the 
1998/1999  school  year.  On  cross  examination,  Thomas  conceded  that  while  she  could  not 
recall  any  other  student  with  whom  she  worked  in  a  home/hospital  assignment  that  year,  it 
was  “possible”  that  she  did  so  on  a  short  term  basis.  It  was  also  possible  that  her  assignment 
extended  beyond  June  10,  1999,  her  deadline  for  submission  of  hours  for  the  fiscal  year 
ending  June  30,  1999.*  Considering  the  totality  of  the  evidence,  it  is  found  that  Thomas  did 
teach  on  at  least  75%  of  the  school  days  in  school  year  1998/1999.  The  parties  agreed  that  if 
Thomas  is  given  a  new  seniority  date  sometime  in  September  of  1998,  she  would  clearly  be 
senior  to  employees  who  are  junior  and  rendering  services  which  she  is  credentialed  and 
competent  to  provide. 

9. 

Following  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to  the  Board  to  reduce  5  FTE 

K-5  positions  and  the  Board’s  adoption  of  that  recommendation  in  the  form  of  Resolution 
03-04-28  on  the  same  date,  six  elementary  teachers  submitted  their  resignations  effective  at 
the  end  of  this  school  year.  Prior  to  the  formulation  of  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation,  she  had  been  in  regular  communication  with  representatives  of  the 
Benicia  Teachers’  Association  and  she  was  aware  of  at  least  five  of  the  upcoming  | 
resignations.  One  additional  resignation  was  a  surprise  but  she  asserted  that  even  had  she 
known  of  a  sixth  resignation,  that  would  not  have  changed  her  recommendation  to  reduce 
elementary  teaching  by  5  FTE  based  primarily  on  concerns  about  overstaffing  at  that  level. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code 

sections  44944  and  44955  were  met." 

RESPONDENT  THOMAS’  CORRECT  SENIORITY  DATE 

2. 

Section  44918  reads,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  Any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee, 
who  serves  during  one  school  year  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number 
of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained  in  that 
school  year  and  has  performed  the  duties  normally  required  of  a 
certificated  employee  of  the  school  district,  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
served  a  complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed 
as  a  probationary  employee  for  the  following  school  year. 

  

>  The  evidence  did  not  establish  whether  there  were  billing  records  for  the  next  fiscal  year  which  reflecting  addi- 
tional  hours  that  Thomas  billed  for  school  year  1998/1999  relating  to  this  program. 
*  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  indicated. 

3

(d)  Those  employees  classified  as  substitutes,  and  who  are  employed 
to  serve  in  an  on-call  status  to  replace  absent  regular  employees  on  a 
day-to-day  basis  shall  not  be  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  this  section. 

@ 

3. 

During  more  than  75%  of  the  number  of  regular  school  days  respondent 

Thomas  was  performing  the  duties  normally  required  of  a  certificated  school  employee  and 
she  was  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  for  the  following  school  year.  Therefore,  she 
is  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete  year  as  a  probationary  employee  during  school  year 
1997/1998. 
who  are  rendering  services  which  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Her  notice 
therefore  violates  section  44955(a). 

It  follows  that  she  is  senior  to  employees  who  have  not  been  given  a  notice  and 

POSITIVELY  ASSURED  ATTRITION 

4. 

Section  44955  reads,  in  pertinent  part: 

_ 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of  a 
district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below  the 
corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing 
board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of 
the  termination  of  an  inter  district  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of 
curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have 
become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 
employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
(Emphasis  added) 

5, 

District  was  not  required  to  take  into  account  positively  assured  attrition  at  the 
time  that  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  eliminate  and/or  reduce  PKS.  Such  consideration 
is  limited  to  lay  off  cases  based  on  a  reduction  in  ADA  in  which  case  the  “corresponding 
percentage  of  employees  in  the  district”  who  may  be  given  notice  should  be  reduced  by 
attrition  known  to  the  District  before  March  15".  Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal. 
App.3d  977,  at  980-983. 

@} 

  

 

6. 

In  San  Jose  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627,  the  court  was  called  upon  to 

@ 

decide  whether  positively  assured  attrition  had  to  be  considered  in  a  PKS  layoff.  Holding 
that  attrition  need  not  be  considered,  the  court  reasoned: 

A  board’s  decision  as  to  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of 
service  is  not  tied  in  with  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  reduction  in  the 
number  of  students.  The  number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by  PKS 
reductions  depends  totally  upon  the  district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services 
to  reduce.  Put  another  way,  the  language  of  section  44955  that  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  “may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  said  district”  is  only 
applicable  to  ADA  terminations  based  upon  an  actual  reduction  in  attendance. 
Where  the  governing  board  determines  to  discontinue  or  reduce  a  particular 
kind  of  service,  there  is  no  way  to  calculate  a  “corresponding  percentage,” 
hence  it  is  within  the  discretion  of  the  board  to  determine  the  amount  by  which 
it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen, 
supra,  at  pp.  635,  636. 

@ 

7. 

Lewin  and  San  Jose  dealt  with  the  impact,  or  lack  of  impact,  of  positively 

assured  attrition  on  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cases 
leave  unanswered  the  question  whether  resignations  which  occur  between  the  date  of  the 
resolution  and  the  final  notice  on  or  before  May  15"  should  affect  the issuance  of  notices 
which  are  a  consequence  of  such  reductions  or  eliminations.  44955  requires  that  the  District 
establish  that  the  cause  for  a  PKS  notice  is  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  services. 
Arguably,  if  elementary  teachers  resign  after  the  resolution,  the  rationale  for  noticing  one  or 
more  elementary  teachers  who  remain  may  no  longer  exist. 
Superintendent  knew,  before  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  or  eliminate  PKS,  that 
at  least  five  elementary  teachers  would  not  return  in  the  ensuing  school  year  and  that  more 
teachers  might  avail  themselves  of  early  retirement  incentives.  These  probable  departures 
were  considered  when  the  level  of  services  to  be  reduced  was  considered  and  resolved.  In 
summary,  the  process  followed  by  the  District  did  not  violate  section  44955. 

In  this  case  however,  the 

8. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondents,  other  than  respondent  Deborah  Thomas, 
are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9. 

Mandated  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year  are  not  being  reduced  beyond 

the  level  required  by  law. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.

Il.  |  Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  providing  notices  to 
respondents,  except  respondent  Deborah  Thomas,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  school  year. 

@ 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents,  save  respondent  Thomas,  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  to  the  extent  of  8.0  FTE  positions. 

2. 

Notice  shall  not  be  given  to  respondent  Thomas  that  her  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

cari  Maga,  ow 

00  ¥ 

  

ih  reusace 

KARL  S.  eet 
Nea} 
Administrative  Ns J 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

   

  

