BEFORE  THE 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
ALAMEDA  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004030622 

In  the  Matter  of  the Accusation  Against: 

ANNIE  GREEN 

and 

GWEN  ESTES, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Mary-Margaret  Anderson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2004,  in  Hayward,  California. 

Janna  L.  Lambert,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Alameda  County  Office  of 

Education. 

Estes,  who  were  present. 

Dale  L.  Brodsky,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents  Annie  Green  and  Gwen 

The  record  closed  on  April  22,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Rick  Minnis,  Chief  Human  Resources Officer  of  the  Alameda  County  Office 

of  Education  (ACOE),  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  ACOE. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2004,  Sheila  Jordan,  Alameda  County  Superintendent  of  Schools, 

adopted  Resolution  No.  01-03/04.  The  resolution  provides  that  particular  kinds  of 
certificated  services  will  be  reduced  and  directs  that  notices  be  given  to  a  corresponding 
number  of  certificated  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2004-2005 
school  year. 

4. 

On  March  11,  2004,  Respondents  were  personally  served  with  written  notice  that 

their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004/2005  school  year.  The  notices  stated  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation.

  

On  March  16,  2004,  Respondents  signed  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense 

forms,  which  were  delivered  to  ACOE. 

5. 

ACOE  is  facing  a  projected  budget  shortfall  in  2004/2005  of  approximately  $1 

million.  Its  total  budget  is  approximately  $5  million. 

Resolution  01-03/04  followed  a  study  of  ACOE’s  financial  situation  by 

Superintendent  Jordan’s  executive  cabinet.  Mr.  Minnis  then  prepared  a  recommendation  for 
her  consideration  which  provided  the  basis  for  the  resolution. 

6. 

Following  consultations  with  the  Alameda  County  Teacher’s  Association, 

ACOE  decided  to  exempt  special  education  teachers  teaching  in  a  position  that  required  such 
credentials.  Respondents  do  not  contest  this  determination. 

7. 

Both  Respondents  teach  at  the  Hayward  Community  School  (HCS),  which 

serves  a  special  population,  ages  12  through  18,  within  Alameda  County.  Most  of  the 
students  have  been  expelled  from  a  school  district.  Many  come  with  severe  behavioral 
problems  and  are  often  working  below  the  grade  level  expected  for  their  ages.  It  is  very 
challenging  to  work  with  such  students,  particularly  given  the  limited  resources  available  to 
Respondents.  In  addition,  it  can  be  difficult  to  obtain  the  services  of  a  substitute  teacher, 
given  the  nature  of  the  students  and  the  physical  environment. 

8. 

It  was  undisputed  that  both  Respondents  are  excellent  teachers,  both 

experienced  and  well  suited  to  work  with  challenging  students.  Annie  Green  has  worked  for 
ACOE  for  eighteen  years.  She  was  the  instructional  assistant  at  HCS  for  sixteen  of  these 
years.  Ms.  Green  has  been  enrolled  in  the  intern  program  at  California  State  University  at 
Hayward  for  two  years,  and  expects  to  become  fully  credentialed.  She  has  completed  the 
CLADD  and  has  studied  Spanish.  Prior  to  enrollment  at  Cal  State  Hayward,  she  attended 
numerous  workshops,  including  an  extensive  course  in  peer  mediation. 

Gwen  Estes  came  to  teaching  following  careers  that  included  work  as  a  probation 
officer.  She  began  as  a  substitute  for  ACOE  in  1997  and  was  offered  a  contract  in  2002. 
The  current  year  is  her  second  full  year  of  teaching.  In  addition,  she  brings  insight  gained  as 
a  result  of  her  position  as  President  of  the  New  Haven  School  District  Board  of  Trustees. 

The  fact,  however,  that  the  teachers  in  line  to  be  terminated  are  excellent  does  not 
give  cause  to  invalidate  the  decision.  The  Superintendent  does  not  propose  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  any  course  offerings  or  services  below  state  mandated  levels.  The  service 
reduction  is  therefore  properly  within  the  Superintendent’s  discretion. 

9. 

Respondent  Gwen  Estes  also  contends  that  ACOE  should  be  estopped  from 

laying  her  off.  Ms.  Estes  applied  for  and  was  accepted  into  an  intern  program  at  Cal  State 
Hayward  to  begin  in  Fall  of  2004.  The  program  requires  employment  as  a  teacher.  Ms. 
Estes  argues  that  she  relied  upon  representations  by  Mr.  Minnis  and  Human  Resources 

@ 

  

  
  

 

Specialist  Janet  Hughes  in  January,  2004,  to  the  effect  that  she  would  continue  to  be 
employed  at  ACOE. 

The  elements  of  estoppel  are:  1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be  apprised  of  the 

facts;  2)  he  or  she  must  intend  that  his  or  her  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that 
the  party  asserting  the  estoppel  had a right  to  believe  it  was  so  intended;  3)  the  other  party 
must  be  ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  facts;  and  4)  he  or  she  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to  his 
or  her  injury.’  The  statements  made  by  Mr.  Minnis  do  not  rise  to  the  level  necessary  to 
warrant  estoppel.  This  is  because  it  was  not  shown  that  Mr.  Minnis  or  any  other  ACOE 
representative  knew  about  the  probability  of  the  termination  of  Ms.  Estes  when  the 
statements  were  made.  Respondent  Gwen  Estes’  assertion  of  the  defense  of  equitable 
estoppel  therefore  fails. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Alameda 

County  Office  of  Education.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  ACOE  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.  The  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services” that  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Superintendent’s 
decision  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  her  discretion.  It  was 
not  demonstrated  that  the  reduction  will  cause  the  failure  to  comply  with  state  mandates. 

3. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  either  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

_ 

render  a  service  which  either  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

Notices  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Annie  Green  and  Gwen  Estes  that  their  services 

will  not  be  required  for  the  2003-2004  school  year. 

MARGARET ANDERSON 
Law  Judge 

MR 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

'  (See  City  of Long  Beach  v.  Mansell  (1970)  3  Cal.3d  462.)

  

  

