  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
FONTANA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

| 

Certificated  Employees  Listed  in  Exhibit  A,  | OAH  No.  L2004030275 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Vallera  J.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Riverside,  California  on  April  29,  2004. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the 

Fontana  Unified  School  District. 

Emma  Leheny,  Esq.,  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  represented  Respondents 

Rachelle  Benavides,  Cheryl  Gonzales,  Debra  Hornaday,  Melia  Kiggins,  Stacey  Koolis, 
Beverly  McConnell,  Robert  Nava  and  Eduardo Valencia. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  5,  2004,  Debra  A.  Bradley,  Ed.D.,  Superintendent  (Superintendent), 

Fontana  Unified  School  District  (District),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official 
capacity. 

Respondents  listed  in  Exhibit  A  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

In  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  on  March  3, 

2004,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Fontana  Unified  School 
District  (Board)  and  Respondents  that  she  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

1

On  March  3,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  04-19,  Reduction  of  Services, 

reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  served  Respondents  with  written  notice,  in 

accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949. 

The  written  notice  of  termination  stated  that  each  Respondent’s  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The 
recommendation  that  each  Respondent  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
his/her  competency  as  a  teacher. 

In  addition,  the  notice  advised  Respondents  of  the  right  to  hearing,  that  the  request  for 

hearing  must  be  delivered  to  the  Board  of  Education  on  or  before  March  29,  2004,  not  less 
than  seven  days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  upon  them,  and  that  the 
failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

With  the  exception  of  Respondent  Gregg  Sherwood,  each  Respondent  filed  a  written 

Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense,  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not 
reemploying  each  Respondent  for  the  ensuing  year. 

Respondent  Gregg  Sherwood  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing  and/or  Notice  of 

Defense  and  thereby  waived  his  right  to  hearing. 

With  the  exception  of  Respondent  Gregg  Sherwood,  an  Accusation  was  timely  served 

on  each  Respondent. 

4. 

5. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  satisfied. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of 

certificated  services  commencing  in  the  2004-05  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Elementary  Counselors 
High  School  Building  Construction  Teacher 

9 
1 

FTE 
FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  total  10.0  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

6. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  District  is  reducing  the  elementary  counselor 

positions,  not  elementary  counseling  services  because  these  services  will  be  provided  by  site 
administrators  or  classroom  teachers.  Sherri  Black,  the  District’s  Director  of  Certificated 
Human  Resources,  described  the  general  duties  of  elementary  counselors,  e.g.,  to  meet  with 
students,  identified  by  the  principal  or  teachers,  regarding  behavioral  or  academic  issues,  and 
to  make  presentations  to  small  groups  of  students  in  the  classroom  on  topics  such  as  anger 
management  or  conflict  resolution.  During  the  2004-05  school  year,  it  is  anticipated  that  site 

2

  

administrators  and  teachers  will  provide  some  but  not  all  of  the  counseling  services  to  the 
students.  There  will  be  a  reduction  of  services  provided  by  fewer  employees  in  a  different 
manner.  Given  the  foregoing,  Respondents’  argument  is  found  to  be  without  merit  and 
therefore  rejected. 

7. 

The  services  that  the  District  proposed  to  reduce  were  “particular  kinds  of 

services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

8. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils  and  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District,  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

Between  the  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 

same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
District  and  the  students.  The  Board  adopted  specific  criteria  and  provided  instructions  for 
implementation  of  the  criteria.  The  order  of  termination  is  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students.  Respondents  Eduardo  Valencia,  Debra  Hornaby  and  Cheryl  Gonzales  have 
the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  i.e.,  March  21,  2003,  are  temporary  employees  and  are 
being  layed  off  simultaneously. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  District  adopted  tie-breaker  criteria  but  did  not  establish 

an  actual  list  of  termination  order  for  Respondents  Eduardo  Valencia,  Debra  Hornaby  and 
Cheryl  Gonzales.  Education  Code  section  44955(b)  is  applicable  to  probationary  and 
permanent  employees  and  requires  the  District  to  establish  an  order  of  termination,  not  a list. 
In  this  case,  no  evidence  was  offered  regarding  the  application  of  the  criteria  to  Respondents 
Eduardo  Valencia,  Debra  Hornaby  and  Cheryl  Gonzales.  Therefore  it  cannot  be  determined 
whether  the  application  of  the  criteria  would  result  in  a  termination  order.  More 
significantly,  as  temporary  employees,  the  District  is  not  required  to  afford  the  rights  set 
forth  in  Education  Code  section  44955(b)  to  them.  Respondents  Eduardo  Valencia,  Debra 
Hornaby  and  Cheryl  Gonzales  were  properly  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

No  Respondent  was  terminated  as  a  result  of  the  application  of  the  tie-breaker  criteria. 

10. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  has  been  retained  to 

perform  any  services  that  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied.

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  vs.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Fontana 
Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for 
the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to  the  welfare 
of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  vs.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.  3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  vs.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393 
vs.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

5. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Rachelle  Benavides,  Cheryl  Gonzales, 

Debra  Hornaday,  Melia  Kiggins,  Stacey  Koolis,  Beverly  McConnell,  Robert  Nava,  Gregg 
Sherwood  and  Eduardo  Valencia  is  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  before  May  15,  2004 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction 
or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as  indicated. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: Mey  b  oy 

Ville P—Fidbuwe 

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

FONTANA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

EXHIBIT  “A” 

The  following  certificated  personnel  will  receive  a  layoff  notice: 

Rachelle  Benavides 
Stacey  Koolis 
Beverly  McConnell 
Robert  Nava 
Gregg  Sherwood 

The  following  certificated  personnel  will  receive  a  precautionary  layoff  notice: 

Cheryl  Gonzales 
Debra  Hornaday 
Melia  Kiggins 

Eduardo  Valencia  

