BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GROSSMONT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
SAN  DIEGO  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004030596 

All  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Grossmont 
Union  High  School  District  Who  Received 
Preliminary  Layoff  Notices  for  the  2004- 
2005  School  Year, 

Respondents. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  14,  2004,  a  Request  for  Proposed  Decision  in  Uncontested  Case  was  filed  by 

Petitioner  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District. 

Anthony  P.  De  Marco,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Petitioner  Grossmont  Union 

High  School  District. 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  subsequently  received  the  request  and  considered  the  matter  in  San  Diego, 
California,  on  April  21,  2004. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  any  certificated  employee  of  the 
Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  who  received  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year,  including  Respondents  M.  Linsey  Kitchens  and  Michael  A.  Truffa. 

On  April  27,  2004,  the  matter  was  submitted. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District 

1. 

The  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  San 

Diego  County,  California.  The  District  serves  the  educational  needs  of  high  school  students 
and  provides  other  educational  services  and  supports.

  

The  District  is  governed  by  a  five  member  Board  of  Education  (the  Board). 

2. 

The  District  employs  many  certificated  employees.  The  certificated 

employees  provide  educational  services  and  supports  to  the  District’s  students. 

Resolution  No.  2003-158 

3. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Board  unanimously  adopted  Resolution  No.  2003- 

158,  which  recommended  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-2005 
school  year. 

4. 

Resolution  No.  2003-158  provided: 

REDUCTION  OR  ELIMINATIONOF  CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  SERVICES 

(Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955) 

WHEREAS,  Sections  44944  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code  require  action  by  the 
Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  eliminate  services  and  permit  the  layoff  of  certificated 
employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Superintendent  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  has 

recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  eliminated 
no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  20004-2004  school  year; 
and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition which 
has  occurred  to  date,  that  is  all  deaths,  resignations,  retirements  and  other  permanent  vacancies  in 
reducing  these  services  and,  but  for  the  attrition  already  assured,  would  have  found  it  necessary  to 
reduce  additional  particular  kinds  of  services. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Grossmont 

Union  High  School  District: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

That  all  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being 
insufficient  to  maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program 
changes  resulting  therefrom,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to  reduce 
or  eliminate  those  positions  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A,  attached  hereto  and 
incorporated  by  reference  herein,  listing  by  level,  subject  field  or classification, 
and  full-time  equivalent,  those  positions  which  shall  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

~ 

That  because  of  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
listed  in  Exhibit  A  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school 
year  certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to  the  positions  affected  in  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  above-described  service.

  

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some  of  the  employees  in  the  services 
being  reduced  are  eliminated  are  such  that  they  have  displacement  rights  by 
virtue  of  seniority,  and  that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior 
employee  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who 
shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  requires  the  Governing  Board  to  state  specific  criteria  to  be  used  in 
order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to 
the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date  are  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit B, 
which  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference  herein. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date,  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B,  are 
based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who 
shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  allows  the  Governing  Board  to  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  by  virtue  of  the  competence, 
credential(s),  assignment,  and  the  specific  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated 
employees  who  may  otherwise  be  terminated  by  order  of  seniority  will  be  based 
on  the  needs  of  the  students  of  the  District,  and  will  ensure  that  no  employee  will 
be  terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

That  the  Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative  will  send  appropriate 
notices  to  all  employees  possibly  affected  by  virtue  of  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

That  the  action  of  this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be  considered  to 
prejudice  the  rights  of  certificated  employees  to  whom  notices  will  be  given  as  to 
the  Governing  Board’s  consideration  of  any  proposed  decision  by  an 
administrative  law  judge  in  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  any  employee 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School 
District  this  11  day  of  March  2004,  by  the  following  vote: 

Cass,  Wills,  Schreiber,  Page  and  Kelly 

AYES: 

NOES: 

ABSENT:

5. 

Exhibit  A  -  attached  to  Resolution  No.  2003-158  -  provided  for  the  reduction 

or  elimination  of  the  following  kinds  of  services  or  programs,  in  full-time  equivalent 
positions  (FTE),  including  preparation  and  travel  periods  where  applicable: 

Secondary 

English 
Math 

Social  Science 
Family  &  Consumer  Science 
Foreign  Language 
Visual  &  Performing  Arts 
Science 
Physical  Education 
Phoenix 
Special  Education 
TUPE  Grant 

10.00  FTE 
14.80  FTE 
7.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
2.20  FTE 
2.60  FTE 
3.00  FTE 
1.30  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
6.30  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

Total: 

50.20  FTE 

6. 

Exhibit  B  -  attached  to  Resolution  No.  2003-158  -  provided  the  criteria  to  be 
applied  to  determine  the  order  of  layoff  for  those  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date 
of  first  paid  probationary  service.  Exhibit  B  provided: 

@ 

1. 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials  in  the  following  subjects,  in  priority  order 
listed: 

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F, 
G. 
H. 
1. 

Visual  and  Performing  Arts 
Math 
Science 
Foreign  Language 
English 
Phoenix 
Social  Service 
Physical  Education 
Other  Electives 

2. 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials  or  certificates  authorizing  services  in  classes 
for  limited  or  non-English  proficient  students  priority  listed  as  follows: 

Cross  Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  Bilingual 

A. 
Cross  Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD) 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials. 

Total  years  of  full-time  teaching  experience. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

@ 

A  lottery  among  individuals  who  remain  tied  with  the  GEA  President  or  his  designee
invited  to  attend  with  the  first  name  being  drawn  the  most  senior  down  to  the  last  name 
drawn  being  least  senior. 

  

Jurisdictional  Matters 

7. 

On  and  before  March  15,  2004,  Respondents  M.  Linsey  Kitchens  (Kitchens) 

and  Michael  A.  Truffa  (Truffa),  each  of  whom  was  employed  by  the  District  as  a  certificated 
employee,  received  written  notice  that  the  District’s  Superintendent  had  recommended  that 
Respondents  not  be  reemployed  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

8. 

Kitchens  and  Truffa  submitted  a  timely  request  for  a  hearing. 

9. 

On  or  before  March  25,  2004,  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human 
Resources,  on  behalf  of  the  District,  filed  and  timely  served  an  Accusation  and  other  required 
jurisdictional  documents  on  each  Respondent,  which  included  a  Notice  of  Hearing. 

10. 

Neither  Kitchens  nor  Truffa  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  Counsel  for 

Respondents  confirmed  that  neither  Kitchens  nor  Truffa  wanted  a  hearing. 

11. 

|  The  Board  did  not  adopt  a  resolution  to  “skip”  junior  employees  with  special 
credentials,  skills,  training  or  experience  over  more  senior  employees.  No  junior  employee 
will  be  retained  to  render  a  service  which  either  Kitchens  or  Truffa  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render,  as  established  by  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

All  certificated  employees  subject  to  the  reduction  in  service  action  will  be 

placed  on  a  reemployment  list  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44956  and  44957. 

Final  notices  of  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  not  to  reemploy  Kitchens  and 

Truffa  must  be  served  before  May  15,  2004. 

12. 

13. 

The  Reduction  or  Elimination  of 
Particular  Kinds  of Services  and  Programs 

14. 

The  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  by  the  Board  as  being  subject  to 
reduction  or  elimination  (listed  as  Exhibit  A  to  Resolution  2003-158,  set  forth  in  Factual 
Finding  5)  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  the  Board  was  authorized  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not 

fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  an  appropriate  exercise  of  the  Board’s 
discretion.  The  extent  to  which  particular  kinds  of  services  were  reduced  or  eliminated  was  a 
matter  well  within  the  Board’s  discretion. 

The  District’s  staff  and  the  Board  considered  known  positive  attrition  including 
resignations  and  retirements  in  determining  the  number  of  layoff  notices  to  be  served.

Each  certificated  employee  providing  a  particular  kind  of  service  who  was  the  subject 

of  this  layoff  proceeding  was  given a  preliminary  notice  of  the  reduction  of  the  particular 
kind  of  service  being  provided. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  particular  kind  of  service  was  lowered  to  levels  less 

than  those  levels  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  more  senior 

employee  was  retained  to  perform  any  service  which  a  more  senior  employee  was 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

The  Seniority  List 

15. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  Certificated  Non-Management 
Temporary/Probationary  Status  Report  dated  March  25,  2004  (Exhibit  4)  was  inaccurate  or 
that  it  did  not  provide  an  accurate  basis  for  determining  the  identity  of  those  credentialed 
employees  who  should  be  given  layoff  notices. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

Jurisdiction:  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections 
were  satisfied  as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  in  the  seniority  lists. 

The  Decision  to  Reduce/Eliminate  Particular  Kinds  of Services:  A  school 

district  may  consider  its  financial  circumstances  in  deciding  whether  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
a  particular  kind  of  service.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627, 
630. 

3. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation.  It  is  within  a  school  board’s  discretion, 
subject  to  the  minimum  level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  a  reduction  of 
services  is  necessary  and  proper  under  the  circumstances.  A  school  board’s  decision  is  made 
at  the  time  of  the  final  notice.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627, 
635-636. 

4. 

Bumping:  Under  the  statutory  scheme,  a  senior  employee  whose  position  is 
discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  he  or  she  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  fill,  and  in  so  doing  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee.  Poppers  v. 
Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399,  405. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  affirm  the  Board’s  reduction  of  50.20  FTE  positions  by  the 
reducing  or  eliminating  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  Exhibit  A  and  in  the 
amounts  determined  by  the  Board  in  Resolution  No.  2003-158  (Factual  Findings  3,  4,  5  and 
14).  The  Board’s  decision  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  valid  exercise  of 

6

  

its  discretion.  The  Board’s  reduction  and  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

6. 

As  a  result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  service, 
cause  exists  to  give  final  notice  to  Respondents  M.  Linsey  Kitchens  and  Michael  A.  Truffa 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1, 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  M.  Linsey  Kitchens  and  Michael  A. 

Truffa  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  identified  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

The  aforementioned  notice  must  be  given  before  May  15,  2004. 

DATED: Agppaake  Aly 200  f 

e 

\esevae  tte 

S  AHLER 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

