BEFORE  THE 
COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
COUNTY  OF  NEVADA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  : 

JENNIFER  HUGHES, 

    

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  N2004030776 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  M.  Amanda  Behe,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  the  noticed  Order  To  Show  Cause  re.  Motion  to  Dismiss  in  this 
matter  on  April  16,  2004,  at  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  Sacramento,  California. 
Counsel  for  the  parties  appeared  telephonically. 

Raymond  W.  Dunne,  Attorney  at  Law,  Mary  Beth  de  Goede  &  Associates, 

represented  the  Nevada  County  Superintendent  of  Schools. 

Andrea  Price,  Attorney  at  Law,  Langenkamp  &  Curtis,  represented  respondent. 

The  record  consists  of  the  following: 

Superintendent’s  March  15,  2004,  letter  and  Order  No.  04-001  with  Proof  of 

1. 
Service,  Respondent’s  Request  for  Hearing  received  March  16,  2004,  Notice  of 
Hearing  with  Proof  of  Service,  Notice  of  Defense. 

2. 

Superintendent’s  Verified  Request  for  Dismissal  filed  April  12,  2004. 

Respondent’s  Opposition  to  Request  for  Dismissal,  Declaration  of  Jennifer 

3. 
Hughes. 

4. 

Superintendent’s  Reply  Brief,  Supplemental  Declaration  of  Susan  Clarabut.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

I. 

Dr.  Terence  K.  McAteer  is  the  Nevada  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  (the 
Superintendent)  and  made  Order  No.  04-001  and  filed  various  jurisdictional  documents  in  his 
official  capacity. 

2. 

Since  July  2000  Jennifer  Hughes  (respondent)  has  been  employed  as  a  Special 

Education  Services  Nurse,  a  position  which  requires  a  credential.  Her  current  “Certificated 
Offer  of  Employment”  dated  August  13,  2003,  identifies  her  as  “probationary”  and  “Support 
Staff’  in  the  job  class  “Special  Education  Nurse.” 

Respondent  holds  a  Professional  Clear  School  Nurse  Services  Credential.  She  has 
never  served  as  a  teacher  with  the  Nevada  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  does  not 
hold  a  teaching  credential. 

Respondent  belongs  to  the  Nevada  County  Special  Educators  Group  whose  collective 

bargaining  agreement  with  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  provides  that  it  represents 
certificated  probationary  and  permanent  employees. 

3. 

On  March  15,  2004,  the  Superintendent  adopted  Order  No.  04-001  which 

provided  that  Special  Education  Nursing  Services  would  be  reduced  by  .4  FTE’  certificated 
employees  for  the  next  school  year. 

4. 

On  March  15,  2004,  the  Superintendent  served  respondent  with  written  notice 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  her  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year. 

5. 

Respondent  filed  a  timely  written  request  for  a  hearing  and a  joint  Notice  of 

Defense  was  filed  on  behalf  of  respondent  and  another  employee,  whose  case  has  since  been 
resolved. 

6. 

Respondent  argued  that  she  is  entitled  to  the  procedural  rights  of  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  she  should  be  reemployed’  for  the  next  school  year. 
Those  issues  were  addressed  in  the  Prehearing  Conference  and  the  Order  set  forth  below  was 
issued. 

7. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Susan  Clarabut  declared  that  respondent  was 

erroneously  served  with  a  layoff  notice  for  the  reduction  in  her  position  from  her  current  1.0 
FTE  to  a  .60  FTE  for  the  2004-05  School  Year.  Respondent  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing,  but 
no  Accusation  was  filed  against  her. 

  

'  The  acronym  FTE  stands  for  “Full  Time  Equivalent”  and  refers  to  a  full  time  certificated  position. 
?  Respondent’s  Opposition  to  Petitioner’s  Verified  Request  For  Dismissal  uses  the  term  “reemployed.”  As 
respondent’s  position  is  being  reduced  from  a  1.0  FTE  to  a  .60  FTE  the  term  apparently  refers  to  the  subject 
proposed  decrease  in  her  position.

  

Ms.  Clarabut  further  declared  that  the  identification  of  respondent  as  probationary  in 

her  annual  contracts  was  “due  to  a  mistake  of  fact.”  Ms.  Clarabut  was  not  aware  of  the 
provisions  of  Education  Code  and  the  appellate  court  decision  Neumarkel  v.  Allard  (1985) 
163  Cal.App.3d  457,  which  provide  that  probationary  and  permanent  status  as  well  as  layoff 
procedures  and  protections  are  limited  to  teachers. 

8. 

Respondent  contended  that  by  commencing  layoff  procedures  the 

Superintendent  is  estopped  from  asserting  that  she  is  not  entitled  to  a  layoff  hearing.  She 
argued  that  “Petitioner’s  issuance  of  a  layoff  notice  to  Respondent  on  March  8,  2004 
confirmed  Respondent’s  long  held  belief  that  she  was  a  probationary  employee.” 
[Respondent’s  Opposition  to  Request  for  Dismissal,  page  5,  lines  8-9]. 

Estoppel  does  not  lie  against  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  in  these  circumstances. 
Four  elements  are  necessary  for  estoppel:  (1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be  apprised  of 
the  facts;  (2)  he  must  intend  that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that  the  party 
asserting  the  estoppel  had  a  right  to  believe  it  was  so  intended;  (3)  the  other  party  must  be 
ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  the  facts;  and  (4)  he  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to  his  injury. 
Estoppel  may  be  assert  against  the  government  where  these  four  elements  are  present  and 
"right  and  justice  require  it,"  but  estoppel  will  not  be  applied  against  the  government  if to  do 
so  would  effectively  nullify  a  strong  rule  of  policy  adopted  for  the  benefit  of  the  public. 
Lentz  v.  McMahon  (1989)  49  Cal.3d  393,  399. 

Here  the  party  to  be  estopped  was  not  apprised  of  the  correct  facts,  and  respondent  did 

not  rely  on  the  conduct  to  her  injury.  She  is  in  no  worse  a  position  because  of  the  erroneous 
issuance  of  notice  regarding  her  layoff.  More  importantly,  estoppel  will  not  be  applied 
against  the  Superintendent  because  it  would  effectively  nullify  the  strong  rule  of  policy  set 
forth  in  the  Education  Code  section  1293  et  seq. 

9. 

Education  Code  section  1293  gives  the  County  Superintendent  the  power  to 
“enter  into  contracts  of  employment  with  persons  employed  by  him  in  positions  requiring 
certification  qualifications  for  periods  of  not  to  exceed  the  end  of  the  school  year  in  which 
the  term  for  which  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  was  elected  or  appointed  expires  and 
in  no  event,  for  more  than  four  years  and  six  months.”  As  noted  in  Neumarkel,  supra,  at  464: 
“Nothing  in  this  section  grants  permanent  status  to  certificated  employees.  To  the  contrary,  a 
maximum  contract  employment  period  is  set  forth.” 

Education  Code  section  1294.5  permits  the  County  Superintendent  to  employ 
certificated  persons  “in  programs  and  projects  to  perform  services  conducted  under  contract 
with  public  or  private  agencies,  or  other  categorically  funded  projects  of  indeterminate 
duration.  ...  Such  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods  which  are  less  than  a  full  school  year 
and  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially  funded  project  without 
regard  to  other  requirements  of  this  code  respecting  the  termination  of  probationary  or 
permanent  employees.  ...”

  

Education  Code  section  1296(b)  pertains  to  classification  of  permanent  employees  of 

a  county  office  of  education  in  teaching  positions.  Education  Code  section  1296(c)  states 
that,  “as  used  in  this  section,  ‘teaching  position’  means  any  certificated  position  designated 
as  of  January  1,  1983,  by  the  county  board  of  education  or  the  county  superintendent  of 
schools  as  a  teaching  position  for  the  purpose  of  granting  probationary  or  permanent  status.” 

Thus  the  Superintendent  has  the  authority  under  the  Education  Code  to  define 
“teaching  positions”  for  purpose  of  granting  probationary  or  permanent  status  to  certificated 
employees.  This  is  consistent  with  the  legislative  intent  of  the  statutes  governing  county 
boards  of  education  and  county  superintendents,  namely  “the  Legislature’s  recognition  in 
[Education  Code]  section  1700  that  the  county  superintendent  is  a  separate  legal  entity 
performing  a  transitory  function  to  meet  the  specific  and  limited  needs  of  some  school 
districts.  ...It  is  reasonable  to  assume  the  Legislature’s  recognition  of  the  county 
superintendents’  transitory  function  caused  it  to  recognize  also  the  need  to  minimize  the 
number  of  employees  who  enjoy  tenure  and  tenure-related  benefits.”  Neumarkel,  supra,  163 
Cal.App.3d  at  466. 

10. 

|  Respondent  argued  that  Neumarkel  is  “...  flawed  and  does  not  bind  this  court 

because  the  court  in  Neumarkel  mischaracterized  layoff  and  hearing  rights  as  benefits  of 
tenure  rather  than  rights  of  all  certificated  probationary  and  permanent  employees  in  a  layoff 
situation.”  [Respondent’s  Opposition  to  Request  for  Dismissal,  page  3,  lines  24-28].  She 
further  argued  that  the  Neumarkel  court  “...  got  off  track  when  it  held  that  county 
superintendent  employees  must  hold  teaching  positions  in  order  to  achieve  tenure  and  be 
entitled  to  layoff  and  hearing  rights.”  [Respondent’s  Opposition  to  Request  for  Dismissal, 
page  4,  lines  2-5] 

In  the  Prehearing  Conference  respondent’s  counsel  acknowledged  that  there  is  no 
authority  for  an  administrative  law  judge  to  disregard  the  holding  in  a  published  appellate 
court  opinion.  As  provided  in  Education  Code  section  1293  et  seg.  and  Neumarkel, 
respondent  is  not  entitled  to  classification  as  a  probationary  employee. 

As  provided  in  Education  Code  section  1293  et  seq.  and  Neumarkel,  respondent  is  not 
entitled  to  the  layoff  procedures  and  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
because  she  does  not  hold  a  teaching  position. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

Respondent  is  not  entitled  to  classification  as  a  probationary  employee. 

Respondent  is  not  entitled  to  the  layoff  procedures  and  provisions  of 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.

  

ORDER 

The  Motion  to  Dismiss  IS  GRANTED. 

  

  

M.  AMANDA  BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   

