BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
POMONA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations 
Against: 

JOYCE  M.  COLBERT,  KAREN  LEE 
DORING  SHURTLEFF,  NINA  NIXON, 
FRANCES  G.  POLLOCK,  PAMELA  P. 
REARDON,  ERLITA  G.  RIVERA,  PAULA 
VLASICH,  and  ADA  YUK  FUNG  YIP, 

  

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

OAH  No.  L-2004030479 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  on  April  21 
and  30,  2004,  in  Pomona.  Complainant  Pomona  Unified  School  District  was  represented  by 
Margaret  A.  Chidester,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondents  were  represented  by  Michael  R. 
Feinberg,  Attorney  at  Law. 

At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  complainant  withdrew  the  Accusation  and  preliminary 

layoff  notice  against  respondent  Erlita  G.  Rivera.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the 
parties  waived  statutory  time  requirements  under  Education  Code  Sections  44944  and  44955, 
in  order  to  file  written  argument.  On  May  10,  2004,  complainant  and  respondents  timely 
filed  written  arguments  which  were  marked  as  Exhibit  13and  Exhibit  L  respectively. 
Administrative  Law  Judge  also  marks  the  parties’  hearing  briefs  as  Exhibit  14  and  M, 
respectively. 

The 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge 

submits  this  matter  for  decision  on  May  10,  2004,  and  finds  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that,  on  March  26,  2004,  the 

Accusations  were  made  and  filed  by  Emmett  L.  Terrell  solely  in  his  official  capacity  as 
Deputy  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services,  of  the  Pomona  Unified  School  District 

(hereinafter  District).  

2.  Respondents  Joyce  M.  Colbert,  Karen  Lee  Doring  Shurtleff,  Nina  Nixon,  Frances 
G.  Pollock,  Pamela  P.  Reardon,  Erlita  G.  Rivera,  Paula  Vlasich,  and  Ada  Yuk  Fung  Yip,  and 
each  of  them,  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3.  (A)  On  February  24,  2004,  pursuant  to  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent, 

the  Governing  Board  of  the  Pomona  Unified  School  District  adopted  Resolution  No.  13 
(2003-04)  in  which  it  determined  that  particular  kinds  of  services  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  at  the  close  of  the  2003-2004  school  year. 
reduce  or  eliminate  241.00  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  certain  services  or  programs 
performed  by  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees,  including  12.0  full-time 
equivalent  positions  performed  by  school  nurse  practitioners  and  24.00  full-time  equivalent 
The  Governing  Board  resolved  that,  because  of  the 
positions  performed  by  school  nurses. 
reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  be 
directed  to  serve  notices  of  termination  in  accordance  with  and  in  the  manner  prescribed  by 
Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955. 

The  Governing  Board  resolved  to 

. 

(B)  On  February  24,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  that,  in  selecting  those 
probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who  shall  receive  notice  of  termination, 
certain  certificated  employees,  who  have  special  training,  experience,  or  credentials  that 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess,  would  be  exempt  from  the  order  of  certificated 
layoff. 
and  are  presently  and  will  be  assigned  to  services  or  positions  in  administration,  special 
education;  language,  speech,  and  hearing;  and  English,  math,  or  science;  as  well  as 
certificated  personnel  who  possess  an  emergency  permit  authorizing  service  in  and  are 
currently  assigned  to  special  education  would  be  exempt  from  the  order  of  layoff. 

The  Governing  Board  determined  that  certificated  personnel  who  possess  credentials 

(C)  On  February  24,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955,  the 

Governing  Board  also  adopted  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  in  a  probationary 
position  on  the  same  date.  The  Governing  Board  resolved  that  the  order  of  termination  of 
said  employees  shall  be  determined  by  reference  to  certain  tiebreaker  criteria  and  to  points 
assigned  to  each  category  of  tiebreaker  criteria.  The  Governing  Board  further  resolved  that 
such  criteria  are  determined  to  best  serve  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  and  would 
be  applied  in  the  layoff  hearing  in  which  the  issue  may  arise. 

4.  On  or  about  March  1,  2004,  pursuant  to  the  resolution  of  the  Governing  Board  and 
the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955,  Deputy  Superintendent  Terrell, 
as  designee  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  District,  gave  written  notice  to  certificated 
employees,  including  respondents,  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  and  the 
Governing  Board  had  determined  that  notice  be  given  that  their  services  may  not  be  required 
for  the  ensuing  2004  -  2005  school  year. 
informed  certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  that  the  reason  for  the  notice  was 
that  the  Governing  Board  had  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  lay  off  certain  certificated 
permanent  and  probationary  employees  due  to  the  decision  of  the  Governing  Board  to 
discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Said  “Preliminary  Notice  Not  to  Re-Employ” 

The  written  notice  indicated  that  it  may  be

necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  by  241  full-time 
equivalent  certificated  employees  and  that  the  District  was  “compelled  by  the  fiscal  realities 
of  the  shortfall  of  State  funding”  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services.  Respondents  were 
properly  served  with  the  written  notice  by  either  personal  service  or  certified  mail. 

5.  The  District’s  notice  dated  March  1“  was  sufficient  in  providing  notice  to 

respondents  under  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955.  Respondents  were  not 
prejudiced  by  errors  or  omissions  in  the  notice,  if  any,  with  respect  to  the  description  of  their 
current  positions,  assignments,  or  any  other  matters. 

6.  On  or  about  March  15,  2004,  respondents,  and  each  of  them,  timely  requested  a 
hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
On  or  about  March  26,  2004,  complainant  District  filed  and  timely  served  Accusations, 
Resolution  No.  13,  Statement  to  Respondent,  blank  Notice  of  Defense,  Reqeust  for 
Discovery,  pertinent  sections  of  the  Government  and  Education  Codes,  and  Notice  of 
Hearing  upon  each  of  the  respondents. 

7.  On  or  about  April  6,  2004,  respondents  and  by  their  counsel  filed  timely  notices  of 
defense,  requesting  a  hearing  and  objecting  to  the  Accusations.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  to  this  matter. 

8. 

On  February  24,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  resolved  and  took 
action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  services  or  programs  offered  by  the  District  for  the 
2003  -  2004  school  year  in  the  following  full-time  equivalent  positions  (hereinafter  FTE): 

FULL-TIME 
EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS 

  

SERVICES 

Classroom  Teacher/Teacher  Specialist 
Counselors 
Resource  Teachers 
Resource  Teachers—Bilingual 

School  Nurse  Practitioners 
School  Nurses 

. 

School  Psychologists 
School  Site  Specialists 
Speech  &  Language  Specialists 

Teacher  Specialists 
Teacher  Specialist-on-Assignment 
Teacher  Specialist—Content  Expert 
Teacher  Specialist—Curriculum/Instruction 
Teacher  Specialists—Educational  Media 

26.00 
22.00 
2.00 
28.00 

12.00 
24.00 

32.00 
6.00 
21.00 

10.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 

3.00  

Teacher  Specialists—Reading  Coach 
Teacher  Specialists—Special  Education 
Teacher  Specialists—Technology 

Teachers—K-6  Drama 
Teachers—K-6  Music 
Teachers—K-6  Visual  Arts 
Teachers-on-Assignment 

14.00 
3.00 
4.00 

7.00 
8.00 
8.00 
8.00 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  services  or  programs  set  forth  hereinabove  constitute 
a  total  of  241.00  full-time  equivalent  positions. 
discontinuance  of  services  or  programs  is  necessary  for  the  economic  solvency  of  the  District 
and  due  to  projected  declining  enrollment  of  approximately  1,000  students  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

The  District  believes  that  the  reduction  or 

9.  (A)  The  services  or  programs  set  forth  in  Findings  3  and  8  above  are  particular 
kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  Section  44955.  The  determination  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  or  programs  is  within  the  sound  discretion  of  the  District  and  is 
The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certifcated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

(B)  Further,  the  District  has  obviated  the  need  to  reduce  or  discontinue  all  of 

the  particular  kinds  of  services  described  in  Findings  3  and  10  above  by  taking  into  account 
the  -personnel  changes  due  to  attrition,  retirements,  and  the  releases  of  temporary  employees. 
Nonetheless,  the  District  has  determined  that  services  in  school  nurses  and  school  nurse 
practitioners  must  still  be  reduced  or  discontinued  by  6.0  FTEs  to  maintain  a  balanced  budget 
and  provide  essential  services. 

10.  On  March  26,  2004,  the  District  withdrew  the  Preliminary  Notice  Not  to  Re- 
Employ  or  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  previously  served  upon  an  undetermined  number  of 
certificated  employees  including  teachers.  On  April  16,  2004,  the  District  withdrew  the 
preliminary  notice  of  layoff  previously  served  upon  school  counselors.  At  the  hearing  on 
April  21,  2004,  the  District  withdrew  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  and  Accusation 
previously  served  upon  respondent  and  school  nurse  Erlita  G.  Rivera.  Consequently,  in  this 
matter,  the  issue  presented  for  decision  is  whether  or  not  the  District  may  not  re-employ  or 
layoff  two  school  nurse  practitioners  and  four  school  nurses  for  the  ensuing  school  year  due 
to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  performed  by  the  school 
nursing  staff. 

11.  Respondent  Frances  Pollock  is  a  school  nurse  for  the  District  and  possesses  a 
professional  clear  credential  as  a  school  nurse.  Ms.  Pollock’s  date  of  first  paid  service  with 
the  District  was  May  28,  2002. 

For  the  past  two  years,  respondent  Pollock  has  been  working

  

half-time  as  a  school  nurse  pursuant  to  a  contract  with  the  District  and  is  considered a  first 
year  probationary  certificated  employee.  Under  the  District’s  seniority  list,  Ms.  Pollock  is 
the  most  junior  of  the  school  nurses  subject  to  layoff. 

_  12.  (A)  Respondent  Karen  Doring  Shurtleff  is  a  school  nurse  and  possesses  a 

professional  clear  credential  in  school  nurse  services.  Her  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the 
District  is  September  30,  2002,  and  she  is  a  second  year  probationary  certificated  employee. 

(B)  Respondent  Doring  Shurtleff  has  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  nursing  and  master’s 

degrees  in  psychology  and  in  biology  and  nutrition.  Before  joining  the  District  two  years 
ago,  she  worked  as  a  school  nurse  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  for  eleven 
years.  She  now  receives  greater  job  satisfaction  from  -her  job  with  the  District  because  she  is 
able  to  provide  continuity  of  care  to  students  and  to  conduct  follow-up  calls  after health 
screenings.  She  works  two  days  per  week  at  Decker  Elementary  School  and  two  days  at 
Ranch  Hills  Elementary  School.  One  day  each  week,  she  performs  screening  examinations 
of  students  for  scoliosis  and  hearing  and  vision  tests  as  a  member  of  school  cluster  nursing 
team. 

(C)  As  a  school  nurse  at  two  elementary  schools,  respondent  Doring  Shurtleff 

administers  medications  to  students  and  assists  students  with  their  medical  needs  including 
catheters  and  diaper  changes.  She  also  trains  and  advises  the  health  clerks  and  administrative 
She  provides  nursing 
staff  how  to  administer  medications  and  assist  students  in  her  absence. 
services  to  students  who  become  ill  or  suffer  injuries.  Respondent  also  performs  health 
assessments  of  special  education  students  for  purposes  of  their  individual  education  plans. 
She  instructs  students  on  hygiene. 

13.  Respondent  Ada  Yuk-Fung  Yip  is  a  full-time  school  counselor  for  the  District  and 

possesses  a  preliminary  school  nurse’s  credential.  Ms.  Yip  has  a  date  of  first  paid  service 
with  the  District  of  September  7,  1999. 
certificated  employee  because,  while  she  worked  full-time  in  her  first  year  with  the  District, 
Ms.  Yip  worked  only  half-time  and  did  not  work  75  percent  of  the  school  days  in  the  three 
subsequent  school  years.  Respondent  Yip  did  not  appear  or  testify  at  the  hearing  but  was 
represented  by  counsel. 
and  may  not  be  reassigned  to  any  other  certificated  employee  position. 

She  is  credentialed  only  to  provide  nursing  services  for  the  District 

She  is  considered  a  second  year  probationary 

14.  (A)  Respondent  Paula  Vlasich  is  employed  as  a  tenured,  full-time  school  nurse 
practitioner  by  the  District  and  possesses  a  life  health  services  credential  as  a  school  nurse. 
Ms.  Vlasich  has a  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the  District  of  October  4,  2001,  and  is  in  her 
third  year  of  employment  with  the  District. 

(B)  Respondent  Vlasich  is  a  registered  nurse  and  has  been a  nurse  practitioner  for 

over  25  years.  She  attained  her  credential  and  a  bachelor  of  science  degree  in  nursing  from 
Loma  Linda  University.  She  received  further  education  to  be  a  nurse  practitioner  from  the 
University  of  Southern  California.  She  has  taken  continuing  education  classes  in  pediatric 
nursing. 

Ms.  Vlasich  appreciates  the  professional  nursing  environment  of  the  District  in  

which  she  is  able  to  consult  with  nursing  colleagues  in  her  cluster  of  schools  and  provide 
first-time  health  care  for  many  low-income  students  who  have  not  seen  a  nurse  or  doctor 
before  enrolling  in  school. 

(C)  Three  and  one-half  days  each  week,  Ms.  Vlasich  works  as  a  nurse  practitioner 
at  Madison  Elementary  School.  On  the  other  one  and  one-half  day  each  week,  she  performs 
duties  as  a  team  leader  and  member  of  her  cluster  team  of  nurses,  including  conducting 
At  her  school  site,  respondent  Vlasich 
vision,  hearing,  and  scoliosis  screenings  of  students. 
sees  children  who  may  have  come  to  school  sick  and  often  refers  such  students  to  the  District 
health  services  clinic  or  outside  physicians  by  completing  referral  forms.  She  assists  students 
with  special  needs  and  conditions  such  as  medical  use  of  a  tracheal  tube  and  attention  deficit 
hyperactivity  disorder. 
themselves  in  the  administration  of  their  own  medical  services. 
immunization  records. 

She  trains  health  aides  to  help  such  students  and  the  students 

She  reviews  students’ 

(D)  In  accordance  with  District  policy,  respondent  Vlasich  regularly  attends 

“Student  Success”  team  meetings  at  her  school  site.  With  the  student,  parents,  and  student’s 
teacher,  she  discusses  what  can  be  done  to  improve  a  student’s  academic  performance  in  the 
Frequently,  respondent  as  a  school  nurse  is  able  to  attribute  the  student’s  poor 
classroom. 
academic  record  to  health  problems  that  are  not  readily  apparent  to  the  teacher  or  parents. 
With  respect  to  special  education  students,  Ms.  Vlasich  regularly  participates  in  triennial 
review  meetings  of  the  students’  progress  and  initial  assessment  conferences  with  the  school 
psychologist,  resource  specialist,  day  teacher,  speech  and  language  specialist,  and  administer 
to  discuss  students’  eligibility  for  the  special  education  program.  In  addition,  in  cases  where 
a  special  education  student  has  a  health  issue,  respondent  will  participate  in  meetings  to 
develop  and  revise  the  student’s  individual  education  plan.  This  school  year,  respondent 
Vlasich  has  taken  part  in  17  IEP  meetings. 

15.  (A)  Respondent  Nina  Nixon  is  a  tenured  certificated  employee  and  school  nurse 
for  the  District.  She  possesses  a  preliminary  school  nurse  services  credential  and  has  a  date 
of  first  paid  service  to  the  District  of  September  4,  2001. 
is  the  same  as  respondent  Pamela  Reardon,  Ms.  Nixon  is  considered  junior  to  Ms.  Reardon 
after  application  of  the  tiebreaker  criteria  and  point  system  by  the  District. 

While  her  date  of  first  paid  service 

(B)  Ms.  Nixon  has a  bachelor  of  science  degree  in  nursing  from  Azusa  Pacific 

She  provides  health  and  nursing  services  to  students  who  are  ill 

University.  She  is  in  her  third  year  as  the  sole  school  nurse  at  Pomona  High  School,  which 
has  approximately  1,700  students,  many  of  whom  come  from  low-income  and/or 
undocumented  families. 
when  they  come  to  school,  who  have  special  health  needs,  and  who  are  disabled  by  medical 
conditions.  She  performs  blood  sugar  tests  for  diabetic  students,  administers  medications, 
and  assists  students  who  use  a  gastric  tube,  oxygen  tank,  or  inhaler. 
Ms.  Nixon  also  cares 
for  and  counsels  students  who  use  illegal  drugs  and  suffer  from  conditions  such  as  eating 
disorders,  pregnancy,  anxiety,  depression,  and  abuse.  She  provides  health  resource 
information  and  refers  students  to  counselors  and  other  health  professionals.  She  is  very 

busy  seeing  students  who  come  by  on  office  visits.  For  example,  in  March  2004,  Ms.  Nixon  

and  her  health  aide  had  916  office  visits  at  the  high  school  nurse’s  office.  In  addition,  she 
performs  health  screenings  of  students  with  her  cluster  team  of  nurses. 
trained  her  health  aide  or  clerk  and  office  staff  to  administer  medications  and  assist  students 
when  she  is  unavailable. 

Ms.  Nixon  has 

(C)  Moreover,  respondent  Nixon  performs  school  nursing  duties  for  students  with 

special  needs.  She  is  the  case  carrier  for  four  special  education  students  who  have  medical 
conditions  requiring  seizure  medications.  She  provides  medications  to  those  students  and 
has  trained  the  health  aide  to  administer  the  medications  as  well.  She  performs  health  history 
and  development  assessments  of  students  with  health  disabilities  and  needs. 
She  participates 
in  individual  education  plan  meetings  for  special  education  students  with  health  concerns  and 
Ms.  Nixon 
individual  health  services  plan  meetings  for  students  with  special  health  needs. 
also  frequently  sees  the  approximately  60  severely  handicapped  students  at  the  high  school 
who  come  to  school  with  illnesses  and  need  follow-up  care. 

16.  (A)  Respondent  Pamela  Reardon  is  a  tenured  certificated  employee  and  school 
nurse  for  the  District.  She  holds  a  professional  health  services  credential  in  school  nursing 
and  has  a  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  of  September  4,  2001.  Under  the 
District’s  tiebreaker  criteria,  Ms.  Reardon  has  more  tiebreaker  points  and  is  considered  senior 
to  respondent  Nixon  even  though  they  both  share  the  same  hire  date. 

(B)  Respondent  Reardon  obtained  a  bachelor  of  science  degree  in  nursing  from 

She  has  also  worked  at  hospitals  in  Pasadena. 

Prior  to  joining  the  District,  she  worked  for  the 

Point  Loma  Nazarene  University  in  San  Diego  and  a  master’s  degree  in  health  services  from 
California  State  University  Los  Angeles. 
Bonita  school  district  for  12  years. 
Ms. 
In  her  current 
Reardon  has  now  been  working  as  a  District  school  nurse  for  three  years. 
District  position,  she  provides  nursing  and  health  services  to  165  moderately  to  severely 
handicapped  pre-school  children  and  to  45  moderately  to  severely  handicapped  adults.  Both 
of  said  student  populations  have  mental  and/or  physical  disabilities  requiring  special 
education  programming.  Ms.  Reardon  services  the  students  at  six  elementary  school  sites 
and  an  adult  transition  program. 
In  connection  with  the  special  education  program,  Ms. 
Reardon  conducts  health  assessments  and  participates  in  individual  education  planning 
meetings 

17.  Respondent  Joyce  Colbert  is  a  tenured  certificated  employee  and  school  nurse  for 
the  District.  She  possesses  a  professional  clear  credential  in  school  nursing  services  and  has 
a  date  of  first  paid  service  with  the  District  of  September  5,  2000.  Based  on  her  date  of  first 
paid  service,  she  is  the  most  senior  of  the  school  nurses  and  nurse  practitioners  subject  to 
layoff  from  the  District  in  this  matter.  Ms.  Colbert  did  not  testify  but  was  represented  by 
counsel  at  the  hearing. 

18.  (A)  Certificated  employee  Gloria  J.  McCrea  is  a  school  nurse  and  has  first  date  of 

paid  service  to  the  District  of  September  28,  1999.  She  holds  a  Ryan  health  services 
credential  as  a  school  nurse  and  a  Ryan  multiple  subjects  credential.  Based  on  the  latter 
teaching  credential,  the  District  has  reassigned  Ms.  McCrea  to  the  classroom.

(B)  Respondent  Erlita  G.  Rivera  is  a  school  nurse  and  has  a  date  of  first  paid 

service  with  the  District  of  September  7,  1999.  She  possesses  a  preliminary  health  services 
credential  to  act  as  a  school  nurse.  The  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  and  preliminary 
notice  of  layoff  previously  issued  to  her  and  she  is  being  retained  as  an  employee  of  the 
District. 

19. 

In  this  proceeding,  the  District  proposes  to  not  re-employ  two  school  nurse 
practitioners  and  four  school  nurses,  or  6.0  FTE  positions  in  school  nursing,  due  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  in  school  nursing.  Currently,  the 
District  employs  33.8  FTE  positions  of  school  nurses  and  school  nurse  practitioners. 
For  the 
ensuing  school  year,  after  reducing  positions  in  school  nursing  by  6.0  FTE,  the  District  plans 
to  retain  10.0  FTE  positions  for  school  nurse  practitioners  and  17.8  FTE  positions  for  school 
nurses  or  a  total  of  27.8  FTE  positions  in  school  nursing. 
The  District’s  school  nurses  are 
employees  within  the  health  services  department  and  provide  health  and  nursing  services  to 
students  who  receive  educational  services  at  school  sites  and  with  the  special  education 
program. 

20.  The  school  nurses  provide  mandated  health  services  to  the  District  students 
including  vision  and  hearing  testing,  scoliosis  screening,  immunization  checks,  and  health 
assessments  for  special  education  eligibility  and  programming.  In  addition,  the  nurses 
prepare  designated  instructional  services  plan  for  certain  disabled  and  special  needs  students 
who  require  additional  supports  and  services  to  fully  utilize  the  educational  opportunities 
offered  by  the  schools.  Non-mandated  services  provided  by  school  nurses  may  include 
classroom  health  presentations,  caring  for  sick  students,  and  attendance  at  meetings  to 
discuss  the  academic  performance  of  students  or  development  of  individual  education  plans 
for  special  education  students  who  do  not  have a  health-related  concern  or  issue. 

21.  (A)  With  the  nurses  of  its  health  services  department,  the  District  provides  health 
and  nursing  services  to  its  special  education  students.  The  District  educates  and  serves  about 
3,900  special  education  students  who  comprise  about  11  percent  of  its  total  student  body. 
Each  school  year,  t  he  school  nurses  participate  in  the  preparation  and  meetings  for 
individual  education  plans  (IEPs)  for  special  education  students  who  have  health  or  medical 
As  part  of  the  IEP  process,  the  school  nurses  also  prepare  individual  health  services 
issues. 
plans  for  those  special  education  students  with  health-related  issues  or  problems.  In  addition, 
the  school  nurses  perform  about  900  triennial  health  and  development  evaluations  for 
enrolled  special  education  students  and  300  health  and  development  evaluations  for  new  or 
prospective  students  for  the  special  education  program. 

(B)  The  school  nurses  perform  these  mandated  services  for  special  education 

students  in  addition  to  their  other  mandated  and  non-mandated  duties  requiring  them  to  see 
the  special  education  students  when  they  undergo  health  screenings,  require  immunization 
records  checks,  and  are  ill  or  need  assistance  at  school. 

(C)  In  meeting  the  requirements  to  provide  mandated  services  to  special  education 
students,  the  District  also  plans  to  employ  27.8  FTE  positions  for  school  psychologists,  33.0

  

FTE  positions  for  speech  and  language  therapists,  and  7.0  FTE  positions  for  adaptive 
physical  education  specialists.  The  District  plans  to  contract  with  an  outside  vendor  to 
provide  occupational  therapy  for  special  education  students.  The  District  also  employs  about 
200  instructional  aides  to  help  special  education  students  with  their  classroom  work  and 
health  care  needs. 

22.  With  the  proposed  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  nursing  services,  the  District 

still  plans  to  meet  its  obligations  to  provide  mandated  and  non-mandated  services  to  the 
students  by  additional  training  of  existing  nursing  staff  and  health  clerks,  prioritizing  which 
-  health  assessments  and  service  plan  meetings  require  actual  participation  by  school  nurses, 
decreasing  the  presence  of  a  school  nurse  at  each  school  site  by  one-half  day  each  week, 
transferring  some  non-mandated  services  such  as  office  consults  of  students  to  school  site 
health  clerks,  and  increasing  the  efficiencies  and  work  of  the  nursing  staff. 
represents  that  it  will  be  able  to  provide  daily  nursing  and  health  services  coverage  at  each  of 
its  school  sites  by  assigning  nurses  and  health  clerks  a  total  of  at  least  5.5  days  each  week  at 
The  District  employs  about  24.5  FTE  positions  for  health  clerks  whose  job  is 
each  school. 
to  assist  students  with  their  health  concerns  and  to  help  the  school  nurse  at  each  school  site. 
For  next  year,  the  District  has  allocated  or  received  funding  for  11.3  FTE  positions  for  school 
nurses  for  special  education  and  2.7  FTE  positions  for  school  nurses  to  the  child 
development  center.  By  its  assignment  of  school  nurses  to  school  sites  and  allocation  or 
funding  for  FTE  positions  for  school  nurses,  the  District  will  provide  mandated  and  non- 
mandated  nursing  and  health  services  to  students  in  a  reduced  manner  that  is  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious  and  meets  the  welfare  and  interest  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

The  District 

23. 

It  was  not  established  that,  if  the  District  does  not  re-employ  the  subject 

certificated  nursing  employees  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District  will  be  unable  to 
provide  services,  including  mandated  services,  to  its  students  due  to  the  recent  transfer  and 
acceptance  of  approximately  195  moderately  to  severely  handicapped  or  disabled  students 
Said  disabled  students  have  been  always 
from  the  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education. 
been  attending  school  in  District  facilities  and  receiving  educational  and  health  services  from 
District  personnel. 
District  to  provide  services  to  its  student  population.  The  District  allocated  an  additional  2.0 
FTE  positions  in  school  nursing  to  provide  health  and  nursing  services  to  these  disabled 
students. 

The  transfer  of  said  disabled  students  has  not  adversely  affected  the 

24.  Based  on  Findings  19  —  23  above,  it  was  not  established  that,  with  the  non  re- 
employment  of  subject  school  nurse  practitioners  and  school  nurses  for  the  next  school  year 
due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  in  school  nursing,  the 
District  will  reduce  mandated  nursing  services  below  the  level  required  by  law  or  will  be 
unable  to  render  nursing  services  at  the  level  required  by  law. 

25.  (A)  Based  on  Findings  9  —  24  above,  respondents  Pollock,  Doring  Shurtleff,  Yip, 

Vlasich,  Nixon,  Reardon,  and  Colbert  may  be  terminated  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  services  of  6.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  for  school  nurses  and  school 
nurse  practitioners.

(B)  There  are  no  certificated  employees  with  less  than  seniority  than  said 

respondents  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render  services  that  any  one  of  said 
respondents  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

x  oe  OK  Kk OK  OK 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the 

following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  exists  for  the  subject  proceedings  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section 
44949  and  44955;  and  all  notices,  accusations,  and  other  related  papers  and  reports  required 
by  said  sections  have  been  provided  in  timely  manner  and,  as  such,  complainant  District  has 
complied  with  the  requirements  of  said  sections. 

2.  Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955  to  reduce  by 
6.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  the  concomitant  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the 
District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  wit:  school 
nurses  and  school  nurse  practitioners,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  3  —  5  and  8  —  9  above.  Said 
cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  of  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Section  44949, 

3.  Cause  exists,  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955,  to  give  notice  to  respondents  who  presently  hold 
6.0  FTE  positions  in  school  nursing  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
school  year,  based  on  Findings  3  —  9  and  25  above.  There  are  no  certificated  probationary  or 
permanent  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority  than  respondents  who  are  being  retained 
by  the  District  for  the  2004  -  2005  school  year  to  render  services  which  respondents  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

4.  Discussion--Respondents  argue  that  the  Accusations  seeking  their  layoff  as  school 
nurses  should  be  dismissed  because  the  employing  District  has  not  shown  that  it  will  be  able 
to  provide  mandated  nursing  services  after  the  proposed  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of 
service  in  school  nursing.  In  support  of  their  argument,  respondents  have  cited  the  case  of 
Degener  v.  Governing  Board,  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  136  Cal.Rptr.  801  (1977),  and  the 
administrative  decision  of  the  governing  board  of  the  Huntington  Beach  high  school  district 
Respondents’  argument,  while  certainly  compelling, 
in  a  layoff  proceeding  from  last  year. 
is  not  persuasive  in  the  circumstances  of  this  matter. 

10  

A  school  district  is  required  to  give  diligent  care  to  the  health  and  physical 

development  of  its  pupils  and  may  employ  certificated  persons  to  perform  the  work. 
(Education  Code  Section  49400.)  Under  the  Education  Code,  a  school  district  is  required  to 
provide  certain  health-related  services  such  as  the  administration  of  prescribed  medications 
for  pupils,  specialized  physical  health  care  services,  and  vision  and  hearing  tests.  (Education 
Code  Sections  49423,  49423.5,  49452,  and  49455.)  Nursing  is  a  particular  kind  of  service 
that  a  school  district  may  reduce  in  the  teacher  layoff  proceeding.  (See  Rutherford  v.  Board 
of  Trustees,  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  134  Cal.Rptr.  290  (1976);  Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  Office 
of  Education,  208  Cal.App.3d  456,  256  Cal.Rptr.  353  (1989).) 

In  Degener  v.  Governing  Board,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  695  —  696,  the  Court  held 
that,  where  a  school  district  does  not  reduce  its  offerings  in  code-mandated  course  or  service 
below  the  level  required  by  law,  said  reduction  should  be  considered  a  reduction  of  a 
particular  kind  of  service  and  proper  under  the  Education  Code.  Further,  it  is  within  the 
school  district’s  discretion,  subject  to  the  minimum  level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the 
extent  to  which  it  deemed  a  reduction  of  services  is  necessary  and  proper  under  the 
circumstances.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  192  Cal.Rptr.  710 
Discretion  also  lies  with  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  to  determine  how 
(1983).) 
and  in  what  manner  mandated  services  are  to  be  provided.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees,  41 
Cal.App.4"  1571,  49  Cal.Rptr.2d  289  (1996).)  Of  course,  a  school  district’s  decision  to 
reduce a  particular  kind  of  service  must  not  be  fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious. 
(Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.  v.  Abbott,  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  807-808,  143 
Cal.Rptr.  281  (1978).) 

In  the  instant  matter,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Pomona  Unified  School  District 

resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  school  nursing,  for 
the  ensuing  school  year  due  to  fiscal  concerns  and  declining  enrollment.  The  District  has 
determined  to  reduce  school  nursing  by  six  full-time  equivalent  positions  and  has 
demonstrated  that,  after  such  service  reduction,  it  has  sufficient  nursing  staff  along  with 
In  recognition 
health  aides  to  provide  daily  nursing  services  and  coverage  at  its  school  sites. 
perhaps  of  the  greater  prospective  workload  for  the  nurses,  the  District  also  plans  to  increase 
work  efficiency  with  training  and  elimination  of  certain  non-mandated  tasks  that  do  not 
require  the  participation  of  school  nurses  in  the  process  or  in  meetings.  With  respect  to 
special  education,  the  pupils  receive  instruction  and  other  services  in  many  or  all  of  the 
school  sites  staffed  by  school  nurses  and  the  District  will  be  retaining,  in  addition  to  school 
nurses,  school  psychologists,  resource  specialists,  and  speech  and  language  therapists  who 
will  continue  to  provide  mandated  services  to  the  students.  Based  on  the  evidence,  the 
District  will  meet  its  legal  obligations  to  provide  services  to  all  of  its  pupils  although  services 
by  nurses  will  be  reduced.  The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  nursing  services  is  related  to 
the  welfare  of  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955. 
The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  a  proper 
exercise  of  the  discretion  of  the  District  and  Governing  Board. 

11  

WHEREFORE,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Order: 

* 

oO 

He  ek 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusations  with  respect  to  respondents  Joyce  M.  Colbert,  Karen  Lee  Doring 
Shurtleff,  Nina  Nixon,  Frances  G.  Pollock,  Pamela  P.  Reardon,  Paula  Vlasich,  and  Ada  Yuk 
Fung  Yip,  and  each  of  them,  is  sustained  and  notice  may  be  given  to  all  of  them  as  well  as 
those  certificated  employees,  if  any,  who  received  written  notices  but  did  not  request  a 
hearing  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004  -  2005  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  based  on 
Conclusions  of  Law  nos.  1 

-  4  above. 

2.  Before  giving  notices  to  respondents  and  other  certificated  employees,  if  any,  who 
did  not  request  a  hearing,  the  District  shall  determine  and  take  into  account  further  positively 
assured  attrition  among  certificated  employees  in  deciding  how  many  and  when  certificated 
employees  should  be  terminated  before  the  ensuing  2004  -  2005  school  year. 

3.  The  District  shall  give  notice  to  respondents  and  those  certificated  employees,  if 

any,  who  did  not  request  a  hearing,  in  the  inverse  order  of  seniority  with  the  District  pursuant 
to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Section  44955. 

4.  The  Accusation  filed  and  issued  against  respondent  Erlita  G.  Rivera  shall  be 
withdrawn  and/or  dismissed  pursuant  to  the  request  of  the  District,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  10 
and  18(A)  above. 

Dated: 

Vincent  Nafarrete 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

12

stipulation  (s)  are  set  forth  in  Exhibit  C,  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein  by  this 
reference. 

Reduction  of  Psychologists 

11. 

District  currently  employs  35  school  psychologists  (some  of  whom  work  part- 

time)  in  26.7  F.T.E.  positions.  As  part  of  its  action  in  reducing  services  for  the  2004-2005 
school  year  the  Governing  Board  of  District  determined  to  reduce  12.50  F.T.E.  school 
psychologist positions.”  At  hearing,  District  indicated  that  only  10.2  F.T.E.  psychologist 
positions  will  actually  be  reduced  and  that  16.5  F.T.E.  psychologist  v will  be  retained  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year. 

Certain  services  provided  by  psychologist  are  mandated  by  state  law.  Mandated 
services  which  require  participation  of  a  school  psychologist  include  special  education 
assessments,  triennial  re-evaluations  of  special  education  students,  manifestation 
determinations,  positive  behavior  intervention  plans,  designated  instruction  and  service  (DIS) 
counseling  and  504  reports  for  special  education  students.  District  has  developed  a 
contingency  plan  designed  to  cover  all  mandated  service  areas.  The  contingency  plan,  which 
is  based  on  a  reduction  of  12.50  psychologist  positions,  will  provide  a  minimum  level  of 
service  in  each  mandated  service  area  with  more  F.T.E.  assigned  to  the  areas  of  greatest  need 
in  District.  In  addition,  in  order  to  ensure  that  each  school  site  will  have  equal  access  to 
psychological  services  psychologists  retained  by  District  will  be  site  based,  i.e.,  assigned 
particular  school  sites.  District  has  also  implemented  a  Learning  Center  Model  to  reduce  the 
need  for  formal  special  education  assessments  of  students.  The  Learning  Center  Model  is  a 
new  program  of  pre-assessment  and  early  intervention  that  is  designed  to  identify  and 
address  a  student’s  educational  problems  early  in  order  to  avoid  the  need  for  special 
education  services. 

12. 

|  Respondents  contend  District  has  failed  to  establish  that  it  will  be  able  to 

provide  all  mandated  psychological  services  if  the  proposed  reductions  are  implemented. 
They  note  that  in  1998  the  State  found  District  was  out  of  compliance  in  providing  mandated 
psychological  services  (i.e.,  special  education  assessments)  at  one  school  site  even  though  it 
had  17  psychologists  on  staff.  They  also  note  that  District  has  a  current  backlog  of  special 
education  assessment  requests.  Lastly,  respondents  argue  that  the  sheer  volume  of  mandated 
psychological  services  District  must  provide  to  students  demonstrates  that  District  will  not  be 
able  to  meet  its  statutory  obligations  if  the  proposed  reductions  are  implemented.’ 

  

*  Although  the  board  resolution  indicates  a  reduction  of  14.50  F.T.E.  school  psychologist 
positions  this  was  a  typographical  error.  At  hearing  District  indicated  that  12.50  F.T-E.  was  actually  the 
correct  number. 

>  Respondent  presented  evidence  that  there  are  approximately  4,900  special  education  students 

currently  enrolled  in  District  and  that  each  year  psychologists  participate  in  approximately  1,600  triennial 
evaluations,  450  manifest  determinations  and  1000  positive  behavior  intervention  plans,  in  addition  to 
performing  crisis  intervention,  writing  504  reports  and  providing  DIS  counseling. 

 

6 

13. 

District  acknowledges  that  it  has  a  backlog  of  triennial  re-evaluations  and  that 
there  is  a  strong  possibility  of  a  larger  backlog  with  the  reduction  in  psychologist  services.  It 
nevertheless  maintains  that  it  will  be  able  to  meet  its  obligation  to  provide  mandated 
services.  It  notes  that  in  1998  it  had  only  recently  hired  17  psychologists  after  operating  for 
years  with  only  6  due  to  budget  constrains.  As  a  result  in  1998  it  had  an  assessment  backlog 
of  approximately  2000  students  and  there  were  complaints  at  one  school  site  that 
psychological  services  were  not  being  equitably  provided  to  all  schools.  In  or  about  1998, 
pursuant  to  a  corrective  action  plan,  District  revamped  its  assessment  process  and  also  made 
its  psychologists  site  based.  District  points  out  that  nothing  in  the  plan  required  District  to 
have  a  specific  number  of  psychologists  or  required  a  psychologist  to  spend  a  certain 
percentage  of  time  on  site.  District  also  believes  it  will  be  able  to  provide  the  mandated 
psychological  services  because  it  is  working  diligently  to  reduce  its  backlog,  some  school 
sites  no  longer  have a triennial  re-evaluation  backlog  and  District’s  current  overall  backlog  is 
only  about  500  cases.  District  notes  that  every  school  district  in  the  state  has  a  backlog.  In 
addition,  District  expects  the  need  for  special  education  assessments,  triennial  reevaluations, 
etc.  to  gradually  decrease  with  implementation  of  the  Learning  Center  Model,  which  will 
also  reduce  the  demand  for  mandated  services.  Lastly,  District  notes  that  it  is  actually 
reducing  only  10.2  F.T.E.  psychologist  positions  rather  than  the  12.50  F.T.E.  anticipated 
under  its  contingency  plan,  which  means  it  will  have  an  additional  2.3  F.T.E.  psychologist 
positions  to  provide  necessary  services. 

14. 

‘The  evidence  established  that  District’s  determination  that  it  can  comply  with 

all  statutory  mandates  with  a  reduced  psychologist  staff  was  not  arbitrary,  but  rather  was 
based  upon  reasonable  considerations.  While  it  is  clear  that  the  psychologists  who  remain  in 
District  will  be  working  harder  due  to  the  reduction  of  psychologist  positions,  it  was  not 
established  that  the  reduction  will  prevent  the  District  from  providing  mandated  services. 
Moreover,  it  must  be  presumed  that  District  will  perform  its  official  duties  and  comply  with 
legislative  mandates.  If  District  finds  it  difficult  to  provide  mandatory  services  next  year,  it 
has  the  option  of  changing  the  manner  or  method  of  offering  the  service.  (Campbell  v.  Abbot 
(1978)  76  Cal.App.3 

796;  Gallup  v.  Loma  School  Dist.  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4"  1571.) 

Retention  of  Behaviorist 

15. 

As  part  of  its  action  in  reducing  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  the 

Governing  Board  of  District  determined  to  skip  Rebecca  J.  Valero.  Valero  holds  a 
Professional  Clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  (PPS)  credential  in  school  counseling  and  has  a 
seniority  date  of  August  8,  2002.  District  currently  employs  Valero  as  a  1.0  F.T.E. 
behaviorist.  The  primary  responsibility  of  a  behaviorist  is  to  work  with  teachers  to  develop 
comprehensive  behavioral  plans  for  students  who  are  in  crisis  or  whose  behavior  is  out  of 
control.*  The  behaviorist  at  District  primarily  works  with  autistic  children  who  have  severe 
behavioral  problems. 

 

  

  
  
  

The  behaviorist  position  was  developed  by  District  because  it  was  paying 
$100,000.00  to  $150,000.00  to  outside  contractors  (who  had  no  incentive  to  limit  costs)  to 
perform  the  services  currently  provided  by  Valero.  When  District  developed  the  behaviorist 
position  the  only  educational  requirement  was  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  (PPS)  credential. 
All  psychologists  employed  by  District  hold  PPS  credentials  and  were  therefore  eligible  to 
apply.  Valero,  who  had  previously  served  as  a  psychology  intern  at  District,  was  the  only 
applicant  for  the  position.  The  behaviorist  position  was  her  first  regular  psychology  position. 
Following  her  hire  Valero  took  numerous  courses  directly  related  to  the  duties  of  a 
behaviorist,  accumulating  42  hours  of  behaviorist  training  that  no  psychologist  who  is 
subject  to  layoff  possesses.  As  part  of  her  duties  as  a  behaviorist  Valero  is  also  responsible 
for  performing  certain  duties  that  school  psychologists  do  not  typically  perform,  including 
developing  comprehensive  behavior  plans,  providing  training  regarding  behavioral 
assessments,  techniques  and  intervention  plans  and  providing  discrete  trial  training. 

16. 

Respondent  Stephen  Cederborg  holds  Standard  Life  Pupil  Personnel  Services 

(PPS)  credentials  in  psychology,  counseling,  psychometry,  child  welfare  and  attendance,  and 
social  work,  as  well  as  a  Life  Administrative  Services  Credential.  He  has  a  Ph.D.  in 
educational  psychology.  District  currently  employs  Cederborg  as  a  .5  F.T.E.  school 
psychologist.°  District  has  assigned  Cederborg  a  seniority  date  of  February  1,  2001. 
Cederborg  holds  .5  of  the  psychologist  positions  that  are  being  eliminated. 

Respondent  Linda  Byrns  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services 

Credential  in  school  psychology.  District  currently  employs  Byrns  as  a  1.0  F.T-.E.  school 
psychologist.  District  has  assigned  Byrns a  seniority  date  of  June  10,  2000.  Byrns  holds  one 
of  the  psychologist  positions  that  is  being  eliminated. 

Valero  is  less  senior  than  psychologists  Stephen  Cederborg  and  Linda  Byrns,  as  well 

as  several  other  psychologists  noticed  for  layoff. 

17. 

Respondents  contend  that  all  psychologists  employed  by  District  are 

certificated  and  competent  to  perform  the  duties  of  the  behaviorist  position  because  all 
school  psychologists  possess  a  PPS  credential.  School  psychologist  Sherry  Burke,  who  is 
not  subject  to  layoff,  testified  that  all  school  psychologist  at  District  either  perform  the 
functions  of  a  behaviorist  or  received  training  in  those  functions  in  order  to  obtain  their  PPS 
credential.  Burke  has  taught  several  courses  at  Chapman  College  and  oversees  their 
psychology  intern  program.  Both  Cederborg  and  Bymns  testified  that  they  are  qualified  to 

  

“  In  order  to  develop  a  plan  to  redirect  behaviors  the  behaviorist  must  do  a  behavioral 
assessment,  which  requires  the  behaviorist  to  observe  the  child  over  a  period  of  time  to  determine  what 
occurs  right  before  the  problem  behavior  takes  place.  Such  plans  are  often  up  to10  pages  long. 

>  Cederborg  was  noticed  for  layoff  of  1.0  F.T.E.  At  hearing  District  stipulated  that  he  should  only 
have  been  noticed  for  layoff  of  the  0.5  F.T.E.  psychologist  portion  of  his  position.  Although  Cederborg  is 
a  1.0  F.T.E.  employee,  0.5  F.T.E.  of  his  position  consists  of  other,  non-psychologist  duties  and  is  funded 
from  a  grant.

  

perform  the  duties  of  a  behaviorist  and  that  no  one  at  District  ever  asked  if  they  could 
perform  the  duties.  Byrns  also  testified  that  she  has  experience  preparing  behavioral  plans 
(school  psychologists  typically  use’a  1  page  behavioral  plan),  that  she  works  with  teachers  to 
implement  those  plans  and  that  she  performs  many  of  the  same  duties  as  a  behaviorist  as  part 
of  her  job  as  a  school  psychologist,  including  working  with  severely  maladjusted  children 
and  providing  crisis  intervention. 

@ 

18. 

District  does  not  contend  that  school  psychologists  are  incompetent  to  perform 

the  duties  of  a  behaviorist.  Rather  it  maintains  that  it  is  entitled  to  skip  Valero  because  she 
has  special  training  and  experience  as  a  behaviorist  that  no  school  psychologist  subject  to 
layoff  possesses  by  virtue  of  having  attended  numerous  trainings  specific  to  behaviorists  that 
school  psychologist  have  not  attended.  District  asserts  that  any  additional  training  by  Valero, 
including  that  obtained  after  she  was  hired  as  a  behaviorist,  qualifies  her  to  be  skipped. 

19. 

Generally  speaking,  a  senior  employee  whose  position  is  eliminated  has  the 

right  to  “bump”  into  a  position  held  by  a  junior  employee  if  the  senior  employee  is 
credentialed  and  competent  to  perform  the  duties  of  the  junior  employee’s  position. 
However,  the  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute.  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d) 
permits  a  school  district  to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of 
seniority  if  it  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course 
of  study,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to 
teach  the  course  or  course  of  study,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

20. 

District  has  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  someone  to  perform  the  duties  of 

a  behaviorist.  However,  it  has  failed  to  establish  that  the  coursework  taken  by  Valero 
constitutes  the  type  of  special  training  that  would  justify  skipping  Valero  in  favor  of  a  more 
senior  school  psychologist.  A  primary  purpose  of  Education  Code  44955,  subdivision  (b)  is 
to  protect  the  seniority  rights  of  certificated  employees.  Skipping  based  on  a  very  narrow 
definition  of  special  skills  is  inappropriate  where  it  serves  to  undermine  that  purpose. 
(Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  (1983)  139 
Cal.App.3™  567,  574,  fn.  2.)  Moreover,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d) 
expressly  provides  that  in  order  to  skip  a  junior  employee  based  on  special  skills  and 
experience,  the  skills  and  experience  must  be  “necessary  to  teach  the  course  or  course  of 
study”  and  must  not  be  possessed  by  the  senior  employee.  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (d)  does  not  authorize  a  comparative  evaluation  of  who  is  better  qualified  where 
both  the  senior  and  junior  employee  possess  the  skills  necessary  to  do  the  job.  In  this  case, 
virtually  all  of  Valero’s  “special  skills  and  experience”  as  a  behaviorist  were  obtained  after 
she  obtained  the  job.  The  coursework  taken  by  Valero  was  not  required  as  a  condition  of 
obtaining  or  continuing  employment.  In  fact  District  was  not  aware  of  all  the  coursework 
undertaken  by  Valero  until  it  began  preparing  for  the  subject  layoff  hearings.  Nor  did 
Valero’s  coursework  lead  to  any  type  of  special  certification.  While  Valero’s  coursework 
and  actual  performance  of  behaviorist  duties  may  suggest  she  has  better  skills  than  a  school 
psychologist  to  perform  the  duties  of  a  behaviorist,  it  does  not  indicate  she  possesses  special 
skills  that  psychologists  do  not  possess.  District  has  therefore  failed  to  demonstrate  that 
Valero’s  “special  skills  and  experience”  are  necessary  for  performance  of  the  behaviorist 

 

  

  
  

©} 

position.  When  laying  off  an  employee  who  is  certificated  to  perform  services  provided  by  a 
junior  employee,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  district  to  establish  that  the  senior  employee  is 
not  competent  to  perform  those  services.  (Davis  v.  Gray  (1938)  29  Cal.App.2d  403,  408; 
Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  Dist.  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3rd  555,  566-567.)  District  has 
failed  to  sustain  that  burden.  Accordingly,  the  most  senior  psychologist  noticed  for  lay  off 
must  be  retained. 

Reduction  of  Counselors 

21. 

The  proposed  reduction  in  the  counseling  program  will  result  in  the 

elimination  of  all  counselors.  Some  of  the  duties  now  performed  by  counselors  will  be 
handled  by  administrators,  teachers  and  other  District  staff.  Many  of  the  counseling  services 
now  offered  will  not  be  provided  at  all.  While  some  of  the  tasks  undertaken  by  counselors 
are  mandated,  counselors  themselves  are  not  a  mandated  service. 

22. 

Respondents  contend  District  has  failed  to  establish  that  it  will  be  able  to 

provide  all  mandated  counseling  services  if  the  proposed  reductions  are  implemented. 
District  maintains  it  will  be  able  to  provide  all  mandated  services  by  utilizing  administrators 
and  other  district  staff  to  provide  student  support.  District  also  contends  the  ALJ  decision  in 
the  2003  layoff  hearing  regarding  elimination  of  counseling  services  is  res  judicata  on  that 
issue. 

23. 

The  doctrine  of  res judicata  is  equally  applicable  to  civil  actions  and 

administrative  proceedings  provided  the  agency  is  acting  in  its  judicial  capacity  to  resolve  a 
disputed  issue  of  fact  that  is  properly  before  the  agency.  (Brosterhous  v.  State  Bar  (1995)  12 
Cal.4th  315;  Shor  v.  Department  of Social  Services  (1990)  223  Cal.App.3d  70.)  It  appears 
that  the  issue  of  whether  District  can  provide  mandated  services  if  it  eliminates  all  counselors 
was  litigated  and  conclusively  decided  at  the  previous  layoff  proceeding.  The  ALJ  found 
that  District  was  not  mandated  to  provide  middle  and  high  school  counselors,  that  critical 
counselor  duties,  including  providing  mandated  services,  could  be  performed  by 
administrators,  and  that  it  was  within  the  discretion  of  District  to  eliminate  all  middle  and 
high  school  counselors.  The  Governing  Board  of  District  adopted  the  ALJ’s  proposed 
decision  and  that  decision  is  now  final.  Respondents  are  therefore  barred  from  asserting  the 
same  claim  in  the  present  layoff  proceeding.  (See  Worton  v.  Worton  (1991)  234  Cal.App,3d 
1638;  Tensor  v.  City  of  Glendale  (1993)  14  Cal.App.4th  154.) 

Reduction  of  504  Intervention  Specialist 

24. 

Respondent  Beverly  Guyton  holds  a  Standard  Designated  Credential  (the 

predecessor  to  the  Pupil  Personnel  Services  Credential)  in  school  psychology  and  an 
Administrative  Services  Credential.  District  currently  employs  Guyton  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  504 
Intervention  Specialist.  Guyton  holds  the  504  Intervention  Specialist  position  that  is  being 
eliminated.

  

Guyton  is  responsible  for  ensuring  that  services  are  provided  to  125  to  130  students 
who  have  an  impairment  that  significantly  impacts  a  major  life  activity.  Her  duties  include 
determining  eligibility  for  services,  coordinating  psychological  services,  supervising  504 
psychologists,  working  with  parents,  administrators  and  teachers,  and  collecting  data  for 
mandated  reports.  Guyton  contends  that  District  has  an  obligation  under  the  American  with 
Disabilities  Act  to  provide  the  services  she  offers  as  the  504  Intervention  Specialist  and  that 
it  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  it  has  any  plan  to  meet  this  mandate. 

} 

25. 

District  acknowledges  that  it  does  not  currently  have  a  plan  regarding 

provision  of  504  services  next  year.  However,  it  notes  that  there  is  no  specific  staffing 
requirement  imposed  by  statute.  Patricia  McWilliams,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human 
Resources,  testified  that  staff  is  currently  discussing  how  to  provide  mandated  services  and 
that  a  plan  will  be  developed  to  ensure  provision  of  504  services  during  the  2004-2005 
school  year.  District  has  established  that  it  does  not  propose  to  reduce  504  services  below 
state  mandated  levels. 

Reduction  of  Secondary  Services 

26. 

As  part  of  its  action  in  reducing  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  the 

Governing  Board  of  District  determined  to  reduce  secondary  teachers.  Respondents  contend 
District  has  not  demonstrated  that  it  will  be  able  to  provide  students  the  necessary 
coursework  required  for  high  school  graduation  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  51225.3 
(which  lists  the  minimum  coursework  requirements  for  high  school  graduation)  if  it  reduces 
160  secondary  teachers  as  planned.  Respondents  also  note  District  offered  no  evidence  that 
it  will  offer  courses  that  will  enable  students  to  meet  the  minimum  coursework  requirements 
for  enrollment  in  the  California  State  University  and/or  University  of  California  systems. 

27. 

|  Howard  Cohen,  Regional  Superintendent  for  Secondary  Schools,  testified  that 
he  carefully  analyzed  what  cut  backs  in  curriculum  were  necessary  at  the  middle  school  and 
high  school  levels.  Then  on  a  school  by  school  basis  he  determined  which  classes  in  each 
subject  area  were  under  enrolled  and  what  reductions  in  F.T.E.  could  be  made  if  each  under 
enrolled  class  had  maximum  enrollment.  At  the  middle  school  level  Cohen  matched  the 
reductions  in  F.T.E.  against  the  state  guidelines  to  ensure  District  would  be  able  to  meet  state 
mandates.  At  the  high  school  level  Cohen  checked  the  F.T.E.  cutbacks  against  District  and 
state  requirements.  Cohen  testified  that  it  was  clear  after  comparing  course  offerings  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year  against  District  and  state  requirements  that  District  would  still  be  able 
to  offer  a  full  secondary  program.  Respondents  have  not  presented  any  contrary  evidence 
that  establishes  District  will  not  able  to  meet  all  state  mandates. 

Reduction  of  Librarians 

28.  —  As  part  of  its  action  in  reducing  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  the 

Governing  Board  of  District  determined  to  eliminate  all  librarians.  Howard  Cohen,  Regional 
Superintendent  for  Secondary  Schools,  testified  that  at  a  minimum  District  will  continue  to 

  

  
  
  

 

distribute  and  keep  track  of  textbooks,  but  it  may  have  to  discontinue  all  other  library 
services. 
. 

29. 

Respondents  contend  District  will  be  in  violation  of  Education  Code  section 

18100  if  it  proceeds  with  its  plan.  That  section  states  that  the  “governing  board  of  each 
school  district  shall  provide  library  services  for  pupils  and  teachers”  by  maintaining  a  school 
library  or  by  contractual  arrangement  with  another  public  agency.  Respondents  further 
contend  District  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  it  will  meet  the  state’s  mandate  for  library 
services  for  the  upcoming  school  year  and  therefore  all  librarians  must  be  retained. 
Respondents  also  note  that  District  will  receive  funds  to  operate  school  libraries  under  the 
California  Public  School  Library  Act  (Library  Act)  through  the  end  of  2003-2004  school 
year,  and  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  District  will  not  receive  similar  funding  during  the 
2004-2005  school  year. 

30. 

Although  there  is  no  evidence  that  District  will  not  receive  funding  under  the 
Library  Act  during  the  next  school  year,  neither  is  there  any  evidence  that  such  funding  will 
continue  to  be  available  during  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Therefore  District’s  action  in  not 
relying  on  such  funding  is  reasonable.  Moreover,  if  funding  under  the  Library  Act  were  to 
be  available  during  the  upcoming  school  year  such  funding  could  not  be  used  to  fund 
personnel.  Also,  librarians  are  not  a  mandated  service.  (See  Ed.  Code,  §  18120  [governing 
board  may  appoint  librarians].)  In  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3™ 
627,  639,  the  court  held  that  there  is  no  statutory  requirement  that  a  school  district  employ 
librarians  and  that  a  school  district’s  decision  not  to  retain  any  librarians  did  not  violate 
Education  Code  section  18100.  It  also  noted  that  a  school  district  may  employ  non-certified 
individuals  as  librarians.  Clearly  reduction  of  librarians  is  properly  within  the  Governing 
Board’s  discretion  and  District  is  entitled  to  reduce  or  eliminate  it  librarians. 

Reduction  of  Administrator 

31. 

Respondent  Jocelyn  Hendrix  holds  Clear  Standard  Secondary  Teaching 

Credentials  in  English  and  Speech  and  a  Professional  Clear  Administrative  Services 
Credential.  District  currently  employs  Hendrix  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  Special  Education 
Administrator  for  its  Adult  Transition  Program.  Hendrix  supervises  multiple  sites.  District 
has  assigned  Hendrix  a  seniority  date  of  August  8,  2000.  Hendrix  holds  the  Special 
Education  Principal  position  that  is  being  eliminated. 

32. 

Hendrix  contends  that  she  is  not  a  Special  Education  Principal  and  that  she 

_was  therefore  improperly  noticed  for  layoff.  Hendrix  was  promoted  to  her  current  position 
on  January  21,  2003.  The  Notice  of  Personnel  Action  she  received  from  District  listed  her 
title  as  “Administrator-Special  Education.”  A  payroll  worksheet  received  by  Hendrix  in 
March  2003  indicates  she  was  transferred  from  the  position  of  Assistant  Principal  to  her 
current  position  of  “Administrator-Special  Education.”  In  March  2004  Stephen  Collins,  the 
Associate  Director  of  Special  Education,  orally  advised  Hendrix  that  she  was  being  laid  off 
from  her  position  of  “Special  Education  Principal.”  This  was  Hendrix  first  notice  that  she 
was  considered  a  Special  Education  Principal.  Later  in  March  2004  Hendrix  also  received  a

formal  layoff  notice  and  an  accusation  packet  that  contained  a  copy  of  the  resolution 
reducing  particular  kinds  of  services. 

33. 

District  argues  that  even  if  Hendrix’s  job  title  was  improperly  listed  in  the 

Board  resolution  authorizing  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  it  was  non-substantive 
procedural  error.  District  notes  that  Hendrix  received  both  an  oral  and  a  formal  written 
notice  that  she  was  subject  to  layoff.  In  addition,  Ana  Souza,  the  Director  of  Personnel 
Services  for  Elementary  Education,  testified  that  a  Special  Education  Principal  is  the  same  as 
a  Special  Education  Administrator. 

34. 

The  purpose  of  the  initial  notice  is  to  notify  the  employee  of  the  probability 
that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  she  may  consider 
looking  elsewhere  for  employment.  (Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.3d  648,  653.)  Hendrix  clearly  received  such  notice  and  there  was  no  evidence  she 
It  must  also  be 
experienced  any  prejudice  as  a  result  of  the  improper  listing  of  her  job  title. 
noted  that  a  notice  of  non-reemployment  because  of  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
services  is  sufficiently  specific  if  it  designates  the  categories  of  services  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued,  even  though  it  does  not  specify  the  specific  positions  to  be  eliminated.  (See 
San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  639.)  Respondent  was  clearly 
on  notice  that  special  education  services  were  going  to  be  reduced.  It  is  therefore  determined 
that  the  improper  listing  of  Hendrix’s  job  title  was  a  non-substantive  procedural  error  that 
does  not  warrant  dismissal  of  the  charges.  (See  Ed.  Code,  §  44949,  subd.  (b)(3) 
[nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  by  school  district  or  governing  board  shall  not  constitute 
cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors].) 

Inconsistencies  between  the  Budget  and  the  PKS  Resolution 

35. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  budget  adopted  by  the  Governing  Board  of  District 

is  inconsistent  with  the  PKS  resolution  the  Board  adopted  because  it  does  not  reflect 
reduction  of  48  elementary  positions,  5  elementary  APL  positions,  23  elementary  Prep 
positions,  80  middle  school  positions  and  80  secondary  positions.  Respondents  then  reason 
that  this  inconsistency  reflects  a  conflicting  intent  because  there  is  no  clear  indication  that  the 
positions  omitted  from  the  budget  will  actually  be  discontinued  next  year. 

36.  |  Respondent’s  contention  is  not  persuasive.  The  PKS  resolution  is  the 
document  that  governs  reductions  in  force.  As a  general  rule  the  budget  is  irrelevant  to  the 
reduction  process.  The  mere  fact  that  the  budget  does  not  parallel  the  PKS  resolution  does 
not  indicate  no  reductions  will  occur.  To  the  contrary,  District  has  presented  evidence  that 
due  to  financial  constraints  faced  by  District  the  reductions  will  in  fact  occur. 

37. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the 

ensuing  school  year. 

38. 

 Nocertificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10      

39. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  4  is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  West  Contra 
Costa  Unified  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare 
of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

4. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Finding  20  notice  may  not  be  given  to  the 

most  senior  psychologist  noticed  for  layoff. 

District  shall  take  action  to  reduce  or  terminate  the  employment  of  respondents 

in  accordance  with  the  stipulations  set  forth  in  Findings  9  and  10. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  occupying  up  to  377.52  F.T.E.  positions  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  except  that  notice  shall  not  be  given  to  the 
most  senior  psychologist  noticed  for  layoff  and  any  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  shall  be  subject  to  the  stipulations  set  forth  in  Findings  9  and  10. 

DATED: 

4 {  "4 

|  oA 

  

11

  

  

