BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE 
PLACENTIA-YORBA  LINDA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004020558 

All  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Placentia- 
Yorba  Linda  Unified  School  District  Who 
Received  Preliminary  Layoff  Notices  for  the 
2004-2005  School  Year, 

Respondents. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Placentia,  California,  on  April  19,  2003. 

David  C.  Larsen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Placentia-  Yorba  Linda  Unified 

School  District. 

Paul  Crost,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  certificated  teachers  employed  by  the 
Placentia-Y  orba  Linda  Unified  School  District  who  received  preliminary  layoff  notices  for 
the  2004-2005  school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  27,  2003. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Placentia-Yorba  Linda  Unified  School  District 

1. 

Notice  is  taken  that  the  Placentia-Yorba  Linda  Unified  School  District  (the 
District)  covers  about  45  square  miles  of  suburban  Northeast  Orange  County.  The  District 
serves  the  communities  of  Placentia  and  Yorba  Linda  as  well  as  parts  of  Anaheim,  Brea, 
Fullerton  and  unincorporated  areas. 

The  District  provides  services  at  20  elementary  schools,  five  middle  schools,  several 
high  schools  and  at  other  continuation  and  adult  schools.  The  District  serves  the  educational 
needs  of  over  27,000  students.

  

The  District  employs  approximately  2,500  persons,  many  of  whom  are  certificated 
@  employees.  Certificated  employees  provide  direct  educational  services  and  supports  to  the 

District’s  students. 

The  District  is  governed  by  a  Board  of  Education  (the  Board). 
2. 
Dennis  M.  Smith,  Ed.  D.  (Dr.  Smith),  is  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  the 
Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer.  Don  Trigg  (Assistant  Superintendent  Trigg)  is  an  Assistant 
Superintendent  of  Schools  who  serves  as  the  District’s  Financial  Officer.  Timothy  VanEck 
(Assistant  Superintendent  VanEck)  is  an  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Schools  who  serves  as 
the  District’s  Chief  Personnel  Officer. 

The  Economic  Layoff 

3. 

Proposition  13  reduced  a  major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public 
education.  Following  the  passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked 
primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  necessary  funding. 
A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 
state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  the  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case 

@  financial  scenario  develops. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 
administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
notices  warning  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than 
March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 
retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  others  with  less  seniority. 

A  school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse 
order  of  seniority  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  an  identifiable  junior  employee  possesses  4 
credential,  special  training  and/or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  provide 
services  that  a  more  senior  employee  does  not  possess. 

4. 

The  Placentia-Yorba  Linda  Unified  School  District  is  required  to  regularly 
analyze  its  budget.  Although  the  District  does  not  have  a  pattern  of  deficit  spending,  a  large 
operating  deficit  was  projected  for  the  2003  -2004  school  year,  substantially  reducing  its 
unrestricted  general  fund  balance.  While  some  carryover  revenues  might  offset  the  District’s 
$4.3  million  budget  deficit,  the  Orange  County  Department  of  Education  (which  reviews  the 
District’s  budget)  recommended  that  deficit  spending  be  reduced  and  that  unrestricted 
reserves  be  maintained  above  recommended  minimum  reserves. 

2 

} 

 

The  District  looked  into  ways  to  trim  its  budget,  including  the  reduction  or 

@  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

The  District’s  administrative  staff  prepared  a  recommendation  that  was  given  to 
the  Board.  The  recommendation  proposed  the  reduction  and/or  elimination  of  particular  kinds 
of  services.  It  was  recommended  that  the  District  eliminate  70.4  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
“ys 
positions. 

1 

Board  Resolution  No. 

26 

On  March  9,  2004,  Board  Resolution  No.  26  was  adopted.  That  resolution 

6. 
provided: 

fiscal  year; 

© 

“On  motion  of  Member  of 
following  Resolution  was  adopted. 

_Craig  Olson,  D.D.S. 

_,  duly  seconded  and  carried,  the 

WHEREAS,  the  District  no  longer  has  the  financial  ability  or  resources  to  provide all 

services  which  it  is  currently  providing, 

WHEREAS,  in  order  to  maintain  a  balanced  budget  and  provide  for  essential  services  in 
the  most  acceptable  manner,  the  District  must  eliminate  programs  and  services  in  the  2004-2005 

WHEREAS,  it  will  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
now  being  rendered  by  certificated  personnel  for  the  2004-2005  fiscal  year  as  set  forth  in  Exhibit 
A  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein  by  this  reference; 

WHEREAS,  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  said  services  may  result  in  reassignment, 

laying  off  of  certificated  employees;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  necessary  for  the  Superintendent  to  give  notice  to  employees  who  may 

be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  reduction  in  services  prior  to  March  15,  2004. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  the  District  reduce  or  eliminate  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  or  programs  and  reduce  the  corresponding  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  positions  as  set  forth  in  attached  Exhibit  A  and  by  this  reference  made a  part  hereof. 
BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED  that  as  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  that  employees  be  laid  off  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs 
of  the  District,  which  need  shall  be  based  upon  the  following  in  priority  order: 

1. 

2. 

BCLAD  certification; 

CLAD  certification; 

@ 

  

A  “FTE”  is  commonly  used  as  the  unit  of  measure  to  describe  the  services  provided  by  one  full-time 

' 
credentialed  employee  over  the  course  of  one  school  year. 

3 

   

Credentialed  status  (clear  versus  preliminary),  if  elementary,  and  credentialed  in 
multiple  areas,  if  secondary; 
Expertise  or  specialty  emphasis  in  a  particular  curriculum  or  subject  area  of  need 
to  the  District; 

Staff  development  certificate/course  work; 
Currently  providing  instruction  in  intervention  programs  if  elementary,  and  co- 
curricular  assignments,  if  secondary; 

7. 

Total  experience  as  a  public  school  teacher;  and 

Advanced  degrees. 

8. 
BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  be  and  hereby  is 
authorized  and  directed  to  give  notices  to  certificated  employees  of  the  district  as  is  necessary  to 
implement  this  resolution  and  as  required  by  District  Rules  and  Regulations  and  applicable 
provisions  of  the  Education  Code  of  the  State  of  California. 

ADOPTED,  SIGNED  AND  APPROVED  this 

9th  _  day  of 

_March,  2004. 

BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OF  THE 
PLACENTIA-YORBA  LIND  UNIFIED 
SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

By:  Dennis  M.  Smith 

Downey,  Freeman,  Miner,  Olson,  and  Wagner 

AYES: 

NOES: 

ABSENT: 

None 

None 

ABSTAIN: 

None 

By:__Karen  M.  Freeman 

Clerk...” 

Exhibit  A  to  Resolution  No.  26  provided: 

7. 
SERVICE  OR  PROGRAM  TO  BE  ELIMINATED  AND/OR  REDUCED  POSITIONS  (Full 
Time  Equivalent  Programs/Course Offerings) 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Elementary  P.  E.  Specialists 

Elementary  (K-6)  Self  contained  teachers  (3  grade  C.S.R.) 

Elementary  (K-6)  Assistant  Principal 

5.0 

40.0 

2.0 

  

 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Elementary  —T.O.S.A. 

Middle  School  Math  Teachers  (7/8  Pre-Algebra  C.S.R.) 

Middle  School  Care  Program  —  English 

High  School  Math  Teachers  —  (9"  grade  Algebra  C.S.R.) 

High  School  English  Teachers  —  (9"  grade  Language  Arts  C.S.R.) 

A 

5.0 

1.0 

8.0 

ae 
70. 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

8. 

On  March  10,  2004,  preliminary  layoff  notices  were  sent  to  about  70 

certificated  employees  who  determined  by  the  District’s  administrative  staff  to  be  the  most 
junior  certificated  employees  performing  a  particular  kind  of  services  that  were  subject  to 
reduction  or  elimination. 

Each  certificated  employee  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  timely  filed  a 

request  for  a  hearing  on  or  before  March  22,  2004. 

9. 

On  April  19,  2004,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

Counsel  for  the  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  Counsel  for  Respondents  waived  the 
giving  of  an  opening  statement.  Stipulations  were  recited.  Sworn  testimony  and 
documentary  evidence  was  received. 

Counsel  for  the  District  gave  an  oral  closing  argument.  Counsel  for  Respondents 

waived  the  giving  of  an  oral  closing  argument,  but  was  given  through  the  close  of  business 
on  April  23,  2004,  to  file  a  closing  written  argument.  Counsel  for  the  District  was  given 
through  noon  on  April  27,  2004,  to  file  a  written  argument  in  reply. 

On  April  27,  2004  the  matter  was  submitted. 

Stipulations 

10. 

The  District  experienced  budgetary  problems,  as  outlined  in  Factual  Finding  4 
(based  on  the  stipulated  testimony  of  Assistant  Superintendent  Trigg),  which  resulted  in  the 
recommendation  to  the  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services  being  provided  by  the  District 
be  reduced  or  eliminated  in  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Board  Resolution  No.  26  was  duly  enacted. 

Each  Respondent  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  was  duly  employed  by  the 
District  as  a  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employee,  proper  notices  were  timely 
served  and  each  Respondent  requested  a  hearing. 

 

Stipulated  Dismissals 

11. 

The  District  requested  that  the  Accusations  filed  against  three  certificated 

employees  -  Edward  J.  Furu  (Furu),  Sean  P.  Shelvin  (Shelvin)  and  Sarah  Christie  (Christie)  — 
be  dismissed. 

There  was  no  objection  to  the  motion  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  Furu, 

Shelvin  and  Christie. 

The  motions  to  dismiss  the  Accusation  against  these  individuals  were granted. 

Skipping 

12. 

Education  Code  section  44955(d)  sets  forth  an  exception  to  the  general  rule 
that  the  services  of  a  senior  employee  must  be  retained  over  the  services  of  more  junior 
employees.  This  exception  involves  “skipping”  a  junior  employee  and  retaining  the  junior 
employee’s  unique  and  necessary  services  over  the  services  of  a  more  senior  employee  who 
does  not  have  special  training  and/or  experience. 

Education  Code  section  44955(d)  provides: 

13. 
“Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 
or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

BCLAD  Certifications 

14. 

The  Bilingual,  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development 

(BCLAD)  Certificate  is  issued  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  The 
BCLAD  Certificate  authorizes  instruction  to  limited-English-proficient  (LEP)  students. 
Holders  of  a  BCLAD  Certificate  may  provide  instruction  for  English  Language  Development 
(ELD),  Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  Delivered  in  English  (SDAIE)  and  Content 
Instruction  Delivered  in  Primary  Language. 

The  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  administers  rigorous  BCLAD  testing 
which  identifies  those  teachers  who  possess  the  level  of  knowledge  and  skill  required  to 

6 

 

 

teach  English  learners  effectively  in  a  native  language.  The  BCLAD  examinations  measure 
an  individual’s  knowledge  and  skill  in  relation  to  established  standards  rather  than  in  relation 
to  the  skills  of  other  examinees.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  every  person  taking  the  BLAD 
examinations  will  pass  and  obtain  certification. 

15. 

Because  of  the  relative  shortage  of  teachers  holding  BCLAD  certifications  and  the 
need  for  BCLAD  certifications  to  teach  certain  classes,  the  District  proposed  to  “skip”  six  junior 
teachers  holding  BCLAD  Certification  over  more  senior  teachers  who  did  not  possess  such 
certification. 

16. 

Luciano  Cid  (Cid)  had a  seniority  date  of  January  15,  2004.  Cid  held  a  Ryan 
Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Certification.  Cid  taught  an  Alternative  (Bilingual) 
Third  Grade  Classroom  at  the  Rio  Vista  Elementary  School,  in  which  there  were  19  English 
Language  Learners. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Cid  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  District 
demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Cid’s  services  based  upon  his  holding  a  BCLAD Certificate 
which  several  other  more  senior  employees  did  not  possess. 

17. 

Jose  Cabrera  (Cabrera)  had  a  seniority  date  of  October  22,  2003.  Cabrera  held  a 
Ryan  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Certification.  Cabrera  taught  an  Alternative 
(Bilingual)  Third  Grade  Classroom  at  Topaz  Elementary  School,  in  which  there  were  17  English 
Language  Learners. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Cabrera  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  District 

demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Cabrera’s  services  based  upon  his  holding  a  BCLAD 
Certificate  which  several  other  more  senior  employees  did  not  possess. 

18. 

Trinidad  Figueroa  (Figueroa)  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  25,  2003.  Figueroa 
held  a  Ryan  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Certification.  Figueroa  taught  a 
Structured  English  Immersion  Fifth  Grade  Classroom  at  Rio  Vista  Elementary  School,  in  which 
there  were  29  English  Language  Learners. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Figueroa  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  District 

demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Figueroa’s  services  based  upon  her  holding  a  BCLAD 
Certificate  which  several  other  more  senior  employees  did  not  possess. 

19. 

Yeni  Osuna-Pasillas  (Osuna-Pasillas)  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  25,  2003. 
Osuna-Pasillas  held  a  Ryan  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Certification.  Osuna- 
Pasillas  taught  an  Alternative  (Bilingual)  Second  Grade  Classroom  at  Tynes  Elementary  School, 
in  which  there  were  19  English  Language  Learners. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Osuna-Pasillas  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The 
District  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Osuna-Pasillas’  services  based  upon  her  holding  a 
BCLAD  Certificate  which  several  other  more  senior  employees  did  not  possess. 

20. 

Elvira  Bermudez  (Bermudez)  had a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003.  Bermudez 

held  a  Ryan  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Certification.  Bermudez  taught  an 
Alternative  (Bilingual)  First  Grade  Classroom  at  Topaz  Elementary  School,  in  which  there  were 
17  English  Language  Learners. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Bermudez  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  District 

demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Bermudez’  services  based  upon  her  holding  a  BCLAD 
Certificate  which  several  other  more  senior  employees  did  not  possess. 

21. 

Julie  Pak  (Pak)  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003.  Pak  held  a  Ryan  Multiple 
Subject  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Certification.  Pak  taught  a  Structured  English  Immersion 
Kindergarten  Classroom  at  Topaz  Elementary  School,  in  which  there  were  26  English  Language 
Learners. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Pak  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  District 
demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Pak’s  services  based  upon  her  holding  a  BCLAD Certificate 
which  several  other  more  senior  employees  did  not  possess. 

The  Child  Welfare/Attendance  Officer  Position 

22. 

Before  the  District  determined  that  layoffs  were  required,  it  filled  a  newly 

established  administrative  position  known  as  Coordinator  Child  Welfare/Attendance  Officer 
(CWA).  The  position  required  applicants  to  hold  a  credential  in  Administrative  Services  and/or 
Pupil  Personnel  Services  and  a  minimum  of  three  years  of  successful  experience  in  child  welfare 
and  attendance  issues  or  related  responsibilities. 

The  District  hired  Richard  T.  Miller  (Miller)  to  fill  the  CWA  position. 
23. 
Miller  holds  a  Ryan  Designated  Subject,  Adult  Credential.  Before  he  was  hired,  Miller 
had  served  for  many  years  as  a  law  enforcement  officer  within  the  District,  dealing  with  truants 
and  delinquents.  Miller  was  responsible  for  the  District’s  DARE  program.  No  employee  senior 
to  Miller  has  his  special  training  and  experience  and  none  can  fill  his  administrative  position, 
which  requires  a  unique  set  of  skills. 

The  District’s  decision  to  skip  Miller  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  District 
demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  Miller’s  services  based  upon  the  nature  of  his  credential  and  his 
specialized  training  and  experience  required  to  hold  the  CWA  position.  While  other  credentialed 
employees  may  have  been  senior  to  Miller,  they  did  not  have  sufficient  training  or  experience  to 
hold  the  CWA  position. 

Tenured  Teachers 

24. 

 Atall  times  relevant  to  this  matter,  Education  Code  section  44955(b)  provided  in 

part: 

 

@ 

«  _.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee, 
or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said 
permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 

25. 

The  District  interpreted  this  portion  of  Education  Code  section  44955(b)  to 

require  the  retention  of  three  tenured  (permanent)  teachers  whose  seniority  dates  were  more 
recent  than  those  of  some  probationary  employees.  The  District’s  interpretation  was 
reasonable  and  was  consistent  with  the  appellate  decision  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v. Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627. 

26. 

Barbara  Barboza  (Barboza),  Jacqueline  L.  Howland  (Howland)  and  Steven  G. 
Zeitlow  (Zeitlow)  were  all  tenured  (permanent)  certificated  employees  with  a  seniority  date  of 
August  25,  2003.  The  District  employed  each  tenured  employee  before  his  or  her  formal 
seniority  date,  each  was  reassigned  and  each  returned  to  the  District  within  39  months,  thereby 
acquiring  tenure. 

The  District  established  that  Barboza,  Howland  and  Zeitlow  acquired  tenure  and  were 
permanent  employees.  The  District  properly  retained  the  services  of  these  tenured  employees 
even  though  probationary  employees  with  more  advanced  seniority  dates  would  be  subject  to  the 
reduction  in  force. 

@ 

Jannis  Frederick 

27. 

The  District  hired  Jannis  Frederick  (Frederick)  in  August  1990.  Frederick  became 

a  tenured  teacher  in  August  1992.  She  became  an  assistant  principal  in  F ebruary  1998. 
Frederick’s  Ryan  Multiple  Subject  credential  expires  August  1,  2005.  Frederick  is  tenured,  is 
properly  credentialed  and  can  provide  teaching  services  that  are  currently  being  provided  by 
certificated  employees  with  less  seniority. 

For  these  reasons,  the  District  properly  determined  Frederick  was  entitled  to  “bump” 
more  junior  employees  and  be  retained  to  provide  services  as  an  elementary  school  teacher. 

The  District’s  Seniority  List 

28. 

According  to  Beth  Berndt  (Berndt),  the  District’s  Director  of  Personnel,  the 

District  created  a  98  page  Seniority  List  (Exhibit  10)  that  was  based  on  the  review  of  all 
‘certificated  employees’  credentials,  assignments,  tenured  status  and  seniority  dates.  The 
Seniority  List  listed  the  most  junior  credentialed  employee  (Luciano  Cid,  seniority  date 
January  16,  2004)  first  and  the  most  senior  employee  (Carol  J.  Potts,  seniority  date  March  4, 
1963)  last. 

Exhibit  10  correctly  identified  the  seniority  dates  of  the  employees  except  as 

29. 

follows:

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

e 

Harvey  L.  Armbrust  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  not  August  25, 
2003. 

Trinidad  Figueroa  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  not  August  25, 
2003. 

Cynthia  Meza  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  not  August  25,  2003. 

AnaL.  Lucero  had a seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  not  August  25,  2003. 

Yeni  Osuna-Pasillas  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  not  August  25, 
2003. 

Eva  Cecilia  Ybarra  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  not  August  25, 
2003. 

Rebecca  Diebolt  had  three  years  teaching  experience,  not  one  year  of  teaching 
experience,  for  purposes  of  evaluating  her  retention  under  the  tie-breaking 
criteria. 

The  District’s  adjustment  of  the  seniority  dates  referred  to  above  does  not  necessarily 

require  the  retention  of  these  persons,  but  the  District’s  seniority  list  should  be  modified  to 
include  these  corrections. 

The  Temporary  Employee/Probationary  Status  Issue 

30. 

The  District  classified  some  persons  as  “temporary”  employees  by  reason  of 

their  written  employment  contracts. 

According  to  Berndt,  Harvey  Armbrust,  Trinidad  Figueroa,  Brian  Shay,  Teresa 
Vitelli,  Eva  Ybarra,  Ana  Lucero,  Yeni  Osuna-Pasillas  and  Robert  Purnell  were  specifically 
serving  the  District  under  written  “temporary”  employment  contracts,  replacing  teachers  who 
were  on  leave. 

31. 

Other  persons  were  classified  as  “temporary”  employees  by  the  District 

because  they  held  either  an  emergency  permit,  a  university  internship  credential  or  because 
they  were  in  their  second  year  of  employment  but  had  previously  failed  to  serve  a  complete 
year  under  a  university  intern  credential. 

Ana  Lucero,  Robert  Purnell  and  Yeni  Osuna-Pasillas  served  in  the  2002-2003  school 
year  on  internship  credentials  and  were  reemployed  on  regular  credentials  at  the  beginning  of 
the  2003-2004  school  year.  Neither  had  completed  a  full  school  year. 

10

Eva  Ybarra  was  on  an  internship  credential  with  prior  service  under  an  emergency 
permit.  Ybarra’s  service  under  the  emergency  permit  did  not  count  towards  permanent  or 
probationary  status. 

Through  counsel,  some  of  these  employees  argued  that  under  California T  eachers 

* 

Association  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98 
Cal.  App.4"  369,  they  were  entitled  to  the  status  of  probationary  employees  in  this  layoff 
proceeding. 

Aimee  Firouznam 

32. 

Aimee  Firouznam  (Firouznam)  began  teaching  Physical  Education  in  August 

1999  under  an  emergency  permit.  She  received  her  credential  in  July  2003. 

Firouznam  served  as  a  dance  team  coach  and  she  reported  to  school  for  her  coaching 

duties  in  early  August  2003.  She  is  clearly  an  enthusiastic  and  talented  member  of  the 
Physical  Education  Department. 

Firouznam  argued,  but  did  not  establish,  the  inability  of  a  senior  Physical  Education 
teacher  to  teach  dance  and  coach  the  dance  team.  Firouznam  did  not  establish  her  right  to 
displace  a  more  senior  employee. 

33. 

Susan  Sawyer  (Sawyer)  is  credentialed  to  teach  physical  education  and 

business  education.  Her  specialty  is  business,  particularly  computer  science.  Sawyer  is 
obviously  a  devoted  and  competent  teacher. 

Sawyer  did  not  establish  that  she  is  senior  to  any  other  employee  being  retained  by 

the  District  to  provide  services  within  the  areas  she  is  competent  to  teach. 

Susan  Sawyer 

Robert  Purnell 

34, 

Robert  Purnell  (Purnell)  is  credentialed  to  teach  business  education.  Purnell 

competently  teaches  computer  skills.  He  obtained  special  training  required  to  run  the 
District’s  Synergistic  Technology  Lab,  training  not  possessed  by  any  other  employee. 
Purnell  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2003,  making  him  one  of  the  most  junior  teachers 
within  the  District. 

Purnell  is  being  displaced  by  a  senior  Mathematics  teacher  who  has  not  had  the 

special  training  required  to  oversee  the  Synergistic  Technology  Lab. 

Notwithstanding  his  having  taken  a  week  long  specialized  training  course,  Purnell  did 

not  establish  that  he  is  senior  to  any  other  employee  being  retained  by  the  District  who  is 
competent  to  provide  services  within  the  areas  Purnell  is  competent  to  teach. 

11

37. 

38. 

2. 

3. 

Other  Matters 

35. 

The  extent  to  which  these  particular  kinds  of  services  were  reduced  or 

eliminated  was  well  within  the  Board’s  discretion.  Each  certificated  employee  providing  a 
particular  kind  of  service  who  was  the  subject  of  the  layoff  resolution  was  given  a  preliminary 
notice  of  the  reduction  of  this  particular  kind  of  service  in  accordance  with  law. 

36. 

No  evidence  established  that  any  certificated  employee  was  unable  to 

determine  his  or  her  employment  status  and  the  likelihood  that  he  or  she  would  not  be  rehired 
for  the  2004-2005  school  year  as  a  result  of  the  Board’s  identification  of  the  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  were  reduced  or  eliminated. 

No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels 

mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

 Nocertificated  employee  junior  to  any  more  senior  employee  was  retained  to 

perform  any  service  which  a  more  senior  employee  was  certificated  and  competent  to 
perform.  Positive  attrition  was  considered  in  creating  the  seniority  list. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction:  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections 
were  satisfied  as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  in  the  seniority  lists. 

The  Reduction/Elimination  of Particular  Kinds  of Services:  A  school  district 

may  consider  its  financial  circumstances  in  deciding  whether  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a 
particular  kind  of  service.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  630. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation.  It  is  within  a  school  board’s  discretion, 
subject  to  the  minimum  level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  a  reduction  of 
services  is  necessary  and  proper  under  the  circumstances.  A  school  board’s  decision  is  made 
at  the  time  of  the  final  notice.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627, 
635-636. 

4. 

Skipping:  Under  the  statutory  scheme,  junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention 

priority  over  more  senior  teachers  when  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399,  405. 

5. 

Bumping:  Under  the  statutory  scheme,  a  senior  employee  whose  position  is 
discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  he  or  she  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  fill,  and  in  so  doing  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee.  Poppers  v. 
Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399,  405. 

12

  

6. 

Credentialing:  The  following  background  information  related  to  credentialing 

is  taken  from  “Symposium:  Access  to  Quality  Teaching:  An  Analysis  of  Inequality  in 
California’s  Public  Schools,”  appearing  in  43  Santa  Clara  Law  Review  1045  (2003). 

The  primary  tool  California  uses  to  ensure  that  teachers  are  prepared  to  teach  is  its 

teacher  credentialing  system.  The  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CCTC) 
is  charged  with  ensuring  that  candidates  recommended  for  a  credential  have  demonstrated 
satisfactory  ability  to  assist  students  to  meet  or  exceed  state  content  and  performance 
standards.  The  CCTC  has  integrated  preparation  for  teaching  the  required  standards  into 
both  the  subject  matter  and  professional  preparation  requirements  for  a  credential  (primarily 
in  the  form  of  courses,  tests,  and  supervised  practice  teaching)  and  the  accreditation 
requirements  that  pertain  to  schools  of  education. 

California  issues  two  types  of  clear  teaching  credentials:  Single  subject  (for  teachers 

who  teach a  specific  subject  in  a  departmentalized  class,  usually  in  secondary  school)  and 
multiple  subject  (for  teachers  who  teach  all  subjects  in  a  self-contained  classroom,  most  often 
used  in  elementary  school).  To  earn  either  type  of  teaching  credential,  candidates  must 
demonstrate  their  subject  matter  competence.  This  can  be  accomplished  either  by, 
completing  an  approved  subject  matter  preparation  program  in  a  California  college  or 
university  or  by  passing  one  or  more  subject  matter  competency  tests  adopted  by  the  CCTC. 

In  addition  to  demonstrating  subject  matter  competence  through  specified  coursework 

or  testing,  candidates  for  a  single  subject  or  multiple  subject  credential  must  complete  an 
accredited  program  of  professional  preparation. 

The  courses  and  tests  required  of  candidates  are  carefully  mapped  onto  the  CCTC’s 

standards  describing  what  teachers  should  know  and  be  able  to  do,  which  are  in  turn  directly 
related  to  the  content  standards  expected  of  students. 

Equally  important  are  the  state’s  expectations  -  reflected  in  its  requirements  for  the 

teacher  credential  and  for  the  accreditation  of  teacher  education  programs  -  for  teaching 
content  to  diverse  learners:  knowledge  of  second  language  acquisition  and  development, 
knowledge  of  child  development,  and  knowledge  of  the  needs  of  exceptional  learners  and 
strategies  for  teaching  to  these  special  needs. 

A  sizeable  minority  of  California’s  teachers  -  well  over  40,000  in  2000-2001  -  lacks  a 

full  credential  for  all  or  part  of  their  teaching  assignment,  and  many  have  not  completed,  or 
even  begun,  a  teacher  education  program.  Candidates  who  receive  other  credentials,  permits 
or  waivers  satisfy  some  but  not  all  of  the  requirements  necessary  to  obtain  a  teaching 
credential. 

To  hold  an  intern  credential,  candidates  must  have  satisfied  most  of  the  subject  matter 
requirements,  passed  the  CBEST  and  hold  a  bachelor’s  degree.  They  must  also  be  enrolled  in 
an  approved  internship  program  providing  coursework  and  a  supervised  teaching  experience. 
Generally,  interns  serve  as  the  teacher  of  record  for  all  or  part  of  the  school  day.  Some 

13

programs  provide  some  student  teaching  experience  before  candidates  take  on  this  role, 
others  do  not.  Interns  generally  complete  the  professional  preparation  requirements  over  a 
two-year  period  while  they  are  teaching. 

Teachers  on  emergency  permits  or  pre-intern  certificates  lack  either  the  professional 
preparation  and/or  the  content  preparation  expected  of  a  fully  prepared  teacher  or  both.  To 
hold  an  emergency  permit  or  a  pre-intern  credential,  candidates  must  have  passed  the 
CBEST,  hold  a  bachelor’s  degree  and  meet a  less  rigorous  subject  matter  standard. 
Emergency  permit  holders  must  submit  a  statement  “demonstrating  intent”  to  complete 
requirements  for  a  credential.  Emergency  permits  can  be  renewed  for  five  consecutive  years, 
during  which  the  candidate  is  expected  to  complete  a  minimum  of  six  semester  units  of 
coursework  annually  to  renew  the  permit.  Some  teachers  who  are  fully  prepared  and 
credentialed  in  another  state  teach  on  emergency  permits  while  they  are  completing  specific 
California  requirements;  some  who  are  credentialed  in  another  field  hold  emergency  permits 
while  they  teach  out  of  field. 

Pre-interns  are  emergency  permit  teachers  who  have  not  yet  satisfied  the  subject 
matter  competence  requirement  for  entry  into  an  internship  program  and  who  have  agreed  to 
work  toward  subject  matter  competence  while  they  are  teaching  as  teachers  of  record.  They 
also  generally  have  not  begun  studying  toward  the  professional  preparation  requirements. 
They  must  “demonstrate  intent”  to  take  the  state’s  subject  matter  examinations  for  teachers 
and  take  content  courses  in  a  university  while  they  hold  the  certificate.  Pre-interns  are  not 
expected  to  have  met  the  longer  list  of  professional  preparation  requirements.  If  they  enter  an 
intern  program,  they  then  will  be  expected  to  pursue  those  requirements.  Finally,  the  CCTC 
also  grants  short-term  and  variable  term  waivers  that  allow  non-credentialed  teacher 
candidates  to  waive  any  of  the  statutory  and  regulatory  requirements  for  credentials.  Waivers 
are  generally  issued  to  candidates  who  have  not  passed  the  CBEST  or  met  the  subject  matter 
standards. 

None  of  these  adjunct  categories  of  credentials,  permits  or  waivers  requires  that  the 
candidates  fully  meet  the  state’s  subject  matter  competence  standards,  which  are  tied  to  the 
student  learning  standards,  before  assuming  teaching  responsibilities.  Furthermore,  none  of 
them  requires  that  teachers  have  studied  or  demonstrated  proficiency  in  standards-based 
methods  of  teaching  subject  matter,  reading,  English  language  learners,  or  special  education 
students  before  they  take  responsibility  for  students,  as  full  (preliminary  or  clear)  credential 
holders  are  required  to  have  done.  None  of  the  alternative  credentials  require  that  teachers 
have  had  the  opportunity  to  work  under  the  direct  daily  supervision  of  a  practicing  veteran 
teacher  available  to  demonstrate  effective  strategies. 

Thus,  while  it  is  possible  that  some  individuals  working  in  California  on  less-than-full 

credentials,  permits,  or  waivers  have  the  preparation  and  teaching  skill  needed  to  teach 
students  to  the  state’s  learning  standards,  there  are  few  guarantees  that  non-credentialed 
teachers  have  the  depth  of  content  knowledge  and  the  breadth  of  teaching  skills  needed  to 
assure  access  to  equal  educational  opportunities  for  the  diverse  set  of  learners  found  in 
California  classrooms. 

14

7. 

Temporary  Employee  Status:  Although  contracts  of  employment  may  fix  an 

employee’s  status  as  that  of  a  temporary  teacher,  the  employee  is  not  estopped  to  claim 
probationary  status  if  the  Education  Code  compels  that  classification  under  the  particular 
facts  of  the  employment  situation.  Santa  Barbara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Santa  Barbara 
High  School  District  (1977)  76  Cal.App.3d  223,  227-228.  The  statutory  mandate  must  be 
clear,  however,  before  the  terms  of  the  contracts  may  be  abrogated.  Jbid.,  at  p.  240. 

Education  Code  Section  44916  mandates  that  a  school  district  comply  with  three 

requirements  to  hire  a  “new  certificated  employee”  as  a  temporary  employee:  it  must  notify 
the  employee  of  his  or  her  salary  and  status  as  a  temporary  employee;  do  so  in  a  written 
notice;  and,  give  such  notice  at  initial  employment.  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County 
Union  High  School  Dist.  (2003)  29  Cal.  4th  911,  918. 

Temporary  Service:  Under  Education  Code  section  44918,  any  employee  classified  as 
a  substitute  or  temporary  employee  who  serves  during  one  school  year  for  at  least  75  percent 
of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained  and  performed  the 
duties  normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  is  deemed  to  have 
served  a  complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary 
employee  for  the  following  school year. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44920,  any  person  employed  for  one  complete  school 
year  as  a  temporary  employee  shall,  if  reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  in  a  vacant 
position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee  and 
the  previous  year’s  employment  constitutes  one  year’s  employment  as  a  probationary 
employee  for  purposes  of  acquiring  permanent  status. 

A  complete  year  requires  75%  service.  See,  Education  Code  sections  44908  and 

44918. 

8. 

Service  Under  Emergency  Credentials:  The  appellate  decision  in  California 

Teachers  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District 
(2002)  98  Cal.App.4"  369,  383,  stated  “teachers  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  who 
satisfy  the  requirements  of  section  44915  are  entitled  to  the  statutory  protections  governing 
the  dismissal  of  a  probationary  employee.”  Golden  Valley  was  decided  within  the  context  of 
a  mid-year  “for  cause”  termination  action  (rather  than  an  economic  layoff  action)  and  there 
was  a  written  contract  between  the  employee  and  the  district  which  specifically  provided  the 
employee  with  contingent  probationary  status.” 

  

As  pointed  out  in  Kalamaras  v.  Albany  Unified  School  Dist.  (1991)  226  Cal.App.3d  1571,  1578,  “The 

2 
obvious  purpose  of  the  statute  is  to  prevent  school  boards  and  administrators  from  abusing  their  discretion  in  hiring 
substitute  [and  temporary]  teachers  so  as  to  circumvent  the  tenure  rights  of  teachers”  and  Education  Code  section 
44918  may  have  been  enacted  to  “grant  temporary  teachers  an  extra  modicum  of  protection.” 

The  decision  in  Golden  Valley  specifically  recognized:  “This  case  does  not  directly  involve  the  first  benefit 

3 
of  probationary  status,  i.e.,  counting  service  towards  completion  of  the  mandatory  two-year  probationary  period. 
That  situation  was  addressed  recently  by  the  First  District  in  Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95 
Cal.App.4th  1026  [116  Cal.  Rptr.  2d  233]  (Summerfield).” 

15 

 

9. 

Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026 

controls  this  matter.  Summerfield  specifically  held  “Time  spent  teaching  under  an 
emergency  teaching  credential  may  not  be  counted  in  computing  an  employee’s  progress 
toward  permanent  status...”  Ibid.,  at  p.  1028.  The  Summerfield  court  concluded  this 
interpretation  was  “consistent  with  numerous  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  expressing 
the  legislative  preference  for  fully  credentialed  teachers  and  the  goal  of  reducing  the  number 
of  teachers  employed  under  temporary  or  emergency  credentials.”  Jbid.,  at  p.  1035. 

10. 

There  is  no  compelling  legal  basis  to  provide  an  emergency  credential  holder 

who  has  served  the  District  under  a  valid,  written  temporary  contract  with  a  year  of 
probationary  credit  for  that  emergency  credentialed  service. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  the  applicability  of  Summerfield  and  on  Education  Code 

section  4491,  which  specifically  provides,  “Service  by  a  person  under  a  provisional 
credential  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to 
attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a  school  district.” 
Golden  Valley  arose  in  a  very  different  factual  context  and  does  not  apply. 

11. 

Service  as  a  University  Intern:  All  of  the  interns  in  this  matter  were  university 

interns  (as  opposed  to  District  interns).  District  interns  (as  opposed  to  university  interns) 
have  a  specific  statutory  right  to  status  as  a  probationary  employee  under  Education  Code 
section  44885.5.  No  similar  statutory  right  exists  for  the  benefit  university  interns.  Indeed, 
Education  Code  section  44464  provides  in  part: 

“An  internship  credential  shall  be  valid  only  as  long  as  the  holder  is  in  good  standing 
in  the  teacher  internship  program  of  the  district  that  makes  the  request, 
notwithstanding  any  provision  of  Section  44463,  and  the  rights  provided  by  Sections 
44948*  and  44949°  shall  not  be  afforded  to  interns.” 

In  order  for  a  university  intern  to  obtain  tenure,  the  intern  must  comply  with 

Education  Code  section  44466,  which  provides: 

“An  intern  shall  not  acquire  tenure  while  serving  on  an  internship  credential.  A  person 
who,  after  completing  a  teaching  internship  program  authorized  pursuant  to  this 
article,  is  employed  for  at  least  one  complete  school  year  in  a  position  requiring 

  

Education  Code  section  44948  requires  cause  to  dismiss  or  suspend  a  probationary  employee  during  a 

4 
school  year.  The  statute  is  limited  to  probationary  employees  whose  probationary  period  commenced  prior  to  the 
1983-84  fiscal  year  or  who  are  employed  in  a  school  district  having  an  average  daily  attendance  of  less  than  250 
pupils. 

Education  Code  section  44949  sets  forth  the  requirements  related  to  the  giving  of  preliminary  layoff 
5 
notices,  the  employee’s  right  to  request  a  hearing  and  the  manner  in  which  the  administrative  hearing  shall  be 
conducted.  A  person  serving  under  an  internship  credential  does  not  have  the  right  to  notice  and  a  hearing  under 
Education  Code  section  44644, 

16

certification  qualifications  by  the  school  district  that  employed  the  person  as  an  intern 
during  the  immediately  preceding  school  year  and  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding 
school  year  to  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  succeeding  school  year,  acquire  tenure.” 

12. 

Conclusions  Regarding  Probationary  Status  Under  a  Provisional  Credential: 

Within  the  context  of  an  economic  layoff  proceeding,  the  retention  of  a  teacher  with  a 
provisional  credential  over  a  teacher  who  possesses  a  valid  teaching  credential  makes  no 
sense.  The  economic  layoff  statutes  were  designed  to  ensure  that  qualified  and  competent 
senior  employees  be  retained  over  more  junior  employees  and  that  permanent  employees  be 
retained  over  probationary  employees.  A  teacher  cannot  become  a  permanent  (tenured) 
employee  without  first  serving  a  probationary  period,  and  a  teacher  cannot  attain 
probationary  status  under a  provisional  credential. 

13. 

Ultimate  Conclusions:  The  District  established  it  had  a  valid  reason  to  reduce 

or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District  properly  identified  these  services. 
No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated  by 
state  or  federal  law.  The  District  established  a  valid  seniority  list,  which  was  adjusted  at  the 
administrative  hearing  to  meet  the  timely  objections  of  individuals  who  were  not  offered  the 
opportunity  to  attend  a  mandatory  teaching  academy  on  August  18,  2003.  The  District 
established  that  persons  holding  BCLAD  credentials  should  be  skipped  over  more  senior 
employees  not  having  such  credentials  and  that  Richard  T.  Miller  should  be  retained  because 
no  senior  employee  had  the  special  skills  and  experience  required  to  hold  the  CWA  position. 
The  District  correctly  determined  that  Jannis  Frederick  had  the  right  to  displace  a  more  junior 
employee  and  teach  elementary  school.  The  District  correctly  determined  that  employees 
holding  temporary  permits  or  a  university  intern  credentials  were  not  entitled  to  probationary 
seniority  for  purposes  of  this  economic  layoff  proceeding.  The  District  took  into  account 
positive  attrition.  Ties  were  properly  broken  under  the  first  of  the  District’s  four  tie  breaking 
criteria,  the  use  of  which  were  not  in  issue. 

The  Accusations  filed  against  Edward  J.  Furu,  Sean  P.  Shelvin,  Sarah  Christie, 

Luciano  Cid,  Jose  Cabrera,  Yeni  Osuna-Pasillas,  Elvira  Bermudez,  Julie  Pak,  Richard  T. 
Miller,  Barbara  Barboza,  Jacqueline  L.  Howland,  Steven  G.  Zeitlow  and  Jannis  Frederick 
should  be  dismissed. 

The  following  persons  should  be  given  final  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be 

required  by  the  District  in  the  2004-2005  school  year:  Jane  C.  Ahn,  Paul  Berman,  Canny  E. 
Christian,  Joy  E.  Cole,  Kathleen  Cramer,  Scott  R.  Davis,  Rebecca  E.  Diebolt,  Aimee  L. 
Firouznam,  Brenda  C.  Fisher,  Brian  Fortenbaugh,  Genevieve  Gish,  Katie  Gotovac,  Dan 
Gullo,  Julie  Hammans,  Calle  R.  Hendry,  Suzanne  M.  Hofstetter,  Amber  D.  Juarez,  Nicole  K. 
Killian,  Robert  C.  Kim,  Ana  L.  Lucero,  Christa  Marmolejo,  Joy  A.  Okada,  Daniel  B. 
O’Leary,  Dawn  Page,  Jason  M.  Parker,  Wesley  W.  Peacock,  Robert  Purnell,  Stephanie  L. 
Rodriguez,  Susan  Sawyer,  Brian  Shay,  Patricia  Simmons,  Andrea  E.  Spencer,  Erik  Starkey, 
Sharon  Swingle,  Tami  T.  Tang,  Rosemary  L.  Taylor,  Jennifer  Terwiske,  Teresa  I. Vitelli, 
Laura  C.  Yeaman  and  Chris  Zagarelia. 

17

RECOMMENDATIONS 

The  Accusations  filed  against  Edward  J.  Furu,  Sean  P.  Shelvin,  Sarah  Christie, 

Luciano  Cid,  Jose  Cabrera,  Yeni  Osuna-Pasillas,  Elvira  Bermudez,  Julie  Pak,  Richard  T. 
Miller,  Barbara  Barboza,  Jacqueline  L.  Howland,  Steven  G.  Zeitlow  and  Jannis  Frederick 
should  be  dismissed. 

The  following  persons  should  be  given  final  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be 

required  by  the  District  in  the  2004-2005  school  year:  Jane  C.  Ahn,  Paul  Berman,  Canny  E. 
Christian,  Joy  E.  Cole,  Kathleen  Cramer,  Scott  R.  Davis,  Rebecca  E.  Diebolt,  Aimee  L. 
Firouznam,  Brenda  C.  Fisher,  Brian  Fortenbaugh,  Genevieve  Gish,  Katie  Gotovac,  Dan 
Gullo,  Julie  Hammans,  Calle  R.  Hendry,  Suzanne  M.  Hofstetter,  Amber  D.  Juarez,  Nicole  K. 
Killian,  Robert  C.  Kim,  Ana  L.  Lucero,  Christa  Marmolejo,  Joy  A.  Okada,  Daniel  B. 
O’Leary,  Dawn  Page,  Jason  M.  Parker,  Wesley  W.  Peacock,  Robert  Purnell,  Stephanie  L. 
Rodriguez,  Susan  Sawyer,  Brian  Shay,  Patricia  Simmons,  Andrea  E.  Spencer,  Erik  Starkey, 
Sharon  Swingle,  Tami  T.  Tang,  Rosemary  L.  Taylor,  Jennifer  Terwiske,  Teresa  I.  Vitelli, 
Laura  C.  Yeaman  and  Chris  Zagarelia. 

BD  OOo, 
DATED:  _Ageaat 

  

    

S  AHLER 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

18

  

  

  

