BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MANHATTAN  BEACH  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Employment  Status 
of: 

SHAHER  BATROUKH,  ERIN 
COPENBARGER,  ERICA  GUBSER,  AL 
HALFERTY,  KAREN  HARNS,  DINA 
MOLL,  SHAUNA  MORRISON,  and  MIKE 
NEILY, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  L2004030554 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Mark  T.  Roohk,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14  and  15,  2004,  in  Manhattan  Beach,  California. 

Howard  Friedman,  Esq.,  Lozano  Smith,  represented  the  Manhattan  Beach  Unified 

School  District. 

Lawrence  B.  Trygstad,  Esq.,  represented  all  named  Respondents.  For  reasons  set 

forth  herein  below,  only  Respondents  Erin  Copenbarger  and  Mike  Neily  were  present  during 
the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2004. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Board  of  Education  of  the  Manhattan  Beach  Unified  School  District  determined 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  teachers  and  other 
certificated  employees  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the 
competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or 

eliminated.     

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Gwen  Gross  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Manhattan  Beach  Unified  School 

District  (“District”).  She  caused  accusatory  pleadings  and  accompanying  documents  to  be 
filed  and  served  upon  Respondents,  while  acting  solely  in  her  official  capacity  and  not 
otherwise. 

2. 

The  parties  stipulated  that,  prior  to  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  the 

accusation  as  to  Respondents  Shaker  Batroukh,  Al  Halferty,  and  Shauna  Morrison,  none  of 
whom  appeared  at  the  hearing.  The  parties  further  stipulated  that  Respondents  Erica  Gubser, 
Karen  Harns,  and  Dina  Moll,  none  of  whom  appeared  at  the  hearing,  had  withdrawn  their 
Notices  of  Defense  to  the  accusation.  The  parties  further  stipulated  that  Respondents  Erin 
Copenbarger  and  Mike  Neily,  both  of  whom  did  appear  at  the  hearing,  timely  requested  in 
writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year,  and  as  such  are  they  are  the  only  individuals  whose  employment  is  at  issue  in 
this  matter. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  personally  served  on  each 
Respondent  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 
Respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year,  and  giving  the  reasons  therefor. 

that  their  services  would 

4, 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  certificated 

employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  certificated  employees. 

5. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  Respondents  herein,  both  of  whom 

are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

6. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  District’s  Board  of  Education  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  certain  employees  be  given  notice  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  reasons  for  that  recommendation  were 
that  the  District  needed  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  close  of 
the  2003-04  school  year. 

7. 

Board  Resolution  No.  2004-5,  adopted  on  February  18,  2004,  proposed  a 
termination  of  23.26  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)!  certificated  employees.  Specifically, 
Board  Resolution  No.  2004-5  provided  for  the  reduction  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
services: 

'  The  acronym  “FTE”  refers  to  positions,  and  not  to  individuals  per  se.  Accordingly,  the  number  of  actual 
individuals  who  are  proposed  for  termination  could  be  greater  or  smaller  than  the  number  of  FTE. 

Career  Counselor,  Secondary  —  1.0  FTE 
English,  Secondary  —  3.0  FTE 

  

  

 

© 

Social  Science,  Secondary  —  2.0  FTE 
Foreign  Language  (Spanish/French),  Secondary  —  1.0  FTE 
Science,  Secondary  —  1.0  FTE 
Math,  Secondary  —  2.0  FTE 
Industrial  Technology,  Secondary  —  .17  FTE 
Drama,  Secondary  —  .17  FTE 
Classroom  Music,  Elementary  —  2.0  FTE 
Physical  Education,  Elementary  —  2.5  FTE 
Elementary  Support  Specialists  —  1.75  FTE 
Art,  Elementary  —  1.0  FTE 
Director  of  Curriculum  —  1.0  FTE 
Educational  Advisor  (Counselor),  Secondary  —  1.0  FTE 
Specialist  Teachers,  Elementary  —  2.67  FTE 
ASB  Advisor,  Secondary  —  .60  FTE 
Technology  Support,  Secondary  —  .40  FTE 

8. 

Board  Resolution  No.  2004-6,  also  adopted  on  February  18,  2004,  established 
tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be 
based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students,  in  accordance  with  the  following  criteria: 

© 

“The  following  rating  system  shall  be  applied  in  determining  the  order  of  termination 
of  certificated  employees: 

A.  Multiple  and  single  subject  credentials.  Rating:  +1  for  preliminary 

credential,  +2  for  clear  credential; 

B.  Credentials  and  experience  to  teach  in  a  special  categorical  program  (e.g. 

special  education,  bilingual).  Rating:  +]  for  preliminary  credential,  +2  for  clear 
credential,  +1  per  year  of  experience; 

C.  Earned  CLAD  or  equivalent  specialization.  Rating:  +1  per 

certificate/authorization; 

D.  Supplemental  Authorization.  Rating:  +1  per  authorization; 
E.  Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BA/BS  level.  Rating:  +1  per  degree; 
F,  Years  of  experience  previous  to  current  employment  as  a  full  time, 
credentialed  teacher  in  a  probationary/permanent,  K-12  teaching  situation  in  a  public 
school.  Rating:  +1  per  year. 

“In  the  event  that  common  day  hires  have  equal  qualifications  based  on  application  of 
the  above  criteria,  the  District  will  then  break  ties  by  utilizing  the  following  tie- 
breaker  criteria  listed  in  order  of  priority  and  to  be  applied  in  the  order  listed: 

A.  Special  Education  Credential 
B.  CLAD 
C.  National  Board  Certification 
D.  Single  Subject  [Credential]  Science 

 

E.  Single  Subject  [Credential]  Math 
F.  Single  Subject  [Credential]  Foreign  Language 
G.  Single  Subject  [Credential]  English 
H.  Single  Subject  [Credential]  Social  Science 
I.  Single  Subject  —  Other  Areas  (Music,  Physical  Education,  Business,  etc.) 
J.  Multiple  Subject  and  a  Supplementary  Authorization 
K.  Multiple  Subject 
L.  Clear  Credential 
M.  Degree  Past  BA 
N.  Previous  job  with  [the  District] 

“In  the  event  that  common  day  hires  have  equal  qualifications  based  on  application  of 
the  above  criteria,  the  District  will  then  break  ties  by  utilizing  a  lottery.” 

9. 

In  essence,  the  District’s  tie-breaker  system  is  applied  as  follows:  If  two  or 

more  employees  have  the  same  first  date  of  service,  the  District  considers  the  first  group  of 
criteria  in  total,  awards  each  employee  points  as  per  the  list,  and  the  employee  with  the  most 
points  is  given  greater  seniority.  If  two  or  more  employees  are  awarded  the  same  number  of 
points  and  thereby  remain  tied,  the  District  considers  the  second  group  of  criteria 
individually,  and  proceeds  through  the  list  until  the  tie  is  broken.  If  two  or  more  employees 
are  still  tied,  a  lottery  is  held  as  the  final  tie-breaker. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  use  of  a  lottery  to  break  ties  is  arbitrary  and  does  not 
comply  with  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44955(b),  which  states  in  pertinent 
part  that,  “[a]s  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.”  While  the  Education  Code  was  amended  in 
1977  to  eliminate  a  lottery  as  the  sole  means  of  determining  seniority  as  between  two  or 
more  employees  who  first  rendered  services  to  a  district  on  the  same  date,  the  law  does  not 
preclude  a  district  from  using  a  lottery  as  a  kind  of  “last  resort”  should  the  application  of 
other  empirical  criteria  fail  to  break  a  tie.  The  District’s  use  of  other  empirical  criteria  as  set 
forth  above  is  extensive  enough  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Education  Code,  and 
accordingly  the  District  is  permitted  to  use  a  lottery  as  the  final  tie-breaker  in  this  case. 

10. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  that  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 
(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials, 
and  authorizations.  Credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  records  of  the 
County  Office  of  Education,  at  which  certificated  employees  must  register  such  documents. 

11. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 

"bumping"  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in 
another  area  and  were  entitled  to  "bump"  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be 
laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not 
covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse

order  of  seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and 
whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees. 

12. 

Respondent  Neily  teaches  Physical  Education  (“P.E.”)  at  the  District’s  high 

school.  He  holds  a  Standard  Secondary  credential  in  P.-E.  and  Psychology,  as  well  as  a  Clear 
Supplemental  Authorization  to  teach  History  in  grades  7-9.  He  was  originally  hired  by  the 
District  as  the  varsity  baseball  coach  at  the  high  school  in  early  2002.  At  that  time,  he  had 
been  teaching  for  almost  thirty  (30)  years  in  another  District  at  both  the  high  school  and 
middle  school  level.  During  that  time,  he  taught  P.E.,  history,  health,  and  economics  classes. 
He  remained  as a  teacher  in  the  other  District  during  the  2002  baseball  season.  However,  at 
the  start  of  the  2002-03  school  year,  he  was  offered  a  teaching  position  by  the  District,  which 
he  eventually  accepted  after  some  discussions  regarding  seniority  credit.  His  first  date  of 
paid  service  is  November  11,  2002.  He  is  the  only  District  employee  with  that  date. 

13. 

Respondent  Copenbarger  teaches  Social  Science  at  the  District’s  high  school. 

She  is  a  probationary  employee  who  holds  a  Single  Subject  credential  in  Social  Science.  She 
also  has  a  Master’s  degree  in  medieval  history.  Her  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003,  a 
date  shared  with  several  other  District  employees. 

14. 

Respondent  Neily  received  a  layoff  notice  because,  while  secondary  Physical 
Education  was  not  affected  by  the  layoff  resolution,  elementary  Physical  Education  was,  and 
the  individuals  teaching  P.E.  in  the  elementary  schools  who  would  otherwise  have  received 
notices  all  have  credentials  permitting  them  to  teach  P.E.  at  the  secondary  school  level,  and 
all  have  more  seniority  than  does  Respondent  Neily,  who  is  the  junior  P.E.  teacher  in  the 
District.  In  essence,  Respondent  Neily  was  “bumped”  out  of  his  position  by  those  other 
teachers. 

15. 

According  to  the  District,  Respondent  Copenbarger  received  a  layoff  notice 

for  essentially  precautionary  reasons:  the  District  anticipated  that  it  might  be  determined  that 
Respondent  Neily’s  Supplemental  Authorization  to  teach  9"  grade  history  will  be  sufficient 
to  allow  him  to  teach  Social  Science  at  the  high  school,  and  if  so,  Respondent  Copenbarger 
would  have  to  be  laid  off,  as  she  is  junior  to  Respondent  Neily,  and  is  the  most  junior  of  the 
remaining  secondary  Social  Science  teachers. 

As  noted,  Respondent  Copenbarger  shares  a  seniority  date  with  approximately  fifty 

(50)  other  District  employees,  and  so  was  subject  to  extensive  tie-breaking  procedures.  After 
applying  all  of  the  criteria,  she  was  placed  31‘  among  employees  with  her  seniority  date,  just 
behind  Wayne  Knutson,  another  social  science  teacher  at  the  high  school.  Although  the 
required  reduction  in  services  in  regard  to  secondary  Social  Science  was  accomplished  by 
laying  off  two  teachers  who  placed  behind  Respondent  Copenbarger  in  the  tie-breaking 
process,  she  was  nevertheless  sent  a  layoff  notice  because  of  the  situation  with  Respondent 
Neily. 

The  layoff  notice  itself  was  sent  to  Respondent  Copenbarger  in  a  timely  fashion,  prior 

to  March  15,  2004.  Mr.  Knutson  was  not  sent  a  layoff  notice.  Thereafter,  subsequent  to 

 

March  15,  2004,  the  District  discovered  that  it  had  failed  to  credit  Respondent  Copenbarger 
with  her  master’s  degree  as  part  of  the  tie-breaking  process.  After  so  doing,  it  was 
determined  that  Respondent  Copenbarger  was  now  tied  with  Mr.  Knutson  on  the  seniority 
list.  As  all  other  tie-breaking  criteria  had  been  exhausted,  the  District  resorted  to a  lottery, 
which  was  held  on  March  30,  2004.  In  attendance  were  District  employees,  including 
Director  of  Human  Resources  Janet  Schwabe,  as  well  as  the  District’s  legal  counsel  in  this 
action.  Respondent  Copenbarger  was  not  present,  nor  was  she  notified  that  the  lottery  was 
occurring.  Respondent  Copenbarger  lost  the  lottery,  and  as  a  result  was  again  placed  behind 
Mr.  Knutson  on  the  seniority  list. 

16. 

Respondent  Neily  offered  several  arguments  in  support  of  his  retention.  First, 
he  maintains  that,  since  the  proposed  reduction  in  services  is  occurring  in  Elementary  rather 
than  Secondary  P.E.,  the  layoff  notices  should  have  been  sent  to  those  employees  teaching 
P.E.  for  the  District  at  the  elementary  school  level.  This  argument  is  without  merit.  Those 
teachers  all  hold  credentials  that  entitle  them  to  teach  P.E.  at  any  level  in  the  K-12  system, 
and  all  have  more  seniority  in  the  District  than  does  Respondent  Neily.  Pursuant  to  the 
Education  Code,  the  District  is  required  to  give  them  priority.  (Education  Code  section 
44955.) 

17.  |  Respondent  Neily  also  argues  that,  in  the  current  school  year,  the  District  high 

school  is  offering  five  (5)  classes  which  his  credential  entitles  him  to  teach:  two  9"  Grade 
Geography  classes,  two  9""  Grade  Model  United  Nations  (“MUN”)  classes,  and  one  upper 
level  Psychology  class.  The  District  concedes  that  Respondent  Neily’s  credentials  entitle 
him  to  teach  any  one  of  those  classes. 

The  Psychology  class  in  question  is  being  taught  by  an  employee  who  has  a  seniority 

date  of  September  22,  1988,  and  who  holds  a  Standard  Secondary  credential  in  Speech  and 
Political  Science.  This  employee  is  also  teaching  Government  classes,  which  are  not  offered 
to  9""  grade  students,  in  the  Social  Studies  Department.  The  MUN  classes  in  question  are 
being  taught  by  an  employee  who  also  has a  seniority  date  of  September  22,  1988,  and  who 
holds  a  Single  Subject  Social  Science  credential.  This  employee  is  also  teaching 
Government  classes  in  the  Social  Studies  Department.  The  Geography  classes  in  question 
are  being  taught  by  an  employee,  Cassidy  Olson,  who  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  2, 
2003,  but  who  is  ahead  of  Respondent  Copenbarger  in  the  seniority  list  due  to  his  Clear 
Single  Subject  Social  Science  credential.  Mr.  Olson  is  also  teaching  U.S.  History  classes, 
which  are  not  offered  to  9"  grade  students,  in  the  Social  Studies  Department. 

18. 

The  District  argues  A)  that  the  Geography  and  Psychology  classes  are  elective 
in  nature,  not  required  to  be  offered,  and  there  is  no  assurance  that  the  school  will  be  offering 
those  classes  in  the  coming  year;  and  B)  that  the  Psychology  and  MUN  classes  are  taught  by 
senior  employees,  and  that  Respondent  Neily  should  not  be  entitled  to  displace  these 
employees  by  “inverse  bumping”.  “Inverse  bumping”  is  a  process  that  allows  for  the 
reassignment  of  a  senior  employee  to  a  position  held  by  a  junior  employee,  in  order  to 
accommodate  another  employee  who  would  otherwise  be  subject  to  layoff.  A  District  is  not 
required  by  the  Education  Code  to  engage  in  this  process;  rather,  its  obligation  to  make 

 

reassignments  is  limited  to  attempting  to  place  an  employee  who  otherwise  would  be 
terminated  in  a  position  being  held  by  a  less  senior  employee.  Duax  v.  Kern  Community 
College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  569. 

As  both  the  Psychology  and  MUN  teachers  have  seniority  over  Respondent  Neily,  the 
District  is  clearly  not  required  to  re-assign  them  to  other  classes  in  order  to  accommodate  his 
continued  employment.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Olson  is  junior  to  Respondent  Neily,  and 
based  simply  on  that  fact  a  re-assignment  might  be  possible.  However,  Mr.  Olson’s 
credential  permits  him  to  teach  not  just  Geography,  but  any  Social  Science  class  at  the  high 
school  level,  and  in  fact  he  has  been  teaching  three  periods  of  U.S.  History  this  school  year  in 
addition  to  the  Geography  classes.  There  is  no  evidence  in  the  record  as  to  why  Mr.  Olson, 
rather  than  one  of  the  other  teachers  in  the  Department,  is  the  one  teaching  Geography  this 
year,  but  there  is  certainly  no  guarantee  that  he  will  be  teaching  it  again  next  year.  Further, 
the  District  is  correct  in  pointing  out  that  Geography  is  an  elective  course,  and  so  it  may  not 
even  be  offered  this  coming  year,  and  therefore  should  not  be  used  as  a  basis  for  determining 
employment.  At  the  same  time,  U.S:  History  is  a  required  course  for  a  grade  level  beyond 
the  scope  of  Respondent  Neily’s  credential.  Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority 
over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  that  their 
more  senior  colleagues  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184 
Cal.App.3d  399,  405;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board 
of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  842.  A  credential  to 
teach  all  high  school  Social  Science  classes,  rather  than  one  limited  to  9""  grade  classes,  may 
be  one  such  skill  or  capability. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  were  met,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  7. 

2. 

All  notice  requirements  as  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  were  met  as  to  Respondent  Neily,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  7. 
However,  all  notice  requirements  were  not  met  as  to  Respondent  Copenbarger.  Section  44949 
states  in  pertinent  part  that  “No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice 
by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year 
for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee  . 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.” 
(Emphasis  added.) 

.  that  it  has  been 

. 

Although  Respondent  Copenbarger  did  receive  written  notice  that  her  services  would 

not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  prior  to  March  15,  2004,  that  notice  was  sent  in  error,  based 
on  a  faulty  application  of  the  District’s  tie-breaking  process.  In  fact,  as  of  March  15,  2004,  the 
District  had  yet  to  properly  and  definitively  determine  whether  Respondent  Copenbarger  or  Mr. 
Knutson  should  be  the  one  to  receive  the  notice.  The  District  did  not  know  this  at  the  time, 
because  it  did  not  discover  the  tie-breaking  error  until  several  days  later.  Once  the  error  was

  

discovered,  the  District  was  forced  to  resort  to  a  lottery  to  break  the  tie  between  Respondent 
Copenbarger  and  Mr.  Knutson.  The  results  of  the  lottery  fortuitously  concurred  with  what  the 
District  had  already  done.  However,  should  the  lottery  have  turned  out  the  other  way,  the 
District  would  have  been  forced  to  at  the  very  least  rescind  Respondent  Copenbarger’s  layoff 
notice,  and  then  decide  what  it  would  do  about  Mr.  Knutson,  who  would  now  be  the  most  junior 
secondary  Social  Science  teacher  in  the  District,  and  who  would  otherwise  be  in  line  to  receive 
the  precautionary  layoff  notice,  except  for  the  fact  that  March  15,  2004,  had  already  passed. 

The  District  maintains  that  what  occurred  was  an  honest  mistake.  There  is  little  doubt 
that  this  is  true,  but  it  is  also  a  fatal  one  for  purposes  of  this  case.  Section  44955(c)  provides  in 
pertinent  part  that  “in  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the 
notices  and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year.”  Had  the  lottery  turned  out  the  other  way,  the  District 
would  certainly  have  been  prohibited  from  attempting  to  terminate  Mr.  Knutson’s  services,  as  it 
would  have  failed  to  have  timely  provided  him  with  a  layoff  notice.  The  District  should  not  be 
entitled  to  benefit  from  the  fact  that  the  lottery  happened  to  turn  out  in  accordance  with  its 
original  action.”  Accordingly,  cause  does  not  exist  to  give  notice  to  Respondent  Copenbarger, 
as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  13  and  15. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  2004-5  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District  identified 
the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed 
be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

5. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  Respondent  Neily,  as  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  16,  17,  and  18.  Although  Respondent  Neily’s  Supplemental 
Authorization  to  teach  9"  grade  History  renders  him  competent  to  teach a  class  that  is 
currently  being  taught  by  a  teacher  with  less  seniority,  that  teacher’s  credential  is  a  superior 
capability  that  renders  him  competent  to  teach  not  only  that  class,  but  also  several  other 
Social  Science  classes  that  are  required  by  the  state.  This  permits  the  District  to  retain  that 
teacher,  as  well  as  others  in  the  Social  Science  Department  who  hold  similar  credentials, 
including  Respondent  Copenbarger,  despite  Respondent  Neily’s  seniority.’ 

  

*  Accordingly,  the  problem  was  not  in  the  District’s  use  of  a  lottery  to  break a tie,  but  in  the  timing  of  that  use. 
>  The  District  represented  several  times  during  the  hearing  that  Respondent  Neily  was  “at  the  top  of”  a  re-hire  list, 
and  that  should  additional  Geography  or  other  9"  grade  elective  Social  Science  courses  be  included  in  the  2004-05 
schedule,  he  would  be  in  line  for  re-hire  to  teach  those  classes. 

 

ORDER 

1, 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondent  Mike  Neily  that  his  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  2004-2005  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondent  Erin  Copenbarger. 

Dated: 

  

  

MARK  T.  ROOHK 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

