BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
TRAVIS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  NO.  N2004020396 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

ELIZABETH  RILEY 
AMY  PETERS 
JESSICA  STINSON 
STEPHANIE  FADELLI 
WENDY  DUNHAM 
TINA  AHN 
CARIN  BRYAN 
JANE  CERIANI 
NORM  DEPONTE 
JAINCE  EWING 
CHRISTIE  GOVERNOR 
JUAN  GUZMAN 
KIM  KAYLOR 
JEFF  KUBIAK 
ADAM  LUNDY  _. 
STEVEN  MIKESELL 
CINDY  MORRIS 
SANDRA  RADELEFF 
CHRISTINA  RIDDOCK 
MONICA  ROBERTSON 
‘MARY  STEINDORF 
MELISSA  SWANGER 
JESSE  LOREN  © 
PATRICIA  BERNAL 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  7,  2004,  in  Fairfield,  California.

} 

@ 

  

Jonathan  A.  Pearl,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Miller  Brown  &  Dannis  represented  the  Travis 

© 

Unified  School  District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  of  the  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  7,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

The  Travis  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  is  comprised  of  approximately 

5300  students.  The  District  has  five  Elementary  Schools  (two  of  which  are  located  on  the 
Travis  Air  Force  Base),  a  Middle  School,  a High  School,  a  Continuation  School  and  a 
Community  Day  School. 

2. 

On  February  10,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (“Board”)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  2003-04-14.  The  resolution  directed  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Steve 
Vaczovsky,  to  give  notices  to  respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  (2004-2005).  The  resolution  proposed  the  elimination  or  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services.  The  specific  particular  kinds  of  services  (“PKS”)  to  be  reduced 
or  eliminated  are: 

' 

_ 

 
N
W
P
 
N

 
A
N
A
O

.  Twenty-three  (23)  FTE  Elementary  Education 
.  Four  (4)  FTE  Elementary  Physical  Education 
.  Two  (2)  FTE  Reading  Specialist 
.  One  (1)  FTE  Elementary  Librarian 
.  One  (1)  FTE  Psychologist 
.  Three-fifths  (0.6)  FTE  District  Volunteer  Coordinator  (full  position) 
.  Three-fifths  (0.6)  FTE  High  School  Vocal  Music  (full  program) 
.  One-half  (0.5)  FTE  Curriculum  Specialist 
.  One-third  (0.33)  FTE-  (2  sections)  Middle  School  Science 
10.  One-sixth  (0.17)  FTE  (1  section)  Middle  School  Drama 
11.  One-sixth  (0.17)  FTE  (1  section)  Middle  School  Band 
12.  One-sixth  (0.17)  FTE  (1  section)  Middle  School  Physical  Education 
13.  One-sixth  (0.17)  FTE  (1  section)  Middle  School  Literacy  Lab 

3. 

The  District  determined  that  in  order  to  accomplish  the  discontinuance  or 

reduction  in  PKS,  33  full  time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  positions  would  be  eliminated.  On  March 
11,  2004,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  the  Board  of  his 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  certificated  employees  whose  positions  would  be  lost 

  

'  The  District  represented  at  hearing  that  the  PKS  identified  in  items  3  through  8  and  10  through  13  will  not  be  dis- 
continued  due  to  the  subsequent  passage  of  Propositions  57  and  58  and  due  to  resignations  and  involuntary  transfers 
of  personnel. 

  

  

@ 

 

through  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for 
school  year  2004-2005. 

4. 

On  or  about  March  11,  2003,  respondents  were  served  in  the  manner 

prescribed  by  law  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given 
them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year,  and  stating  the 
reasons  therefore.  Respondents,  with  the  exceptions  of  Jesse  Loren  and  Patricia  Bernal,  filed 
a  timely  Request  for  a  Hearing  and  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation  which 
followed.  The  District  waived  any  objections  to  the  timeliness  of  Jesse  Loren’s  and  Patricia 
Bernal’s  filings. 

5. 

6. 

Each  of  the  respondents  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Resolution  No.  2003-04-14  included a  further  resolution  that  “it  will  be 

necessary  to  retain  the  services  of  certificated  employees  in  the  2004-2005  school  year  _ 
regardless  of  seniority,  who  provide  services  in  and  possess  qualifications  needed  for  the 
following  programs”: 

  

1.  Bilingual  Immersion  Program  at  Cambridge  Elementary  School 
2.  English  Language  Learner  Programs 
3.  Special  Education  Programs  (except  Psychologists) 
4.  Counseling  Programs 
5.  Travis  Arts  and  Academics  Visual  and  Performing  Arts  Program  at  Center 
Elementary  School 
6.  Travis  Unified  School  District  Alternative  Education  Program  (Travis 
Community  Day  School  (CDS)  and  Travis  Education  Center  (TEC) 

7. 

In  Resolution  No.  2002-04-15,  also  passed  on  February  10,  2004,  the  Board 
adopted  tie-breaker  criteria  for  those  certificated  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service.  Points  were  assigned  in  four  categories:  Credentials  and/or  Degrees  Held, 
Credentials  to  Provide  Service  in  ELL,  BCLAD  or  Special  Education,  Current  Assignment  in 
Arts  and  Academics  or  JROTC,  and  Teaching  Experience.  The  resolution  provided  that  any 
‘remaining  ties  would  be  broken  by  lot. 

8. 

°  The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees.  As  of  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  Board  determined  that  the 

reduction  in  PKS  could  be  decreased  to  13.33  FTE.  

 

9. 

The  affected  employees  raise  the  issue  of  whether  the  Board  may  terminate 
senior  employees  while  retaining  junior  employees  “who  provide  services  in  and  possess 
qualifications  needed  for  English  Language  Learner  Programs  (“ELL”)’?  7 

10. 

‘If  those  teachers  who  hold  ELL  certificates  are  :skipped”,  the  seniority  list 

indicates  that  notice  would  be  given  to  respondents  Carin  Bryan,  Jane  Ceriani,  Janice  Ewing, 
Christie  Governor,  Kim  Kaylor,  Pam  Miller,  Amy  Peters,  Sandra  Radeleff,  Christina 
Riddock,  Monica  Robertson,  Julie  Sill,  Juan  Guzman,  and  Cindy  Morris  (each  1  FTE)  and  to 
Steven  Mikesell  (.33  FTE).  If  ELL  certificate  holders, are  not  skipped,  notice  would  instead 
be  given  to  respondents  Elizabeth  Riley,  Amy  Peters,  Jessica  Stinson,  Stephanie  Fadelli, 
Wendy  Dunham,  Jennifer  Ikemiyagi,  Kim  Kaylor,  Christina  Riddock,  Jan  Howsden,  Julie 
Sill,  Norm  DePonte,  Cindy  Morris,  (each  1FTE)  and  Steven  Mikesell  (.33  FTE). 

11. 

Kathleen  Bond,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Educational  Services  and  Steve 
Vaczovsky,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  testified  in  support  of  the  Board’s 
decision  to  exempt  from  lay  off  those  teachers  holding  ELL  certificates.  They  explained  that 
budgetary  cutbacks  and  an  anticipated  reduction  in  housing  at  the  Travis  Air  Force  Base 
necessitated  the  decision  to  reduce  overall  PKS  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Ms.  Bond  testified  that  the  decision  to  skip  junior  certificated  teachers  with  ELL 

certificates  was  based  on  findings  by  the  California  Department  of  Education  (“DOE”)  in  its 
2001-2002  Coordinated  Compliance  Review.  The  DOE’s  review  of  the  District’s  English 
Learners  program  found  that  the  District  had  an  inadequate  number  of  qualified  teachers 
assigned  to  provide  English  Language  Development  instruction.  The  DOE’s  review  noted, 
“Many  English  learners  are  placed  in  mainstream  English  classes  with  teachers  who  do  not 
have  appropriate  certification.” 

Ms.  Bond  described  ELL  programs.  She  explained  that  ELL  programs  are  based  on 
federal  and/or  state  mandates  and  the  “No  Child  Left  Behind  Act”.  One  of  the  goals  of  the 
legislation  is  the  mainstreaming  of  English  learners  into  the  overall  academic  program.  The 
Districts  must  identify  students  whose  native  language  is  not  English.  These  students  are 
designated  for  specialized  instruction  and  materials  in  order  to  become  more  proficient  in 
English.  There  are  entrance  and  exit  criteria  for  the  program.  There  are  yearly  review 
procedures  and  evaluations  of  the  students  to  make  certain  that  they  are  both  acquiring 
course  contents  and  improving  in  their  English  language  skills. 

Students  are  classified  according  to  levels  of  English  language  development.  Levels 
range  from  1  through  5.  Thereafter,  there  are  three  monitoring  levels.  Students  with  little  or 
no  English  are  placed  in  an  English  Immersion  program.  Once  the  student  reaches a  level  of 

  

*  Certified  employees,  regardless  of  seniority,  were  retained  to  teach  Travis  Arts  and  Academics  Visual  and 
Performing  Arts  Program  at  Center  Elementary  School  (“VSP”).  Although  there  was  some  indication  that  VSP 
skipping  might  be  at  issue,  no  evidence  was  received  or  argument  made  that  skipping  junior  teachers  who  taught  in 

the  VSP  program  was  in  violation  of  law.  Thus,  that  issue  was  not  considered  herein.     

3  or  4,  she  or  he  is  mainstreamed  into  regular  classrooms.  A  teacher  with  an  ELL  student  in 
his  or  her  classroom  is  responsible  for  specialized  instruction  and  testing  of  that  student.  It  is 
the  teacher’s  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  student  masters  the  course  content  and  that  the 
child  moves  upward  at  least  one  level.  Once  the  student  becomes  proficient  in  English,  the 
student  is  still  monitored  to  ensure  that  his  or  her  grades  do  not  slip;  an  indication  that  the 
student  may  not  be  acquiring  course  content. 

12. 

Ms.  Bond  and  Mr.  Vaczovsky  voiced  the  District’s  concern  that  unless  it 

retains  all  teachers  with  ELL  certification,  it  would  again  be  non  compliant  with  the  ELL 
program  requirements  that  all  ELL  students  be  placed  in  a  classroom  with  an  ELL  teacher. 
They  testified  that  non  compliance  would  probably  cause  the  District  to  lose  Federal  and 
State  funding.  The  DOE  reviews  the  District’s  compliance  with  ELL  requirements  every 
four  years,  with  self  auditing  and  reporting  in  the  interim.  The  next  audit  will  take  place  in 
2005-2006. 

13. 

The  District’s  goal  is  to  have  100%  of  the  faculty  with  ELL  certificates  before 

2006.  The  District  has  actively  encouraged  teachers  to  obtain  ELL  certification.  It  has 
offered  a  $400  incentive  pay,  and  has  held  ELL  certification  training  on  campus.  The 
District  has  provided  related  staff  development  classes  in  how  to  use  the  certification  once  it 
In  the  2003- 
is  obtained.  The  ELL  certification  training  program  is  also  available  on  line. 
2004  school  year  there  were  approximately  100  certificated  staff  of  a  total  certificated  staff 
of  approximately  350  who  held  some  form  of  ELL  certificate.  In  the  current  school  year, 
there  are  an  estimated  130  teachers  holding  ELL  certificates.  There  are  approximately  30 
teachers  in  the  ELL  certification  training  program  who  are  scheduled  to  obtain  their 
certificate  before  the  2004-2005  school  year  commences.  Respondents  provided  evidence 
that  many  additional  teachers  are  obtaining  CLAD  certifications  and  will  also  be  able  to 
teach  ELL  students. 

14. 

There  are  currently  190  ELL  students  at  levels  1  through  5.  There  are  142 
ELL  students  who  are  fluent  in  English.  The  latter  students  do  not  require  placement  in  a 
classroom  staffed  with  an  ELL  teacher,  but  they  do  require  an  ELL  teacher  to  monitor  their 
progress,  provide  supplementary  services,  and  to  keep  pertinent  data.  The  evidence  was 
unclear  whether  Federal  and/or  State  mandates  require  that  an  ELL  credentialed  teacher 
perform  this  monitoring.  The  District  has  one  English  Immersion  class.  The  number  of  ELL 
students  is  expected  to  continue  to  grow. 

15. 

The  District  did  not  produce  evidence  that  each  ELL  teacher  currently  has  an 

ELL  student  in  his  or  her  classroom.  The  District  did  not  produce  evidence  of  the  number  of 
certificated  ELL  teachers  it  would  lose  if  it  was  not  able  to  exempt  senior  non  ELL  teachers. 

16.  |  Respondents  argued  that  the  District  did  not  need  to  skip  ELL  teachers  in 
order  to  ensure  that  it  could  place  all  ELL  students  in  a  classroom  with  an  ELL  teacher. 
Respondents  suggested  that  the  District  employ  various  measures  to  utilize  the  more  senior 
ELL  teachers,  such  as  placing  more  children  in  a  classroom  that  has  an  ELL  teacher, 
transferring  teachers  to  other  schools  in  the  District  where  they  were  needed,  transferring 

  

 

students  to  a  campus  with  a  classroom  with  an  ELL  teacher,  and  assigning  new  ELL  students 
to  campuses  with  ELL  teachers.  Respondents  argued  that  the  District  could  meet  its  goals  by 
attrition  and  training  incentives  already  in  place.  The  District  countered  by  pointing  out  the 
many  considerations  that  go  into  the  formulation  of  classrooms.  The  District  maintained  that 
teachers  and  students  would  be  uprooted  and  disrupted  by  intercampus  transfers. 

17. 

The  feasibility  of  both  parties’  arguments  cannot  be  tested,  of  course,  without 

evidence  of  the  current  distribution  of  ELL  students  and  ELL  teachers  in  classrooms,  the 
projected  number  of  ELL  teachers  too  senior  to  be  subject  to  layoff  and  their  assignments, 
and  the  projected  number  of  ELL  students  and  their  grade  levels. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  the  California  Education 

Code  *  sections  44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of  a 
district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below  the 
corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing 
board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of 
the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of 
curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have 
become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 
employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Coen  e  cease  nerereeeereeseuese 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the 
governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of 
termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five 
days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 

  

>  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  California  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  stated. 

  

     

group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in 
the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent 
or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in 
Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee 
to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not 
have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a 
subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or 

course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  the  purpose  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 

requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.  (emphasis  added) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated  employees  face 

layoffs  due  to  economic  exigency,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to  reassign 
senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers,  if  the 
senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The  intent 
of  the  Legislation  is  clearly  to  prevent  Districts  from  laying  off  senior  teachers'while 
retaining  junior  teachers. 

However,  the  District  is  permitted  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic  layoff  in 

situations  where  the  District  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study...  and  that  the  certificated  employee  (to  be  exempted  from  layoff) 
has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  [section  44955  (d) 
(1)].  The  issues  herein  are  whether  the District demonstrated  a  “specific  need”  for  personnel

  

to  teach  a  “specific  course  or  course  of  study”,  and  if  so,  whether  it  is  “necessary”  for 
employees  to  hold  ELL  certificates  in  order  to  teach  Ell  “courses”. 

4. 

The  Board  resolved  to  exempt  any  certificated  employee  teaching  any  course 

in  any  school  if  the  certificated  employee  “provides  services  in  and  possess  qualifications 
needed  for  ...English  Language  Learner  Programs”.  At  hearing,  the  District  introduced 
evidence  designed  to  show  that  ELL  programs  were  a  “course  of  study”.  The  District 
focused  on  the  programming  requirements  for  ELL  students;  providing  testimony  that  the 
ELL  students  received  specialized  instruction  in  course  content  and  received  evaluation, 
testing  and  monitoring. 

Respondents  countered  that  the  ELL  program  is  not  a  course  or  a  specific  course  of 

study.  The  program  does  not  have  specific  course  content  but  is  rather  a  system  of 
accommodations  designed  to  make  the  course  contents  of  all  courses  more  available  to  non 
native  speakers.  Respondents  maintain  that  the  ELL  program  encompasses  all  students  in  all 
grades  on  all  campuses  and  does  not  meet  the  definitions  of  “course  of  study”  and  “course” 
as  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  51014  and  51015,  respectively. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  51015  states  “‘Course’  means  an  instructional  unit  of 
an  area  or  field  of  organized  knowledge,  usually  provided  on  a  semester,  year,  or  prescribed 
length  of  time  basis.”  Section  51014  states  “‘Course  of  study’  means  the  planned  content  of 
a  series  of  classes,  courses,  subjects,  studies,  or  related  activities.” 

It  is  clear  that  the  ELL  program  provides  instruction  to  students.  However,  the  “field 

of  organized  knowledge”  and  the  “planned  content”  of  the  studies  vary  from  class  to  class. 
The  instruction  is  tied  to  the  course  content  of  the  class  being  taught  (eg  Math,  Reading, 
Writing,  Science,  Arts,  Social  Studies,  Computer  Skills  etc.). 

6. 

The  legislative  intent  of  the  ELL  program  is  helpful  in  determining  whether 

ELL  programming  is  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study  as  defined  in  Education  Code 
section  44955  (d)  (1). 

In  1992,  the  Legislature  found  that 

...almost  one  million,  or  one  in  every  five,  pupils  in  California’s  public  schools  are  of 
limited  English  proficiency,  and  that  the  number  of  those  pupils  is  increasing  rapidly. 
In  addition,  the  number  of  primary  languages  spoken  by  California’s  limited-English- 
proficient  pupils  is  increasing.  The  Legislature  recognizes  that  limited-English- 
proficient  pupils  have  the  same  right  to  a  quality  education  as  all  California  pupils. 
For  these  pupils  to  have  access  to  quality  education,  their  special  needs  must  be  met 
by  teachers  who  have  essential  skills  and  knowledge  related  to  English  language 
development,  specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English,  and  content 
instruction  delivered  in  the  pupils’  primary  languages.  .......  Section  44253.1 

     

The  Legislature  directed  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  to  issue 
certificates  authorizing  the  holders  to  provide  certain  services  to  limited-English  proficient 
pupils.  Section  44253.3  et  seq.  Teachers  were  thus  enabled  to  obtain  what  became  known  as 

  

*  BCAD  and  CLAD  credentials.  Those  with  CLAD  credentials  were  qualified  to  provide 

instruction  for  English  language  development  (instruction  designed  specifically  for  limited- 
English-proficient  pupils  to  develop  their  listening,  speaking,  reading,  and  writing  skills  in 
English)  and  to  deliver  specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English 
(instruction  in  a  subject  area,  delivered  in  English,  that  is  specially  designed  to  meet  the 
needs  of  limited-English-proficient  pupil). 

Those  with  BCLAD  credentials  were  authorized  to  provide  the  services  a  CLAD 

certificated  teacher  could.  Additionally,  BCLAD  holders  were  authorized  to  provide  content 
instruction  delivered  in  the  primary  language  (instruction  in  a  subject  area  delivered  in  the 
primary  language  of  the  pupil)  and  instruction  for  primary  language  development  (instruction 
designed  to  develop  a  pupil's  listening,  speaking,  reading,  and  writing  skills  in  the  primary 
language  of  the  pupil.) 

7. 

Two  years  later,  in  1994,  the  Legislature  found  that  additional  steps  should  be 

  

taken  to  mainstream  LEP  [Limited  English  Proficiency]  students.  The  Legislature  “found  and 
declared”  that  the  new  credentialing  system  including  CLAD  was  designed  to  provide  “equal 
educational  access  to  the  curriculum”  to  pupils  who  speak  limited  or  no  English  proficiency. 
(emphasis  added)  (Section  44253.10  Leg.  Intent.  The  Legislature  found  that  the  trend  toward 
a  more  culturally  diverse  population  will  continue  at  a  rising  pace.  The  Legislature  declared 
the  CLAD  certification  program  was  providing  for  the  preparation  and  credentialing  of 
teachers  for  LEP  [Limited  English  Proficiency]  students.  However,  the  Legislature  found 
that  the  CLAD  certification  program  was  not  meeting  immediate  needs.  It  found; 

For  the  near  future,  there  is  a  shortage  of  teachers  who  will  meet  the  educational 
requirements  of  the  CLAD  certificates.  However,  there  is  an  abundance  of  LEP 
pupils  who  need  trained  and  competent  teachers.  In  appreciation  of  these  current 
circumstances,  and  as  an  alternative  to  the  CLAD  certificate  program  for  a  limited  | 
duration  to  efficiently  and  quickly  generate  a  sufficient  number  of  experienced, 
competent  teachers  to  provide  equal  educational  access  for  the  large  school  age 
population  of  LEP  pupils  in  this  state,  the  Legislature  hereby  enacts  Section  44253.10 
of  the  Education  Code.  (emphasis  added) 

8. 

Section  44253.10  of  the  Education  Code  provides  in  pertinent  part, 

(a)  A  teacher  with  a  basic  teaching  credential  may  be  assigned  to  provide  specially 
designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English,  as  defined  in  subdivision  (b)  of 
Section  44253.2,  to  limited-English-proficient  pupils  only  if  the  following  conditions 
are  met: 

(1)  The  teacher,  as  of  January  1,  1999,  is  a  permanent  employee  of  a  school  district, 

a  county  office  of  education,  or  a  school  administered  under  the  authority  of  the 
Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction,  or  was  previously  a  permanent  employee  and 
then  was  employed  in  any  California  public  school  district  within  39  months  of  the 
previous  permanent  status,  or  has  been  employed  in  a  school  district  with  an  average

  

daily  attendance  of  not  more  than  250  for  at  least  two  years. 

(2)  The  teacher  completes  45  clock  hours  of  staff  development  in  methods  of 

specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English  prior  to  January  1,  2005. 
(emphasis  added)  ......... 

(c)  The  staff  development  may  be  sponsored  by  any  school  district,  county  office  of 

education,  or  regionally  accredited  college  or  university  that  meets  the  standards 
included  in  the  guidelines  established  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  or  any  organization 
that  meets  those  standards  and  is  approved  by  the  commission.  Any  equivalent  three 
semester  unit  or  four  quarter  unit  class  may  be  taken  by  the  teacher  at  a  regionally 
-  accredited  college  or  university  to  satisfy  the  staff  development  requirement  described 
in  either  subdivision  (a)  or  (d),  or  both.  Once  the  commission  has  made  a 
determination  that  a  college  or  university  class  is  equivalent,  no  further  review  of  the 
class  shall  be  required  pursuant  to  paragraph  (5)  of  subdivision  (b),  regardless  of  the 
date  of  the  initial  review. 

(d)(1)  A  teacher  who  completes  the  staff  development  described  in  subdivision (a) 

shall  be  awarded  a  certificate  of  completion  of  staff  development  in  methods  of 
specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English. 

(2)  A  teacher  who  completes  the  staff  development  described  in  subdivision  (a) may 

provide  specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English,  as  defined  in 
subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44253.2,  and  English  language  development,  as  defined  in 
subdivision  (a)  of  Section  44253.2,  in  any  departmentalized  teaching  assignment 
consistent  with  the  authorization  of  the  teacher's  basic  credential.  This  authorization 
also  applies  to  teachers  who  completed  the  required  staff  development  before  the 
effective  date  of  the  amendments  made  to  this  section  by  the  act  adding  this 
authorization. 

(3)  A  teacher  who  completes  the  staff  development:described  in  subdivision  (a)  may 

not  be  assigned  to  provide  content  instruction  in  the  pupil's  primary  language,  as 
defined  in  subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44253.2. 

(4)  A  teacher  who  completes  the  staff  development  described  in  subdivision  (a)  may 

be  assigned  to  provide  instruction  for  English  language  development,  as  defined  in 
subdivision  (a)  of  Section  44253.2,  in  a  self-contained  classroom  under  either  of  the 
following  circumstances: 

       

(A)  The  teacher  has  taught  for  at  least  nine  years  in  California  public  schools, 
certifies  that  he  or  she  has  had  experience  or  training  in  teaching  limited-English- 
proficient  pupils,  and  authorizes  verification  by  the  entity  that  issues  the  certificate  of 
completion.  The  teacher  shall  be  awarded  a  certificate  of  completion  in  methods  of 
instruction  for  English  language  development  in  a  self-contained  classroom. 

  

10 

  

(B)  The  teacher  has  taught  for  less  than  nine  years  in  California  public  schools,  or 
has  taught  for  at  least  nine  years  in  California  public  schools  but  is  unable  to  certify 
that  he  or  she  has  had  experience  or  training  in  teaching  limited-English-proficient 
pupils,  but  has,  within  three  years  of  completing  the  staff  development  described  in 
subdivision  (a),  completed  an  additional  45  hours  of  staff  development,  including 
specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English  and  English  language 
development  training,  as  set  forth  in  the  guidelines  developed  pursuant  to  subdivision 
(b).  Upon  completion  of  this  additional  staff  development,  the  teacher  shall  be 
awarded a  certificate  of  completion  in  methods  of  instruction  for  English  language 
development  in  a  self-contained  classroom. 

(e)  During  the  period  in  which  a  teacher  is  pursuing  the  training  specified  in 

- 
paragraph  (2)  of  subdivision  (a)  or  subdivision  (d),  or  both,  including  the  period  for 
the  assessment  and  awarding  of  the  certificate,  the  teacher  may  be  provisionally 
assigned  to  provide  instruction  for  English  language  development,  as  defined  in 
subdivision  (a)  of  Section  44253.2,  or  to  provide  specially  designed  content 
instruction  delivered  in  English,  as  defined  in  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44253.2. 

(f)(1)  A  teacher  who  completes  the  staff  development  with  any  provider  specified  in 

subdivision  (c),  and  who  meets  the  requirements  of  subdivision  (a)  or  (d)  for  a 
certificate  of  completion  of  staff  development  in  methods  of  specially  designed 
content  instruction  delivered  in  English  or  English  language  development  in a  self- 
contained  classroom,  or  both,  shall  be  issued  the  certificate  or  certificates. 

~ 

(2)  A  teacher  who  completes  a  staff  development  program  in  methods  of  specially 
designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English  or  English  language  development  in 
a  self-contained  classroom,  or  both,  who  has  been  determined  by  the  commission  to- 
meet  the  applicable  guidelines  and  standards,  pursuant  to  paragraph  (5)  of  subdivision 
(b),  shall  receive  a  certificate  or  certificates  of  completion  from  the  commission , 

i 

(3)  veeeeee 
(g)  The  certificate  of  completion  is  valid  in  all  California  public  schools.  A  teacher 

who  has  been  issued  a certificate  of  completion  may  be  assigned  indefinitely  to 
provide  the  instructional  services  named  on  the  certificate  in  any  school  district, 
county  office  of  education,  or  school  administered  under  the  authority  of  the 
Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction. 

(h)  oe... 
(i)  The  governing  board  of  each  school  district  shall  make  reasonable  efforts  to 
provide  limited-Enelish-proficient  pupils  in  need  of  English  language  development 
instruction  with  teachers  who  hold  appropriate  credentials,  language  development 
specialist  certificates,  or  crosscultural  language  and  academic  development 
certificates  that  authorize  English  language  development  instruction.  ...... 
(emphasis  added) 

. 

11

9. 

Section  44253.10  and  its  Legislative  Intent  support  respondents’  position  that 

the  District  has  not  demonstrated  a  specific  need  to  skip  ELL  certified  teachers.  Section 
44253.10  provides  that  the  District  may  provisionally  assign  teachers  to  provide  English 
Language,  Development  instruction  during  the  period  in  which  a  teacher  is  pursuing  the 
training  for  certification.  The  District  has  not  considered  retaining  the  more  senior  teachers 
who  are  engaged  in  coursework  to  obtain  their  ELL  certificate.  Mr.  Vaczovsky  testified  that 
the  District  did  not  exempt  from  layoff  those  teachers  who  are  in  training  for  certification  but 
who  have  not  yet  obtained  their  certification.  The  District  has  thus  not  complied  with  section 
44955’s  dictate  that  “The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such 
a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
_  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  The  District  cannot  show  a  need  to  skip  all  ELL 
certificate  holders,  regardless  of  seniority,  without  first  skipping  senior  teachers  in  the 
process  of  getting  their  ELL  certificates.  These  senior  teachers  may  be  reassigned  pursuant 
to  section  44955  to  ELL  classrooms. 

Section  44325.10  provides  that  the  Board  shall  make  reasonable  efforts  to  provide 
limited-English-proficient  pupils  in  need  of  English  language  development  instruction  with 
teachers  who  hold  appropriate  credentials,  language  development  specialist  certificates,  or 
crosscultural  language  and  academic  development  certificates  that  authorize  English 
language  development  instruction.  Contrary  to  the  District’s  assertions  at  hearing,  the 
Legislature  does  not  require  school  Districts  to  place  each  English  Language  Learner  with  an 
ELL  teacher.  The  Board  must  make  reasonable  efforts  to  accomplish  this  goal.  Termination 
of  senior  teachers  from  employment  in  favor  of junior  teachers  who  hold  ELL  certificates  is 
an  extreme  remedy  and  far  exceeds  a  “reasonable  effort”.  The  District  has  made  reasonable 
efforts  by  providing  a  training  program,  incentives  and  support  to  teachers  pursuing  ELL 
certification.  The  District  has  not  shown  a  need  to  terminate  senior  teachers  when  the 
applicable  statute  does  not  make  it  mandatory  that  each  ELL  student  be  provided  an  ELL 
teacher. 

Finally,  section  44325.10  permits  the  District  to  reassign  teachers  who  have  been 
issued a  certificate  of  completion  to  any  school  district  or  school  administered  under  the 
authority  of  the  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction.  The  District  provided  evidence  that  it 
did  not  consider  reassignment  of  teachers  in  making  layoff  detérminations  because  of  the 
disruption  that  would  ensue.  However,  the  Legislature  clearly  contemplated  that 
reassignment  would  be  necessary  to  meet  the  crisis  schools  face.  A  District  cannot 
demonstrate  a  “specific  need”  to  retain  junior  employees  to  meet  ELL  teaching  needs 
without  first  having  considered  reassignments  in  order  to  meet  that  need. 

 

10. 

Additionally,  it  is  clear  from  section  44253.10  and  its  Legislative  intent  that 

the  Legislature  considered  the  problem  of  increasing  numbers  of  English  Language  Learners 
and  enacted  statutes  designed  to  quickly  qualify  teachers  to  address  some  of  the  pupils’ 
needs.  If  the  Legislature  had  determined  that  the  problem  was  so  great  that  it  needed  to 
retain  every  ELL  teacher,  it  had  the  opportunity  to  amend  section  44955  to  allow  junior 
teachers  to  displace  senior  ones  in  the  event  of  a  layoff.  The  Legislature  did  not  do  so. 

  

      

12 

* 

11. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions,  the  District  did  not 

demonstrate  a  specific  need  for  ELL  personnel,  as  required  by  section  44955  (d).  The 
evidence  is  also  persuasive  that  the  District  did  not  establish  that  ELL  is  a  specific  course  or 
course  of  study,  as  identified  in  section  44955  (d).  The  ELL  program,  as  delineated  in 
section  44253.10  is  a  method  of  providing  English  Language  Learners  with  “access  to  the 
[public  school]  curriculum”.  Teachers  must  have  forty  five  hours  of  training  (staff 
development).  Teachers  are  trained  in  methods  and  techniques  designed  to  bring  the  English 
language  curriculum  to  these  pupils.  The  ELL  teachers  are  not  required  to  acquire  a  foreign 
language  or  to  demonstrate  competency  in  foreign  language.  They  are  not  required  to  deliver 
instruction  in  the  pupil’s  language.  The  Legislature  has  set  this  special  certification  program 
to  “sunset”  in  January  of  2005,  thereby  foreclosing  additional  teachers  from  obtaining  this 
type  of  credential.  The  exigent  and  limited  nature  of  ELL  certification  supports  respondents’ 
position  that  ELL  teachers  do  not  provide  a  course  or  a  course  of  study,  but  rather  provide 
students  with  tools  to  facilitate  their  mainstreaming  into  the  regular  course  of  study  offered 
by  the  District. 

12. 

The  court  of  appeal  in  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  139  Cal.  App.  3d 
567,  considered  the  application  of  an  earlier  version  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  That 
section  was  amended  in  1983  to  include,  among  other  things,  subdivision  (d)  relating  to 
deviation  from  the  seniority  order.  Alexander  is  not  applicable  herein.  However,  that  court 
acknowledged  a  principal  of  fairness  which  is  equally  applicable  here.  The  court 
acknowledged  a  legislative  mandate  to  provide  bilingual  education,  but  added: 

Employment  of  new  teachers  with  bilingual  ability  and  gradual,  prospective 
amendment  of job  descriptions  to  include  language  skills  may  be  a  proper  means  of 
creating  district-wide  bilingualism.  However,  presently  employed  teachers  hired  as 
monolingual  teachers,  who  are  otherwise  competent,  may  not  be  discharged  under 
these  conditions  merely  because  more  junior  employees  have  achieved  passing  grades 
from  a  committee  of  bilingual  teachers. 

In  this  case,  the  District  seeks  to  discharge  other  wise  competent  teachers  who  were 

hired  without  the  necessity  of  an  ELL  certificate  and  retain  junior  teachers  who  have 
completed  forty  five  hours  of  staff  development  and  thus  secured  an  ELL  certificate. 
Moreover,  the  District  seeks  to  do  this  without  sufficient  evidence  that  the  needs  of  the 
District  for  a  course  or  course  of  study  require  such  Draconian  measures.  The  District’s 
teachers  are  acquiring  ELL  certificates  or  similar  credentials,  perhaps  not  at  the  pace  the 
District  would  prefer.  However,  the  District’s  progress  and  the  legislative  provisions  for 
obtaining  ELL  certificates  demonstrate  that  there  are  avenues  less  punitive  than  terminating 
teachers  to  accomplish  the  goal  of  mainstreaming  English  Language  Learners  into  the 
schools.  The  District  has  shown  that  a  combination  of  encouragement  and  positive 
incentives  can  quickly  swell  the  ranks  of  certificated  employees  with  such  special  skills, 
without  the  necessity  of  discharging  more  senior  teachers  in  an  economic  layoff. 

13

  

13. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide 

notice  to  respondents  Elizabeth  Riley,  Amy  Peters,  Jessica  Stinson,  Stephanie  Fadelli, 
Wendy  Dunham,  Jennifer  Ikemiyagi,  Kim  Kaylor,  Christina  Riddock,  Jan  Howsden,  Julie 
Sill,  Norm  DePonte,  and  Cindy  Morris,  (each  1FTE)  and  Steven  Mikesell  (.33  FTE)  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Such  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  identified  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
‘required  for  the  2004-2005  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services 

Dated  Al 

25  Boo 

bald 

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

     

  

14 

