BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
WEST  HILLS  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
FRESNO  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  NO.  L2004040031 

TOM  WINTERS  and  LINDA 
AMAYA-GUENON, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2004,  in  Coalinga,  California. 

Sue  Ann  Cercone,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  West  Hills  Community  College 

District. 

Wesley  T.  Green,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents. 

Respondent  Linda  Amaya-Guenon  appeared  for  the  hearing.  Respondent  Tom 

Winters  did  not  appear  for  the  hearing  despite  receiving  notice  of  the  time  and  place  of  the 
hearing.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Amaya-Guenon  was  withdrawn  pursuant  to  a 

stipulation  between  Respondent  Amaya-Guenon  and  West  Hills  Community  College 
District. 
Amaya-Guenon. 

Therefore,  no  findings  or  legal  conclusions  will  be  made  concerning  Respondent 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  22,  2003. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Frank  Gornick,  Chancellor  of  the  West  Hills  Community  College  District 

(“District),  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity.

2.  At  all  relevant  times,  Respondent  Tom  Winters  (“Respondent  Winters”)  has  been 

employed  by  the  District  as  a  faculty  employee. 

3.  On  March  8,  2004,  Chancellor  Gornick  recommended  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  of 
the  District  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondent  Winters,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections 
87740  and  87743,  that  his  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004/2005  school  year. 

4.  On  March  8,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution  No. 

PS-15  directing  Complainant  to  initiate  procedures  to  eliminate  two  (2)  Full-Time  Equivalent 
(FTE)  faculty  positions  in  the  Title  V  Bridge  Program  and  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2004/05  school  year. 

5.  On  March  9,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743, 

Chancellor  Gornick  gave  written  notice  to  Respondent  Winters  of  the  Chancellor’s 
recommendation  to  the  Board,  and  of  the  Board’s  resolution.  The  written  notice  set  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing 
the  faculty  employees  by  two  (2)  FTE  positions  in  the  Title  V  Bridge  Program. 

6.  Respondent  Winters  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  him  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

7.  On  April  2,  2004,  Chancellor  Gornick  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against 
Respondent  Winters.  The  Accusation  along  with  the  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  Respondent  Winters. 

8.  Respondent  Winters  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

9.  The  Title  V  Bridge  Program  is  funded  by  a  grant  which  is  scheduled  to  expire  in 

September  2004.  Although  the  District  is  attempting  to  obtain  funding  for  the  program,  there 
is  no  guarantee  that  said  funding  will  be  available  for  the  2004/2005  school  year. 

10.  The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 
(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials, 
and  authorizations. 

11.  The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  "bumping" 

list  of  employees  currently  assigned  in  various  services.  The  District  then  determined 
whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to 
"bump"  other  employees. 

12.  Respondent  Winters  has  exercised  his  “bumping  rights”  and  has  been  reassigned 

by  the  District  to  another  position  for  the  ensuing  school  year.

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

87740  and  87743  were  met. 

2.  The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  PS-15  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  87740  and  87743.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743. 

3.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 

the  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District  identified  the  faculty 
employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be  discontinued. 

4. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

5. 

A  faculty  employee  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondent  Winters  that  his  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  Title  V  Bridge  Program  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the  elimination  of 
two  (2)  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  said  program. 

2.  The  West  Hills  Community  College  District  shall  honor  any  “bumping  rights”  that 
have  been  properly  exercised  by  Respondent  Winters  and  shall  reassign  Respondent  Winters 
to  a  position  wherein  he  is  qualified  serve  that  is  currently  held  by  an  employee  less  senior  to 
Respondent  Winters. 

Dated: 

  

  HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

