BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
MARTINEZ  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff  of: 

Certificated  Employees, 

OAH  No.  N2004030296 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  20,  2004,  in  Martinez,  California. 

Elizabeth  B.  Mori,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal  Services, 

represented  the  Martinez  Unified  School  District. 

Dale  L.  Brodsky  of  Beeson,  Tayer  &  Bodine  represented  all  the  respondents,  of  whom 

John  Buschiazzo,  Joan  Dakin,  Kristen  Holmberg,  Amilia  Maggi  and  Jan  Robertson  were 
present  at  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  20,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dan  White  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  Super- 

intendent  of  the  Martinez  Unified  School  District  (District). 

2. 

Respondents  are  listed  on  Appendix  A,  attached  hereto  and  by  this  reference 

incorporated  herein.  They  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2004,  pursuant  to  the  recommendation  of  Superintendent  White, 

the  District’s  Board  of  Education  (Board)  adopted  Resolution  No.  2004-11  reducing  or 
discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  Superintendent  to  send  approp- 
riate  notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05 
school  year. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  District  Director  of  Personnel  Services  Robert 

Thompson  gave  written  notice  to  27  certificated  employees,  including  the  21  respondents,  of  

the  recommendation  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year. 
Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

© 

5. 

Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
terminating  their  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  An  accusation  was  served  on  respon- 
dents,  all  of  whom  are  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  notices  of  defense.  All  prehearing  juris- 
dictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds 

of  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year: 

SERVICES 
Secondary  Counselor 
Secondary  Math 
Secondary  English 
Secondary  Social  Science/History 
Secondary  Physical  Science 
Secondary  General  Science 
Secondary  Physical  Education 
Secondary  Art 
French 
Spanish 
Secondary  Industrial  Arts 
AVID 
Elementary  PE  Specialists 
Elementary  Science  Specialists 
Elementary  Music  Specialists 
K-5  Multiple  Subject 
PAR  Consulting  Teacher 

TOTAL 

FTE! 
1.0 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
1.0 
4 
2 
2 
4 
4 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.0 
_2 
28.2 

7. 

8. 

Sonia  Ryan  and  Sandra  Swidler. 

By  the  time  of  the  hearing,  the  District  had  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  sent  to 

The  District  has  taken  into  account  all  positively  assured  attrition. 

i 

9, 

For  the  2003-04  school  year  there  are  16  certificated  employees  on  full  or 

partial  leaves  of  absence  totaling  7.7  FTE.  In  determining  how  many  layoff  notices  to  issue, 
the  District  assumed  all  these  employees  would  return  from  leave  next  year,  since  they  have 
the  right  to  do  so. 
District  will  rehire  to  fill  the  vacancies. 

If  some  employees  extend  their  leave  to  the  2004-05  school  year  the 

  

"  Full-time  equivalent  positions.

    

  
  

10. 

Ina  March  8,  2004  letter  to  the  “School  Community,”  Superintendent  White 
discussed  the  financial  problems  facing  school  districts  statewide  and  the  budget  shortfall  in 
the  District.  He  stated,  in  pertinent  part: 

In  the  Martinez  Unified  School  District,  we  have  already  made 
some  tough  budget  cuts.  During  the  past  couple  of  years,  we 
have  made  as  many  cuts  away  from  the  classroom  as  possible. 
Last  spring,  for  example,  we  cut  $1.7  million  from  the  district’s 
operating  budget.  Even  with  the  passage  of  Proposition  57,  we 
are  presently  faced  with  needing  to  cut  another  $600,000  for 
2004-2005.  At  this  time,  finding  cuts  away  from  the  classroom 
has  become  increasingly  more  difficult.  We  have  no  choice  but 
to  consider  cuts  that  are  closer  to  the  classroom. 

It  is  important  for  us  to  balance  our  budget  in  Martinez.  Our 
expenses  need  to  not  exceed  our  income,  and  at  the  present  time, 
expenses  do  exceed  income.  During  the  current  year,  even  with 
the  cuts  we  have  made,  we  are  spending  in  excess  of  $100,000 
more  than  we  receive,  and  next  year,  this  gap  grows  to  over 
$600,000.  ... 

Robert  Thompson  explained  that  $600,000  was  a  “ballpark”  estimate  at  that  time,  but 
the  District  has  since  learned  that  the  cost  of  employee  benefits  may  go  up  20%  or  30%  next 
year  instead  of  the  10%  budgeted.  The  District  now  pays  approximately  $2  million  per  year 
for  benefits,  so  a  10%  increase  amounts  to  about  $200,000.  For  this  reason  Thompson 
believes  the  budget  shortfall  for  the  2004-05  school  year  could  be  as  high  as  $1  million. 
Although  the  District  is  considering  cuts  to  classified  personnel  and  services,  Thompson 
maintains  that  previous  reductions  in  these  areas  have  left  little  room  for  further  cuts. 
Closing  the  budget  gap  will  be  largely  accomplished  through  the  layoff  of  certificated 
employees. 

11. 

Respondents  assert  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  cut  28.2  FTE  in  services  to 

address  the  budget  shortfall  for  next  year.  By  respondents’  calculation  (using  the  District’s 
numbers),  the  layoffs  will  save  the  District  between  $900,000  and  $1  million,  almost  the 
entire  amount  of  the  worst-case  scenario  $1  million  shortfall.  Respondents  contend  that  by 
imposing  an  unnecessarily  large  burden  of  cuts  on  certificated  employees  the  District  has 
acted  arbitrarily  and  capriciously  and  its  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  should  be 
disallowed. 

Respondents’  contention  is  without  merit.  In  determining  how  to  allocate  its 
resources,  a  school  district  is  given  broad  discretion  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds 
of  services.  Reasons  for  such  service  cuts  may  be  other  than  financial,  as  long  they  are 
“related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44949.) 

  

*  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

-3-

  

Although  reasonable  minds  may  differ  about  how  the  District  should  allocate  its  resources 
and  address  its  fiscal  problems,  the  District’s  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set 
forth  in  Finding  6  is  related  to  the  overall  welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils.  The  District 
has  not  acted  arbitrarily  or  capriciously. 

12. 

The  District  plans  to  eliminate  for  the  2004-05  school  year  the  physical 

education,  science  and  music  specialists  who  currently  teach  those  subjects  to  elementary 
school  students.  These  specialty  classes  afford  the  students’  classroom  teachers  a  preparation 
period.  The  collective  bargaining  agreement  now  in  effect  provides  for  this  “prep”  period. 
The  District  has  not  formulated  a  plan  for  how  physical  education,  science  and  music  will  be 
taught  next  year,  but  it  recognizes  that  any  plan  that  requires  classroom  teachers  to  teach 
these  subjects  and  give  up  their  prep  period  will  entail  negotiation  with  their  union. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  elimination  of  elementary  specialists  should  be  disallowed 
as  contrary  to  public  policy  because  the  District  will  have  to  violate  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement  to  effectuate  the  cuts.  This  argument  is  rejected.  It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this 
proceeding  to  address  possible  violations  of  the  collective  bargaining  agreement. 

13. 

Respondent  John  Buschiazzo  is  one  of  the  elementary  music  specialists  whose 
positions  will  be  eliminated  next  year.  He  has  taught  music  in  the  District  since  1988,  and  he 
had  nine  years  of  experience  teaching  music  before  he  came  to  the  District.  Buschiazzo 
testified  that  music  is  a  core  subject  under  the  State  Framework  (and  the  District  Framework 
adapted  from  the  State  Framework)  and  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  program.  The  State 
Framework  and  the  District  Framework  apparently  state  that  music  should  be  taught  by  a 
credentialed  music  teacher,  only  one  of  whom  will  be  left  in  the  District  next  year.  One 
music  teacher  can  not  effectively  teach  music  to  all  students  in  the  District.  In  Buschiazzo’s 
opinion,  music  instruction  meets  the  creative  and  expressive  needs  of  children  and  is  an 
essential  part  of  a  complete  education.  The  District  has  not  decided  how  music  instruction 
will  be  provided  next  year,  but  the  frequency  of  this  service  will  probably  be  reduced. 

Respondents  challenge  the  District’s  elimination  of  elementary  music  specialists, 

claiming  that  the  District  will  be  unable  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  students  in  this  important 
subject  area.  This  challenge  is  rejected.  While  the  quality  of  music  instruction  will 
undoubtedly  suffer  without  specialists  like  Buschiazzo,  the  law  does  not  require  the  District 
to  employ  credentialed  music  teachers  to  provide  such  instruction.  It  is  within  the  District’s 
discretion  to  discontinue  the  services  of  elementary  music  specialists  and  provide  music 
instruction  in  a  different  manner. 

14. 

One  of  the  services  being  discontinued  is  the  .2  FTE  position  of  the  PAR  (Peer 

Assistance  and  Review)  Consulting  Teacher.  The  California  Peer  Assistance  and  Review 
Program  for  Teachers,  established  by  statute  in  1999  (§  44500,  et  seq.),  provides  state  funds 
to  school  districts  that  participate  in  the  program.  The  PAR  program  provides  mentoring  and 
remediation  to  any  teacher  who  has  received  an  unsatisfactory  performance  evaluation  and  to 
_  any  teacher  who  requests  assistance.  Respondent  Jan  Robertson  currently  holds  the  position 

       

of  PAR  Consulting  Teacher,  reporting  to  Robert  Thompson,  in  addition  to  her  duties  as  an 
elementary  teacher  in  a  .4  FTE  position.  During  this  school  year  there  have  been  no  teachers 
who  required  or  requested  PAR  services,  but  as  the  PAR  Consulting  Teacher  Robertson  also 
coordinates  activities  for  the  BTSA  (Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment)  program 
and  serves  as  District  Liaison  with  the  County  Office  of  Education  for  BTSA.  She  has 
trained  seven  teachers  to  be  mentors  and  she  herself  mentors  two  beginning  teachers.  Other 
teachers  need  release  time  to  act  as  mentors,  but  because  Robertson  teaches  part-time  she  is 
able  to  arrange  her  schedule  so  her  mentoring  duties  do  not  take  her  away  from  her  class- 
room.  (She  ends  up  working  more  than  the  .6  FTE  for  which  she  is  paid.)  Robertson 
believes  that  the  BTSA  funding  received  through  the  County  Office  of  Education,  along  with 
a  $7,500  grant  she  obtained  from  the  Johnson  Fund  this  year,  covered  the  District’s  costs  for 
her  .2  FTE  PAR  Consulting  Teacher  position.  The  BTSA  funding  is  assured  for  next  year, 
but  the  application  to  renew  the  Johnson  Fund  grant  is  still  pending  along  with  a  number  of 
other  grant  applications  Robertson  has  submitted.  The  Johnson  Fund  grant  requires  that  the 
District  have  a  consulting  teacher.  It  was  not  established  that  BTSA  funding  requires  that 
there  be  a  consulting  teacher.  Robertson  testified  that  if  the  PAR  Consulting  Teacher 
position  is  eliminated  the  PAR  program  could  not  be  conducted  as  it  now  is  done. 

Robert  Thompson  testified  that  if  the  PAR  program  mandates  are  not  eliminated  next 

year,  as  he  has  heard  they  may  be,  he  will  perform  the  required  services.  It  was  not  clear 
whether  he  meant  that  he  would  act  as  a  consulting  teacher  and  prepare  peer  review  reports 
for  teachers  receiving  PAR  services.  (Section  44501  sets  forth  qualifications  for  a  consulting 
teacher  that  Thompson  might  not  meet.)  In  any  event,  the  District  could  have  a  consulting 
teacher  available  to  provide  PAR  services  without  maintaining  a  separate  position  for  this 
teacher.  Thompson  considers  it  a  luxury  to  have  a  PAR  consulting  teacher  released  for  those 
duties  on  an  ongoing  basis. 

Respondents  challenge  the  elimination  of  the  .2  FTE  PAR  Consulting  Teacher 
position  on  the  basis  that  this  position  reflects  the  District’s  commitment  to  statutory 
requirements  for  the  PAR  program.  And  for  very  little  cost  to  the  District  the  PAR 
Consulting  Teacher  provides  important  services  to  beginning  teachers  and  other  teachers  in 
need  of  assistance.  While  it  seems  clear  that  the  District  is  getting  a  real  bargain  having  Jan 
Robertson  in  this  position,  elimination  of  the  position  will  not  prevent  the  District  from 
meeting  PAR  program  mandates.  It  is  within  the  District’s  discretion  to  eliminate  the  PAR 
Consulting  Teacher  position. 

, 

15. 

All  contentions  made  by  respondents  not  specifically  addressed  above  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

16. 

Nocertificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained 

by  the  District  to  perform  services  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 

render.  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955 > 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 

2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

DATED: 

yori  BA  2004 

NANCY  L/RASMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

@ 

  

 

RESPONDENTS 

Allen-Kirkhouse,  Dee 
Buschiazzo,  John 
Dakin,  Joan 
DeBritz,  Natalie 
Edgecomb,  Laurel 
Frazer,  Kathleen 
Galletti,  Pam 
Gliatto,  Rebecca 
Graziano,  Gina 
Holmberg,  Kristen 
Hunter,  Tracy 
Hussey,  Ryan 
Maggi,  Amilia 
Potter,  Joni 
Remy,  Brett 
Robertson,  Jan 
Rones,  Ronnie 
Ryan,  Sonia 
Stafford,  Sara 
Swidler,  Sandra 
Yunis,  Amy 

Appendix  A

