BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GARVEY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2004040260 

JANET  A.  HEIGHTLAND, 

Respondent. 

  

  

  

 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Timothy  S.  Thomas,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  4,  2004  at  Rosemead,  California. 

Daniel  E.  Wright,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Garvey  School  District 

(hereinafter  the  District). 

Glenn  Rothner,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Janet  A.  Heightland  (hereinafter 

respondent),  who  was  also  present. 

The  District  also  filed  an  Accusation  against  respondent  Kathryn  Contreras,  and  a 

hearing  as  to  her  proposed  dismissal  was  scheduled  for  the  same  day  and  time.  Ms. 
Contreras  did  not  attend,  and  during  the  hearing  her  counsel,  Mr.  Rothner,  withdrew  the 
Notice  of  Defense  on  her  behalf.  The  hearing  therefore  proceeded  as  against  Ms.  Heightland 
only. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  4,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Dr.  William  Loose,  District  Superintendent,  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official 

capacity. 

2.  The  District  operates  thirteen  schools,  including  11  elementary  schools  and  two 

intermediate  schools.  While  every  school  has  a  library,  their  daily  operations  are  handled  by 
teachers’  aides,  who  are  supervised  by  one  District  librarian.  Following  months  of  study  by 
his  staff,  the  District  Superintendent  recommended  that  the  Garvey  School  District  Board  of 
Education  eliminate  the  position  of  District  Library/Media  Teacher.  On  March  12,  2004  the 
governing  board  of  the  District  passed  Resolution  No.  03-04-33,  which  “resolved  that  it  shall 
be  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2003/2004  school  year  the  employment  of  full- 

  

time  equivalent  employee  positions  of  the  Garvey  School  District  as  a  result  of  the  above 
reduction  in  services.” 

3.  On  March  12,  2004  the  Superintendent  signed  a  letter  addressed  to  respondent  that 

notified  her  of  the  Board’s  decision  “that  your  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2004/2005  school  year.  This  recommendation  is  based  upon  the  following  reason  which 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  of  the  district: 

“Because  the  particular  kinds  of  services  listed  below  are  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  it  has  become  necessary  to  terminate  the  services 
of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  employees  who  perform  that  particular 
kind  of  service  in  the  district.  The  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  are: 

“Service 

Number  of  Full  Time 
Equivalent  Positions 

“District  Library/Media  Teacher 

1” 

4.  The  letter  was  served  on  the  members  of  the  governing  board  and  hand-delivered  to 

respondent  prior  to  March  15,  2004,  and  she  timely  requested  a  hearing.  On  or  about  April 
20,  2004  the  Superintendent  caused  an  Accusation  to  be  filed  with  the  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  and  respondent  executed  a  Notice  of  Defense  in  a  timely  fashion. 
Counsel  for  the  district  caused  a  Notice  of  Hearing  to  be  timely  served  on  respondent  for 
May  4,  2004. 

5.  Respondent  is  a  teacher  with  the  District  whose  original  hire  date  and  seniority  date 

are  September  1,  1972.  Respondent  served  the  District  as  an  elementary  grade  teacher  for 
many  years,  and  holds  a  lifetime  teaching  credential.  She  is  senior  to  literally  hundreds  of 
teachers  who  are  being  retained,  and  whose  positions  respondent  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  fill.  The  District  has  expressed  an  intention  to  offer  respondent  her  choice  of 
teaching  vacancies. 

6.  In  2000  respondent  assumed  her  current  duties  as  District  Library/Media  Teacher. 

Only  one  such  position  exists  in  the  District.  Respondent’s  duties  are  primarily  four: 
1)  Training  and  support  of  library  staff  in  the  installation  and  use  of  the  libraries’  software 
program  (which  requires  approximately  50%  of  her  time);  2)  Assessment  of  each  school’s 
needs,  and  the  formulation  and  delivery  of  recommendations  to  the  schools’  principals  for 
the  acquisition  of  books  and  materials  (25%);  3)  Services  related  to  the  drafting  and  revising 
of  the  District’s  library  plan  (10%);  and  4)  Reading  to  students  in  the  schools’  libraries,  and 
assisting  pupils  with  research  and,  generally,  how  to  use  their  libraries  (10%).  Other 
miscellaneous  responsibilities  occupy  the  remaining  5%  of  respondent’s  time. 

7.  On  February  12,  2004  the  Board  of  Education  for  the  District  instructed  its 

Superintendent  to  work  with  the  various  “stakeholders”  affected  by  a  statewide  “fiscal 
crisis,”  including  teachers.  Loose  wrote  to  all  employees  on  February  24,  2004  seeking  their

  

input  to  help  “identify  possible  school  configurations  and  consolidations”  in  order  to  avoid 
layoffs. 

8.  Deborah  Loob,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Instructional  Services,  is  respondent’s 

immediate  supervisor.  Loob,  who  testified  she  was  asked  by  the  Superintendent  to  “find 
ways  to  save,”  explored  a  number  of  options  that  included  expanding  the  duties  of  the 
District  Library/Media  Teacher  position.  Prior  to  Loob’s  employment,  the  District  had 
eliminated  an  administrative  position  that  had  previously  handled  the  ordering  of  textbooks 
for  the  District  (as  opposed  to  library  books  and  materials),  and  since  that  time  a  teacher  on 
special  assignment  has  assumed  those  duties.  That  teacher,  however,  must  be  paid  for  extra 
hours  and  extra  days,  as  an  administrator’s  workday  and  work  year  are  longer  than  a 
teacher’s  contractual  arrangement.  Loob  and  respondent  explored  the  possibility  of  the 
Library/Media  Teacher’s  position  assuming  textbook  ordering  responsibilities,  but 
respondent  balked  at  such  an  arrangement.  Loob  eventually  recommended  to  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  that  the  textbook  procurement  administrator’s  position 
be  filled  again,  that  the  libraries  be  operated  in  a  decentralized  manner  under  the  authority  of 
the  principals,  and  that  the  services  related  to  reading  to  students  at  the  various  libraries  by  a 
roving  librarian  be  eliminated.  The  technology  support  is  to  be  transferred  to  the  District’s 
technology  department.  In  these  ways  Loob  determined  the  Library/Media  Teacher  position 
could  be  eliminated. 

9.  Genaro  Alarcon,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources,  testified  that  he 

recommended  to  the  Superintendent  that  respondent’s  position  be  eliminated  due  to 
“budgetary  issues  and  a  decline  in  enrollment.”  Decline  in  enrollment,  Alarcon  pointed  out, 
has  been  dramatic.  From  an  historical  high  in  the  1991-1992  school  year  of  7,322  students, 
and  an  enrollment  of  6,936  as  recently  as  2000-2001,  the  enrollment  in  the  fourth  months  of 
2003-2004  was  6,427.  Recently  the  District  mailed  a  survey  to  parents  in  the  District 
describing  this  trend,  adding,  “The  challenge  of  declining  enrollment  facing  the  District  is 
compounded  by  the  fact  the  state  of  California  is  also  plagued  by  a  budget  crisis.  Potential 
impacts  to  the  operation  of  our  schools  may  be  severe  with  shrinking  financial  resources.  (A 
reduction  of  more  than  1.2  million  dollars  from  the  2004-05  state  revenue  may  be  expected 
due  a  decline  of  249  students  in  enrollment  from  2002-03  to  2003-04.)”  One  option 
discussed  in  the  District  and  mentioned  in  the  survey  is  the  possible  need  to  close  a  school 
next  year.  Alarcon  testified  that  declining  enrollment  is  “one  of  the  variables”  considered  in 
the  elimination  of  respondent’s  position. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1,  Respondent  challenges  the  District’s  action  to  eliminate  the  Library/Media  Teacher 

position  on  three  grounds.  First,  she  argues  that  the  District’s  actual  rationale  for  the 
reduction  in  services  is  a  decline  in  enrollment  or  average  daily  attendance  (ADA),  and  the 
District  failed  to  notify  her  of  that  fact  in  its  letter/notice  to  her  of  March  12,  2004.  Second, 
respondent  asserts  that  the  particular  kind  of  service  (PKS)  represented  by  her  position  is  not 
being  eliminated  at  all,  rather,  with  the  exception  of  the  10%  of  time  she  spends  reading  to 
students,  her  duties  are  merely  being  reassigned.  Therefore,  respondent  argues  that  any  order

  

sustaining  the  District’s  position  in  this  matter  should  be  limited  to  the  elimination  of  0.1 
full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  for  the  position  she  holds. 

2.  No  later  than  March  15  a  teacher  is  entitled  to  notice  from  the  employing  district  of 

its  intention  to  not  reemploy  the  teacher  for  the  following  school  year,  and  the  notice  must 
state  the  reasons  for  the  decision  not  to  reemploy.  (Education  Code  section  44949(a).) 
Respondent  here  contends  that  the  notice  to  her,  which  stated  as  the  reason  for  the  decision 
not  to  reemploy  her  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  in  a  particular  kind  of  service,  actually 
misrepresented  the  reason,  in  that  the  evidence  at  the  hearing  revealed  the  primary  reason  to 
be  a  decline  in  ADA.  Respondent  describes  as  “on  all  fours”  Karbach  v.  Board  of  Education 
of  the  Lawndale  School  District,  39  Cal.  App.  3d  355  (1974)  in  support  of  her  position.  In 
Karbach,  43  teachers  were  given  layoff  notices  for  the  sole  reason  of  a  decline  in  ADA. 
Since  ADA  had  declined  5.79%,  only  13  of  the  teachers  could  be  terminated  on  that  basis. 
The  hearing  officer  allowed  the  district  to  amend  its  accusation  to  add  reduction  in  PKS  as  an 
additional  reason  for  the  terminations,  and  the  district  thereafter  adopted  the  decision  of  the 
ALJ  allowing  the  termination  of  the  additional  30  teachers  for  PKS  reductions.  The  court 
held  the  district  board  had  no  power  to  terminate  the  teachers  based  upon  the  March  15 
notices  that  did  not  recite  the  actual  reason  for  the  attempted  terminations.  But  in  our  matter 
while  it  may  be  true  that  a  decline  in  enrollment  was  an  important  factor  in  the  decision  to 
eliminate  respondent’s  position,  a  fair  interpretation  of  the  evidence  is  that  a  declining  ADA 
is  one  of  two  main  factors  precipitating  the  decision.  The  other  is  described  in  general  as 
“budgetary  issues”  and  “state  fiscal  crisis”  and  is  consistently  referred  to  in  the  testimony  of 
the  decision  makers  and  the  letters  that  went  out  to  parents  and  employees  during  the  months 
that  District  staff  was  seeking  input  into  solutions  sought  by  the  Superintendent.  No 
authority  is  cited  or  found  that  requires  the  District  to  utilize  a  statutory  ground  that  is 
somehow  proportional  or  weighted  to  the  actual  analysis  leading  to  the  decision  to  eliminate 
or  reduce  positions,  It  is  sufficient  that  the  District  specified  in  its  March  15  notice  the 
statutory  grounds  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  44955.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  of  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District,  116  Cal.  App.  3d  831, 
841  (1981).)  Unlike  respondents  in  Karbach,  respondent’s  position  herein  is  being 
eliminated,  at  least  in  substantial  part,  for  the  reason  stated  in  her  March  15  notice,  a 
reduction  in  a  particular  kind  of  service. 

3.  Respondent  next  argues  that  the  position  of  Library/Media  Teacher  is  not,  in  fact, 
being  eliminated  or  significantly  reduced.  Rather,  the  argument  goes,  her  duties  will  merely 
be  assumed  by  others,  and  under  the  authority  of  Santa  Clara,  supra,  a  PKS  allegedly  being 
eliminated  cannot  be  continued  by  having  the  services  performed  by  others  if  there  is  no 
difference  in  the  method  or  manner  of  delivery  of  the  services.  In  that  case,  the  district 
sought  to  lay  off  nurses  while  transferring  the  services  they  performed  (first  aid,  health 
instruction  and  child  abuse  complaints)  to  others.  Citing  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers 
Assoc.  v.  Abbott,  76  Cal.  App.  3d  796  (1978),  the  Santa  Clara  court  reaffirmed  that  “a 
district  may  not  dismiss  an  employee  pursuant  to  section  13447  [now  44955]  and  yet 
continue  the  identical  kind  of  service  and  position  held  by  the  terminated  employee.”  (Santa 
Clara  at  page  844.  Emphasis  added.)  The  court  affirmed  the  trial  court’s  determination  that 
the  health  care  positions  were  invalidly  eliminated,  pointing  out  that  the  district  offered  no

  

evidence  that  there  would  be  a  difference  in  the  method  or  manner  of  provision  of  the 
services.  (Santa  Clara,  supra,  at  page  844.)  Campbell  and  other  cases  are  the  source  of 
respondent’s  candid  admission  that  a  particular  kind  of  service  may  nevertheless  be 
eliminated  even  though  a  service  continues  to  be  offered  if  provided  in  a  different  manner  by 
the  district.  (Campbell,  supra,  at  page  812.)  Here,  unlike  in  Campbell,  substantial  evidence 
supports  the  conclusion  that  the  services  of  the  Library/Media  Teacher  would  either  be 
eliminated  (the  reading  function),  or  delivered  in  a  different  method  or  manner  (all  other 
duties).  The  decision  to  decentralize  the  function  of  respondent’s  position  as  a  roving 
librarian,  and  distribute  the  duties  to  13  principals  and  the  District  technology  department  is 
similar  to  the  changes  approved  by  the  court  in  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  District,  2  Cal.  2d 
770  (1934),  in  which  a  roving  art  instructor’s  duties  were  assumed  by  regular  teachers  at  the 
various  campuses.  (Davis  was  cited  with  approval  by  Campbell.) 

4.  Finally,  respondent  urges  that  if  an  order  is  issued  reducing  her  PKS  that  the  order 
be  to  reduce  the  service  by  only  0.1  FTE,  as  only  10%  of  her  services  (direct  student  contact) 
are  being  eliminated.  For  the  reasons  stated  in  Legal  Conclusion  3,  it  is  determined  that  the 
District  has  the  discretion  to  define  the  nature,  manner  and  method  of  the  delivery  of  services 
to  its  students,  and  may  eliminate  the  position  entirely.  Library/Media  Teacher  is  a  PKS  that 
may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
decision  to  eliminate  the  Library/Media  Teacher  PKS  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
of  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

5.  While  the  District  may  eliminate  the  position  of  Library/Media  Teacher,  it  may  not 
terminate  respondent,  who  is  senior  to  many  employees  being  retained  to  render  services  that 
respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Education  Code  section  44955.) 

ORDER 

1.  Insofar  as  the  Accusation  seeks  an  order  allowing  the  Garvey  School  District  to 

reduce  or  eliminate  the  position  of  Library/Media  Teacher,  it  is  sustained. 

2.  As  to  the  continued  employment  of  respondent  Janet  A.  Hightland,  the  Accusation 

is  not  sustained.  The  District  shall  offer  respondent  a  position  as  a  teacher  consistent  with 
her  credential  and  competence  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

DATED:  May  5,  2004 

  

TIMOTHY  S.  THOMAS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

