  

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES  OF  THE 
BARSTOW  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Lee  Ordway, 

OAH  No.  L2004020363 

Respondent 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  30,  2004  Administrative  Law  Judge  Ralph  B.  Dash,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Riverside,  California. 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Barstow  Community 

College  District  (“District”). 

Kate  Phillips,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Lee  Ordway. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing.  The  record  was 
left  open  until  May  17,  2004  for  the  filing  of  post-trial  briefs.  The  parties  stipulated 
that  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  must  issue  his  Proposed  Decision  by  no  later  than 
May  25,  2004,  and  the  District  had  until  June  1,  2004  to  make  its  Final  Decision. 
Post-trial  briefs  and  reply-briefs  were  timely  received  and  the  matter  was  deemed 
submitted  on  May  17,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  parties  stipulated  that  all  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  of 

Education  Code’  Sections  87740  and  87743  have  been  met. 

2.  Dr.  James  Meznek  is  the  President  of  the  District  and  made  the  Accusation 

in  his  official  capacity.  On  March  11,  2004,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District 

'  All  code  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified. 

  

  

 

adopted  a  resolution  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year.” 

Reduce  Computer  Science  Teaching  Services--1.0  FTE’ 

Reduce  Program  Coordinator/Instructor  Services--2.0  FTE 

Total  services  reduced--3.0  FTE 

2.  The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  1  are  particular  kinds  of  service  that  may 
be  reduced  within  the  meaning  of  Section  87743.  None  of  the  programs  or  classes  to 
be  eliminated  is  mandated  by  the  State  to  be  taught  at  a  community  college.  The 
decision  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  above  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
services  was  necessary  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
as  determined  by  the  Board  of  Trustees. 

3.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

services  that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

4,  During  the  current  school  year,  Respondent  has  been  working  60%  of  the 

time  teaching  computer  science,  and  40%  of  the  time  as  the  Chair  of  “Off- 
Campus/Online  Programs.  However,  his  teaching  position  was  100%  computer 
science. 

5.  The  District  presented  its  seniority  list  at  the  hearing.  Evidence  showed 

that  four  teachers,  including  Respondent,  were  hired  on  the  same  date,  September  13, 
2001.  One  of  these  teachers,  Wendy  Chisholm,  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render  the  same  teaching  service  (computer  science)  as  Respondent,  yet  is  listed  as 
being  senior  to  Respondent  for  purposes  of  these  proceedings.  The  seniority  rankings 
came  about  as  follows: 

On  January  28  and  29,  2002,  the  District  conducted  a  “lottery”  to  determine, 
with  respect  to  the  four  teachers  hired  on  the  same  date,  their  order  of  seniority.  The 
lottery  is  mandated  by  Sections  87413  and  87414.  The  lottery  was  conducted  by 
having  each  of  the  teachers  draw  a  “lot”  from  a  container,  the  lots  being  marked  “1”, 
“2”,  “3”and  “4”.  The  lottery  was  conducted  over  the  course  of  two  days.  Each  of  the 
teachers  was  not  present  as  the  lots  were  drawn;  rather  the  container  of  lots  was  hand 
carried  to  the  teacher’s  classroom  where  each  teacher  drew a  lot  separately.  Ms. 
Chisolm  drew  lot  “2”  and  Respondent  drew  lot  “4”.  Thus,  Ms.  Chisolm  was  ranked 
senior  to  Respondent. 

  

*  The  Board  of  Trustees  also  elected  not  to  renew  contracts  for  five  temporary  employees  who  also  taught 
computer  science  courses. 
3  Full  time  equivalent.

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code 

sections  87740  and  87743  were  met. 

2.  Respondent  contends  the  time  and  manner  in  which  the  seniority  lottery 

was  conducted  violated  the  relevant  sections  of  the  Education  Code;  that  the  District 
failed  to  correct  the  mistake  it  allegedly  made  in  the  manner  of  conducting  the  lottery, 
and  therefore  the  seniority  list  used  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  is  void. 

Section  87413  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  “In  case  two  or  more  employees 

accepted  employment  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  of  the  district  shall 
determine  the  order  of  employment  by  lots  drawn  by  the  employees  concerned...” 
Section  87414  provides,  “Every  academic  employee  who  first  rendered  paid  service 
on  the  same  date  shall  participate  in  a  single  drawing  to  determine  the  order  of 
employment...within  30  days  of  the  date  service  was  first  rendered  by  the  employee.” 
(emphasis  added) 

It  is  undisputed  the  lottery  was  not  conducted  within  the  30  day  requirement  of 
Section  87414  (employment  date  in  mid-August  of  2001  and  lottery  held  at  the  end  of 
January  2002).  Case  law  is  clear  that  the  District’s  failure  to  hold  the  lottery  within 
the  time  specified  in  Section  87414  does  not  make  it  invalid.  In  Compton  College 
Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Compton  Community  College  District,  (1980)  108 
Cal.App.  3d  437  held,  at  page  443,  “...the  30-day  time  period  in  Section  87414  was 
necessarily  intended  to  be  directory  rather  than  mandatory...Noncompliance  with  a 
directory  provision  does  not  result  in  invalidity  of  the  proceeding  or  action  taken...” 
Thus,  the  District’s  failure  to  timely  hold  the  lottery,  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence 
of  prejudice  (and  there  was  none  presented  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter)  does  not 
invalidate  the  lottery. 

Respondent  next  contends  that  the  manner  in  which  the  lottery  was  conducted 

was  not  a  “single  drawing”,  and  thus  invalid.  The  manner  in  which  the  lottery  was 
conducted  presents  the  potential  for  great  mischief  to  occur.  Unless  the  lots  are 
drawn  with  everyone  present,  the  lot  container  could  easily  be  “rigged”  so  as  to  pre- 
determine  the  outcome.  However,  there  was  no  evidence  presented  that  such  mischief 
did  occurred,  nor  can  it  be  determined  whether  the  manner  in  which  it  was  held  was, 
or  was  not,  a  “single  drawing”.  Each  teacher  drew  one  time;  there  was  not  a  second 
or  third  lottery  held  where  each  teacher  had  the  chance  to  draw  again.  Thus,  an 
argument  can  be  made  that  although  “drawings”  were  done  at  four  separate  times,  the 
entirety  of  the  draws  constituted  a  “single  drawing”  within  the  meaning  of  the  statute. 

While  no  published  authority  could  be  found  defining  the  term  “single 
drawing”,  the  facts  in  Compton,  supra,  are  instructive.  In  that  case,  seven  teachers 
were  hired  on  the  same  date.  The  seniority  lottery  there  was  conducted  on  two

separate  dates,  March  27  and  March  29,  1978.  Presumably,  some  lots  were  drawn  on 
one  date,  and  some  on  the  other.  Whether  the  teachers  were  all  present  at  the  time  of 
each  drawing  cannot  be  determined.  However,  the  possibility  of  tampering  with  the 
lots  was  just  as  great  there  as  here.  No  contention  was  made  that  holding  the  lottery 
on  two  separate  days  violated  Section  87414. 

Under  Evidence  Code  Section  664,  it  is  presumed  that  official  duty  has  been 

regularly  performed.  This  presumption  is  applicable  to  school  boards.  See  for 
example,  City  and  County  of  San  Francisco  v.  Cooper,  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  898.  This 
presumption,  which  includes  that  the  law  has  been  obeyed,  is  rebuttable  by  evidence 
to  the  contrary.  Carruth  v.  City  of  Madera,  (1965)  233  Cal.App.  2d  192.  There  was 
no  evidence  presented  that  the  lottery,  as  conducted  here,  violated  the  law,  other  than 
the  argument  that  the  term  “single  drawing”  means  that  all  teachers  must  be  present 
and  draw  lots  at  one  time.  No  evidence  or  convincing  legal  argument  was  made  that 
would  support  this  position  to  the  extent  the  presumption  of  Evidence  Code  Section 
664  was  rebutted. 

It  is  certainly  true  that  a  school’s  administrative  decisions  must  be  made  in  a 

manner  that  do  not  arbitrarily  infringe  on  employees’  rights  of  seniority  and 
reemployment.  See,  Balen  v.  Peralta  Junior  College  Dist.,  (1974)  11  Cal.  3d  821). 
No  evidence  was  presented  that  such  misconduct  occurred  here. 

  

ORDER 

The  District  may  give  notice  to  teacher/Respondent  Lee  Ordway  that  his 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the  reduction 
and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  service. 

DATED:  May  21,  2004 

  

RALPH  B.  DASH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

