BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LIVERMORE  VALLEY  JOINT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004030513 

© 

©} 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of: 

AUDREY  AMOS,  KIM  ANDERSON;  DOROTHY 
BEDRIN;  JAINEEN  BLOSS;  LYNDA  BREKKE; 
HARRIET  CAPITO;  JANNIE  DEILING;  GEORGE 
ENOS;  DANETTE  EVENS;  CHARLOTTE  FRENCH; 
LAURIE  GOMEZ;  MICHELLE  GONSALVAS; 
SHERRE  HALLAHAN;  HOLLY  HAMILTON;  JAY 
HENDRICK;  BARBARA  HOEFLER;  JESSICA 
HOLCK;  KATHLEEN  JONES;  KOREN 
KALOUSTIAN;  DEBORAH  KEESLING;  RONNA 
LAGIN;  ANDREW  LOCKHART;  KAREN  MARTIN; 
ELIZABETH  McCLELLAN;  KELLY  MOORE; 
CAROL  NESE-FORTE;  THU  HIEN  NGO;  MARSHA 
NISHIKAWA;  BETH  PETERSON;  CHRISTINE 
PYTLIK;  SHELLI  RHODES;  TERRI  ROBERTS; 
PATTY  SANTIN;  CAROLYN  SCARLETT;  PEGGY 
SOBRERO;  SAM  STEELE;  ERIN  SUMMERS; 
ANGELA  SWENSON;  JAMES  TAYLOR;  LESLIE 
WILLIAMS;  CARRIE  SENG,  CYNTHIA 
WOODWARD,  JENNIFER  BLUM,  TERRI 
ROBERTS,  LESLIE  WILLIAMS,  CYNTHIA 
WOODWORTH,  and  KAREN  WOODWARD,  _ 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  22,  2004,  in  Livermore,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law 

Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Ann  M.  Murray,  Esq.,  of  Kronick,  Moskovitz,  Tiedermann,  and  Girard,  Attorneys  at 

Law,  400  Capital  Mall,  27"  Floor,  Sacramento,  California,  95814-4417,  represented  the 
Livermore  Valley  Joint  Unified  School  District. 

@ 

Michael  D.  Nelson,  Esq.,  and  Mandy  G.  Leigh,  Esq.,  of  Beeson,  Tayer,  and  Bodine, 

Attorneys  at  Law,  1404  Franklin  Street,  Fifth  Floor,  Oakland,  California  94612, 

 

(“Respondents’  attorneys”)  represented  Respondents  herein.  Also,  Respondents’  attorneys 
represented  Ms  Pamela  Tabel  and  Ms  Danielle  Freels,  who  are  credentialed  teachers,  but 
who  hold  positions  with  the  Districts  as  temporary  employees. 

On  April  22,  2004,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  2,  2004,  Brenda  Miller,  Superintendent  of  Schools  (“the 

Superintendent”),  Livermore  Valley  Joint  Unified  School  District  (“the  District”),  made  and 
filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  Audrey  Amos,  Kim  Anderson;  Dorothy  Bedrin;  Jaineen  Bloss; 

Lynda  Brekke;  Harriet  Capito;  Jannie  Deiling;  George  Enos;  Danette  Evens;  Charlotte 
French;  Laurie  Gomez;  Michelle  Gonsalvas;  Sherre  Hallahan;  Holly  Hamilton;  Jay 
Hendrick;  Barbara  Hoefler;  Jessica  Holck;  Kathleen  Jones;  Koren  Kaloustian;  Deborah 
Keesling;  Ronna  Lagin;  Andrew  Loackhart;  Karen  Martin;  Elizabeth  McClellan;  Kelly 
Moore;  Carol  Nese-Forte;  Thu  Hien  Ngo;  Marsha  Nishikawa;  Beth  Peterson;  Christine 
Pytlik;  Shelli  Rhodes;  Terri  Roberts;  Patty  Santin;  Carolyn  Scarlett;  Peggy  Sobrero;  Sam 
Steele;  Erin  Summers;  Angela  Swenson;  James  Taylor;  Leslie  Williams;  Carrie  Seng, 
Cynthia  Woodward,  Jennifer  Blum,  Terri  Roberts,  Leslie  Williams,  Cynthia  Woodworth,  and 
Karen  Woodward  (“Respondents”)  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  of 
the  District. 

3. 

Ms  Pamela  Tabel  and  Ms  Danielle  Freels  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  declare 
either  that  the  status  of  temporary  employee  status  is  improper  or  that  despite  that  status  as 
temporary  employee  the  District  is  obligated  to  offer  employment  for  the  ensuring  school 
year. 
However,  neither  Ms  Tabel  nor  Ms  Freels  are  deemed  as  Respondents,  who  have 
standing  to  contest  the  District’s  prospective  lay-off  action. 

4. 

On  March  2,  2004,  Brenda  Miller,  the  District’s  Superintendent 
(“Superintendent”)  presented  the  District’s  Governing  Board  a  recommendation  in  the  form 
of  written  confidential  memorandum  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of 
services,  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  eliminated  by  the  District  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  (that  is,  the  term  of  2004-2005). 

5. 

On  March  2,  2004,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  44-03/04. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to 

discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year,  particular  kinds  of 
services  in  the  form  of  an  array  of  ten  distinct  categories  in  the  sum  of  109.84  FTE  (full  time 
equivalent)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

@ 

60 

FTE  positions 

Elimination  of  Elementary  Class  Size  Reduction 

  

  
  

2

15 
7.18 

FTE 
FTE 

3.68 

FTE 

1.0 
5.0 
2.84 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

“ 
“ 

“ 

“ 
“ 
“ 

0.80 

FTE 

position 

1.84 
26.0 

FTE  positions 
“ 
FTE 

program  in  grades  Kindergarten,  Second  &  Third  grades; 
Reduction  of  Fourth  Grade  Music  Program; 
Reduction  of  the  High  School  program  by 
modifying  the  ratio  of  student  to  teacher  to  30:1; 
Reduction  of  the  Middle  School  Program  by  modifying 
the  ratio  of  student  to  teacher  to  31:1; 
Reduction  of  the  BTSA/Title  II  Program; 
Reduction  of  the  Title  I  Program; 
Reduction  of  the  English  Language  Development 
Specialist  Program  (ELD); 
Reduction  of  [portion  of  teacher  position  by  virtue  of 
prospect  of  lower  receipts  through]  Donations  [from 
Private  Foundation]; 
Reduction  of  School  Improvement  Program  (SIP);  and 
Reduction  of  Elementary  Classroom  Teaching 
Program  Arroyo  due  to  potential  opening  of 
Charter  School  in  light  of  closure  of  Arroyo  Mocho  and 
Almond  Avenue  Elementary  Schools  Program. 

6. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  10,  2004,  the  District’s  Superintendent 
dispatched,  via  hand  delivery,  preliminary  notices’  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders, 
The 
including  each  respondent,  who  had  status  as  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee. 
letter  stated  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  discontinue 
the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the 
prospective  elimination  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of 
the  recipient  Respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named  individual  in 
the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked. 

The  letter,  dated  March  10,  2004,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  District’s  resolution 

and  other  pertinent  documents’,  also  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no  certificated 
employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective  respondent  would  be 
retained  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  each  respondent  was  then 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency  criteria. 

7. 

Also,  by  another  letter,  dated  March  10,  2004,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

sent  a  number  of  preliminary  notices  to  FTE  position  holders,  who  were  temporary  teachers 
or  emergency  credentialed  teachers.  Although  those  teachers,  as  individuals,  have  no  vested 
property  interests  in  his  or  her  respective  employment  so  as  to  grant  each  individual 
temporary  employee  standing  under  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  to  a  hearing  to 
challenge  in  this  matter  on  questions  of  bumping  mechanism  or  skipping  procedures,  the 

  

“Notice  of  Recommendation  That  Services  Will  Not  be  Required.” 

Request  for  Hearing  form  and  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.

District  informed  those  temporary  or  emergency  credentialed  teachers  of  his  or  her  ability  to 
appear  at  the  hearing  to  challenge  the  propriety  of  being  deemed  either  a  temporary’  teacher 
or  emergency  credentialed  teacher. 

8. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  each  respondent  from  the  District’s 

Superintendent  and  the  District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s 
Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  course  as  taught  by  each  affected  respondent. 

9. 

Each  Respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

10. 

The  District’s  Superintendent  caused  to  be  timely  served  upon  each  respondent 

the  Accusation,  dated  April  2,  2004,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely 
notices  of  defense. 

11. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

12. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  District  withdrew  Accusations  as  filed 
against  Respondents  Jennifer  Blum,  Terri  Roberts,  Leslie  Williams,  Karen  Woodward, 
Cynthia  Woodworth,  Linda  Dinwiddie  and  Jaineen  Bloss.  By  its  withdrawal  of  the 
Accusation  in  that  limiting  scope,  the  District  will  retain  the  services  of  those  respondents. 

13. 

The  Superintendent  for  the  District  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  to 

-  provide  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

The  Superintendent  is  responsible  for  advising  the  District’s  governing  board  on  all 

aspects  of  the  district’s  provision  of  educational  services  as  weighed  against  the  fiscal 
abilities  of  the  district. 

The  Superintendent  in  her  official  capacity  was  reasonable  in  her  exercise  of 

discretion  in  executing  the  procedures  associated  with  lay-off  of  required  by  the  Board’s 
resolution.  The  District  governing  board’s  subject  designee  was  not  arbitrary,  capricious  nor 
fraudulent  in  carrying  out  the  District’s  Resolution  44-03/04 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-2005  school 
‘year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s  budget.  In  order 
to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year  the 
Superintendent  recommended  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of 
funds  that  may  be  distributed  to  the  District  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

  

Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal  4th  911. 

  

   

14. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  lay-off  action  will  result  in  school 

programs  being  not  in  compliance  with  state  law  on  the  matter  of  English  language 
requirements.  The  action  purportedly  may  result  in  a  cut  in  teacher  personnel  that  is  arbitrary 
and  illegal. 

Further  Respondents  contend  that  the  Superintendent  made  recommendations  to  the 

District’s  governing  board  regarding  the  proposed  teacher  lay-off  action  that  lacked 
knowledge  of  sound  budget  or  fiscal  percepts.  Respondents  advance  that  the  Superintendent 
did  not  consult  with  the  community  of  parents  and  other  local  interests  (outside  the  District) 
on  the  prospective  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  term.  Moreover,  Respondents’  assert  that  a 
local  foundation  that  has  made  donations  of  about  $300,000  in  past  years  has  not  been 
adequately  factored  into  the  budget  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

Also,  Respondents  contend,  through  input  from  the  local  teacher  union  representative, 

that  the  program  called  “Classroom  size  reduction,”  provides  the  District  with  tremendous 
sums  of  money  that  does  not  warrant  reduction  of  teacher  positions.  Respondent  allude  to 
the  District’s  executives  effecting  miscalculations  or  “bad  math”  in  reaching  conclusions  for 
teacher  lay-offs  as  associated  with  elimination  of  the  Classroom  size  reduction  program. 

And,  other  respondents  contend  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective  and 
improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does  not 
fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of  credentialed 
employees  who  are  junior  in  time,  or  equal  in  time,  in  service  to  respondents. 

Certain  teachers,  who  serve  under  temporary  employee  contracts,  assert  that  the 
District’s  action  is  improper  due  to  (a)  existence  of  a  “conversion  scheme”  that  acts  to 
equitable  estops  that  lay  off  due  to  representations  made  by  District  administrators  or  (b) 
special  education  programs  under  state  and  federal  law  that  mandates  education  for  persons 
with  developmental  disabilities  will  be  violated. 

Respondents’  various  and  respective  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Labor  Union’s  Assertions 

«15. 

Richard  Edward  Boyd,  Jr.,  Chapter  Services  Consultant  of  the  California 

Teachers’  Association  (“Union  Representative”)  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 
However,  the  evidence  offered  by  him  is  not  persuasive. 

Union  Representative  claims  that  analysis  by  the  District  indicates  that  the  Class  Size 

Reduction  program  “makes  money”  for  the  District’s  general  fund  account. 
analysis  by  the  Union  Representative  is  not  reliable  or  trustworthy.  The  unreliable  analysis 
is  founded  upon  information  transmitted  to  the  union  from  the  District’s  Student  Services 
unit  as  opposed  to  the  District’s  Fiscal  Services  operations. 

But,  the 

°

The  lay-off  proceeding  for  which  the  hearing  in  this  matter  was  conducted  is  not  the 
proper  forum  for  the  labor  union  to  advance  its  argument  on  District  savings  with  regard  to 
the  balance  between  teacher  salaries  and  costs  of  operations  in  the  District. 

© 

Claims  of Individual  Teachers  at  Hearing 

16. 

Respondent  Patricia  Santin  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  offer  evidence  under 

oath  (“Respondent  Santin”). 

Respondent  Santin  worked  for  the  District  as  a  first  grade  teacher  during  the  current 

school  year. 

August  31,  2000,  is  her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 

Respondent  Santin  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  credential  as  issued  by  the  State  of 

California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (“CTC”). 

Respondent  Santin  holds  a  CTC  issued  Supplemental  Credential  in  Home  Economics 

But,  the  credential  only  authorizes  Respondent  Santin  to  teach  the 

and  Business. 
departmentalized  courses  of  Home  Economics  and  Business  in  grades  nine  and  below. 
Respondent  Santin  has  no  teacher’s  credential  to  teach  at  the  high  school  level. 

Respondent  Santin  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 
faculty  member  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Santin  possesses  a  credential  and  is  competent  to 
teach  or  to  provide  service  to  the  District’s  students. 

_- 

@ 

17. 

|  Respondent  Michelle  Gonsalvas  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  offer  evidence 

under  oath  (“Respondent  Gonsalvas”). 

During  the  current  school  year,  Respondent  Gonsalvas  has  taught  fifth  grade  bilingual 

classes  at  Portola  Elementary  School.  Her  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was 
August  31,  2000. 

Respondent  Gonsalvas  compellingly  declares  that  she  has  been  a  teacher  for  twenty 

years. 

Respondent  Gonsalvas  holds  a  life  time  Multiple  Subject  credential  for  kindergarten 

through  eighth  grade.  Also,  she  holds  a  BCLAD  as  she  is  fluent  in  Spanish.  Respondent 
Gonsalvas  represents  that  she  has  participated  in  the  ELD  program. 

Respondent  Gonsalvas  claims  that  she  possesses  personal  knowledge  that  the  District 

faces  a  situation  involving  Spanish  speaking  student  that  is  of  “crisis  proportion.” 

But,  Ms. Gonsalvas  in  not  persuasive  that  the  District  can  reasonable  determine  that 

she  is  licensed  and  competent  to  teach  Spanish  at  the  middle  school,  or  higher,  level. 

  

  
 

Respondent  Gonsalvas  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  faculty  member  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Gonsalvas  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
competent  to  teach  or  to  provide  service  to  the  District’s  students. 

18. 

Official  Notice’  is  taken  of  the  policy  set  by  the  California  Legislature  in 

Education  Code  section  44253.1° 

But,  California  state  law  in  mandating  that  school  district  provide  specialized  services 
to  students  with  limited  English  language  skills  is  not  violated  in  a  manner  as  to  give  cause  to 
find  the  District’s  prospective  lay-off  action  is  defective.  Evidence  does  not  show  that 
mandated  services  in  the  District  for  the  ensuing  school  year  are  in  jeopardy  of  being  reduced 
below  the  level  required  by  law.  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.  3d  32,  34-35;  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.  App.  3d  167;  Degner 
v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.  App.  3d  689.) 

19. 

Respondent  Christine  Pytlik  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  offer  evidence  under 

oath  (“Respondent  Pytlik”). 

Respondent  Pytlik  has  a  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  of  August  27,  2001. 

She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  credential. 

During  the  current  school  year,  Respondent  Pytlik  taught  first  grades  classes.  She 

claims  that  she  has  provided  English  Learner  liaison  services  to  the  District  over  her  term  of 
service.  Also,  she  has  held  the  position  of  “reading  intervention”  teacher  for  three  distinct 
sessions. 

Currently,  Respondent  Pytlik  works  with  two  special  education  students,  whose 
parents  had  sought  the  children  to  be  part  of  the  “Full  Inclusion”  program.  One  of  the 
students  has  a  diagnosis  of  Asperger’s  Disorder®  while  the  other  student  has  been  diagnosed 
as  having  Down’s  Syndrome. 

  

4 

Government  Code  section  11515. 

Education  Code  section  44253.1,  sets  out,  in  part:  “The  Legislature  finds  and  declares  that  almost  one 

° 
million...  pupils  in  California’s  public  schools  are  of  limited  English  proficiency....  The  Legislature  recognizes  that 
limited-English  proficient  pupils  have  the  same  right  to  a  quality  education  as  all  California  pupils.  For  these  pupils 
to  have  access  to  quality  education,  their  special  needs  must  be  met  by  teachers  who  have  essential  skills  and 
knowledge  related  to  English  language  development....” 

“Asperger’s  Disorder”  involves  features  that  reflect  severe  and  sustained  impairment  in  social  interaction 

§ 
and  the  development  of  restricted,  repetitive  patterns  of  behavior,  interests  and  activities.  Diagnostic  and  Statistical 
Manual for  Mental  Disorders,  Fourth  Ed.,  Text  Revision  (DSM-IV-TR),  (2000),  p.80.

Respondent  Pytlik  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 
faculty  member  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Pytlik  possesses  a  credential  and  is  competent  to 
teach  or  to  provide  service  to  the  District’s  students. 

20. 

©  Ms  Pamela  Tabel  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing. 

Ms  Tabel  first  worked  for  the  district  as  of  August  26,  2002.  During  the  current 

school  year,  Ms  Talel  has  provided  teacher  services  to  the  District  under  a  temporary 
employee  contract.  For  the  school  term  2003-2004,  Ms  Tabel  held  the  status  of  intern. 

Ms  Tabel  teaches  ceramics  at  Granada  High  School  under  a  single  subject, 

preliminary  credential  in  Art. 

Ms  Tabel  offers  insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  she  has  status  as  a  probationary 

or  tenured  teacher  with  the  district.  Ms  Tabel  lacks  standing  to  engage  in  a  contest  of  the 
District’s  prospective  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  that  may 
result  in  the  loss  of  the  position  occupied  by  her. 

21. 

Ms  Danielle  Freels  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing. 

Ms  Freels  first  worked  for  the  district  as  of  August  27,  2002.  At  the  end  of  the  school 

year  of  2002-2003,  she  was  released  from  her  employment  with  the  District. 
commencement  of  the  current  school  year,  the  District  offered  Ms  Freels  a  temporary 
employee  teacher  contract,  which  she  signed.  During  the  current  school  year,  Ms  Freels  has 
provided  teacher  services  to  the  District  under  the  temporary  employee  contract. 

But,  near  the 

@ 

Ms  Freels  holds  a  multiple  subject  professional  clear  credential.  Currently,  she 

teaches  second  grade  classes. 
teacher,  which  includes  services  as a  first  grade  teacher. 

Ms  Freels  represents  that  she  has  six  years  experience  as  a 

Ms  Freels  claims  that  two  principals  of  schools  of  the  District  made  reference  to  a 
program  called  “conversion,”  which  purportedly  would  allow  her  temporary  status  to  be 
changed  to  probationary  or  tenured  employee  status.  But,  Ms  Freels  did  not  call  as  a  witness 
to  the  proceeding  either  of  the  school  principals  to  corroborate  the  account  of  District  policy 
as  described  by  her.  Nor,  did  Ms  Freel  demonstrate  that  she  possesses  the  qualification, 
experience  or  knowledge  of  District  employment  practices  as  to  render  competent  testimony 
regarding  current  controlling  District  policy  on  the  notion  of  “conversion.” 

The  District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

22. 

Ms  Yolanda  Charmine  Holmes,  Director  of  Human  Resources,  appeared  at  the  - 

hearing  of  this  matter  to  offer  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

Ms  Holmes  is  directly  involved  and  knowledgeable  of  the  details  of  many 
administrative  matters  pertaining  to  certificated  employees.  Ms  Holmes  provided  expert

  

  
  
  

@ 

witness  opinions  on  the  District  policies  and  practices  of  matter,  including  but  not  limited  to: 
credential  standing  of  employees;  hire  dates  for  temporary  employees  hired  to  replace  a 
permanent  teacher  on  leave  and  for  emergency  credentialed  teachers;  seniority  dates  for 
permanent  and  probationary  teachers;  as  well  as  the  array  of  services,  academic  offerings  and 
programs  offered  by  the  District  for  its  students. 

| 

Upon  learning  that  the  District  was  required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  teacher 

employees  of  the  District,  Ms  Holmes  and  other  employees  of  the  Office  of  Education 
effected  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the  District’s 
teachers. 

Ms  Holmes  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teacher  who  were 
properly  designated  as  provisional  employees  and  temporary  teachers.  Also,  she  studied  and 
set  forth  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  probationary  and  permanent  employees  the  dates 
that  established  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  by  the  permanent  and  probationary 
teachers,  who  have  standing  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

During  the  current  school  year,  the  District’s  governing  board  has  approved  certain 
natural  attrition  (resignations  or  retirements)  of  teachers  who  will  not  return  to  teach  in  the 
District  during  the  next  school  year. 

Ms  Holmes  compellingly  establishes  that  over  her  three  year  term  of  service  as  the 

District’s  Human  Resources  Director,  she  has  not  implemented  or  recognized  a  past  practice 
of  “conversion”  so  as  to  alter  during  a  school  term  the  status  of  a  temporary  employee- 
teacher  to  the  status  of  probationary  or  tenured  employee. 

23. 

Ms  Judith  Hintz,  Assistant  Director  for  the  District’s  Human  Resources 

Department,  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  provide  credible  and  compelling  evidence. 

Ms  Hintz  established  that  Respondent  Santin  has  a  supplemental  authorization  by  a 
credential  issued  by  CTC  to  teach  Home  Economics  and  Business  for  eight  grade  or  lower 
grades.  However,  the  District  only  has  teaching  positions  in  grades  nine  through  twelve. 
And,  the  District  has  three  teachers  with  credentials  to  teach  Business  through  grade  12  in  the 
persons  of  Thomas  Curl,  Brian  Divizich  and  Diane  Russell  (although  Ms  Russell  holds  an 
emergency  credential  for  the  current  year). 

Also,  Ms  Hintz  shows  that  even  though  a  teacher  holds  a  BCLAD  certificate  so  as  to 

provide  instruction  to  students  with  limited  English  language  skills,  the  BCLAD  does  not 
authorize  a  teacher  to  teach  a  specialized  foreign  language  class  such  as  Spanish  at  the  high 
school  level. 

And,  Ms  Hintz  establishes  that  for  the  current  school  year,  the  District  did  not 
implement  or  execute  a  conversion  program  so  as  to  alter  temporary  employee  contracts  into 
probationary  employee  teacher  status  contracts. 
For  the  current  year,  temporary  contracts 
were  used  to  “back  fill”  for  teachers  on  leave  of  absence  status  or  to  meet  requirements  of

categorically  funded  programs.  The  District  employed  a  number  of  teachers  as  temporary 
employees’  as  replacements  for  permanent  teachers  then  on  leaves  of  absence  or  for  the 
provision  of  services  through  categorically  funded  programs. 
temporary  teachers  did  not  confer  any  benefit  of  probationary  status  onto  the  affected 
temporary  teachers,  who  have  no  standing  in  this  administrative  proceeding  under  Education 
Code  sections  44949  or  44955. 

The  existence  of  the  pool  of 

© 

24. 

Mr.  James  Fitzgerald,  the  District’s  Director  of  Student  Services  in  Special 
Education  Services  (“Mr.  Fitzgerald”),  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  offer  credible  evidence. 

Mr.  Fitzgerald  established  that  under  IDEA  (a  federally  funded  program  to  provide 

services  to  students  with  developmental  disabilities),  an  IEP  (“individual  education 
program’)  does  not  preclude  reassignment  or  change  of  a  teacher  to  an  affected  student.  The 
evidence  from  Mr.  Fitzgerald  refutes  and  overcomes  the  evidence  and  argument  by 
Respondent  Pytlik. 

Ultimate  Findings 

25.  |  The  recommendation  of  the  District’s  superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision 

to  eliminate  or  discontinue  a  number  of  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions  held  by  each 
respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

26. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

27. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

28. 

The  District  has  considered  all  known  attrition,  including  resignations  and 

retirements,  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to 
its  employees.  But,  whether  or  not  the  District  accounted  for  loss  of  teachers,  by  resignations 
or  retirements,  has  no  bearing  on  the  authority  and  the  discretion  of  the  governing  board  to 
issue  final  notices  under  this  lay-off  procedure  due  to  the  rationale  decision  to  eliminate  or 
reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

29. 

The  District  seeks  to  skip  and  retain  certain  junior  employees  who  are 

credentialed  and  competent  to  perform  services  that  certain  more  senior  employees  are  not. 
As  with  most  other  school  districts,  the  District  has  been  impacted  by  the  reduction  in 

  

Education  Code  44920 

  

  
  

10

® 

funding  from  the  State,  necessitating  the  issuance  of  the  layoff  notices.  In  determining  the 
needs  of  the  students  and  the  schools,  the  Superintendent  considered  that  there  is  an  issue 
regarding  the  solvency  of  the  District  and  is  being  subjected  to  a  credentials  audit  by  the 
County  Office  of  Education.  Further,  she  is  concerned  about  not  jeopardizing  funding  from 
No  Child  Left  Behind,  a  federal  program.  As a result,  the  District  has  determined  that  the 
District  must  have  teachers  who  are  credentialed  to  teach  the  classes  to  which  they  are 
assigned. 

30.  | Nocompetent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed 

elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents  herein,  the 
District  will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  such  respondents  to  perform  services  for 
which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE 
positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1  and  11. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 

duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been  regularly 
performed. 
Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the  District  has 
properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non  reemployment  of 
respondents. 

4. 

Judgments  entered  by  a  tribunal  on  the  stipulation  of  the  parties  have  the  same 

effect  as  acts  tried  on  the  merits.  John  Siebel  Associates  v.  Keele  (1986)  188  Cal.  App.  3d 
560,  565. 

The  District  stipulates  to  withdraw  the  Accusation  against  those  teachers  named  in 

Factual  Finding  12.  The  stipulation  is  binding  on  the  parties. 

5. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  vs.  Board  of Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

6. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 

In  doing  so,  the 

11

senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  vs.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.  3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  vs.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393 
vs.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

©} 

7. 

A  teacher  who  accepts  a  contract  as  a  temporary  teacher  are  estopped  to  claim 
probationary  status,  absent  a  clear  statutory  mandate  that  warrants  the  contract  be  abrogated. 
(Santa  Barbara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Santa  Barbara  High  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  76  Cal. 
App.  3d  223,  227-228;  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (2004)  116  Cal.  App.4th 
1070,  1079.) 

The  temporary  teachers  who  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  -  Ms  Tabel  and  Ms 

Freels  —  offer  no  competent  evidence  to  refute  the  District’s  position  that  each  teacher  holds 
status  as  a  teacher  under  temporary  contracts  with  the  District.  Hence  neither  teacher  has 
standing  as  a  Respondent  to  contest  the  District’s  lay-off  action. 

8. 

In  this  matter  the  teachers  who  held  contractual  positions  as  temporary 

employees  did  not  present  competent  evidence  to  establish  a  basis  for  the  application  of  the 
doctrine  of  equitable  estoppel.  The  facts  in  this  matter  do  not  present  the  elements  necessary 
for  the  District’s  lay-off  action  to  be  set  aside  as  to  the  complaining  temporary  employees. 
(Shoban  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Desert  Center  Unified  School  District  (1969)  376 
Cal.App.2d  534,  544-546.)  No  competent  and  credible  evidence  shows  that  Ms  Freels  or  Ms 
Tabel  reasonably  relied  upon  information  or  guidance  from  responsible  personnel  of  the 
District  that  misled  the  temporary  teachers  to  their  respective  detriment. 

9. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Livermore  Valley  Joint  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is 
related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10. 

The  District’s  lay-off  action  is  necessary.  The  District’s  proposed  action  is 

consistent  with  the  law.  And,  the  District’s  contemplated  lay-off  action  is  reasonable  in  its 
execution. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained,  except  that  the 

Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondents  Jennifer  Blum,  Terri  Roberts,  Leslie  Williams, 
Karen  Woodward,  Cynthia  Woodworth,  Linda  Dinwiddie  and  Jaineen  Bloss 

@ 

  

  

12

2. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Audrey  Amos,  Kim  Anderson; 
Dorothy  Bedrin;  Lynda  Brekke;  Harriet  Capito;  Jannie  Deiling;  George  Enos;  Danette 
Evens;  Charlotte  French;  Laurie  Gomez;  Michelle  Gonsalvas;  Sherre  Hallahan;  Holly 
Hamilton;  Jay  Hendrick;  Barbara  Hoefler;  Jessica  Holck;  Kathleen  Jones;  Koren 
Kaloustian;  Deborah  Keesling;  Ronna  Lagin;  Andrew  Lockhart;  Karen  Martin;  Elizabeth 
McClellan;  Kelly  Moore;  Carol  Nese-Forte;  Thu  Hien  Ngo;  Marsha  Nishikawa;  Beth 
Peterson;  Christine  Pytlik;  Shelli  Rhodes;  Terri  Roberts;  Patty  Santin;  Carolyn  Scarlett; 
Peggy  Sobrero;  Sam  Steele;  Erin  Summers;  Angela  Swenson;  James  Taylor;  Leslie 
Williams;  and  Carrie  Seng  is  sustained. 

| 

Notice  may  be  given  before  May  15,  2004  to  Respondents,  as  well  as  the  temporary 

teacher  employees  who  received  preliminary  notices  before  March  15,  2004,  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as  indicated. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: 

April  30,  2004 

as ong. 

  

PERRY 
0- JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

13

