BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MAXWELL  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Reduction  of  4.48  FTE 
in  Particular  Kinds  of  Services  affecting: 

OAH  No.  N2004040112 

Russell  Gardner,  Kathy  Jones,  John 
Patterson, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2004,  in  Maxwell,  California. 

David  E.  Robinett,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Maxwell  Unified  School  District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin  Jr.  represented  respondents  Russell  Gardner,  Kathy  Jones,  and 

John  Patterson.  ' 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  28,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Maxwell  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  operates  three  schools;  an 
Elementary  School,  a  High  School  and  an  Alternative/Continuation  School.  The  District 
serves  approximately  450  students. 

2. 

Ronald  Turner  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions  and  the 

actions  of  the  Governing  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice 

that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to  Education 

  

'  These  three  employees  are  the  only  noticed  employees  who  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  followed  by  Notices  of 
‘Defense  to  the  Accusations.  Thus,  these  three  employees  are  the  only  respondents  in  this  action.

Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year,  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation and  noted  that  the 
Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS) 
which  reduced  the  certificated  staff  by  4.48  full-time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  positions. 

© 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 
District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

7. 

On  March  11,  2004,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(the  Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  4.48  FTE 
positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

8. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  03-04-013,  providing 

for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

SERVICE  REDUCED 

REDUCTION  IN  FTE 

Reconfiguration  Junior  High  to  3  Self  Contained  Classrooms 

3.0 

SERVICE  ELIMINATED 

Band  Teaching  Services 
Elementary  Reading  Specialist 

. 

TOTAL 

A8 
1.0 

4.48 

9. 

The  District  is  experiencing  financial  difficulties.  The  Governing  Board 

determined  that  it  needs  to  reduce  its  2004-2005  operating  budget  in  order  to  remain  solvent. 
Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  and  eliminate  teaching  services,  affecting 
employment  of  4.48  FTE  teaching  positions.  The  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce 
teaching  services  was  made  in  order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

10.  |  Supervisor  Turner  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 
implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  maintains  a  Certificated

  

  
  
  

Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  as 
tenured,  probationary  or  temporary,  and  credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential 
and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  District’s  records. 

11. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 
senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of 
affected  service,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known 
vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The 
District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump” 
other  employees.  The  District  then  looked  at  employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as 
opposed  to  other  positions. 

12. 

The  Governing  Board  established,  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  03-04-012,  tie- 

breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  did  not  become  necessary  to  employ  the  tie 
breaking  criteria. 

13. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees.  As  of  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  District  has  granted  leave  for 
the  2004-2005  school  year  to  Carrie  Daneau.  Ms.  Daneau  is  currently  teaching  six  periods  of 
classes  at  the  high  school. 

14. 

As  aresult  of  the  PKS  reduction  in  services  of  band  teaching  and  elementary 

teaching,  the  District  reduced  certificated  personnel  by  1.48  FTE.”  As  a  result  of  the 
reconfiguration  of  the  junior  high  school,  the  services  of  3.0  FTE  teachers  were  reduced. 
'  Those  teachers  affected  by  the  junior  high  school  reconfiguration  and  consequent  3.0  FTE 

reduction  were  Eric  Lay,  *  Russell  Gardner  and  John  Patterson. 

15. 

The  District  concedes  that  Mr.  Patterson  is  qualified  and  competent  to  bump  a 

junior  teacher,  Kathy  Jones.  *  Thus,  the  Accusation  against  Mr.  Patterson  should  be 
dismissed,  provided  he  agrees  to  teach  the  Continuation  education  program  now  taught  by 
Ms.  Jones. 

16. 

— 

The  District  also  concedes  that  Mr.  Gardner  is  qualified  and  competent  to 

bump  a  junior  teacher,  Wiley  Williams.  >  Thus,  the  Accusation  against  Mr.  Gardner  should 
be  dismissed. 

  

*  Those  teachers  affected  by  the  band  and  elementary  reduction  in  services  were  Vicki  Wilson  and  Eric  Leal. 
Neither  is  a  respondent  in  this  action. 
>  Mr.  Lay  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing  and  is  not  a  respondent  herein 
*  Mr.  Patterson  was  not  present  at  the  hearing  and  had  not  previously  consented  to  teach  alternative  education. 
°  Mr.  Williams  was  given a  lay  off  notice.  However,  he  is  not  a  respondent  in  this  matter  and  his  retention  rights 
are  not  considered  herein.

  

» 

17. 

Ms.  Jones’s  date  of  first  paid  service  to  the  District  is  1-15-97.  She  holds  a 

© 

Single  Subject-English  Credential  and  a  Certificate  of  Completion  of  SB  1969.  She  teaches 
four  periods  a  day  as  the  lead  teacher  at  Endi  Prine  Continuation  School  and  two  periods  a 
day  of  English  at  the  High  School.  She  contends  that  junior  employees  are  unlawfully  being 
retained  to  perform  services  that  she  is  qualified  and  competent  to  render.  She  also  maintains 
that  the  District  is  unlawfully  discontinuing  a  position  that  was  not  identified  in  the  Board’s 
Resolution.  That  position  is  held  by  Carrie  Daneau.  Ms.  Daneau  is  junior  to  Ms.  Jones.  Ms. 
Jones  argues  that  she  is  qualified  and  competent  to  render  the  services  provided  by  Ms. 
Daneau. 

18. 

Ms.  Daneau  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Single  Subject  —  Art  Credential  with  a 
supplement  in  English  and  Literature  as  well  as  a  Certificate  of  Completion  of  SB  1969.  She 
is  currently  teaching  six  periods;  three  periods  of  Art,  one  period  of  English  12,  one  period  of 
Yearbook  and  one  period  of  the  Avid  Program.  The  Avid  program  is  designed  to  assist 
“middle  of  the  road”  students  to  become  “college  bound”.  No  specialized  credential  is 
required  to  teach  this  program. 

19. 

|  Superintendent  Turner  testified  that  the  District  wishes  to  save  the  money 

required  to  hire  or  retain  a  replacement  for  Ms.  Daneau  during  her  2004-2005  leave  of 
absence.  The  District  proposes  to  retain  Ms.  Daneau  as  an  employee  and  to  redistribute  the 
classes  she  now  teaches.  Specifically  the  District  plans  to  subsume  the  Art  portions  of  the 
classes  into  its  industrial  arts  (floral  arts)  program.  Alternatively,  the  District  proposes  that  if 
it  “brings  back”  the  Band  program  reduced  in  its  Resolution,  the  Band  teacher,  Vicki  Wilson, 
can  teach  two  periods  of  Art  after  the  District  assists  her  in  obtaining  an  Emergency 
Credential  to  teach  Art.  Ms.  Wilson  is  junior  to  Ms.  Jones. 

The  District  proposes  to  have  Patricia  Bauer  teach  the  Avid  course  now  taught  by  Ms. 

Daneau.  Ms.  Bauer  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Pupil  Services  Credential  and  a  Preliminary 
Single  Subject  —  Math.  She  is  junior  to  Ms.  Jones. 

The  District  plans  to  move  Ms.  Daneau’s  yearbook  class  to  the  Media  class.  Mr. 

Patterson  would  teach  Ms.  Daneau’s  English  classes. 

20. 

In  addition  to  claiming  that  Ms.  Daneau’s  position  was  unlawfully  reduced  and 

junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  render  Ms.  Daneau’s  services,  Ms.  Jones  also 
contends  that  she  may  bump  into  the  position  held  by  Bill  Bernstein.  Mr.  Bernstein  is  junior 
to  Ms.  Jones.  He  has  a  Standard  Teaching  Credential  with  a  major  in  Agricultural  Science 
and  a  minor  in  Biological  Science.  He  holds  a  Certificate  of  Completion  in  SB  1969.  He  is 
currently  assigned  to  Enid  Prine  Continuation  School,  where  Ms.  Jones  is  lead  teacher.  He 
teaches  four  periods  at  Enid  Prine;  one  of  the  four  periods  is  an  elective  Woodshop  course. 
He  also  teaches  Woodshop  at  the  High  School.  Ms.  Jones  suggests  that  she  be  assigned  to  a 
full  load  of  six  periods  at  Enid  Prine  and  that  the  woodshop  elective  be  changed  to  an 
elective  she  can  teach,  like  Drama. 

  

  
 

@ 

The  District  counters  that  it  cannot  change  the  Enid  Prine  elective  from  Woodshop  to 

Drama,  because  the  Woodshop  class  is  in  great  demand.  Further,  the  District  contends  it 
cannot  fragment  Mr.  Bernstein’s  position  by  assigning  three  of  his  Continuation  School 
classes  to  Ms.  Jones.  Mr.  Turner  was  candid  in  voicing  his  concern  that  the  District  did  not 
want  to  reduce  Mr.  Bernstein’s  Enid  Prine  classes  by  giving  them  to  Ms.  Jones,  because  it 
feared  losing  Mr.  Bernstein’s  services.  The  District  is  heavily  dependent  upon  the  welding 
classes  Mr.  Bernstein  teaches  to  prepare  its  students  to  work  for  local  employers. 

© 

21. 

The  District  employees  receiving  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be 

required  next  year,  whether  temporary  or  certificated  employees,  have  all  rendered  valuable 
services  to  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

L. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis,  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  PKS  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  03-04-013  are  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of particular 
kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.

  

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689. 

6. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to,transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

7. 

The  evidence  was  clear  that  the  District  intends  to  “freeze”  the  position  held 

by  Carrie  Daneau,  by  not  filling  it  while  she  is  on  leave  of  absence  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year.  The  District  did  follow  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  44955  for  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  the  services  rendered  by  Carrie  Daneau.  Rather,  the  District  intends  to 
have  the  majority  of  that  position  taught  by  teachers  junior  to  respondent  Kathy  Jones.  Thus, 
Ms.  Daneau’s  position  was  not  lawfully  reduced  or  discontinued  and  is  available  for  the 
2004-2005  school  year. 

8. 

The  District  may  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of 
seniority  only  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  (d).  The  District  must  prove  that  it 
has  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  and  that  certificated  employees  it 
seeks  to  retain  have  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  of  study, 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  The  District  has  not  met  this  burden  in 
respect  to  employing  junior  teachers,  Bill  Bernstein,  Patricia  Bauer,  Vicki  Wilson  and 
retaining  Carrie  Daneau,  while  eliminating  the  services  of  Kathy  Jones.  Ms.  Jones  is  senior 
to  these  employees  and  is  qualified  and  competent  to  teach  the  various  components  of  the 
Daneau  position  the  District  proposes  to  assign  to  the  junior  teachers.  Just  as  the  District 
proposed  to  assist  Ms.  Wilson  in  obtaining  an  emergency  credential  to  allow  her  to  teach  Ms. 
Daneau’s  Art  classes,  the  District  may  assist  Ms.  Jones  in  obtaining  that  credential.  Ms. 
Jones  is  thus  qualified  and  competent  to  “bump”  into  the  position  held  by  Ms.  Daneau. 

9, 

The  District  has  also  failed  to  demonstrate  that  Bill  Bernstein  should  retain  his 
three  periods  of  general  teaching  at  Enid  Prine  Continuation  School,  while  the  senior  “lead” 
teacher  at  Enid  Prine,  Ms.  Jones,  is  laid  off.  The  District’s  contention  that  his  position 
should  not  be  “fractionalized”  by  removing  three  of  his  classes  is  without  merit.  Mr. 
Bernstein’s  Enid  School  position  is  already  divided  into  three  components;  three  general 
Continuation  School  classes,  one  Woodshop  Continuation  class  and  an  assignment  to  the 
High  School  to  teach  vocational  classes.  The  District’s  concern  that  reducing  Mr. 

  

       

Bernstein’s  class  load  by  the  general  Enid  Prine  classes  may  result  in  the  loss  of  a  very 
valuable  vocational  teacher  is  understandable.  However,  this  fear  cannot  lawfully  form  a 
basis  to  retain  Mr.  Bernstein  to  teach  classes  which  a  senior  teacher  1 is  qualified  and 
competent  to  teach.  ° 

10. 

Ms.  Jones  may  bump  into  the  classes  presently  taught  by  Bill  Bernstein  at  Enid 
Prine  Continuation  School,  with  the  exception  of  the  Woodworking  class.  She  may  augment 
her  position  to  1  FTE  by  teaching  some  of  the  classes  now  taught  by  Ms.  Daneau. 
Alternatively,  Ms.  Jones  may  assume  Ms.  Daneau’s  full  position,  provided  she  obtains  the 
Emergency  Credential  necessary  to  teach  the  Art  sections  of  that  position. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  4.48  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 
are  dismissed. 

The  Accusations  against  Russell  Gardner,  Kathy  Jones,  and  John  Patterson, 

DATED: LE 

OC  eee 

  

Ju  Gf  - 

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

Clearly,  the  District  can  maintain  that  Mr.  Bernstein  possess  specific  qualifications  and  skills  in  vocational 

° 
education  that  allow  him  to  be  skipped  or  retained  in  a  lay  off.  However,  he  may  only  be  skipped  in  the  area  of  his 
special  skills,  not  because  he  is  otherwise  a  valued  employee  who  the  District  is  fearful  of  alienating.  Mr. 
Bernstein’s  qualifications  are  in  fact  less  valuable  than  Ms.  Jones’s  qualifications  in  teaching  the  general  classes  in 
the  Enid  Prine  Continuation  School.  Ms.  Jones  has  taught  in  that  program  four  years  longer  than  Mr.  Bernstein. 
And  she  has  functioned  in  the  lead  teacher  capacity  at  that  school.

  

