BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GOLD  OAK  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  EL  DORADO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

a 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

CHRISTINE  JOHNSTON, 
DEANNA  JOHNSON, 
CAROL  ROWBERG, 
&  TIFFANY  WHETSTONE. 

    

Respondents. 

oe 

OAH  No.  N200040141 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

William  O.  Hoover,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2003  at  the  district  office  for  Gold  Oak 
School  District,  3171  Pleasant  Valley  Road,  Placerville,  California. 

Thomas  M.  Griffin, Attorney  at  Law,  represented  complainant  Gold  Oak  School 

District  (“District”). 

Johnston. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Christine 

, 

| 

The  parties  were  permitted  to  submit  letter  briefs  and  the  record  remained  open  until 

May  6,  2004.  Respondent’s  letter  brief  was  received  May  3,  2004  and  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  C.  Complainant’s  letter  brief  was  received  May  5,  2004  and  marked 
for  identification  as  Exhibit  5.  The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  6,  2004. 

| 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

‘1, 

The  Gold  Oak  Union School  District  (“District”)  operates  2  elementary 
schools,  Gold  Oak  School  and  Pleasant  Valley  School.  Gregory  Himes  is  the  District. 
Superintendent.  The  district  currently  maintains  a  total  of  37.5  Full  Time  Equivalent 
positions.

  

  

2. 

On  March  9,  2003  the  Governing  Board  (“Board”)  of  the  Gold  Oak  Union 

@ 

School  District  adopted  Resolution  No.  04-03-01,  in  which  the  Board  resolved  to  eliminate 
the  services  of  6.0  full  time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  certificated  staff  for  the  2004/05  school  year, 
effective  June  30,  2004.  The  resolution  averred  that  the  reduction  of  staff  was  due  to  a 
reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written 

notice  from  the  District  Superintendent  informing  each  of  them  that,  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  their  services  wouid  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year.’  The  written  notice  specifically  informed  respondents  that  the  Board  adopted  a 
resolution  “...reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  6.0  full  time  equivalent  positions  effective 
July  2004.””  A  copy  of  the  resolution  was  included  with  the  notice. 

4. 

There  was  no  issue  as  to  the  timeliness  of  filing  or  service  of  any  notice  or 

other  action  required  by  the  District  and  each  respondent  was  deemed  to  have  filed  timely 
requests  for  hearing  and  notices  of  defense. 

5. 

At  or  before  the  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  or  withdrew  the  accusations 
against  respondents  Deanna  Johnson,  Carol  Rowberg  and  Tiffany  Whetstone,  all  of  whom 
will  be  retained  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  Respondent  Johnston  is  the  sole  respondent 
remaining  and  is  identified  on  the  District  seniority  list  as  a  kindergarten  teacher.  She  is  a 
full-time  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  district  with  a  date  of  hire  of  August  22, 
2001. 

@ 

6. 

The  District  has  created  a  seniority  list  of  its  certificated  employees  which  was 

current  as  of  March  3,  2004.  The  seniority  list  was  developed  from  District  personnel  and 
other  records  and  ranks  certificated  employees  according  to  the  date  of  hire  of  each  (date  of 
first  paid  service).  The  seniority  list  also  includes  such  information  as  current  assignments 
and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations  data.  Credential  and 
authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  records  of  the  County  Office  of  Education,  at  which 
certificated  employees  must  register  such  documents. 

| 

7. 

Respondent  Johnston  is  ranked  as  the  least  senior  permanent  certificated 

employee.  Only  two  employees  were  ranked  beneath  her,  a  temporary  (1  FTE)  and  a 
probationary  employee  (1  FTE),  neither  of  whom  is  being  retained.  The  non  retention  (or 
known  attrition)  of  these  two  individuals  permitted  the  District  to  limit  service  of  the  layoff 
notices  in  this  matter  to  4  FTE.  Respondent  Johnston  did  not  challenge  the  accuracy  of  the 
seniority  list.  She  also  did  not  assert  that  she  had  any  superior  rights  over  any  employee 
being  retained  or  that  any  employee  junior  to  her  was  being  improperly  retained.  Her 
selection  for  receipt  of  a  layoff  notice  was  related  solely  to  her  seniority  and,  as  noted,  no 
issues  were  presented  relating  to  the  application  of  “bumping”,  “skipping”  or  tie-breaking” 
procedures. 

  

'  All  subsequent  references  to  statutes  and/or  sections  are  to  the  California  Education  Code. 

 

8. 

The  sole  issue  raised  at  hearing  was  the  adequacy  of  the  resolution  adopted  by 

the  Board.  Respondent  Johnston  claimed  that  the  resolution  was  legally  insufficient  for 
jurisdictional  purposes  since  it  stated  only  that  the  services  of  6.0  FTE  certificated  staff 
would  be  eliminated.  Respondent  Johnston  contends  that  the  statute  requires  that  the 
particular  kinds  of  service  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  be  specifically  identified  in  the 
resolution.  The  necessary  implication  of  this  contention  is  that,  because  of  the  lack  of 
specificity  in  the  resolution  language,  respondent  Johnston  asserts  that  she  was  unable  to 
effectively  assess  her  risk  of  layoff.  Thus,  the  District’s  pre-March  15"  notice  was  fatally 
defective  and  void  ab  initio.  This  contention  is  without  merit. 

| 

, 

DISCUSSION 

9. 

“California  Education  Code  section  13447  provides  that  a  school  district  may 

reduce  its  certificated  staff  because  of  either  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance,  or  a 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services”.  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers, 
Local  2393  et  al,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  et  al,  (1981) 
116  Cal.App.3d  831  (hereinafter  “Santa  Clara’) 

10. 

“Because  the  March  15  notice  in  section  13447  is  intended  to  insure  that  the 

affected  employee  is  informed  of  the  facts  upon  which  he  can  reasonably  assess  the 
probability  he  will  not  be  reemployed,  the  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation...  The  March  15  notice  is  only  the  first  step  in  the  termination  process.  It 
is  not  required  that  this  preliminary  notice  specify  the  precise  number  of  teachers  to  be 
terminated  or  the  specific  positions  to  be  eliminated;  those  details  emerge  as  the 
administrative  hearing  process  progresses.  It  is  enough  that  the  board  specify  in  the  March 
15  notice  the  statutory  grounds  set  forth in  Cal.  Educ.  Code  section  13447  for  staff 
reduction.”  Santa  Clara,  supra 

. 

Karbach  v.  Board  of Education  of Lawndale  School  District  (1974)  39 

Cal.App.3d  366  requires  a  District  to  provide  sufficient  information  in  its  resolution  for  an 
employee  to  be  able  to  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  s/he  will  not  be  reemployed. 

“A  school  board’s  exercise of discretion  i is  not subject  1  to  judicial  review  unless. 

the  board  fails  to  follow  proper  procedures  or  the  action  was  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or 
capricious.”  Santa  Clara,  supra. 

13.  | Aschool  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service 

need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  the  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.  A  school 
board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  the  section  44955  by  determining  that  a 
certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district 
employees  who  perform  such  services.  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower

11. 

12. 

       

Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167..(see  also  Campbell  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  811) 

14. 

In  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Goleta  Union  High  School  District 

(1982)  132  Cal  App.3d  32,  the  reduction  of  K-6  classes  was  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind 
of  service  and  the  termination  of  the  teachers  providing  those  services  was  permissible  under 
section  44955.  The  court  held: 

“,..since  high  school  offerings,  such  as  mathematics,  science,  history  and  art,  are 
particular  kinds  of  service,  logically  elementary  grade  classes  which  teach  the  same 
offerings,  although  with  a  single  teacher,  are  particular  kinds  of  service.” 

15. 

In  San  Jose  Teachers  Association,  supra,  pp  635-637,  the  court  noted  that 

“The  number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services  to  reduce”  and  that  a  valid  reduction  in  service 
can  be  found  “as  long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching  or  in  the  particular  kind 
of  service  in  teaching  a  subject.” 

16. 

These  decisions  consistently  recognize  that,  at  the  elementary  school  level,  | 
classroom  teaching  is  a  particular  kind  of  service.  Unlike  middle  school  and  high  school, 
where  a  teacher  instructs  in  a  particular  subject  or  subjects,  elementary  school  classes  are 
multi-subject.  Therefore,  at  the  elementary  school  level,  a  reduction  in  services  cannot  be 
limited  to  a  single  subject  or  discipline,  but  must  encompass  the  spectrum  of  academic 
offerings  in  a  K-5  class,  i.e.,  a  classroom  teaching  position.  Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  of 
Ferndale  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4™  838 

17. 

In  this  case  the  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  reduction  of  6  FTE 

certificated  positions  based  on  a  reduction  of  service  for  the  next  school  year.  While  greater 
specificity  might  have  been  more  desirable,  it  was  statutorily  sufficient  given  the  fact  that 
Gold  Oak is  an  elementary  school  district  and  respondent  Johnston is  an  elementary  school 
teacher  (kindergarten).  Under  these  circumstances  any  elementary  school  teacher  with 
limited  time  in  service  in  the  District,  especially  respondent  Johnston,  could  discern  from  the 
resolution  language  that  she  was  at  risk  of  being  laid  off.  Therefore,  the  services  identified  in 
Board  Resolution  04-03-01  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

. 

18. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was 

neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and 
pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

19. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessitated  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
as  determined  by  the  Board. 

  

 

20. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

| 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction or 
discontinuance  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

_ 

The  Accusation  against  Christine  Johnston  is  sustained.  The  District  may  give  notice 
that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

MMi? Kren — 

 

WILLIAM  O.  HOOVER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Dated:  56 fe /  oY 

    

