BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  SANTEE  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2004030480 

Sandra  Mehlop,  Ph.D.,  a  Certificated  Employee 

and 

Santee  School  District,  a  Public  Entity. 

    

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Santee,  California,  on  June  7,  2004. 

Anthony  P.,De  Marco,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Santee  School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Sandra  Mehlop,  Ph.D.,  a 

certificated  employee  of  the  Santee  School  District.  Dr.  Mehlop  was  present  throughout  the 
entire  proceeding. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  June  7,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Santee  School  District 

1. 

The  Santee  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  eastern  San  Diego 

County.  It  was  established  in  1981.  The  District  capably  serves  the  educational  needs  of 
approximately  6,900  students  in  the  10  schools  and  at  the  special  program  within  the  District, 
from  Kindergarten  through  8"  Grade.  The  District  employs  about  400  certificated  persons. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  a  five  member,  elected  Board  of  Education  (the 

Board). 

Lisbeth  A.  Johnson,  Ed.D.  (Dr.  Johnson)  is  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  the 

District’s  Chief  Executive  Officer.

The  Economic  Layoff 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 
major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education.  Following  the  passage  of 
Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to 
other  governmental  entities  for  necessary  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  that  professional  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school  year.  These 
preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  others  with  less  seniority. 

4. 

The  District  carefully  reviewed  its  income  and  expenses  and  determined  there 

was  an  approximate  $4.1  million  shortfall  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Dr.  Johnson,  Carolyn  Harness  (who  served  as  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent, 
Business  Services)  and  others  determined  that  to  meet  its  budget,  the  District  would  have  to 
give  notice  to  approximately  45  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  not  be 
needed  in  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Under  the  supervision  of  John  Tofflemire  (Tofflemire),  the  District’s  Director  of 
Human  Resources,  a  seniority  list  was  prepared  which  identified  each  credentialed  employee, 
his  or  her  date  of  hire,  his  or  her  date  of  probationary  service,  his  or  her  seniority  date,  the 
individual’s  current  assignment,  the  site  at  which  services  were  being  provided  and  the 
individual’s  credential(s). 

, 

5. 

On  March  9,  2004,  it  was  recommended  to  the  Board  in  writing  that 

preliminary  layoff  notices  be  served  on  approximately  45  certificated  employees,  advising 
them  that  their  services  would  not  be  necessary  in  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

Resolution  No.  0304-24 

6. 
provided: 

On  March  9,  2004,  Resolution  No.  0304-24  was  adopted  by  the  Board.  It 

  

 

“WHEREAS,  Sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code  require  action  by  the 
Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  eliminate  services  and  permit  the  layoff  of 
certificated  employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Superintendent  of  Santee  School  District  has  recommended  to  the 
Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  2003-2004  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2003-2004 
school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition 
which  has  occurred  to  date,  that  is,  all  deaths,  resignations,  retirements  and  other 
permanent  vacancies  in  reducing  these  services  and,  but  for  the  attrition  already 
assured,  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  reduce  additional  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  Santee  School 
District: 

1. 

That  all  of  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

2. 
That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being 
insufficient  to  maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program 
changes  resulting  therefrom,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  those  positions  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A,  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by 
reference  herein,  listing  by  level,  subject  field  or  classification,  and  full-time 
equivalent,  those  positions  which  shall  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2003-2004  school  year. 

That  because  of  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 

3. 
listed  in  Exhibit  A  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2002-2003  school  year 
certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to  the  positions  affected  in  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  the  above-described  service. 

4. 
That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some  of  the  employees  in  the  services 
being  reduced  or  eliminated  are  such  that  they  have  displacement  rights  by  virtue  of 
seniority,  and  that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees 

5. 
who  shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  requires  the  Governing  Board  to  state  specific  criteria  to  be  used  in

determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date. 

6. 
That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date  are  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B,  which  is 
attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference  herein. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of 
7. 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date,  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B,  are  based 
solely  on  the  needs  of  the  Santee  School  District  and  the  students  thereof. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees 

8. 
who  shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  allows  the  Governing  Board  to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated 
employee  in  order  of  seniority  by  virtue  of  their  competence,  credential(s), 
assignment,  and  the  specific  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

9. 
That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated 
employees  who  may  otherwise  be  terminated  by  order  of  seniority  will  be  based  on 
the  needs  of  the  students  of  the  District,  and  will  ensure  that  no  employee  will  be 
terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is  retained  to  render  service  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10.  —  That  the  Superintendent  or  her  designated  representative  will  send  appropriate 
notices  to  all  employees  possibly  affected  by  virtue  of  the  reduction  and  elimination 
of  particular  kinds  of  service. 

That  the  action  of  this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be  considered  to 

11. 
prejudice  the  rights  of  certificated  employees  to  whom  notice  will  be  given  as  to  the 
Superintendent’s  consideration  of  any  proposed  decision  by  an  administrative  law 
judge  in  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  any  employee.” 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

7. 

On  March  12,  2004,  a  Notice  of  Recommendation  Not  to  Reemploy 

Certificated  Employee  was  served  on  the  persons  providing  particular  kinds  of  services  that 
were  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination  under  Board  Resolution  No.  0304-24.  Dr.  Johnson 
signed  that  notice. 

  

' 
Attached  to  the  Resolution  No.  0304-24  was  Exhibit  B,  which  was  a  document  identifying  each  particular 
kind  of  service  or  program  subject  to  the  economic  layoff  resolution,  the  number  of  full  time  equivalent  positions, 
the  identity  of  the  Board  members  making  the  motions  and  seconding  the  motions  for  each  area,  and  the  Board’s 
final  vote.

Attached  to  the  notice  was  a  memo  Tofflemire  prepared  which  had  been  provided  to 

the  Board.  The  memo  explained  the  reason  why  preliminary  layoff  notices  needed  to  be 
served.  The  Board’s  resolution  and  other  documents  were  attached. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  timely  filed  a  request  for  a  hearing. 

On  and  before  March  22,  2004,  persons  requesting  a  hearing  were  served  with  an 

Accusation,  a  notice  of  hearing  and  other  related  materials. 

Dr.  Mehlop  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  after  being  served  with  the  Accusation. 

The  administrative  hearing  was  originally  set  for  April  19  and  23,  22004.  The 
hearing  date  was  continued  by  stipulation  to  June  7,  2004,  to  permit  settlement  negotiations 
between  the  teachers  union  and  the  District. 

Through  the  use  of  an  early  retirement  incentive  program,  the  reduction  of  45 
certificated  employees  became  unnecessary.  In  accordance  with  the  stipulation  of  the 
parties,  all  of  the  Accusations  filed  against  those  employees  were  withdrawn  and  dismissed 
except  for  the  Accusation  that  had  been  filed  against  Dr.  Mehlhop. 

On  June  7,  2004,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  Counsel  for 

the  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  Counsel  for  Dr.  Mehlhop  gave  an  opening  statement. 
The  caption  was  amended  sua  sponte.  A  written  stipulation  was  recited.  Sworn  testimony 
and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  Closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was 
closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  District’s  Seniority  List 

8. 

The  District’s  administrative  staff  created  a  13  page  seniority  list  based  upon  a 

close  review  of  the  District’s  personnel  records.  Each  certificated  employee,  including  Dr. 
Mehlhop,  was  advised  in  writing  of  his  or  her  seniority  date  (the  date  on  which  the  employee 
first  rendered  service  in  a  probationary  status)  and  his  or  her  credential(s)  on  file  with  the 
District.  The  notice  invited  the  employee  to  promptly  advise  the  District  of  any  errors  or 
additions. 

The  seniority  list  was  reasonably  prepared  and  accurate. 

Reduction  of School  Psychologist  Services 

9. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  was  and  is  employed  as  a  school  psychologist.  She  holds  a  Pupil 

Personnel  Services  credential,  which  authorizes  Dr.  Mehlhop  to  perform  all  the  duties  of  a 
school  psychologist. 

Dr.  Mehlhop’s  seniority  date  with  the  District  is  September  15,  2000. 

  

 

10. 

The  District  employed  5.5  full-time  school  psychologists  in  the  2003-2004 

school  year,  including  Dr.  Mehlhop.  The  position  of  a  school  psychologist  was  and  is  very 
demanding  assignment  according  to  Raydene  Wolf  (Wolf),  the  District’s  Coordinator  of 
Special  Education  and  the  supervisor  of  the  school  psychologists,  Dr.  Mehlhop  and  Dianna 
Danley,  who  serves  as  a  school  psychologist. 

School  psychologists  are  required  to  work  6.5  hours/day  for  the  same  number  of  days 

during  the  school  year  as  school  teachers.  Most  school  psychologists  work  far  more  than 
that.  There  are  ten  “extra  days”  available  to  compensate  a  school  psychologist  for  the  time 
required  complete  necessary  assignments. 

| 

A  school  psychologist  performs  mandated  assessments  (primarily  Special  Education 
assessments  and  behavior  intervention  assessments),  serves  on  child  assistance  teams,  meets 
with  parents  and  students,  meets  with  teachers,  provides  counseling  services,  participates  in 
“Manifest  Determinations,”  serves  in  crisis  intervention  triages  and  accomplishes  a  host  of 
other  wide  ranging  duties. 

11. 

|  Wolf  was  asked  by  the  Superintendent’s  office  to  review  her  program  and  to 

determine  if  any  cuts  could  be  made  and  still  meet  state  and  federal  mandates. 

In  response  to  that  request,  Wolf  calculated  the  school  psychologists/student  ratio 

within  the  District  and  compared  it  to  the  school  psychologists/student  ratio  in  neighboring 
elementary  school  districts.  Wolf  reviewed  the  number  of  assessments  currently  being 
performed  within  the  Santee  School  District.  Wolf  looked  at  special  education  pupil  counts 
from  April  1990  through  the  date  of  the  request. 

Based  on  her  review  of  all  the  data,  Wolf  reluctantly  concluded  the  District’s 
projected  needs  for  school  psychologists  could  barely  be  met  if  there  were  4.5  school 
psychologists  on  staff  rather  than  the  5.5  school  psychologists  that  were  presently  on  staff. 

12. 

The  results  of  Wolf’s  study  and  her  conclusions  were  forwarded  to  the  Board. 

Dianna  Danley  testified  at  the  Board  hearing  to  the  effect  that  school  psychologists’ 

services  could  not  reasonably  be  reduced  by  eliminating  one  position  and  the  cost  of  any 
necessary  psychological  services  on  a  contract  basis  would  be  far  more  expensive  than 
continuing  Dr.  Mehlhop’s  employment. 

The  Board  considered  several  options  with  regard  to  the  reduction  of  services  being 

provided  by  school  psychologists.  The  Board  ultimately  determined  to  provide  the  least 
senior  school  psychologist,  Dr.  Mehlhop,  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice. 

Dr.  Sondra  Mehlhop 

13. 

Dr.  Sondra  Mehlhop  was  born  in  Dayton,  Ohio.  She  moved  with  her  mother 

to  San  Diego  County  in  the  late  1940s.  She  graduated  from  Helix  High  School  in  1958.

  

Dr.  Mehlhop  began  her  undergraduate  studies  at  San  Diego  State  University,  and  then 

transferred  to  the  University  of  Dayton.  She  began  teaching  in  Russia,  Ohio,  without  a 
degree  or  teaching  credential,  in  the  1960s. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  had  two  children,  a  daughter  who  is  now  a  MSW  with  the  San  Diego 

Regional  Center  and  a  son  who  is  self-employed. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  returned  to  college  and  graduated  from  California  State  University, 

Fullerton  with  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  Psychology  in  1968.  She  received  a  Master  of 
Arts  in  Psychology  from  the  University  of  California,  Riverside  in  1972.  Dr.  Mehlhop  was 
awarded  a  Ph.D.  in  Psychology  from  the  University  of  Northern  Colorado  in  1986. 

In  1996,  Dr.  Mehlhop  returned  to  San  Diego  County.  She  was  employed  as  a  school 
psychologist  for  three  years  with  the  Lakeside  Union  School  District.  Dr.  Mehlhop  became 
tenured  while  working  at  the  Lakeside  Union  School  District. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  heard  great  things  about  the  Santee  School  District.  She  was  asked  to 

interview  with  the  District  and  she  did  so  in  August  2000.  It  was  a a  good  match.  The  District 
hired  Dr.  Mehlop in  September  2000. 

14. 

There  is  no  issue  concerning  Dr.  Mehlhop’s  competency.  Wolf  and  Danley 
have  the  utmost  respect  for  Dr.  Mehlhop’s  personal  and  professional  skills.  Dr.  Mehlhop 
more  than  carries  her  weight  with  the  District  in  meeting  its  mandated  needs. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  understands  clinical  reports  and  the  diagnoses  provided  by  private 
psychologists  and  psychiatrists.  She  has  vast  experience  with  crisis  intervention  and  in 
dealing  with  situations  involving  threatened  violence.  Dr.  Mehlhop  has  good  rapport  with 
parents  and  students,  and  she  exerts  a  calming  influence  during  Individualized  Education 
Program  meetings.  She  communicates  clearly  and  easily  with  students  and  parents.  She  is 
technically  proficient.  On  the  personal  side,  she  has  a  good  sense  of  humor,  is  a  team 
member  and  knows  her  boundaries.  School  children  like  her. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  has  completed  approximately  95  assessments  within  the  past  year,  eight 

of  which  were  quite  comprehensive  because  of  the  students’  emotional  and  behavioral 
problems.  She  completed  six  Manifest  Determinations  and  four  AB  22762  reports.  Twenty 
attention  scales  were  given  to  parents  and  teachers  and  she  prepared  15  typewritten  reports. 
Dr.  Mehlhop  evaluated  and  cared  for  four  seriously  suicidal middle  school  students  who 
needed  immediate  attention. 

The  District  will  rehire  Dr.  Mehlhop  if  it  determines  it  cannot  meet  state  and  federal 

mandates  with a  staff  of  4.5  full  time  equivalent  school  psychologists  and  if  Dr.  Mehlhop 
remains  available  for  reemployment. 

15. 

|  Dr.  Mehthop  is  the  least  senior  school  psychologist  on  the  District’s  staff  of 

school  psychologists.  Before  serving  Dr.  Mehlhop  with a  preliminary  layoff  notice,  the

considered  all  known  attrition.  Since  then,  the  District  has  considered  all  known  attrition 
before  bringing  this  matter  to  hearing. 

Dr.  Mehlhop  does  not  possess  any  credential  which  would  permit  her  to  “bump”  any 

employee  whose  services  are  being  retained. 

16. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  school 
psychologist  services,  will  necessarily  be  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated 
by  state  and  federal  law  by  terminating  Dr.  Mehlhop’s  professional  services. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  more  senior 

employee  was  retained  to  perform  any  service  which  a  more  senior  employee  was 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction:  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections 
were  satisfied  as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  in  the  seniority  lists. 
Education  Code  section  44955  provides: 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  part: 

“(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 
than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947, 
inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845...” 

3, 

Financial  Circumstances:  A  school  district  may  consider  its  financial 

circumstances  in  deciding  whether  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service.  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  631. 

4, 

Reduction  of Particular  Kinds  of Services:  A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce 

or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation, 
such  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  students.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion,  subject  to  the 
minimum  level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  a  reduction  of  services  is 
necessary  and  proper  under  the  circumstances.  The  board’s  decision  is  made  at  the  time  of 
the  final  notice.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  635-636. 

8  

5. 

The  position  of  “school  psychologist”  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  which  can 

be  reduced  or  eliminated.  The  particular  kind  of  service  provision  set  forth  in  California 
Education  Code  section  44955  can  apply  to  mandated  services.  See,  Gallup  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.  App.4th  1571. 

6. 

A  reduction  in  services  may  not  be  based  on  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious 

action  of  the  District.  Brough  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  118  Cal.App.3d  702,  738. 

7. 

Conclusion:  Within  the  context  of  this  economic  layoff  proceeding  it  is 

reluctantly  concluded  that  cause  exists  to  recommend  that  the  District  give  Dr.  Mehlhop  final 
notice  that  her  services  will  not  be  necessary  in  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

The  Board  reasonably  determined  for  financial  reasons  it  could  eliminate  one  full 

time  equivalent  school  psychologist  position  and  continue  to  meet  state  and  federal 
mandates.  Dr.  Mehlhop  was  the  most  junior  school  psychologist  on  the  District’s  staff. 

It  was  not  established  the  Board  unreasonably  decided  to  reduce  its  staff  by  one  full- 

time  school  psychologist  equivalent  position,  that  the  services  provided  by  a  school 
psychologist  constituted  a  particular  kind  of  service  not  subject  to  reduction,  or  that  the 
Board’s  determination  was  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  1-16and  on  Legal  Conclusions  1-4. 

RECOMMENDATION 

The  Santee  School  District  shall  give  notice  to  Sondra  J.  Mehlhop,  Ph.D.  that  her 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

DATED: 

  

  

JAMES  AHLER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

