BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEE 
COMPTON  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L-2004030536 

ROBINSON  SIRKEGIAN, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  above  captioned  matter  was  heard  on  April  14,  2004  at  Compton, 

California  by  Carolyn  D.  Magnuson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings. 

Stephan  K.  Matson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Complainant. 

Dana  S.  Martinez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  of  the  Respondent. 

Evidence  was received,  the  matter  argued,  and  the  case  submitted  for  decision 
on  the  hearing  date.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby  makes  her  factual  findings,  legal 
conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Complainant,  Ulis  C.  Williams,  filed  the  Accusation  in  the  instant  case 
while  acting  in  his  official  capacity  as  Superintendent/President  of  Compton  Community 
College  District  (““CCCD”). 

2.  Robinson  Sirkegian  (“Respondent”)  is  a  certificated  probationary  employee 

of  the  CCCD.  He  is  completing  his  fourth  year  of  employment  with  CCCD. 

3.  Prior  to  March  15,  2004,  CCCD  gave  the  Respondent  notice  that  he  would 

not  be  reemployed  by  CCCD  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

   

4.  The  Respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  for  the  2004-2005  year. 

5.  Thereafter,  Complainant  filed  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  and  had  it 

served  on  the  Respondent.  Respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense  to  the  Accusation. 

6.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

7.  On  March  23,  2004,  CCCD’s  Board  of  Trustees  adopted  Resolution  No. 

03/04-032340(a)  to  discontinue  all  offerings  and  instruction  in  diesel  mechanics  technology 
effective  at  the  end  of  the  2003  —  2004  school  year. 

8.  As  aresult  of  this  discontinuation  of  services,  CCCD  reduced  the  number 

of  its  full  time  equivalent  certificated  employees  by  one. 

9.  CCCD  compiled  a  list  of  certificated  employees  and  their  seniority  dates. 
For  those  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  service,  a  lottery  was  held  to  break  the  tie 
and  determine  seniority. 

10.  The  evidence  established  that  Respondent  is  authorized  to  teach  in  two 

faculty  service  areas  (“FSA”):  diesel  mechanics  and  auto  mechanics.  During  his 
employment  at  CCC,  Respondent  has  taught  in  both  areas.  Respondent  is  the  only  CCCD 
employee  teaching,  or  qualified  to  teach,  courses  in  diesel  mechanics. 

11.  There  are  three  faculty  members  who  teach  auto  mechanics  and/or  auto 

body  at  the  college  who  are  being  retained  as  employees.  Each  of  these  individuals  is  senior 
to  Respondent. 

12.  Two  of  these  instructors  often  teach  overload  classes  in  auto  mechanics 
and/or  auto  body.  An  overload  class  is  one  that  is  taught  by  an  instructor  in  addition  to  his 
standard  18  hour  a  week  teaching  obligation.  An  overload  class  is  offered  when  the 
instructor  indicates  a  willingness  to  teach  the  additional  class  and  the  college  agrees  that  the 
class  can  be  taught  by  the  instructor.  If  either  party  is  unwilling,  the  class  will  not  be  offered. 

13.  Respondent  was  hired  by  CCCD  to  create  a  diesel  mechanics  curriculum 

and  to  be  the  instructor  for  the  program.  Although  Respondent  spent a  great  deal  of  time 
and  effort  developing  the  curriculum  and  soliciting  support  from  the  community  and 
businesses,  the  program  never  really  was  implemented  because  the  college  did  not  have  the 
money  to  properly  equip  it.  Respondent  believes  that  the  college  should  have  done  more  to 
help  establish  the  diesel  mechanics  program  such  as  allowing  classes  with  few  students 
enrolled  to  continue,  more  aggressively  recruiting  students  for  the  program,  and  facilitating 

Respondent’s  promotion  and  enrollment  efforts.   

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

14.  Jurisdiction  to  proceed  in  this  matter  was  established  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  87740  and  87743.' 

15.  Respondent  contended  that  the  Accusation  was  invalid  because  it 

identified  him  as  being  a  probationary  teacher  when,  in  fact  he  was  tenured. 

16.  Education  Code  sections  87608,  87608.5  and  87609  provide  the  method 

of  acquiring  tenure  at  a  California  community  college.  Under  that  process,  the  original 
contract  is  for  one  year.  At  the  end  of  that  year,  the  district  has  three  options:  not  rehiring  the 
employee,  renewing  the  employment  contract  for  one  year  or  employing  the  contract 
employee  as  a  regular  employee  for  all  subsequent  academic  years.  If  the  option  of  a  one 
year  contract  is  chosen,  at  the  end  of  that  year,  the  district  has  three  choices:  not  rehiring  the 
employee,  renewing  the  employment  contract  for  two  years  or  employing  the  contract 
employee  as  a  regular  employee  for  all  subsequent  academic  years.  If  the  option  of  a  two 
year  contract  is  chosen,  at  the  end  of  that  period,  the  district  has  two  choices:  employ  the 
probationary  employee  as  a  tenured  employee  for  all  subsequent  academic  years  or  not 
reemploy  the  probationary  employee.  Thus,  tenure  necessarily  accrues  when  a  contract 
employee  is  employed  for a  fifth  year. 

17. 

In  this  case,  Respondent  is  finishing  his  fourth  year  of  teaching  at  the 

college.  Therefore,  all  other  things  being  equal,  CCCD  has  two  options  regarding 
Respondent’s  future  employment:  either  grant  Respondent  tenure  or  not  reemploy  him.  If 
CCCD  had  rehired  Respondent  when  his  current  contract  expires,  he  would  then  be  a  tenured 
employee.  However,  because  no  such  contract  has  been  executed,  Respondent  is  a 
probationary  employee  of  CCCD  and  is  properly  characterized  as.such  in  the  Accusation. 

18.  Diesel  mechanics  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  can  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  87743. 

. 

19.  CCCD  chose  to  discontinue  the  diesel  mechanics  program  because  of  a 

lack  of  student  interest  in  the  courses  and  because  the  college  could  not  afford  to  provide  the 
required  equipment,  supplies  and  instructional  materials  the  program  needed  to  be 
successful.  Respondent  contends  that  CCCD  should  be  prohibited  from  discontinuing  diesel 
mechanics  because  the  college  is  entirely  responsible  for  the  existence  of  the  negative  factors 
that  led  to  the  decision  to  discontinue  the  program. 

20.  The  law  presumes  that  administrative  actions  are  taken  in  good  faith. 

' 

  

(Burrell  v.  City  of Los  Angeles  (1989)  209  Cal.  App.  3d  568)  The  fact  that  a  particular  cut 
could  be  avoided,  or  that  cogent  arguments  can  be  made  for  choosing  a  different  option,  does 
not  establish  that  a  board’s  decision  to  discontinue  services  and  lay  off  instructors  was 
fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious.  As  the  courts  are  not  allowed  to  substitute  their  judgment 

All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.  

for  the  considered  judgment  of  a  school  board  (See  Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41 
Cal.  App.  4th  1571,  1589),  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  in  the  instant  case  is  similarly 
limited. 

21.  CCCD’s  decision  to  discontinue  diesel  mechanics  was  a  proper  exercise 

of  CCCD’s  discretion.  The  discontinuance  of  the  service  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
CCCD  and  its  students. 

22.  Finally,  Respondent  asserts  that  there  is  no  need  to  lay  him  off  because 

there  are  sufficient  students  interested  in  auto  mechanics  and  auto  body  to  fill  classes  for  him 
to  teach,  as  demonstrated  by  the  overload  classes  in  those  areas  regularly  being  taught  by  the 
retained  instructors. 

23.  Neither  the  college  nor  the  instructors  is  obligated  to  make  available 

overload  courses.  Therefore,  there  is  no  certainty  that  such  courses  would  be  offered  in  any 
given  semester.  Undoubtedly  there  are  a  number  of  disciplines  in  which  student  interest 
exceeds  the  ability  of  CCCD  to  offer  desired  courses  because  of  staffing  limitations.  CCCD 
is  not  obligated  either  to  provide  all  the  courses  students  would  like  to  take  or  all  those  its 
_  certificated  employees  would  like  to  teach;  nor  is  it  obligated  to  create  such  courses  in  order 
to  avoid  laying  off  Respondent. 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusation  is  sustained. 

2.  CCCD  may  notify  Respondent  that  his  services  will  not  be  needed  in  the 

2004-2005  school  year  due  to  the  discontinuance  of  services  by  CCCD. 

Dated:  April  15,  2004 

  CAROLYN  D.  MAGNUSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   

