BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
RIM  OF  THE  WORLD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2004030276 

SIXTEEN  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  27,  2004,  in  Riverside,  California,  Alan  S.  Meth,  Administrative  Law  Judge, 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Sherry  G.  Gordon,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Rim  of  the  World  Unified  School 

District. 

Ronald  G.  Skipper,  Attorney  At  Law,  represented  the  following  respondents:  Annette 

Brown,  Heidi  Erlanger,  Joyce  Garrison,  Andrea  Ingham,  Dawn  Malcolm,  James  Olsen, 
Sherri  Soto,  and  Janice  Williamson.  Respondents  Timothy  Barany,  Morgan  Black,  Brandon 
Harms,  Heather  Katz,  Ward  Lee,  Shannon  Millen,  Richard  Vega,  and  Mark  Warhol  did  not 
submit  notices  of  defense  or  requests  for  hearing  or  appeared  at  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  27,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  12,  2004,  Dr.  Clint  Harwick,  Superintendent  of  the  Rim  of  the 
World  Unified  School  District  (hereafter,  “the  District”),  made  and  filed  the  accusations 
against  respondents  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  of  the 
Superintendent's  recommendation  that  respondents  be  notified  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Superintendent's  notification  to  the  Governing 
Board  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

2. 

3. 

1

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  each  respondent  was  given  written  notice  by  the 
Superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

5. 

Accusations  were  timely  served  on  all  respondents.  Respondents  Brown, 
Erlanger,  Garrison,  Ingham,  Malcolm,  Olsen,  Soto,  and  Williamson  timely  requested  in 
writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 

following  services  for  the  2004-05  school  year: 

Elementary  Classroom  Teacher 
Elementary  Special  Education 
Middle  School  Special  Education 
High  School  Art 
High  School  Science 
High  School  English 
High  School  Math 

3  full  time  equivalents 
2  full  time  equivalents 
3  full  time  equivalents 
1  full  time  equivalents 
1  full  time  equivalents 
4  full  time  equivalents 
2  full  time  equivalents 

The  proposed  reductions  total  16  full-time  equivalent  positions. 

The  services  set  forth  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of 
the  District's  discretion. 

7. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  retained  to  perform 

services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

9. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required.

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  in  16  full- 
time  equivalent  positions  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44949. 

ORDER 

The  Accusations  served  on  respondents  Timothy  Barany,  Morgan  Black,  Annette 
Brown,  Heidi  Erlanger,  Joyce  Garrison,  Brandon  Harms,  Andrea  Ingham,  Heather  Katz, 
Ward  Lee,  Dawn  Malcolm,  Shannon  Millen,  James  Olsen,  Sherri  Soto,  Richard  Vega,  Mark 
Warhol,  and  Janice  Williamson  are  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  each  respondent 
before  May  15,  2004  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-05  school  year 
to  the  extent  of  16  full-time  equivalents  positions  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s 
resolution  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: 

Ye 3/o  ¢ 

LMI 

ALAN  S.METH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

~~ 

