BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
SPRECKELS  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

OAH  No.  N2004020461 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Michelle  Ball,  Elizabeth  Belz-Templeman,  |  — 
Nadene  Dermody,  Stephen  Dodd,  Rosie 
Filice,  Karen  Hawkins,  Rose  Kershing, 
Judith  Marcy,  Kristin  Mooney,  Holly 
Preece,  Roberta  Roberts,  Diana  Siegel, 
Maria  Sigala,  Carolyn  Starmer,  Kristina 
Szaszy-Jones,  Jaime  L.  Torres, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  15,  2003,  in  Salinas,  California. 

Sarah  Levitan  Kaatz  of  Lozano  Smith  represented  the  Spreckels  Union  School  District. 

Michelle  A.  Welsh  of  Stoner,  Welsh  &  Schmidt  represented  respondents  Michelle  Ball, 
Elizabeth  Belz-Templeman,  Nadene  Dermody,  Stephen  Dodd,  Rosie  Filice,  Karen  Hawkins, 
Rose  Kershing,  Judith  Marcy,  Kristin  Mooney,  Holly  Preece,  Roberta  Roberts,  Diana  Siegel, 
Maria  Sigala,  Carolyn  Starmer,  Kristina  Szaszy-Jones,  Jaime  L.  Torres,  all  of  whom  were 
present  except  for  Stephen  Dodd. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

2. 

3. 

Harold  Kahn  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  Super- 

intendent  of  the  Spreckels  Union  School  District  (District). 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

On  March  9,  2004,  Superintendent  Kahn  recommended  to  the  District’s  Board 

of  Trustees  (Board)  that  the  Board  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 
kinds  of  services. 
:

  

4. 

On  March  9,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  03-04/20  reducing  or 
discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  Superintendent  to  send  approp- 
riate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  services  may  be  terminated. 

5. 

On  or  about  March  1  1,  2004,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to 

6. 

All  respondents  are  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  to  deter- 
mine  if  there  is  cause  for  ternunating  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  An  accus- 
ation  was  served  on  respondents,  all  of  whom  are  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  notices  of 
defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional]  requirements  have  been  met. 

7. 

of  services  effective  June  30,  2004: 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds 

SERVICES 
Elementary  (K-5) 
Middle  School  Single  Subject  or  Core 
Literature 
Language  Arts 
Math 
Science 
Physical  Education 
Social  Science 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Music 
Title  I 
Principal,  Spreckels  School 
Principal/District  Program  Coordinator 
District Psychologist/Coordinator 

of  Special  Education  Services 

FTE! 
8.0 

5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

1.0 
16.0 

the District. 

8 

2 

9, 

10. 

TOTAL  REDUCTION 
The  Board’s  reduction  of  Services  was  prompted  by  a  severe  financial  crisis  in 

By  the  time  of  the  hearing  the  District  had  rescinded  the  layoff notice  to 

Tespondent  Nadene  Dermody  as a result  of  the  Board’s  rescission  of  the  1.0  F TE  reduction  in 

Music. 

At  the  hearing  the  District  rescinded  the  layoff notice  to  respondent  Judith 

Marcy. 
ee 

Full-time  equivalent  positions. 

  
 
  

11. 

There  is  no  attrition  for  the  District  to  take  into  account,  because  there  are  no 

retirements  or  resignations  of  certificated  employees  that  will  be  effective  before  the  2004-05 
school  year. 

12. 

Respondents  contend that  the  proposed  1.0  FTE  reduction  in  Title  I  services 

should  be  disallowed  because  this  reduction  will  leave  the  District  unable  to  provide 
mandated  ELD  (English  Language  Development)  services  next  year.  This  contention  is 
without  merit.  The  mandated  ELD  services  currently  provided  by  the  teacher  holding  the 
Title  I  position  to  be  cut  will  be  provided  in  a  different  manner  next  year.  Although  District 
administrators  have  not  reached  a  final  decision  on a  plan,  they  have  determined  that  the 
required  services  can  be  provided  by  reconfiguring  the  teaching  assignments  of  teachers 
authorized  to  provide  these  services  (those  holding  a  CLAD  or  BCLAD  certification).?  The 
District  will  be  able  to  administer  the  required  testing  with  the  two  teachers  currently  doing 
so  in  Title  I  positions.  (No  other  teachers  have  the  special  training  qualifying  them  to 
administer  this  testing.)  The  District  is  not  required  at  this  point  to  have a  final  plan  in  place 
for  ELD  services  next  year. 

13. 

Board  Resolution  No.  03-04/20  contains  the  following  provision  for  determin-. 
ing  relative  seniority  among  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  in  probation- 
ary  status: 

...[FJor  the  purposes  of  determining  the  order  of  layoff  for 
employees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  the  Governing  Board 
determines  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students,  for  the 
2004-05  school  year,  are  in  priority  order  as  follows:  (1)  greatest 
number  of  years  of  teaching  experience  with  the  District;  (2) 
possession  of  a  clear  credential;  (3)  greatest  breadth  of 
experience  teaching  classes  with  multiple  grades;  (4)  greatest 
breadth  of  experience  teaching  different  grade  levels  in  a  K-5 
school  (for  K-5)  teachers  or  the  greatest  breadth  of  experience 
teaching  in  different  grade  levels  in  areas  authorized  by 
credential  (for  middle  school  teachers);  (5)  bilingual  credential 
in  English/Spanish  and/or  possession  of  a  CLAD  or  BCLAD 
certification. 

14. 

To  break  seniority  ties  the  District  applied  the  above  criteria  serially, i.e.,  ifa 
tie  could  be  broken  utilizing  the  first  criterion  the  District  did  not  consider  the  other  criteria, 
and  the  District  utilized  the  criterion  next  in  order  only  if  application  of  the  previous  criterion 
did  not  break  the  tie.  The  District  did  not  have  to  go  beyond  the  third  criterion  to  break  any 
of  the  ties  involving  respondents. 

  

*  CLAD  stands  for  Cross-Cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development,  and  BCLAD  stands 

for  Bilingual,  Cross-Cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development.

  

15. 

Superintendent  Kahn  explained  that  the  priority  order  of  the  tie-breaking 
criteria  reflects  the  Board’s  philosophy  of  how  best  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its 
students.  The  rationale  for  giving  the  highest  priority  to  the  number  of  years  of  teaching 
experience  in  the  District  is  the  belief  that  a  teacher  who  has  been  teaching  longer  in  the 
District  will  have  a  greater  understanding  of  the  students,  the  District  and  the  community,  and 
this  translates  into  a  greater  opportunity  for  success  as  a  teacher.  The  Board  considered 
breadth  of  experience  teaching  classes  with  multiple  grades  and  teaching  different grade 
levels  to  be  more  important  than  CLAD  or  BCLAD  certification. 

16. 

Respondents  challenge  the  tie-breaking  criteria  and  how  they  were  applied. 

They  contend  that  the  criteria  and  their  relative  priority  do  not  meet  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students,  especially  as  to  CLAD  or  BCLAD  certification  being  given  the  lowest 
priority  at  a  time  when  the  District  needs  teachers  with  such  certification  to  provide  ELD 
services.  Respondents  also  claim  that  the  District  failed  to  comply  with  the  Board’s  - 
resolution  when  it  applied  the  tie-breakers  serially  rather  than  using  a  point  system  where  a 
teacher  is  given  a  certain  number  of points  for  each  criterion  he  or  she  meets. 

The  Board  has  broad  latitude  in  establishing  and  applying  tie-breaking  criteria. 
Education  Code  section  44955?  requires  only  that  the  District  determine  the  order  of  seniority 
for  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of paid  service  “solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof,”  and  the  District  has  met  this  mandate.  Respondents  may 
disagree  with  the  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  and  how  they  were  prioritized,  but  the  criteria 
and  their  priority  order  are  rationally  related  to  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 
While  there  is  arguably  some  ambiguity  in  the  Board’s  resolution  as  to  how  the  tie-breaking 
criteria  should  be  applied,  the  District’s  serial  application  of  the  tie-breakers  was  a  reasonable 
way  to  effectuate  the  Board’s  stated  priorities. 

17. 

The  parties  stipulated  to  the  following  matters  conceming  the  seniority  and 

credentials  of  respondents: 

a.  Michelle  Ball  has  completed  all  the  CLAD  requirements  and  applied  for 
certification  from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC). 
b.  Elizabeth  Belz-Templeman’s  seniority  date  is  September  14,  2000,  and  that  gives 
her  permanent  status. 
c. 
Rosie  Filice  has  an  English  Language  Acquisition  (ELA)  authorization. 
d. 
Rose  Kershing  has  a  CLAD  certification,  and  it  is  on  file  with  the  District. 
€. 
Judith  Marcy’s  seniority  date  is  August  20,  1998,  based  on  her  service  as  an 
intern.  She  has  CLAD  and  SDAIE‘  certification  and  is  teaching  English  under  a 
section  44256  board  resolution  for  the  current  school  year  only. 

f.  Carolyn  Starmer’s  standard  teaching  credential  counts  as  a  clear  credential. 

: 
. 

  

>  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

4  Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English. 

-4. 

   

18. 

Respondent  Holly  Preece  asks  that  her  seniority  date  be  changed  from  August 
25,  1999  to  August  19,  1999.  Preece  testified  that  her  paid  status  in  a  probationary  position 
began  on  August  19,  1999  before  school  started  that  year  because  she  had  to  move  to  a 
different  classroom.  (She  apparently  had  been  a  long-term  substitute  replacing  someone  on 
leave  who  at  the  last  minute  came  back.)  Preece  is  entitled  to  have  her  seniority  date  changed 
to  August  19,  1999.  This  change  will  not  affect  her  place  on  the  seniority  list,  however. 

Preece  testified  that  she  has  completed  the  requirements  for  a  clear  teaching  credential 
and  submitted  the  documentation  to  CTC.  The  District  agreed  to  change  its  records  to  reflect 
the  clear  credential  once  it  gets  confirmation  that  the  credential  has  been  issued  by  CTC. 

19.  |  Respondent  Carolyn  Starmer  is  a  permanent  employee  whose  first  date  of  paid 

service  in  a  probationary  position  was  August  21,  2000.  Her  seniority  date  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  is  August  21,  2000.  Starmer  was  a  respondent  in  the  District’s  layoff  proceed- 
ing  for  the  2003-04  school  year,  and  at  the  administrative  hearing  in  that  matter  on  April  4, 
2003  she  stipulated  that  August  21,  2000  was  her  seniority  date.°  On  February  9,  2004, 
Starmer  signed  a  Verification  of  Employment  Information  form  confirming  the  accuracy  of 
the  District’s  information  about  her  employment,  including  her  seniority  date  of  August  21, 
2000. 

Starmer  now  claims  that  her  seniority  date  should  be  changed  to  sometime  in  March 

2000.  In  December  1999  she  was  hired  for  a  long-term  substitute  position  to  replace  Victoria 
McDowell  during  her  pregnancy  leave  from  the  beginning  of  January  to  mid-February  2000. 
As  Starmer  recalls,  McDowell  took  an  additional  two  weeks  of  leave.  When  McDowell 
returned  to  work  it  was  to  share  her  position  with  Starmer.  On  March  13,  2000  Starmer 
signed  a  temporary  contract  with  the  District  for  a  .50  FTE  position.  She  taught  under  this 
contract  through  the  end  of  the  1999-2000  school  year.  Starmer  believes  McDowell  returned 
from  leave  (and  they  began  sharing  the  position)  before  March  13,  2000. 

Starmer  asserts  that  her  correct  seniority  date  is  the  date  in  early  March  2000  when 

_ 
she  began  teaching  in  the  shared  position  with  McDowell.  She  first  argues  that  since  she  was 
not  replacing  an  employee  on  leave  she  must  be  considered  a  probationary  employee. 
(Section  44920,  in  essence,  prohibits  a  school  district  from  having  a  greater  number  of 
temporary  employees  than  employees  on  leave.)  It  is  unknown  how  many  employees  were 
on  leave  in  March  2000  and  how  many  temporary  employees  the  District  had.  It  is  also 
unknown  whether  McDowell  was  considered  to  still  be  on  leave  for  .50  FTE  of  her  position 
or  whether  she  had  relinquished  that  .50  FTE  when  she  returned  to  work  half-time. 

~  Starmer  next  argues  that  under  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High 
School  District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911,  she  is  entitled  to  probationary  status  because  she  did 
not  receive  written  notice  of  her  status  as  a  temporary  employee  (i.e.,  her  temporary  contract) 

  

°  Official  notice  is  taken  of  the  proposed  decision  of  Administrative  Law  Judge  Mary-Margaret 

Anderson  in  OAH  No.  N2003030561,  in  which  Starmer’s  stipulation  is  recited  in  the  findings.  It  is 
presumed  that  the  District  adopted  the  proposed  decision  as  its  decision  in  the  matter. 

-5-

until  after  she  started  teaching  in  the  shared  Position  covered  by  the  contract.  In  January 
2003  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  in  Kavanaugh  that  under  section  44916°  a  teacher 
who  was  not  given  written  notice  of her  status  as  a  temporary  employee  on  or  before  her  first 
day  of paid  service  must  be  considered  a probationary  employee. 
If  Starmer’s  seniority  date  were  changed  from  August  21,  2000  to  sometime  in  March 
2000,  she  would  move  up  on  the  seniority  list  ahead  of four  respondents  —  Karen  Hawkins, 
Maria  Sigala,  Rose  Kershing  and  Jaime  Torres  —  who  share  the  August  21,  2000  seniority 
date  but  who  came  out  ahead  of  Starmer  when  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied.  Starmer 
would  still  be  laid  off  if  the  District  makes  all  the  Proposed  cuts  in  services. 

© 

Assuming  that  Starmer  Started  teaching  in  the  temporary  shared  position  before  she 
signed  the  contract  on  March  13,  2000,  under  section  44916  as  clarified  by  Kavanaugh  she 
would  be  entitled  to  probationary  status  as  of  the  date  she  started  teaching  in  that  position. 
The  three-year  statute  of  limitations,  if  applicable,  would  not  have  Started  running  until 

While  neither  party  brought  up  the  fact  that  Starmer  stipulated  in  the  2003  layoff 
hearing  that  August  21,  2000  was  her  seniority  date,  it  is  this  stipulation  that  defeats  her 
current  claim  to  an  earlier  seniority  date.  Starmer  Was  represented  in  that  proceeding  by  the 
same  legal  counsel,  and  she  had  the  Opportunity  to  raise  and  litigate  a Kavanaugh  seniority 

°  Section  44916  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

...At  the  time  of  initial  employment  during  each  academic  year,  each 
new  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall  receive  a written 

  

 
  
  

stipulation.  Under  the  doctrine  of  collateral  estoppel,  Starmer  is  bound  by  that  finding. 
Starmer’s  seniority  date  shall  not  be  changed  from  August  21,  2000. 

20. 

Respondent  Kristina  Szaszy-Jones  is  a  “university  intern”  in  a  teaching 

internship  program  established  by  the  District  in  cooperation  with  Chapman  College  under 
the  authority  of  the  Teacher  Education  Internship  Act  of  1967.’  She  started  teaching  in  the 
District  on  August  20,  2001,  originally  under  an  emergency  permit  and  then  as  a  pre-intern. 
(She  completed  her  pre-internship  in  June  2003.)  Szaszy-Jones  challenges  the  District’s 
failure  to  classify  her  as  a  probationary  employee  and  include  her  on  the  seniority  list.  This 
challenge  is  rejected.  The  statutory  scheme  authorizing  university  interns  has  no  provision 
for  classifying  such  interns  as  probationary  employees.  Indeed,  section  44464  states  that  “the 
rights  provided  by  Sections  44948  [protecting  probationary  employees  from  mid-year 
dismissal  or  suspension  without  cause]  and  44949  [governing  layoff  of  permanent  and 
probationary  employees]  shall  not  be  afforded  to  interns.”  (This  is  in  contrast  to  the  statutory 
treatment  of  district  interns,  who  are  required  to  be  classified  as  probationary  employees 
under  section  44885.5.) 

21.  |  Respondents  contend  that  the  District  has  not  established  that  the  layoffs  are 
“related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof”  as  required  by  Education  Code 
section  44949,  but  this  contention  is  without  merit.  In  determining  how  to  allocate  its 
resources,  a  school  district  is  given  discretion  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
services.  While  almost  any  reduction  or  elimination  of  services  is  arguably  detrimental  to  at 
least  some  students  (not  to  mention  school  employees),  in  the  absence  of  a  showing  that  the 
district’s  decision  is  arbitrary  or  capricious,  its  action  is  related  to  the  overall  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  its  pupils.  In  this  case,  the  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  Finding  7  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

22. 

All  contentions  made  by  respondents  not  specifically  addressed  above  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

23. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained 

by  the  Board  to  perform  services  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955, 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  pursuant  to  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2004-05  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

  

” 

§§  44450,  et  seq.

3. 

Cause  exi 
August  25,  1999  to  August  19,  1999, 

sts  to  change  the  seniori 

ty  date  of respondent  Holly  Preece  from 

© 

1. 

2. 

August  25,  1999  to  August  19,  1999. 

The  District  shal]  change  the  seniority  date  of respondent  Holly  Preece  from 
Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  se 
use  of  the  reduction  or  discontin 

Tvices  will  not  be  required  for 
uation  of particular  kinds  of 

the  2004-05  school  year  beca 
Services. 

DATED: 

  

Kk  22,270 

  

     

MUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of Administrative Hearings 

  

   
  

