BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LONG  BEACH  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L-2004030655 

MARK  SNYDER, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  above  captioned  matter  was  heard  on  April  23,  2004  in  Long  Beach, 

California  by  Carolyn  D.  Magnuson,  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Kate  Phillips,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Respondent. 

Spencer  E.  Covert,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Complainant. 

1.  Complainant,  Victor  R.  Collins,  filed  the  Accusation  in  the  instant  case 

while  acting  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Executive  Vice  President  of  Human  Resources  for 
the  Long  Beach  Community  College  District  (“District”). 

Evidence  was  received,  the  matter  argued,  and  the  case  submitted  for  decision 
on  the  hearing  date.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby  makes  her  factual  findings,  legal 
conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follows: 

cause  for  not  reemploying  him  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.     

3.  On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  gave  the  Respondent  notice  that 

4,  Respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was 

he  would  not  be  reemployed  by  the  District  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

2.  Mark  Snyder  (“Respondent”)  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

©} 

5.  Thereafter,  Complainant  filed  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  and  had  it 

served  on  the  Respondent.  Respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense  to  the  Accusation. 

6.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

7.  On  March  9,  2004,  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  (“Board”)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  030904  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  as  follows: 

a.  Discontinue  all  sections  of  Electronics  instruction  except  CISCO  Networking  and 
Robotics  Technology; 

b.  Reduce  one  section  of  Machine  Tool  50A  and  50B,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  4.25 
Teaching  Units;  and 

c.  Discontinue  the  services  of  an  instructor  assisting  in  the  teaching  of  Machine  Tool, 
which  is  the  equivalent  of  10.25  Teaching  Units. 

8.  As  aresult  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services,  it  has  become 

necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  by  one. 

9,  The  District  compiled a  list  of  certificated  employees  and  their  seniority 

@ 

dates.  For  those  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  service,  a  lottery  was  held  to  break  the 
tie  and  determine  seniority.  These  lotteries  were  organized  and  overseen  by  District 
personnel. 

10. 

In  February  2002,  the  District  advertised  a  faculty  opening  for  “.  . 

.  one 
full-time  tenure  track  Electronics/Electrical  Instructor  for  the  2000-2001  academic  year”  at 
Long  Beach  City  College  (“LBCC”).  The  bulletin  went  on  to  describe  the  duties  of  such  an 
instructor,  which  included  “.  . 
Electrical  Technology...  .” 

.  teaching  a  variety  of  courses  in  the  field  of  Electronics  and 

11.  Respondent,  who  has  a  bachelor  of  science  degree  in  electronic 

engineering,  applied  for  this  position.  As  part  of  the  application  process,  Respondent  was 
asked  to  perform  lecture  and  laboratory  demonstrations.  For  each  of  these  demonstrations, 
he  was  given  the  choice  between  demonstrating  in  the  Electrical  or  Electronics  subject  area. 
Respondent  chose  in  both  instances  to  present  the  Electronic  subject  matter. 

12. 

In  May  2000,  the  District  offered  to  employ  Respondent  “.  . 

Electronics/Electricity  Instructor  for  the  2000-2001  school  year.”  Respondent  accepted  the 
employment.  His  hire  date  is  August  11,  2000. 

.  as  an 

   

13.  At  the  same  time,  the  District  hired  another  instructor  for  the 

Electronics/Electricity  department.  Although  the  two  new  instructors  had  the  same  date  of 
hire,  Respondent’s  number  in  the  tie-breaking  lottery  was  lower.  Thus,  Respondent  is  senior 
to  Dr.  Shaw. 

14.  However,  Dr.  Shaw  is  now  assigned  as  the  interim  dean  of  the  LBCC 

Department  of  Health  and  Sciences.  She  is  not  teaching  in  the  Electronics/Electrical 
department.  Prior  to  March  15,  2004,  Dr.  Shaw  was  not  given  notice  of  intent  not  to 
reemploy  her  as  an  administrator;  therefore,  she  will  be  employed  in  an  administrative 
capacity  at  LBCC  in  the  2004-2005  school  year,  although  she  does  retain  retreat  rights  to  her 
former  position. 

15.  The  District’s  Executive  Vice  President  of  Human  Resources  testified  that 
each  District  faculty  member  is  assigned  one  or  more  faculty  service  areas  (“FSA”)!  in  which 
s/he  is  certified  to  teach  and  is  assigned  to  courses  or  duties  falling  within  the  ambit  of 
her/his  certification(s).  Certification  can  be  obtained  either  by  meeting  the  required 
academic  standards  or  by  demonstrating  other  skills  and  experiences  that  would  qualify  an 
individual  to  teach  a  particular  subject.  The  determination  of  an  individual’s  eligibility  to  be 
certified  in  a  particular  FSA  is  initially  made  by  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Department 
at  the  time  a  faculty  member  is  first  hired.  Thereafter,  a  faculty  member  may  apply  to  the 
Equivalency  Committee  for  further  FSA  certifications. 

16.  When  Respondent  was  hired  by  the  District,  the  Human  Resources 

personnel  assigned  Respondent  FSAs  in  Electronics  and  Machine  Tool.  These  are  also  the 
areas  in  which  Respondent  was  assigned  to  teach.  It  was  not  established  that  Respondent 
was  informed  at  the  time  he  was  hired  what  FSAs  had  been  assigned  to  him.  Dr.  Shaw  was 
given  a  FSA  in  Electricity  and  assigned  to  teach  classes  in  that  discipline. 

17.  As  early  as  June  2003,  Respondent  was  aware  that  the  District  did  not 
consider  him  qualified  to  teach  Electricity  courses  because  he  did  not  hold  a  FSA  in  that 
discipline.  Respondent  also  knew  then  that  he  could  apply  to  the  LBCC  Equivalency 
Committee  for  an  Electricity  FSA.  However,  Respondent  refused  to  make  that  application 
because  he  believed  he  had  been  hired  to  teach  in  both  Electronics  and  Electricity  and  was 
qualified  to  teach  both.  In  Respondent’s  view,  if  he  applied  for  the  Electricity  FSA,  he 
would  be  admitting  that  he  had  not  been  qualified  to  teach  in  Electricity  at  the  time  he  was 
hired. 

  

+  Education  Code  section  87743.3  provides:  “Each  faculty  member  shall  qualify  for  one  or  more  faculty  service 
areas  at  the  time  of  initial  employment.  A  faculty  member  shall  be  eligible  for  qualification  in  any  faculty  service 
area  in  which  the  faculty  member  has  met  both  minimum  qualifications  pursuant  to  Section  87356  and  district 
competency  standards.  After  initial  employment,  a  faculty  member  may  apply  to  the  district  to  add  faculty  service 
areas  for  which  the  faculty  member  qualifies.  The  application  shall  be  received  by  the  district  on  or  before  February 
15  in  order  to  be  considered  in  any  proceeding  pursuant  to  Section  87743  during  the  academic  year  in  which  the 
application  is  received.”

18.  The  proposed  Electronics  class  schedule  for  the  fall  semester  2004 

contains  courses  in  robotics  and  Cisco  systems.  These  classes  will  be  assigned  to  full  time 
faculty  members  who  are  senior  to  Respondent.  A  one  unit  network  wiring  installation  class 
is  planned,  and  the  proposed  teacher  is  a  part  time  instructor  to  whom  Respondent  is  senior. 
If  that  class  is  actually  offered  in  the  fall  and  no  more  senior  faculty  member  is  assigned  to 
teach  it,  Respondent  should  be  assigned  to  it. 

19,  There  are  a  number  of  classes  proposed  for  the  fall  semester  2004  in 
Electricity  which  Respondent  believes  he  is  qualified  to  teach  that,  under  the  proposed 
schedule,  would  be  taught  by  part  time  faculty.  Respondent  feels  that,  because  he  was  hired 
to  teach  in  “Electronics/Electricity,”  because  the  subject  matter  of  Electronics  and  Electricity 
is  analogous,  and  because  he  has  assisted  in  teaching  some  Electricity  labs,  he  should  be 
retained  to  teach  these  Electricity  courses  instead  of  assigning  them  to  part  time  faculty. 

20.  Most  of  the  classes  proposed  for  the  fall  2004  semester  in  Machine  Tool 

are  being  taught  by  full  time  faculty  who  are  senior  to  Respondent.  The  two  proposed 
classes  to  be  taught  by  a  part  time  instructor  are  advanced  computer  programming  courses, 
and  Respondent  did  not  claim  to  be  competent  to  teach  those  classes. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

21.  Jurisdiction  was  established  pursuant  to  Education  Code’  section  87740 

and  87743  to  proceed  in  this  matter. 

22.  Section  87743.2  provides:  “Not  later  than  July  1,  1990,  each  community 

college  district  shall  establish  faculty  service  areas.  The  establishment  of  faculty  service 
areas  shall  be  within  the  scope  of  meeting  and  negotiating  pursuant  to  Section  3543.2  of  the 
Government  Code.”  Section  87743.1  defines  faculty  service  area  to  mean  “.  . 
.  a  service  or 
instructional  subject  area  or  group  of  related  services  or  instructional  subject  areas  performed 
by  faculty  and  established  by  a  community  college  district.” 

23.  Article  XVI  of  the  Agreement  between  the  Long  Beach  Community 

College  District  and  Community  College  Association  —  Long  Beach  City  College 
(“bargaining  agreement”  or  “contract”)  provides: 

“A.  Faculty  Service  Areas 

1.  Pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  code  Section  87743.3,  there  shall 
be  one  faculty  service  area  to  be  known  as  the  Long  Beach  Community 
College  Faculty  Service  Area. 

2.  Faculty  means  those  full-time  probationary  or  tenured  employees  who  are 
employed  in  positions  that  are  not  designated  as  supervisory  or  management 

  

* 

All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

4   

...  and  for  which  minimum  qualifications  for  hire  have  been  specified  in  the 
regulations  the  Board  of  Governors  adopted...  . 

3.  Competency  Standards 

All  faculty  who  meet  the  requirements  of  3.a.  and  any  one  of  the 
conditions  listed  under  3.b.  shall  be  considered  competent  in  a  specific 
discipline. 

a. 
Meet  the  minimum  qualifications  as  adopted  by  the  Board  of 
Governors  and  as  described  [by  statute].  Equivalency  granted  at  the 
time  of  initial  employment  in  the  District  shall  meet  the  minimum 
qualifications  for  the  faculty  member  in  the  discipline  for  which  it  was 
granted. 

and 

b. 

Any  one  of  the  following: 

(1).  Possess  a  valid  credential  authorizing  service  in  the 
discipline  through  either  a  major  or  minor,  or 

(2).  Previous  approval  by  the  Board  to  teach  in a  discipline  in 
which  the  Board  has  deemed  the  faculty  member  to  have  either 
a  major  or  minor,  or 

(3).  Prior  college  teaching  experience  in  a  course  that  is 
identical  to,  or  that  shares  most  of  the  major  elements  with,  any 
course  taught  in  the  discipline  in  the  Long  Beach  Community 
College  District,  or 

(4).  Possess  a  baccalaureate  or  higher  degree  showing  a  major  or 
minor  in  the  discipline,  or 

(5).  Possess  the  equivalent  of  a  minor,  which  shall  be  a 
minimum  of  twenty-four  (24)  semester  units  in  the  discipline 
with  a  minimum  of  twelve  (12)  upper  division  or  graduate  level 
units,  or 

(6).  For  disciplines  in  which  a  master’s  degree  is  not  available 
or  generally  expected,  possess  a  degree  plus  appropriate 
experience  plus  any  required  certificate  or  license  as  specified  in 
the  Board  of  Governor’s  Discipline  list  for  the  discipline  or  the 

equivalent.   

  

5.  [sic]  For  purposes  of  determining  competency  under  XVI.A.3.b.(3)  a 
Course  Equivalency  Committee  shall  be  formed  when  proof  of  previous 
college  teaching  experience  in  a  discipline  has  been  provided  to  the  District. 
The  Course  Equivalency  Committee  shall  determine  whether  this  experience  is 
identical  to,  or  shares  most  of  the  major  elements  with,  a  course  taught  in  the 
discipline  at  Long  Beach  City  College. 

i 

B.  Assignment 

1.  Faculty  members  hired  after  June  30,  1990,  shall  be  assigned  only  to  those 
disciplines  for  which  they  meet  the  minimum  qualifications  as  adopted  by  the  Board 
of  Governors  or  the  equivalency  standards  as  established  through  joint  agreement 
between  the  Academic  Senate  and  representatives  of  the  Board,  and  approved  by  the 
Board. 

Ce 

C.  Layoffs  and  Reductions  in  Force 

1.  No  tenured  or  probationary  unit  member  shall  be  deprived  of  his/her  position  for 
causes  other  than  those  specified  in  the  Education  Code. 

2.  The  service  of  no  tenured  employee  may  be  terminated  under  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render a  service  in  a  faculty  service  area  in  which  the  records  of  the  District 
maintained  pursuant  to  Section  87743.4  reflect  that  the  tenured  employee  possesses 
the  minimum  qualifications  prescribed  by  the  Board  of  Governors  and  is  competent  to 
serve  under  district  competency  criteria.” 

24.  The  collective  bargaining  agreement  establishes  standards  and  procedures 
that  are  substantially  different  from  the  procedures  described  by  the  Executive  Vice  President 
of  Human  Resources.  Initially,  the  contract  states  that  there  is  only  one  FSA  for  all  faculty 
members,  which  is  the  LBCC  Faculty  Service  Area.  Therefore,  based  on  the  FSA 
designation  alone,  any  faculty  member  is  eligible  to  teach  in  any  discipline  and  any  course 
offered  by  LBCC. 

25.  However,  Article  XVI.A.3  of  the  contract  also  requires  a  faculty  member 
to  qualify  as  competent  to  teach  in  a  particular  discipline  by  meeting  one  of  the  six  standards 
set  forth  in  Article  XVI.A.3.b.  Article  XVI.A.3.a  provides  that  “[e]quivalency  granted  at  the 
time  of  initial  employment  in  the  District  shall  meet  the  minimum  qualifications  for  the 
faculty  member  in  the  discipline  for  which  it  was  granted.” 

26.  Further,  according  to  the  bargaining  agreement,  the  authority  of  the 

Course  Equivalency  Committee  is  limited  to  determining  competency  under  the  provisions 
of  Article  XVI.A.3.b.(3).  The  contract  is  silent  on  the  procedure  by  which  post-hire

competency  based  on  the  other  Article  XVI.A.3.b  categories  is  to  be  determined.  In  fact,  the 
District  uses  the  Course  Equivalency  Committee  to  determine  all  post  employment 
competency  issues.  However,  contractually,  the  approval  of  the  committee  is  only  required 
when  the  claim  of  competency  falls  within  the  ambit  of  section  XVI.A.3.b.(3). 

27.  Applying  the  law  and  the  contract  provisions  to  Respondent’s  case 

requires  some  analysis.  First,  when  respondent  was  initially  hired,  per  the  contract,  he  was 
assigned  the  standard  FSA  of  LBCC  Faculty  Service  and  granted  two  competency  approvals: 
electronics  and  machine  tool.  The  bargaining  agreement  does  not  require  the  District  to 
personally  inform  a  new  employee  of  the  FSA  and  competency  determinations  that  have 
been  made  based  on  his  perceived  qualifications. 

28.  Education  Code  section  87743.3  provides  that  each  community  college 
faculty  member  shall  be  assigned  at  least  one  faculty  service  area  at  the  time  of  hiring  for 
which  the  new  instructor  meets  both  minimum  qualifications  under  section  87356  and  district 
established  competency  qualifications;  that  an  instructor  may  apply  to  the  employing  district 
to  add  FSAs  for  which  the  faculty  member  qualifies;  and  that  any  such  application  must  have 
been  made  by  February  15™  to  be  considered  in  any  proceeding  under  section  87743. 

29.  Both  the  statutes  and  the  bargaining  agreement  are  quite  clear;  to  be 

considered  competent  to  teach  in  a  discipline,  a  faculty  member  must  possess  a  FSA  in  the 
discipline.  Because  Respondent  does  not  possess  an  electricity  FSA,  he  is  ipso  facto  not 
competent  to  teach  electricity  —  at  least  for  the  purposes  of  a  reduction  in  force  proceeding. 

30. 

It  is  beyond  the  purview  of  this  proceeding  to  determine  whether,  at  the 
time  he  was  hired,  Respondent  should  have  been  determined  to  also  be  qualified  under  the 
provisions  of  Article  XIV.A.3.b  as  competent  to  teach  electricity.  Even  if  such  a 
determination  would  otherwise  be  within  the  province  of  this  hearing,  no  such  determination 
could  be  made  because  the  District’s  criteria  for  competency  to  teach  electricity  were  not  in 
evidence. 

31.  While  it  is  true  that  Respondent  does  have  some  past  experience  in 

teaching  in  the  field  of  electricity  and  it  is  equally  true  that  there  is  substantial  subject  matter 
overlap  between  electronics  and  electricity,  those  facts  are  only  relevant  if  they  are  the  basis 
of  a  timely  application  by  Respondent  to  the  District  for  an  additional  FSA. 

31.  There  is  a  well  established  legal  precedent  that  a  person  may  not  apply  to 
the  courts  for  relief  unless  he  has  first  exhausted  his  administrative  remedies.’  In  this  case, 
Respondent  chose  not  to  proceed  with  the  administrative  process  for  obtaining  the  FSA  to 
which  he  claims  entitlement;  and  he  is,  therefore,  not  entitled  to  relief  in  this  proceeding 
from  the  consequences  of  that  failure. 

  

3  The  general  rule  is  “where  an  administrative  remedy  is  provided  by  statute,  relief  must  be  sought  from.  the 
administrative  body  and  that  remedy  exhausted  before  the  courts  will  act.”  Abelleira  v.  District  Court  of Appeal 
(1941)  17  Cal.2d  280,  292.

32.  Respondent  also  believes  that  his  contract  with  the  District  is  to  teach  in 
both  disciplines  because  the  position  was  designated  as  being  an  instructor  for  Electronics/ 
Electricity. 

33.  However,  the  term  “Electronics/Electricity”  simply  identified  the 

department  in  which  Respondent  would  teach;  it  did  not  establish  that  he  was 
qualified/competent  to  teach  every  class  offered  within  the  Electronics/Electricity 
Department.  In  fact,  Respondent  acknowledged  that  there  were  courses  offered  within  the 

-  department  that  he  was  not  competent  to  teach. 

34.  Respondent  did  not  establish  that  he  was  competent  to  teach  courses  in 

electricity.  Therefore,  he  is  not  entitled  to  bump  part  time  instructors  or  junior  faculty 
members  who  are  being  retained  to  teach  courses  in  electricity. 

35.  While  it  was  established  that  there  is  one  course  that  is  on  the  proposed 
course  list  for  electronics  that  Respondent  could  teach,  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  the  final 
class  schedule  will  offer  that  course  or,  if  offered,  that  the  assigned  instructor  will  be  a  part 
time  faculty  member  or  one  who  is  junior  to  Respondent. 
Thus,  the  evidence  is  insufficient 
to  determine  that  a  teaching  assignment  exists  at  this  time  which  Respondent  is  qualified  to 
teach  for  which  a  more  junior  employee  is  being  retained. 

36. 

It  was  not  established  that  Dr.  Shaw  would  be  returning  to  her  teaching 
position  in  Electricity.  Moreover,  under  the  holding  in  Moreland  Teachers’  Association  v. 
Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  an  administrator  may  be  retained  over  a  more  senior 
colleague  when  the  administrator  has  a  special  credential  or  needed  skill  not  shared  by  the 
more  senior  employee.  Respondent  did  not  establish  that  he  was  qualified  to  replace  Dr. 
Shaw  either  as  an  interim  dean  or  as  a  teacher  in  any  electricity  class  that  could  be  assigned 
to  Dr.  Shaw  if  she  should  return  to  the  department. 

37. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  was  being  arbitrary  or  inequitable  in 

~ 

relying  on  existing  FSAs  in  making  layoff  determinations.  Nor  was  it  established  that  the 
District  has  retained  employees  junior  in  seniority  to  render  services  which  Respondent  is 
qualified  and  competent  to  perform 

38.  The  discontinued  courses  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  can  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  87743. 

39.  The  District’s  decision  to  discontinue  or  reduce  services  was  a  proper 

exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion.  The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to 
the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

//1 

//1 

 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained,  and  the  District  may  notify  the  Respondent  that 

his  services  will  not  be  needed  in  the  2003-2004  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  services  by  the  District. 

Dated:  May  6,  2004 

  

CAROLYN  D.  MAGNUSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

