BEFORE  THE 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  THE 
SAN  MATEO  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

-VEL  ANDERSEN-RANDLE;  JENNIFER 
ANGERS;  HARRIETT  BECK; 
KATHARINE  RIVEIRA;  JEANNE 
RUSSELL;  and  JENNIFER  SMITH 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N  2004030299 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  27,  2004,  in  San  Mateo,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the  San  Mateo 

Office  of  Education,  at  101  Twin  Dolphin  Drive,  Redwood  City,  California, 
Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (“OAH”), 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

John  C.  Beiers,  Deputy  County  Counsel,  Office  of  County  Counsel,  400  County 

Center,  Sixth  Floor,  Redwood  City,  California,  94063,  (“Complainant’s  counsel”) 
represented  the  Senior  Human  Resources  Administrator  for  the  Office  of  Education,  San 
Mateo  County. 

Costa  Kerestenzis,  Esq.,  of  Beeson,  Tayer  &  Bodine,  Attorneys  at  Law,  1001  6° 
Street,  Suite  500,  Sacramento,  California  95814-3324,  (“Respondents’  counsel”)  represented 
Respondents  in  this  matter.  However,  only  Respondents  Vel  Andersen-Randle  and  Jennifer 
Angers  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 
Respondent  Jeanne  Russell  remained  a  party 
to  this  matter;  but,  she  was  absent  from  the  hearing  proceeding.  Respondents’  counsel 
represented  that  Respondents  Harriett  Beck  and  Katharine  Riveira  had  withdrawn  her 
respective  Request  for  Hearing  form;  so  that  each  was  no  longer a  party  to  the  hearing. 

The  record  was  held  open  to  afford  the  parties  the  opportunity  to  file  written  closing 

arguments.  On  Thursday,  April  29,  2004,  OAH  received  written,  by  way  of  telefacsimile 
transmission  from  Respondents’  counsel a  letter  brief,  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  “6,”  and, 
the  document  was  received  as  argument.  Also,  on  April  29,  2004,  OAH  received  from 
Superintendent’s  counsel a  letter  brief,  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  “B;”  and,  the  letter  was 
received  as  argument. 

‘On  April  29,  2003,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

-1l-

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  5,  2004,  in  his  official  capacity,  Reynaldo  Santa  Cruz,  Senior  Human 

Resources  Administrator  for  the  San  Mateo  County  Office  of  Education  (“Complainant”), 
made  and  filed  the  respective  Accusations  regarding  Respondents  Vel  Andersen-Randle; 
Jennifer  Angers;  Harriett  Beck;  Katharine  Riveira;  Jeanne  Russell;  and  Jennifer  Smith. 

2. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  counsel  for  Respondent  declared  that 

Respondents  Harriett  M.  Beck,  Katharine  Riveira,  and  Jennifer  Smith  had  authorized  him  to 
withdraw  each  teacher’s  respectively  filed  Request  for  Hearing.  Accordingly,  the  proceeding 
did  not  include  evidence  regarding  their  interests. 

3. 

Respondents  Vel  Andersen-Randle  (“Respondent  Andersen-Randle”),  Jennifer 

Angers  (“Respondent  Angers”),  and  Jeanne  Russell  (“Respondent  Russell”)  are  certificated 
employees  of  the  Office  of  Education,  who  contest  the  instant  proposed  teacher  lay-off 
action. 

Respondent  Angers  and  Respondent  Russell  credentialed  employees  are  probationary 

teachers  in  either  the  first  year  or  the  second  year  of  service  to  the  Office  of  Education. 
Respondent  Andersen-Randle  is  a  teacher  with  permanent  or  tenured  status  with  the  Office 
For  the  current  school  term,  each  Respondent  has  held  an  assignment  in  the 
of  Education. 
Community  School  program  of  the  Office  of  Education. 

© 

4. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  Office  of  Education’s  Superintendent  of  Schools 

adopted  Resolution  number  04-3. 

The  resolution  recites  that  it  had  become  necessary  for  the  Office  of  Education  to 

reduce  and/or  to  discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year, 
particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of  7  (seven)  FTE  (full  time  equivalent)  positions  as 
follows: 

Teachers,  Court/Community  School 

..............  7.0  FTE  positions 

5. 

The  parties  stipulate  and  agree  that  by  individual  letter,  the  Office  of 

Education’s  dispatched  respective  preliminary  notice’  to  a  number  of  probationary  and 
permanent  teachers,  including  each  respondent  named  in  Factual  Finding  1,  above.  The 
preliminary  notice  informed  the  subject  certificated  employees  that  the  Office  of  Education’s 
County  Superintendent  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  discontinue  the  particular  service 
provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination 
of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of  the  remaining  three 
respondents  learned  the  Office  of  Education  would  not  reemploy  the  individuals  in  the 
certificated  positions  each  had  worked  during  the  current  year. 

1 

  

“Notice  that  Services  Will  Not  be  Required.”

  

Also,  in  accordance  with  the  stipulation  between  the  parties,  the  letter  conveyed  to 

each  Respondent  that  no  certificated  employee  of  the  Office  of  Education  having  less 
seniority  than  each  respective  respondent  would  be  retained  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  to 
render a  service  that  each  respondent  is  credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students 
under  the  Office’s  competency  criteria. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  each  respondent  from  the  Office  of 

Education’s  Superintendent  states  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s  Board’s  intent  to 
eliminate  the  course  as  taught  by  respondents. 

7 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

8. 

District?’s  Human  Resources  Senior  Administrator  timely  served  upon  each 
respondent  the  Accusation,  dated  April  5,  2004,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent 
filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

9. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

10. 

|  Respondents  aver  that  the  Office  of  Education’s  action  is  procedurally 

defective  and  improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  elimination  of  7.0  FTE  positions,  and  the 
corresponding  lay-off  of  credentialed  employees,  in  the  Community  Schools  Program  is 
contrary  to  law  and  unnecessary. 

In  particular,  Respondents  contend  that  the  lay-off  directive  will  deprive  troubled 

students,  who  are  enrolled  in  the  Community  Schools,  of  essential  educational  services  that 
are  best  offered  in  the  setting  of  the  Community  Schools.  Furthermore,  Respondents  aver 
that  elimination  of  Community  Schools  will  violate  federal  law  (i.e.,  Individuals  with 
Disabilities  Act  (“IDEA”),  29  United  States  Code  section  794,  et.  seq.)  because  certain 
special  education  youth  may  not  have  Individual  Education  Plans  (IEPs)  properly  crafted  and 
executed  outside  the  Community  School  setting. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

11. 

No  Respondent  offered  evidence,  under  oath,  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

Nor  did  Respondents  call  any  expert  witness  to  offer  evidence  in  support  of  the  contentions 
argued  by  Respondents’  counsel.

Acts  by  Designees  of  the  Office  of Education 

12. 

John  Mehl,  Ed.D.,  the  Superintendent  for  the  Office  of  Education  of  San 

Mateo  County  (“the  Superintendent”),  appeared  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  to  provide 
credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2004-2005  school 

years  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  Office  of  Education’s 
budget. 

On  March  11,  2004,  the  San  Mateo  County  Probation  Officer  informed  the 
Superintendent  that  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  no  probation  employees  would  be  assigned 
to  community  school  class  rooms.  Probation  Officers  at  the  community  school  rendered  vital 
assistance  to  classroom  teachers  by,  among  other  things,  maintaining  security  in  the  © 
classrooms,  which  included  students  who  have  been  released  from  facilities  for  juveniles 
convicted  of  crimes.  Probation  Officers  also  maintain  attendance  by  tracking  down  tardy  or 
The  Superintendent  expressed  that  the  community  school  program  can  not 
truant  students. 
operate  safely  without  the  presence  of  probation  officers  at  the  facilities.  Although  the  San 
Mateo  County  Probation  Officer  eventually  expressed  a  compromise  position  to  pay  half  the 
costs  of  probation  officers  at  the  community  schools,  under  the  plan  the  Superintendent 
would  be  required  to  pay  $128,000  for  the  ensuing  school  year  in  order  to  gain  the  necessary 
number  of  probation  officers  at  the  four  community  schools”  of  the  Office  of  Education. 

@ 

In  order  to  partially  aid  the  Office  of  Education  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for 

the  ensuing  school  year,  the  Superintendent  reasonably  decided  that  certain  certificated 
positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  to  properly  maintain  safety  and  security  for  the 
community  schools  program. 

The  Superintendent  in  his  official  capacity  was  reasonable  in  his  exercise  of 

discretion  in  executing  the  procedures  associated  with  lay-offs  required  by  the  subject 
resolution. 
the  San  Mateo  County  Office  of  Education’s  Resolution  04-3. 

The  Superintendent  was  not  arbitrary,  capricious  nor  fraudulent  in  carrying  out 

13. 

Ms  Susan  Larramendy,  Associate  Superintendent  for  Student  Services  of  the 

San  Mateo  County  Office  of  Education  (“Ms  Larramendy”),  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  offer 
credible  and  compelling  evidence. 

Ms  Larramendy  confirmed  that  the  San  Mateo  County  Chief  Probation  Officer’s 

decision  to  seek  partial  funding  from  the  Office  of  Education  for  retention  of  probation 
officers  in  classrooms  of  the  Community  School  would  impact  the  Office  of  Education  in  an 
amount  of  $128,000. 
sought  by  the  Chief  Probation  Officer. 

The  Office  of  Education  did  not  have  surplus  funds  to  absorb  the  costs  | 

2 

  

The  Gateway  Center,  Community  School  North,  Community  School  Central  and  Community  School South. 

  

-4.

  

Ms  Larramendy  represented  that  20%  of  students,  who  are  enrolled  in  the  community 
schools  program,  have  learning  disabilities  or  are  classified  as  special  education  needs  youth. 
Some  of  the  students  within  the  Office  of  Education’s  Community  Schools  are  eligible  to 
services  under  the  federal  government  program  known  as  IDEA?  and  have  educational  plans 
as  specified  in  IEP  (“individual  education  plan”)  documents. 

But,  Ms  Larramendy  established  that  under  IDEA  the  “school  district  of  residence”  is 

ultimately  responsible  as  the  “local  educational  agency”  to  assure  that  affected  students 
receive  free  and  appropriate  education  under  the  federal  law.  Ms  Larramendy’s  office  has 
informed  the  local  school  districts  of  the  prospect  that  the  students  currently  in  the 
community  schools  must  be  absorbed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  due  to  closure  of  the Office 
of  Education’s  program  for  such  students.  Moreover,  Ms  Larramendy  showed  that  other 
alternatives  exists  (for  example,  continuation  schools  and  community  day  schools  as 
operated  by  local  high  school  districts)  for  the  provision  of  educational  services  to  students 
now  in  the  Office  of  Education  Community  Schools  program. 

Ms  Larramendy  offered  that  the  IEPs  for  special  education  students  now  in  the 

Community  Schools  program  will  be  crafted  to  determine  the  appropriate  placement  next 
year  for  the  students,  under  the  principle  of  “least  restrictive  environment,  which  may  show 
the  best  setting  to  be  a  regular  school  program. 

14. 

Mr.  Michael  Guevara,  Human  Resources  Coordinator  for  the  San  Mateo 

County  Office  of  Education  (“Mr.  Guevara”)  appeared  at  the  hearing  to  offer  credible  and 
persuasive  evidence. 

Upon  learning 

that  the  Office  of  Education  was  required  to  initiate  lay-off 

proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  Mr.  Guevara  and  other  employees  of  the 
Office  of  Education  effected  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority 
list  for  the  Office  of  Education’s  teachers. 

Mr.  Guevara  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  Office  of  Education’s  seniority  list 
for  probationary  and  permanent  employees  the  dates  that  established  first  day  of  paid  service 
to  the  Office  of  Education  by  the  permanent  and  probationary  teachers,  who  have  standing 
under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

Mr.  Guevara  established  that  at  the  time  of  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  notice  on 

March  15,  2004,  Respondent  Russell  and  Respondent  Angers  possessed  Multiple  Subject 
Credentials.  Neither  respondent  held  a  credential  in  special  education  disciplines. 

Mr.  Guevara  showed  the  Respondent  Andersen-Randle  had  been  known  by  his  office 
to  hold  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  until  near  the  date  of  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  notice. 
However,  a  few  days  before  March  15,  2004,  the  Office  of  Education’s  Human  Resources 

  

Individuals  with  Disabilities  Act,  29  U.S.C.  section  794,  et  seq. 

-5S- 

3 

  

 

learned  that  Ms  Andersen-Randle  held  a  Learning  Handicapped  credential.  But,  Respondent 
Andersen-Randle  offered  no  evidence  that  she  registered  the  specialized  credential  with  the 
District  as  of  the  date  of  execution  of  her  contract  with  the  Office  of  Education,  or  before  a 
date  shortly  before  March  15,  2004.  Moreover,  Respondent  Andersen-Randle  possessed  no 
credential  that  would  enable  her  to  bump  into  a  position  held  by  a  teacher  to  be  retained  for 
next  year  by  the  Office  of  Education.  And,  Respondent  Andersen-Randle  provides  no 
competent  evidence  that  the  Office  of  Education  has  retained  any  faculty  member  junior  to 
her  for  which  Ms  Andersen-Randle  possesses  a  credential  and  is  competent  to  teach  or  to 
provide  service  to  the  Office  of  Education’s  students. 

@ 

Ultimate  Findings 

15.  | Nocompetent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed 
elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  the  Office 
of  Education  will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services  for 
which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE 
positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

16. 

The  decision  of  the  Office  of  Education’s  Superintendent  to  eliminate  or 

discontinue  a  total  of  7.0  FTE  positions  as  specified  in  Resolution  04-3,  including  the 
positions  held  by  each  respondent,  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the 
Superintendent’s  determination  was  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  discretion  bestowed  by 
law  upon  the  Office  of  Education. 

@ 

17. 

The  Office  of  Education’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  the 

subject  full  time  equivalent  positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by 
respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  Office  of  Education 
and  its  overall  student  population. 

18. 

The  Superintendent  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination 
of  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Superintendent  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of 
the  elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  Office  of  Education  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  and  9. 

3, 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 
duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  Office  of  Education  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 

  

-6-

@ 

  
  

  

regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
Office  of  Education  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the 
non  reemployment  of  respondents. 

4. 

Although  not  on  point  as  to  the  facts  pertaining  to  Respondent  Andersen- 

Randle,  the  recent  decision  in  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (March  15,  2004) 
2004  DJDAR  3221,  offers  some  guidance. 

The  Fine  appellate  court  opinion  sets  out  that  “Education  Code  section  44330  governs 
the  ‘[e]ffect  of  registration’  of  a  teaching  credential,  and  strongly  suggests  the  registration  of 
a  credential  operates  to  authorize  the  teacher’s  service  under  that  credential,  rather  than  the 
validity  date  of  that  credential....  [J]  Therefore,  registration  is,  by  statute,  the  sine  qua  non 
for  a  teacher’s  service  under  a  credential.  Without  registration  of  the  credential,  service  is 
not  authorized....  [J] 
In  short,  the  statute  does  not  compel  classification  retroactive  to  the 
validity  date  of  a  teaching  credential....” 

In  this  matter,  no  evidence  shows  that  before  early  March  2004  Respondent 

Andersen-Randle  properly  gave  notice  to  the  Office  of  Education  that  she  possesses  a 
credential  for  Learning  Handicapped  classroom  teaching  so  that  proper  consideration  could 
be  given  to  her  ability  to  bump  another  teacher,  with  less  seniority  or  qualifications.  But,  Mr. 
Guvera  showed  that  through  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  Office  of  Education  could  not 
identify  that  the  affected  respondent  would  have  been  retained  even  had  she  timely  registered 
the  credential  for  the  provision  of  learning  handicapped  teacher  services. 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in 
Factual  Findings  12  to  16,  inclusive,  and  18. 

6. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  each 
respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  Office  of  Education  and  its  students  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in  Factual 
Finding  17. 

 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained. 

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Vel  Andersen-Randle;  Jennifer 
Angers;  Harriett  Beck;  Katharine  Riveria;  Jeanne  Russell;  and  Jennifer  Smith,  that  their 
respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  San  Mateo  County 
Office  of  Education. 

DATED:  May  5,  2004 

  PERRY  O.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 
State  of  California 

  
  

     

