BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
CULVER  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2004020552 

Holly  Angel,  Dr.  Josephine  Basel, 
Marshanne  Kendrick,  Adrienne  Lockwood, 
Judy  Nahman-Stouffer,  Scott  Spector, 
Andrew  Sotelo,  Lynda  Tomlinson, 

Respondents. 

  

) 
) 
) 
). 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  hearing  in  the  above-captioned  matter  was  held  on  April  13,  2004,  at  Culver  City, 

California.  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  presided.  The  Complainant  was  represented  by  Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Atikinson, 
Andelson,  Loya,  Rudd  &  Romo.  Respondent  were  represented  by  Mr.  Lawrence 
Rosenzweig. 

At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  Complainant’s  counsel  confirmed  that  the  layoff  notice 

previously  issued  to  Respondent  Scott  Spector  had  been  withdrawn.  There  was  no 
appearance  by  Respondent  Josephine  Basel,  who  had  failed  also  to  request  a  hearing; 
Respondent  Addrienne  Lockwood  was  unable  to  attend,  but  was  represented  by  Mr. 
Rosenzweig.  To  clarify  the  record,  the  District’s  written  discovery  responses  are  received  as 
Exhibit  13,  and  the  District’s  trial  brief  is  identified  as  Exhibit  14. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing,  and  the  matter  submitted 
on  the  hearing  date.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby  makes  his  factual  findings,  legal 
conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follow. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Dr.  Laura  McGaughey  filed  the  accusation’  in  this  proceeding  in  her  official 
capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  Culver  City  Unified  School  District  (“the  District’). 

  

'  The  term  “accusation”  refers  to  a  type  of  pleading  utilized  under  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act,  Government 
Code  11503.  It  should  be  made  clear  that  the  Respondents  are  not  “accused”  in  the  every-day  sense  of  that  word, 
unless  it  can  be  said  they  are  accused  of  not  having  enough  seniority  to  retain  their  positions  with  the  district  in  the 

face  of  a  resolution  to  reduce  positions.  

2.  Each  of  the  Respondents  identified  in  the  caption  are  certificated  employees  of  the 

District. 

3.  On  March  2,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  resolution  number 

#23-2003-2004(HR),  to  reduce  and  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  no 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Specifically,  the  resolution  requires 
the  reductions  of  9.0  “FTE”—full  time  equivalents—as  follows: 

(A)  To  reduce  K-5  Classroom  Teaching  Services  by  4  FTE; 

(B)  To  reduce  High  School  Physical  Science  Teacher  Services  by  2  FTE; 

(C)  To  reduce  District  Librarian  Services  by  1  FTE; 

(D)  To  reduce  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  Services  by  2  FTE. 

4.  The  District  further  resolved  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at 
the  close  of  the  2003-2004  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent 
positions  due  to  the  reductions  or  discontinuance  of  the  services.  The  Governing  Board 
directed  the  Superintendent  to  implement  the  determination  to  reduce  services  by  nine  FTE. 

5.  Superintendent  McGaughey  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board,  in  writing,  that 

the  Respondents  be  notified  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Thereafter,  on  March 
11,  2004,  the  Respondents,  and  each  of  them,  were  personally  served  with  written  notice  that 
their  services  would  not  be  needed  in  the  2004-2005  school  year,  and  the  reasons  therefore, 
i.e.,  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  they  were  served  with  an 
accusation,  as  well  as  other  documents  relevant  to  this  proceeding. 

6.  Respondents  Angel,  Kendrick,  Lockwood,  Nahman-Stouffer,  Spector,  Sotelo,  and 

Tomlinson  all  requested  hearings,  in  a  timely  manner.  As  noted  above,  Respondent  Basel 
did  not  request  a  hearing,  and  has  waived  her  rights  to  contest  the  matter,  while  the  notice 
and  accusation  has  been  withdrawn  as  to  Respondent  Spector.”  All  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

7.  The  services  which  the  District  seeks  to  discontinue  or  reduce  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  * 

8.  The  decision  by  the  Governing  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  neither 

arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

  

*  The  notice  of  defense,  filed  on  behalf  of  all  Respondent’s  except  Dr.  Basel,  also  refers  to  a  Respondent  Jason 
Risher.  However,  there  is  no  evidence  in  the  record  that  the  District  was  proceeding  as  to  that  person,  who  the 
District  identified  as  a  temporary  employee.  Instead,  Mr.  Risher  received  a  notice  to  the  effect  that  his  temporary 
position  would  not  be  renewed. 

All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.

  

9.  The  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

10.  On  March  2,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  #24-2003-2004 

(HR),  which  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  used  for  determining  the  relative  seniority 
of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided  that 
the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  in 
accordance  with  specifically-designed  and  stated  factors,  such  as  the  nature  of  the  teachers’ 
credentials  and  the  nature  of  the  teachers’  experience. 

11.  The  District  has  generated  a  seniority  list  of  all  teachers.  As  to  the  Respondents 

herein,  it  accurately  states  their  date  of  hire,  or  seniority  date,  and  is  otherwise  based  on 
school  records  and  other  reliable  information.  This  finding  includes  Respondent  Angel, 
whose  date  of  hire  was  October  8,  2003,  and  Respondent  Kendrick,  who  was  hired 
November  10,  2003. 

12.  Respondent  Holly  Angel  has  a  child  development  permit  on  file  with  the  District, 

along  with  her  Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential.  She  has  taught  in  the  child 
development  area,  and  did  so  for  much  of  the  2002-2003  school  year.  Ms.  Angel  asserts  this 
should  allow  her  to  “bump”—displace—a  more  junior  teacher  or  teachers  who  hold  child 
development  permits.  However,  the  teachers  she  sought  to  bump—Cruz,  Rico,  and  Lopez— 
are  full  time  teachers  in  the  Child  Development  Program  and  not  subject  to  displacement  by 
Ms.  Angel. 

13.  Ms.  Marshanne  Kendrick  provided  evidence  that  she  holds  a  CLAD  certificate. 

However,  it  was  not  established  that  such  has  been  registered  with  the  County  Office  of 
Education.  As  no  other  teacher  has  her  date  of  hire,  it  appears  irrelevant,  as  there  is  no  tie 
that  would  be  broken  by  her  possession  of  the  certificate. 

14.  The  District  applied  its  tie-breaking  criteria  to  teachers  whose  seniority  date  was 

August  25,  2003. 
breaking  criteria  was  appropriately  applied  to  the  sixteen  teachers  listed  thereon. 

This  included,  among  others,  Respondents  Sotelo  and  Spector.  The  tie 

15.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  by  the  District  to 

render  a  service  for  which  a  Respondent  was  certificated  and  qualified  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  based  on  Factual  Findings  1  through  7.

2.  The  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services  within  the 

meaning  of  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949,  (See 
also  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179;  Zalec  v. 
Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.  App.  4"  838,  853-854.  This 
Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  3-9. 

3.  Cause  for  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which 

a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  based  on  Factual  Findings  10 
through  15. 

5.  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  to  fill.  In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may 
displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified 
School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.  3  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over 
senior  teachers—may  “skip”  that  senior  employee—if  the  junior  teacher  possesses  superior 
skills  or  capabilities  not  possessed  by  their  more  senior  colleagues.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais 
Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.  App.  3"  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers, 
Local  2393  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  Dist.  (1981)  116  Cal.  App.  3%  831.) 
No  Respondent  established  the  right  to  bump  a  junior  employee,  and  no  Respondent  established 
the  right  to  displace  or  “skip”  a  senior  employee. 

| 

6.  Ms.  Angel  may  not  displace  her  more  junior  co-workers  assigned  as  child 
development  teachers,  based  on  Santa  Clara  Federation  of Teachers,  supra,  116  Cal.  App.  3m 
at  849-850. 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusation(s)  is  sustained. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  9  full-time  equivalent  certificated 

positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  as  identified  in  Finding  3. 

H

3.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority  based  on  the 

© 

seniority  list  established  by  the  District  in  this  proceeding. 

April  30,  2003 

  

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

