BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BIGGS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

OAH  No.  N2004040090 

James  Rizzuto,  Cruz  Gutierrez, 
Tony  Reis,  Valerie  Erb,  Scott  Gates,  Vince 
Sormano,  and  Deborah  Waller 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2004,  in  Biggs,  California. 

David  E.  Robinett,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Biggs  Unified  School  District. 

Leslie  Beth  Curtis,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Langekamp  &  Curtis  filed  a  Notice  of 

Defense  on  behalf  of  all  of  the  respondents.’  At  hearing,  Ms.  Curtis,  stated  that  she 

-  represented  respondents  Deborah  Waller,  Vince  Sormano,  James  Rizzuto  and  Tony  Reis  to 
the  extent  that  their  interests  did  not  conflict.  These  respondents  represented themselves  to 
the  extent  that  their  interests  conflicted. 

Although  Notices  of  Defense  were  filed  by  and  on  behalf  of respondents  Cruz 
Gutierrez,  Valerie  Erb,  and  Scott  Gates,  these  respondents did  not  appear  through  Ms.  Curtis, 
nor  did anyone  appear  on  their  behalf. 

  

  

'  Kendi  Botts,  John  Hopper,  and  Rob  Gregor  didnot  file  a  Request  for  Hearing  after  being  served  with  layoff 
notices.  Thus,  they  were  not  served  with  Accusations.  Nevertheless,  the  Law  Office  of  Langekamp  &  Curtis  filed  a 

.  Notice  of  Defense  on  behalf  of  these  three  employees.  These  three  employees  did  not  appear  at  hearing  and 

Attorney  Leslie  Beth  Curtis  advised  that  she  did  not  represent  them.  Because  of  their  failures  to  file  Requests  for 
Hearing,  these  three  employees  are  not  respondents  in  this  action. 

The  District  agreed  to  rescind  the  layoff  notices  issued  to  Patty  Jones  and  Suzanne  Francis  at  a  pre  hearing 
conference,  Thus,  these  two  employees  are  no  longer  respondents  in  this  action.

  

The  matter  proceeded  in  respect  to  the  Lay  Off  Notices  issued  to  the  following 
employees;  James  Rizzuto,  Cruz  Gutierrez,  Tony  Reis,  Valerie  Erb,  Scott  Gates,  Vince 
Sormano,  and  Deborah  Waller,  as  these  employees  had  filed  Requests  For  Hearing,  been 
issued  Accusations,  and  had  filed  (either  individually  or  through  Langekamp  &Curtis)  a 
Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

The  record  remained  open  until  April  30,  2004,  to  allow  parties  to  submit  briefs.  Said 

briefs  were  timely  filed.  The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  30,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Biggs  Unified  School  District  (“District”)  operates  two  elementary 

schools,  one  middle  school,  one  high  school,  and  two  Community  Day  Schools.  The  District 
serves  approximately  750  students. 

2. 

Steven  Lee  Funk,  Ed.D  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions,  and 

the  actions  of  the  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted 
that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  6.49  full-time 

_ 
"equivalent  (“FTE”)  positions. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 
District. 

. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

7. 

On  March  10,  2004,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(the  Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  6.49  FTE 
positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year 

and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation.  

8. 

On  March  10,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2003/04  #9,  providing 

for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

 
S
D
O
O
M

The  services  of  three  elementary  classroom  teachers. 
The  services  of  one  middle  school  teacher. 
The  services  of  two  agricultural  teachers. 
The  services  of  one  .29  FTE  Community  Day  School  teacher. 
The  services  of  one  .20  FTE  District-wide  teacher. 

9. 

The  District is  experiencing  financial  difficulties.  The  Govemitig  Board 

determined  that  it  needs  to  reduce  its  2004-2005  operating  budget  by  approximately 
$240,000 in  order  to  remain  solvent.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  teaching 
services,  affecting  employment  of  6.49  FTE  teaching  positions.  The  Board’s  resolution  to 
eliminate  and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  in  order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the 
welfare  of  students. 

10. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or  temporary,  and 
credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from 
the  District’s  records. 

11... 

Dr.  Funk  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for  implementation  of 
the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  failed  to  circulate  or  post  the  seniority  list  in 
anticipation  of  issuing  layoff  notices.  7  However,  no  respondent  raised  the  argument  that  she 
or  he  was  prejudiced  by  the  District’s  failure  to  circulate  the  list. 

12. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 
senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of 
affected  service,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known 
vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The 
District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump” 
other  employees.  The  District  then  looked  at  employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as- 
opposed  to  other  positions. 

. 

| 

13. 

The  Governing  Board  did  not  establish  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the 
relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date. 
The  Governing  Board  considered  proposed  tie  breaking  criteria,  but  did  not  adopt  any  tie 
breaking  criteria. 

  

*  Dr.  Funk  testified  that  the  Certificated  Seniority  List  (“list”)  was  not  circulated  because  it  contained  confidential 
information.  He  is  in  error,  The  information  contained  on  the  list  is  not  confidential  personnel  information. 
Employees  have  a  statutory  right  to  be  informed  of  their  respective  placements  on  the  list  and  to  review.  the 
information  contained  on  the  list  in  order  to  challenge  any  perceived  inaccuracies.

  

14. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees.  As  of  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  Board  had  determined  that  the 
position  held  by  Karen  Bischoff  as  a  part  time  elementary  school  teacher  may  become 
. 
available  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

MAY  THE  DISTRICT  RETAIN  COMMUNITY 
and  VINCE  SORMANO  WHILE  LAYING  OFF  SENIOR  TEACHERS? 

DAY SCHOOL  TEACHERS  SCOTT  GATES 

15. 

- 

Scott  Gates  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  Community  Day  School  and  he  is 

assigned  as  Lead  Teacher  for  Alternative  Education.  The  District  seeks  to  retain  (“skip”)  Mr. 
Gates,  and  noticed  him  only  in  the  event  he  could  be  “bumped”  by  a  more  senior  employee. 
Mr.  Gates’  first  day  of  service  is  5/1/2002.  He  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  and  CLAD  - 
credentials.  More  senior  respondents;  Valerie  Erb  and  Tony  Reis,  maintain  that  they  can 
“bump”  Mr.  Gate. 

Vince  Sormano  is  currently  assigned  as  a  secondary  Community  Day  School  teacher. 
Mr.  Sormano’s  first  day  of  service  is  8/22/2002.  Mr.  Sormano,  however,  is  serving  under  an 
Emergency  Long  Term  Multiple  Subject  Permit  and  under  an  Internship  Single  Subject 
Social  Science.  As  an  emergency  credential  holder,  Mr.  Sormano  ordinarily  may  be 
displaced  or  “bumped”  by  permanent  or  probationary  employees  regardless  of  seniority  date. 

The  District  wishes  to  retain  Mr.  Gates  and  Mr.  Sormano.  The  District  maintains  that 

it  has  a  specific  need  to  retain  these  teachers  to  teach  Community  Day  School.  The  District 
maintains  that  no  employee,  except  Mr.  Gates  and  Mr.  Sormano,  is  qualified  and  competent 
to  teach  Community  Day  School  (“CDS”). 

CDS  classrooms  are  self  contained  with  a  class  size  of  from  five  to  eight  students  in 

grades  5  through  12.  The  CDS  was  established  four  years  ago  in  order  to  provide  classroom 
instruction  to  students  with  chronic  and  pronounced  attitude  and  behavioral  problems.  The 
vast  majority  of  CDS  students  are  on  probation  as  a  result  of  a  court  order  issued  in  a 
juvenile  criminal  matter. 

Dr.  Funk  testified  persuasively  that  the  CDS  teacher  is  a  unique  position.  He  testified ‘ 

that  CDS  teachers  in  this  District  require  a  special  set  of  skills  and  knowledge  which  is  not 
usually  provided  in  the  credentialing  process.  Teachers  require  a  background  in  psychology 
or  sociology.  They  require  experience  and  training  working  with  students-with  extreme 
behavioral  problems.  The  CDS  teacher  also  requires  training  and  experience  working  with 
persons  with  behavioral  problems  which  stem  from  disabilities. 

The  evidence  was  persuasive  that  Mr.  Gates  has  extensive  background  and  training  in 

specialized  areas  vital  to  teaching  CDS.  Mr.  Gates  has  ten  years  of  experience  teaching, 
eight  years  of  which  involved  working  with  disabled  populations.  His  Bachelor’s  degree  is 
_  in  Applied  Psychology.  He  has  had  extensive  training  in  mediation,  aggression  management -

  

managing  assaultive  behaviors,  after  school  programs  in  test  taking  skills,  abuse  recognition 
and  numerous  other  areas  of  training  related  to  working  with  difficult  student  populations. 
Mr.  Gates is  also  the  District  trainer  for  management  of  assaultive  behaviors.  He  provides 
training  to  those  who  train  others in  assault  management  techniques. 

There  is  no  respondent  who  possesses the unique qualifications  and  competency  Mr.  . 

Gates  possesses.  The  District  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  retaining  Mr.  Gates  in  the 
lead  CDS  position. 

The  evidence  was  persuasive  that  Mr.  Sormano  has  extensive  background  and 

training  in  specialized  areas  vital  to  teaching  CDS.  Mr.  Gates  has  worked  as  a  long  term 
substitute  teacher  and  has  completed  all  of  the  coursework  necessary  to  receive  his  teaching 
credential.  His  Bachelors  degree  is  in  History  with  a  Social  Science  option.  He  has 
sufficient  academic  credits  to  achieve  an  Associates  degree  in  sociology.  He  has  extensive 
specialized  training  in  management  of  assaultive  behavior,  drug  abuse  recognition  and 
working  with  hard  to  handle  students.  He  has  experience  working  with  special  needs 
children.  He  has  training  in  serving  special  education  students  and  utilizing  behavioral 
modification  techniques. 

Tony  Reis  and  Deborah  Waller  maintain  that  they  should  bump  into  the  position  Mr. 

Sormano  now  occupies.  Mr.  Reis  possesses  a  Clear  Designated  Vocational  Agricultural 
Mechanics  (K-12)  credential.  He  has  had  some  experience  disciplining  ROP  students  and 
managing  groups  of  students  on  and  off  campus.  He  has  no  psychological  or  sociological 
traming.  The  evidence  was  persuasive  that  he  does  not  possess  the  skills  and  qualifications 
necessary  to  teach  CDS. 

, 

Deborah  Waller  has  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  supplemental  credential 

in  Social  Sciences.  She  also  holds  a  CLAD  certificate.  She  has  completed  all  of  the 
coursework  necessary  to  obtain  a  Master’s  degree.  Although  she  has  one  year  of  experience 
working  with  adults  with  disabilities  through  a  Mental  Health’Department,  she  does  not, 
however,  possess  the  extensive  training  and  experience  necessary  for  working  with  the 
troubled  and  aggressive  student  population  of  CDS  classes. 

There  is  no  respondent  who  possesses  the  unique  qualifications  and  competency  Mr. 
Sormano  possesses.  The  District  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  retaining  Mr.  Sormano  in 
the  secondary  CDS  position. 

| 

.  MAY  THE  DISTRICT  RETAIN  QUEST/DISCIPLINARIAN  TEACHER  ROB  GREGOR 

WHILE  LAYING  OFF  MORE  SENIOR  EMPLOYEES? 

16. 

The  District  wishes  to  skip  Rob  Gregor  from  layoffs.  The  District  maintains 
that  it  has  a  specific  need  to  retain  Mr.  Gregor  to  fill  the  Quest/Disciplinarian  position.  The 
District  maintains  that  no  respondent  with  more  seniority  than  Mr.  Gregor  is  qualified  to 

teach  Quest  and  to  serve  as  the  School  Disciplinarian.  

Mr.  Gregor  holds  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Credential.  Three  respondents  are 

senior  to  Mr.  Gregor.  In  order  of  seniority  these  are  Tony  Reis,  Valerie  Erb  and  Jar ames 
Rizzuto.  Ms.  Waller is  tied  with  Mr.  Gregor  for  seniority. 

Dr.  Funk  testified  that  the  Quest/Disciplinarian  (“Quest”)  program  focuses  on 

developing  the  social  skills,  communication  skills  and  decision  making  skills  of  young 
adolescents.  The  students  engage  in a  set  of  activities  and  scenarios  designed  to  generate 
discussion.  The  emphasis  is  on  socialization,  communication  and  decision  making  skills. 
The  program  is  mandatory  for  every  student  in  grades  7  and  8.  Every  student  takes  one 
section  of  Quest  programming.  The  teacher  must  be  credentialed  and  must  take  a  short 
period  of  Quest  training. 

The  teacher  who  provides  Quest  instruction  also  serves  as  the  School  Disciplinarian. 

The  Disciplinarian  is  assigned  to  carry  out  discipline,  to  monitor  attendance,  and  to  make 
referrals  to  social  and  legal  authorities. 

Dr.  Funk  did  not  meet  the  District’s  burden  of  showing  that  this  position  was  of  such 

a  specialized  nature  that  it  was  necessary  to  retain  a  junior  employee.  Nor  did  the  District 
show  that  two  of  the  employees  senior  to  Mr.  Gregor  were  not  competent  and  certificated  to 
fill  this  position.  The  evidence  was  that  Ms.  Erb,  who  holds  a  Clear  English  Subject 
credential,  and  Mr.  Rizzuto,  who  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  and  CLAD  credentials,  are 
each  competent  and  certificated  to  bump  into  the  Quest/Disciplinarian  position  now  held  by 
Mr.  Gregor. 

Mr.  Reis  is  not  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  Quest.  Mr.  Reis  holds  a 

Designated  Subjects  Vocational  Education  Teaching  Credentials.  This  credential  only 
permits  him  to  teach  a  course  that  is  designated  as  a  technical,  trade  or  vocational  course. 
(Education  Code  section  44256)  Mr.  Reis  does  not  have  an  academic  degree,  nor  has  he  had 
experience  in  teaching  the  programming  offered  in  Quest. 

The  Quest/Disciplinarian  position  is  a  .79  FTE  position.  Ms.  Erb  is  senior  to  Mr. 

Rizzuto.  However,  she  was  noticed  at  .29  and  .20  FTE  layoff.  She  cannot  bump  into  .49  of 
the  Quest  position,  as  the  District  is  not  required  to  split  positions  into  fractions  in  orderto 
facilitate  bumping.  Mr.  Rizzuto  was  noticed  at  1FTE  layoff  and  may  bump  into  the 
Quest/Disciplinarian  position  for  .79  FTE. 

MUST  THE  DISTRICT  RETAIN  THE  IN  SCHOOL  SUSPENSION  PROGRAM AND 

STAFF  IT  WITH A  CERTIFICATED  TEACHER? 

17. 

The  District  currently  has  an  In  School  Suspension  Program  (“ISSP”). 

The 
program  allows  students  to  remain  on  campus  while  serving  suspensions.  ISSP  has  up  to 
seven  students  three  days  a  week.  And  on  Wednesdays,  ISSP  has  approximately  thirty 
Students. 

  

 

This  program  is  currently  staffed  by  a  substitute  credentialed  teacher.  The  substitute 

teacher  has  worked  approximately  four  full  days  a  week  for  the  entire  school  year.  She 
reviews  the  list  of  the  next  day’s  suspended  pupils,  emails  the  pupils’  teachers  to  make  sure 
they  provide  assignments  to  the  suspended  pupil  for  the  day’s  work,  collects  assignments 
from  teachers  who  do  not  comply  with  her  email  request,  isolates  suspended  pupils  from  the 
rest  of  the  student  population  and  supervises  pupils  as  they  do  their  assignments.  She  helps 
pupils  with  their  schoolwork  when  they  ask  for  help.  Students  ask  for  help  approximately 
three  times  a  week.  She  also  maintains  appropriate  records  for  the  program. 

When  a  substitute  teacher  is  needed  in  a  classroom  and  no  other  substitute  teachers 
are  available,  the  substitute  assigned  to  ISSP  cancels  suspension  for  the  day  and  substitutes 
in  the  classroom.  This  happens  infrequently. 

Dr.  Funk  testified  that  the  District  intends  to  eliminate  the  services  of  the  substitute 
credentialed  teacher  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  In  place  of  the  credentialed  substitute 
teacher,  the  District  is  considering  various  options  for  changing  the  ISSP  so  that  it  is  more 
cost  effective.  One  consideration  is  employing  a  classified  employee  to  supervise  suspended  _ 
students.  Another  is  having  principals  or  other  administrators  take  turns  supervising  the 
students.  Another  option  is  changing  the  program  scheduling  to  reduce  its  hours  and 
retaining  a  substitute  for  those  hours. 

The  District  maintains  that  the  ISS  program  does  not  require  a  credentialed  teacher. 
Therefore,  ISSP  was  not  designated  as  a  PKS  to  be  reduced  in  the  2004-2005  school  year, 
and  no  teacher  subject  to  layoff  was  considered  to  replace  the  substitute  teacher.  The 
respondents  contend  that  the  program  is  a  “classroom”,  “taught”  by a  certificated  teacher  and 
requires  a  certified  teacher  because  of  the  need  to  supervise  and  assist  students  in  completing 
the  classwork  assigned  by  the  suspended  pupils’  teachers.  The  District  and  respondent  Mr. 
Reis  agree  that  if  the  ISSP  position  is  a  credentialed  position,  Mr.  Reis  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  assume  the  ISSP  position. 

Supervised  suspension  classrooms  are  authorized  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
48911.1.  The  respondents  argue  that  the  language  of  this  section  and  language  elsewhere  in 
the  Education  Code  support  their  contention  that  ISSP  classes  must  be  conducted  by 
certificated  teachers.  These  arguments  were  not  persuasive.  Section  48911.1  (c  )  provides 
only  that  school  districts  who  wish  to  claim  ADA  apportionment  for  pupils  assigned  to  a 
supervised  suspension  classroom  staff  the  supervised  suspension  classroom  “as  otherwise 
provided  by  law.”  The  District  agrees  that  the  language  “as  otherwise  provided  by  law”  in 
section  48911.1  means  that  when  a  District  is  receiving  ADA  apportionment  for  pupils  in  an 
ISSP,  that  program  must  be  staffed  by  a  certificated  employee. 

Section  48911.1  also  provides  that  when  Districts  claim  ADA  for  their  ISSP,  the 

pupils’  teachers  assign  class  work  and  tests  to  their  students  who  are  in  suspension.  Ifno 
such  work  is  assigned,  “the  person  supervising  the  suspension  classroom  shall  assign 
schoolwork”.  Section  48911.1  (c)  (4).

  

These  two  provisions  of  48911.1,  staffing  as  provided  by  law  and  assignment  of 

schoolwork  to  pupils,  apply  only  when  the  District  claims  ADA  apportionment.  There  is  no 
such  requirement  in  section  48911.1for  ISS  programs  which  do  not  clam  ADA 
apportionment. 

The  District  presented  persuasive  evidence  that  it  does  not  claim  ADA  apportionment 

for  pupils  in  its  ISSP.  Superintendent  Funk  testified  that  the  District  does  not  receive  ADA 
apportionment  for  the  time  students  are  attending  the  supervised  suspension  classroom. 
There  was  testimony  suggesting  that  students  are  attending  the  ISSP  for  part  of  the  day, 
while  the  District  claimed  ADA  apportionment  for  their  attendance  in  a  regular  classroom. 
Dr.  Funk  testified  that  this  is  a  proper  accounting  and  was  approved  by  the  California 
Department  of  Education.  There  was  no  competent  evidence  to  the  contrary. 

The  evidence  was  persuasive  that  the  District’s  ISSP  does  not  require  staffing  by  a 

certificated  employee.  Therefore,  the  District  may  take  such  action  as  it  deems  appropriate 
in  staffing  the  ISSP  and  no  respondent  may  bump  into  the  position  staffing  that  program. 

OTHER  ISSUES 

18. 

Cruz  Gutierrez  is  an  intern,  teaching  under  a  Pre-Intern  Certificate  -General 
K-12  Self  Contained  class.  Mr.  Gutierrez  is  not  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  of 
the  District.  The  District  has  no  legal  duty  to  retain  Mr.  Gutierrez  or  to  consider  his  retention 
under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

19.  |  Mr.  Sormano  expressed  concerns  regarding  the  seniority  date  assigned  to  him 
by  the  District.  Mr.  Sormano’s  seniority  date  was  not  addressed  as  it  was  not  at  issue  in  this 
proceeding.  Mr.  Sormano  was  lawfully  “skipped”  by  the  District. 

20. 

_  Deborah  Waller  and  Rob  Gregor  have  the  same  seniority  date.  The  Governing 

Board’s  failure  to  adopt  tie  breaking  criteria  was  not  at  issue  in  this  proceeding;  as  there  are 
no  positions  occupied  by  junior  employees  for  which  Ms.  Waller  or  Mr.  Gregor  are  qualified 
and  competent  to  assume. 

21. 

The  District  employees  receiving  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be 

required  next  year,  whether  temporary  or  certificated  employees,  have  all  rendered  valuable 
services  to  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

l. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 

 

kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Board’s  decisions  were  a  proper  exercise  of 
its  discretion. 

- 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  2003/04  #9  are  particular 

.  kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s 

decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  vy.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both in  the  Board  Resolution  and in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689. 

‘No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

8. 

The  District  may  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of 
seniority,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  (d).  The  District  must  prove  that  it  has 
a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  and  that  certificated  employees  it

6. 

7. 

  

seeks  to  retain  have  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that,course  of  study, 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  The  District  has  met  this  burden  in  respect 
to  retaining  Scott  Gates  and  Vince  Sormano  to  teach  Community  Day  School. 

9. 

The  District  has  not  demonstrated  a  specific  need  to  retain  Rob  Gregor  in  the 

Quest/Disciplinarian  position  while  laying  off  more  senior  employees.  Senior  employee  and 
respondent,  James  Rizzuto  is  qualified  and  competent  to  hold  this  position.  . 

10. 

The  In  School  Suspension  Program  does  not  require  staffing  by  a  certificated 

employee.  No  respondent  may  “bump”  into  this  position. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  6.49  full-time  equivalent — 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004-2005  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the 
following  respondents:  Cruz  Gutierrez,  Tony  Reis  (.57),  Valerie  Erb  (.49),  and  Deborah 
Waller. 

2. 

The  Accusations  against  James  Rizzuto  as  to  .79  FTE,  Scott  Gates,  and  Vince 

Sormano  are  dismissed. 

DATED: 

pe 

JS  Que 

_ANWN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

10

  

