BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LYNWOOD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation 
Against: 

BERNARDINO  RODRIGUEZ  and 
CARLOS  TORRES, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  L-2004030076 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  on  April  26, 

2004,  in  Lynwood.  Complainant  Lynwood  Unified  School  District  was  represented  by 
Warren  S.  Kinsler,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondents  Bernardino  Rodriguez  and  Carlos  Torres 
were  present  during  the  hearing  and  represented  by  Michael  R.  Feinberg,  Attorney  at  Law. 

During  the  hearing,  complainant  presented  documentary  evidence  (Exhs.  1 

-  11)  and 
the  testimony  of  Diane  Lucas,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources.  Respondents 
presented  documentary  evidence  (Exhs.  A  -  P)  and  the  testimony  of  respondents  Carlos 
Torres  and  Bernardino  Rodriguez  and  teacher  Thomas  Foltz. 
In  rebuttal,  complainant 
presented  the  testimony  of  Linda  Hembrick,  Director  of  Secondary  School  Improvement  and 
Regional  Occupational  Programs,  and  Jose  Urias,  Principal  of  Lynwood  High  School. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  parties  requested  that  they  be  allowed  to  file 

written  argument.  The  request  was  granted  and,  on  May  5,  2004,  complainant  and 
respondents  timely  filed  written  arguments  which  were  marked  as  Exhibit  12  and  Exhibit  Q, 
respectively. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge 

submits  this  matter  for  decision  on  May  5,  2004,  and  finds  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that,  on  March  10,  2004,  the 

Accusation  was  made  and  filed  by  Yvonne  Contreras  solely  in  her  official  capacity  as  Acting 
Superintendent  of  the  Lynwood  Unified  School  District  (hereinafter  District). 

   

2.  Respondents  Bernardino  Rodriguez  and  Carlos  Torres,  and  each  of  them,  are 

certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3.  On  or  about  February  24,  2004,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and 
44955,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  gave  written  notice  to  the  Governing  Board  of  his 
recommendation  that  certificated  employees  Rodriguez  and  Torres  be  notified  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2004  -  2005  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  his 
recommendation.  Due  to  the  low  number  of  students  registering  for  auto  shop  and  electronic 
shop  classes,  the  District  staff  had  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
particular  services  in  those  two  fields  by  reducing  the  concomitant  number  of  teachers. 

4.  (A)  On  February  24,  2004,  pursuant  to  said  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent, 

the  Governing  Board  of  the  Lynwood  Unified  School  District  adopted  Resolution  No.  03- 
04/57  and  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  of  the  District  in  auto  shop  classes  and  instruction  by  1.0  full-time  equivalent 
position  and  in  electronic  shop  classes  and  instruction  by  1.0  full-time  equivalent  position  for 
the  2004-2005  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  further  determined  that  it  was  necessary 
by  reason  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  those  particular  kinds  of  services  to  decrease 
the  number  of  certificated  employees  by  the  equivalent  of  2.0  full-time  equivalent  employees 
for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

(B)  On  February  24,  2004,  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  03-04/57,  the  Governing 

Board  of  the  District  resolved  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  provided  by  the 
District  in  auto  shop  and  electronic  shop  classes  and  instruction  by  2.0  full-time  equivalent 
positions  and,  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  those  particular  kinds  of  services,  to 
not  reemploy  the  legal  number  of  employees  for  the  2004-200  school  year.  The  Governing 
Board  further  resolved  that  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  give  Notice  of 
Recommendation  Not  to  Reemploy  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Education  Code 
Section  44949  and  44955  to  the  number  of  certificated  employees  allowed  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  Section  44955. 

5.  On  or  about  March  9,  2004,  pursuant  to  the  resolution  of  the  Governing  Board  and 
the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of 
Human  Resources  for  the  District  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  Rodriguez  and  Torres, 
and  each  of  them,  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that 
notice  be  given  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004-2005  school  year. 
The  notice  was  entitled,”Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Your  Services  Will  Not  Be 
Required  for  the  Ensuing  School  Year  (2004-2005)”.  Said  written  layoff  notice  informed 
respondents  that  the  reason  for  the  recommendation  was  that  the  Governing  Board  had 
decided  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  not  later  than  the  commencement 
of  the  ensuing  school  year  and  the  services  to  be  reduced  and  discontinued  were  auto  shop 
and  electronic  shop  classes  and  instruction  by  1.0  full-time  equivalent  position  each.  The 
written  notice  further  informed  respondents  that  they  were  serving  within  a  particular  kind  of 

service  that  was  being  reduced  or  discontinued  and  their  seniority,  ranking,  and  credentials  

did  not  allow  them  to  bump  a  more  junior  certificated  employee.  A  copy  of  the  resolution  of 
the  Governing  Board  was  also  served  upon  respondents. 

6.  The  District’s  layoff  notice  dated  March  9,  2004,  was  sufficient  in  providing 

notice  to  respondents  under  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955.  Respondents  were 
each  properly  and  timely  served  with  the  written  notice  of  layoff  under  Education  Code 
Sections  44949  and  44955.  Respondents  were  not  prejudiced  by  errors  or  omissions  in  the 
notice,  if  any,  with  respect  to  the  description  of  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution,  their 
current  positions  and  assignments,  or  any  other  matters. 

7.  On  or  about  March  9,  2004,  with  the  notice  of  recommendation  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District  also  properly  and  timely  served 
respondents  Rodriguez  and  Torres,  and  each  of  them,  with  the  Accusation,  copies  of 
Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955  and  pertinent  sections  of  the  Government  Code, 
Request  for  Hearing/Notice  of  Defense,  and  a  Notice  of  Hearing. 

8.  Later  in  March  2004,  respondents  Rodriguez  and  Torres  made  timely  requests  for 
a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
Respondents,  and  each  of  them,  acknowledged  service  of  a  copy  of  the  Accusation.  All  pre- 
hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties  to  this  matter. 

9.  On  February  24,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  resolved  and  took 

action  to  reduce  or discontinue  certain  services  or  programs  offered  by  the  District  for  the 
2004  -  2005  school  year  in  the  following  full-time  equivalent  positions  (hereinafter  FTE): 

SERVICE  OR  PROGRAM 

  

Auto  Shop  Classes/Instruction 

Electronic  Classes/Instruction 

FULL-TIME 
EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS 

  

1.00 

1.00 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  services  or  programs  set  forth  hereinabove  constitute 
a  total  of  2.0  full-time  equivalent  positions. 

10.  (A)  The  services  or  programs  set  forth  in  Findings  3  —  5  and  9  above  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  Section  44955. 

(B)  In  or  about  April  2003,  which  was  during  the  spring  semester  of  the  2002-2003 

school  year,  the  District  distributed  class  registration  forms  to  eighth  and/or  ninth  grade 
students  of  the  District.  These  students  would  be  incoming  freshmen  and/or  sophomores  at 
Lynwood  High  School  in  the  fall  of  the  next  school  year.  The  District  has  or  operates  a 
single  high  school  for  its  secondary  school  students.  The  class  registration  forms  are  used  by 
the  District  to  assess  what  and  how  many  classes  will  be  necessary  to  accommodate  the 

   

students’  class  requests  and  to  prepare  a  master  class  schedule  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
For  the  fall  semester  of  the  2003-2004  school  year,  the  principal  of  the  high  school 
determined  from  the  class  registration  forms  that  approximately  25  students  registered  for 
auto  shop  classes  and  approximately  10-12  students  registered  for  electronic  shop  classes. 
The  normal  number  of  students  in  a  regular  class  at  the  high  school  would  be  30  students;  the 
normal  number  of  students  in  an  auto  or  electronic  shop  class  would  be  20-25  students. 

(C)  Based  on  the  registrations  for  auto  shop  and  electronics  shop  classes,  the 

principal  reported  to  the  District  that  student  interest  in  these  two  subjects  was  low  such  that 
the  prospective  enrollment  would  not  fill  more  than  one  or  two  classes  or  justify  the  retention 
of  a  full-time  teacher  in  either  subject.  The  District  thereupon  determined  that  services  in 
auto  and  electronic  shop  classes  and  instruction  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued  by  1.0  FTE 
each  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

(D)  The  determination  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  these  services  or  programs  is  within  the  sound  discretion  of  the  District  and  is 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

Dates  of  First  Paid  Service 

11.  (A)  Respondent  Bernardino  Rodriguez  is  the  sole  auto  shop  class  teacher  at 
Lynwood  High  School  and  possesses  a  professional  clear  designated  subject  vocational 
education  teaching  credential  in  the  subject  of  automobile  mechanics.  Rodriguez  attained  his 
vocational  education  teaching  credential  on  or  about  November  10,  1998.  According  to  the 
District’s  seniority  list  for  certificated  personnel,  Rodriguez  has  a  seniority  date  with  the 
District  of  July  1,  1999. 

(B)  However,  respondent  Rodriguez  has  been  actually  working  as  an  auto  shop 

teacher  for  the  District  since  July  29,  1996,  when  he  was  hired  as  a  new  employee  to  replace 
a  teacher  and  soon  after  he  attained  his  preliminary  credential.  His  preliminary  designated 
subjects  vocational  education  teaching  credential  in  automotive  mechanics  became  valid  on 
July  3,  1996. 
was  not  established,  however,  that  Rodriguez  was  hired  as  a  temporary  or  part-time 
employee.  Nor  was  it  established  that  the  District  and  respondent  Rodriguez  entered  into  any 
employment  contract,  including  a  contract  that  demonstrates  Rodriguez  was  hired  as 
temporary,  substitute,  or  non-probationary  teacher. 

His  initial  salary  with  the  District  as  auto  shop  teacher  was  $26.75  per  hour.  It 

12.  (A)  Respondent  Carlos  Torres  is  the  sole  electronics  shop  class  teacher  at 
Lynwood  High  School.  He  possesses a  professional  clear  designated  subject  vocational 
education  teaching  credential  in  electronics  assembly,  electronic  consumer  products  service, 
and  electronic  publishing.  According  to  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  certificated 
employees,  Torres  has  a  seniority  date  with  the  District  of  October  1,  2000.

  

(B)  However,  respondent  Torres  has  been  working  for  and  employed  by  the 

District  for  over  30  years.  He  first  worked  as  a  classified  employee;  his  duties  included 
working  as  an  instructional  assistant  in  electronics.  In  October  1995,  Torres  became 
employed  as  an  electronics  teacher  for  the  District. 

(C)  On  or  about  September  10,  1992,  Torres  received  a  preliminary  designated 

subjects  vocational  education  teaching  credential  in  computer  operations,  accounting, 
computerized  accounting,  small  business  management,  and  income  tax  preparation.  The 
preliminary  credential  was  valid  for  five  years.  To  renew  his  credential,  Torres  was  required 
to  receive  a  recommendation  from  an  approved  local  education  agency  and  complete  a 
minimum  of  two  years  of  full-time  teaching,  nine  semester  units  or  135  clock  hours  in  an 
approved  program  of  personalized  preparation,  and  a  health  education  unit. 

. 

(D)  On  or  about  September  1,  1995,  Torres  received  his  preliminary  designated 

subjects  vocational  education  teaching  credential  in  electronics  assembly,  electronic 
consumer  products  service,  and  electronic  publishing. 
Board  of  the  District  approved  Torres’  “new”  “employment”  as  an  electronics  and  ROP 
teacher  at  the  high  school  and  ROP  program.  His  salary  was  $25.47  per  hour.  At  that  time, 
the  District  did  not  classify  Torres’  employment  status  as  probationary,  permanent,  or 
temporary. 
designated  subjects  vocational  education  teaching  credential. 

On  or  about  October  1,  2000,  Torres  attained  his  present  professional  clear 

On  October  10,  1995,  the  Governing 

(E)  It  was  not  established  that  Torres  was  hired  as  a  temporary  or  part-time 

employee.  Nor  was  it  shown  that  the  District  provided  notice  to  or  entered  into  a  contract 
with  Torres  that  demonstrated  that  he  was  hired  as  a  temporary,  substitute,  or  non- 
probationary  teacher. 

13.  On  March  27,  2001,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  approved  the  partial 

funding  of  Rodriguez’s  auto  shop  position  and  Torres’  electronics  shop  position  from 
ROP/Vocational  Education  sources  for  the  next  three  months.  The  Personnel  Schedule 
Report  shows  that  both  Rodriguez  and  Torres  were  earning  $32.46  per  hour.  On  said  date, 
Rodriguez  and  Torres,  while  earning  salaries  at  said  hourly  rate,  were  already  considered 
permanent  certificated  employees. 

14.  On  September  11,  2001,  the  Governing  Board  retroactively  approved  the  District’s 

change  in  Torres’  employment  status  from  an  hourly-salaried  electronics  instructor  to  a 
monthly-salaried,  contract  electronics  instructor,  group  IV,  step  6.  Inasmuch  as  the  change 
of  employment  status  was  made  effective  to  October  1,  2000,  Torres  was  given  credit  for  two 
years  of  employment  experience  beginning  with  the  2000-2001  school  year.  His  new  salary 
was  $4,772  per  month.  The  District  made  the  change  of  status  for  Torres  pursuant  to  an 
agreement  with  the  Lynwood  Teachers’  Association  and  because  Torres  attained  his 
professional  clear  designated  subjects  vocational  education  credential  on  October  1,  2000.

   

15.  (A)  Based  on  Findings  11  and  14  above,  respondent  Rodriguez’s  date  of  first  paid 

service,  or  seniority  date,  with  the  District  as  a  permanent,  certificated  employee  is  deemed 
to  be  July  29,  1996. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  12  ~  14  above,  respondent  Torres’  date  of  first  paid  service, 

or  seniority  date,  with  the  District  as  a  permanent,  certificated  employee  shall  be  deemed  to 
be  October  10,  1995. 

(C)  Based  on  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Section  44916,  because  the  District 

did  not  provide  notice  to  respondents  Rodriguez  and  Torres  that  they  were  hired  as 
temporary  or  substitute  teachers,  and  the  evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that  they  taught  or 
worked  as  temporary,  substitute,  or  part-time  employees,  respondents  must  be  considered  to 
have  been  probationary  employees  when  they  both first  joined  the  District  as  teachers.  (See 
Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District,  29  Cal.  4"  911  (Jan. 
2003).) 
as  of  the  date  when  they  were  hired  as  probationary  certificated  employees. 

As  such,  respondents’  dates  of  first  paid  service  to  the  District  must  be  determined 

Auto  Mechanics  and  Electronics/Computers 

16.  (A)  In  prior  school  years,  respondent  Rodriguez  taught  five  or  six  classes  each 

semester  in  auto  shop  and  instruction  at  the  high  school.  He  has  certifications  in  automobile 
mechanics  and  was  the  only  auto  shop  teacher.  Last  summer,  however,  the  principal  at  the 
high  school  advised  Rodriguez  that  no  auto  shop  classes  were  to  be  offered  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  due  to  low  registration.  For  this  school  year,  Rodriguez  was  placed  on  special 
assignment  and  has  been  teaching  at  the  high  school  as  a  substitute  teacher.  He  has  taught 
science  and  Spanish  and  is  currently  teaching  graphic  communications  and  special  education. 

(B)  Students  at  the  high  school  have  asked  Rodriguez  why  auto  shop  was  not 

He  circulated  a  petition  among  students  at  the  high  school 

being  offered  as  a  class  this  year. 
and  obtained  signatures  of  many  students  who  indicated  interest  in  receiving  instruction  in 
In  addition,  a  fellow  high  school  biology  teacher  asked  students  in 
automotive  technology. 
his  classes  whether  or  not  they  were  interested  in  taking  auto  shop  classes  and  obtained 
affirmative  answers  from  a  majority  of  them. 
would  certainly  expand  students’  career  choices,  especially  for  those  students  who  do  not 
matriculate  to  college,  the  District  demonstrated  that  student  registrations  for  auto  shop 
classes  were  low  in  number,  evidencing  a  lack  of  interest  among  the  student  body. 
not  established  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  auto  shop  classes  and  instruction  was 
necessarily  contrary  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils. 

While  instruction  in  auto  shop  and  mechanics 

It  was 

17.  (A)  As  set  forth  in  Findings  3  —  5,  11,  13,  and  15  —  16  above,  respondent 
Rodriguez  is  the  only  automobile  mechanics  or  auto  shop  teacher  at  the  high  school  and,  as 
such,  the  most  junior  of  the  District's  auto  shop  teachers.  Other  than  his  designated  subjects 

vocational  education  credential  in  automotive  mechanics,  Rodriguez  does  not  hold  any  other  

credential  that  would  allow  him  to  teach  other  subjects  or  to  be  reassigned  to  provide  other 
services  to  the  District. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  there  are  any  certificated  employees  with  less 

seniority  than  respondent  Rodriguez  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render  services 
which  Rodriguez  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

(C)  Respondent  Rodriguez  may  be  terminated  pursuant  to  the  District’s  reduction 

or  discontinuance  of  the  1.0  full-time  equivalent  position  in  auto  shop  classes  and  instruction. 

18.  (A)  In  years  prior  to  the  current  school  year,  respondent  Torres  taught  five 

electronic  shop  classes  at  elementary  and  advanced  levels. 
taught,  in  part,  computer  repair  which  entailed  the  reassembly  of  computers  and  the 
installation  and  trouble-shooting  of  software  programming.  Torres  obtained  computers  that 
were  considered  surplus  or  scrap  from  fellow  staff  members  at  the  high  school. 
electronics  classes  also  involved  the  repair  and/or  servicing  of  consumer  electronic  products 
such  as  video  cassette  recorders,  printers,  small  radios,  and  tape  or  compact  disc  players. 

In  his  electronic  classes,  Torres 

His 

(B)  For  the  current  school  year,  respondent  Torres  has  been  acting  as  a 

“supernumerary”  or  substitute  teacher.  He  has  taught  graphic  communications  and  four 
classes  in  social  science  for  the  special  education  program.  Recently,  Torres  was  reassigned 
to  teach  primary  subjects  to  seventh  to  eleventh  grade  students  at  the  District’s  suspension 
In  this  matter,  Torres  contends  that  he  has  the  credentials  and  experience  to  teach 
center. 
computers,  including  computer  repair,  for  the  District. 

19.  (A)  Permanent  certificated  employee  Natarajan  Srinivasan  teaches  Introduction  to 

Computers  at  Lynwood  High  School.  Srinivasan  holds  a  professional  clear  designated 
subjects  vocational  education  teaching  credentials  in  computer  applications  and  zoology  and 
a  designated  subject  credential  in  supervision  and  coordination.  Srinivasan  has a  seniority 
date  or  date  of  first  paid  service  with  District  of  July  1,  1996,  and  is  junior  to  respondent 
Torres  in  terms  of  seniority  with  the  District. 

(B)  In  the  introduction  to  computers  class(es),  Srinivasan  teaches  high  school 
students  the  basics  or  fundamentals  of  using  computers,  including  keyboarding,  use  of 
operating  systems  and  software,  and  word  processing. 
Torres  possesses  the  requisite  credential  to  teach  introduction  to  computers;  Torres’ 
vocational  education  credential  is  in  electronics  assembly,  electronic  consumer  products 
service,  and  electronic  publishing. 

It  was  not  established  that  respondent 

20.  (A)  Permanent  certificated  employee  Lorraine  J.  Abbass  teaches  computer  science 

at  Lynwood  High  School.  Abbass  holds a  preliminary  single  subject  credential  in  business 
and  a  professional  clear  designated  subjects  vocational  education  credential  in  business 
management  and  computer  applications.  Abbass  has  a  seniority  date  with  the  District  of 
August  27,  2001,  and  is  therefore  junior  to  respondent  Torres  in  terms  of  tenure  with  the 
District.

   

Her  computer  science  course  has  been  approved  as  an  elective  for  admission 

(B)  In  her  computer  science  classes,  Abbass  teaches  business  applications  of  the 
computer,  including  preparation  of  business  plans,  operation  of  a  business,  and  the  use  of 
spreadsheets 
to  the  University  of  California  system. 
possesses  the  requisite  credential  to  teach  computer  science  or  computer  applications;  his 
credential  is  electronics  assembly,  electronic  consumer  products  service,  and  electronic 
publishing  and  not  in  computer  applications. 

It  was  not  established  that  respondent  Torres 

21.  (A)  Permanent  certificated  employee  Phillip  Dominguez  teaches  computer  repair 

at  the  District’s  high  school.  Dominguez  has  attained  a  professional  clear  single  subject 
credential  in  business  and  a  preliminary  designated  vocational  education  credential  in 
business  management  and  computer  systems  operation.  He  also  holds  an  authorization  in 
cross-cultural,  language,  and  academic  development.  Dominguez  has a  seniority  date  with 
the  District  of  June  1,  2003,  and  is  therefore  considered  to  be  junior  to  respondent  Torres  in 
seniority. 

(B)  Moreover,  Dominguez  has  undergone  special  training  in  teaching  computer 

repair  such  that  students  who  successfully  complete  his  class  or  classes  are  entitled  to  receive 
While  a 
certificates  which  make  them  eligible  or  marketable  for  employment  in  the  field. 
portion  of  his  electronics  shop  classes  included  computer  repair,  it  was  not  established  that 
respondent  Torres  has  attained  the  requisite  credential  to  teach  computer  repair,  for  he  is 
credentialed  in  electronics  assembly  and  consumer  products  service  and  publishing  and  not 
in  computers. 

22.  (A)  As  set  forth  in  Findings  3  —  5,  12  —  15,  and  18  —  21  above,  respondent  Torres 

is  the  sole  electronic  shop  teacher  at  the  high  school  and,  as  such,  the  most  junior  of  the 
District's  electronic  shop  teachers.  Other  than  his  designated  subjects  vocational  education 
credential  in  electronics  assembly,  electronic  consumer  products  service,  and  electronic 
publishing,  Torres  does  not  hold  any  other  credential  that  would  allow  him  to  teach  other 
subjects  or  to  be  reassigned  to  provide  other  services  to  the  District. 

(B)  It  was  not  established  that  there  are  any  certificated  employees  with  less 

seniority  than  respondent  Torres  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render  services 
which  Torres  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

(C)  Respondent  Torres  may  be  terminated  pursuant  to  the  District’s  reduction  or 

discontinuance  of  the  1.0  full-time  equivalent  position  in  electronic  shop  classes  and 

instruction.  

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the 

© 

following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  exists  for  the  subject  proceedings  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section 
44949  and  44955;  and  all  notices,  accusations,  and  other  related  papers  and  reports  required 
by  Sections  44949  and  44955  have  been  provided  in  timely  manner.  As  such,  complainant 
District  has  complied  with  the  requirements  of  said  sections. 

2.  Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955  to  reduce  by 

2.0  full-time  equivalent  positions,  including  1.0  full-time  equivalent  position  in  auto  shop 
classes  and  instruction  and  1.0  full-time  equivalent  position  in  electronic  shop  classes  and 
instruction,  the  concomitant  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  3  —  10 
above.  Said  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  of  the  District  and  the  pupils 
thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Section  44949. 

© 

3. 

Cause  also  exists,  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955,  to  give  notice  to  respondents  Torres  and 
Rodriguez  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  based  on 
Findings  3  —  10,  15,  17,  and  22  above.  There  are  no  certificated  probationary  or  permanent 
certificated  employees  with  less  seniority  than  respondents  who  are  being  retained  by  the 
District  for  the  2004  -  2005  school  years  to  render  services  which  respondents  are  certificated 
and  competent  to  provide. 

4.  Grounds  also  exist  to  modify  respondents’  dates  of  first  paid  service  to  the  District 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44916  and  Sections  44949  and  44955  in  that 
respondents  must  be  deemed  to  have  been  hired  as  probationary,  certificated  employees 
when  they  each  joined  the  District  as  teachers,  based  on  Finding  15  above. 

WHEREFORE,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Order: 

* 

Ke  OR  OK  Oe 

OK 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusation,  Case  No.  L-2004030076,  against  respondents  Bernardino 
Rodriquez  and  Carlos  Torres,  and  each  of  them,  is  sustained  and  notice  may  be  given  to  both 
of  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2004  -  2005  school  year

© 

because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  based  on 
Conclusions  of  Law  nos.  1  —  3  above. 

2.  Before  giving  notices  to  respondents,  the  District  shall  determine  and  take  into 

account  positively  assured  attrition  among  certificated  employees,  if  applicable,  in  deciding 
how  many  and  when  certificated  employees  should  be  terminated  before  the  ensuing  2004  - 
2005  school  year. 

3. 

If  applicable,  the  District  shall  give  notice  to  respondents  in  the  inverse  order  of 

seniority  with  the  District  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Section  44955. 

4.  The  seniority  dates,  or  dates  of  first  paid  service  with  District,  of  respondents 
Rodriguez  and  Torres  shall  be  changed  on  the  official  seniority  list  and  books  and  records  of 
the  District  to  July  29,  1996,  and  October  10,  1995,  respectively,  based  on  Conclusion  of 
Law  no.  4  above. 

Vincent  Nafarrete 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

10  

