| 
© 

@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
LAKE  TAHOE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2004030062 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

CINDY  PASTORE-WALKER,CHERYL 
WILLIAMS,  RENE  NEWARD,  GEOFF 
BLACHMAN,  CRYSTAL  DENNIS, 
KATRINA  SANFORD,  SUSAN 
McALLISTER,  MARGARET  WHITFIELD, 
JESUS  CORTES-ACOSTA,  VIVIAN 
RIDER,  RHONDA  RIGGS,  JENNIFER 
DALY,  H.  ROBERT  COMLOSSY, 
CONNIE  LaCROIX,  DEBORAH 
CENTANNI,  DENISE  PRESTON, 
KRISTIN  WILSON,  ELIZABETH  BRYAN, 
NANCY  COLE,  ROBIN  HALL,  KAREN 
NIGHSWONGER,  NANCY  DALTON, 
NANNETTE  NIVEN,  TISHA  SIEMS, 
BETH  MICHELLE  BOTTO,  SABRINA 
ZALLES,  GEORGE  ALLISTER, 
JENNIFER  SEELY-HAMBURG,  AMBER 
STEPHEN,  GINI  GUNSCH,  WENDY 
GANSBERG-SMALLEY,  LINDA 
WYSONG  and  LAURA  CURATOLO. 

    

   

On  April  8,  2004,  in  South  Lake  Tahoe,  California,  Leonard  L.  Scott,  Administrative 

Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Respondents. 

@ 

Allen  R.  Vinson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Lake  Tahoe  Unified  School 

District  (School  District). 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

In  addition,  Vivian  Rider,  Connie  LaCroix,  Nancy  Cole,  Elizabeth  Bryan,  H.  Robert 
Comlossy,  Kristin  Wilson,  Wendy  Gansberg-Smalley,  Geoff  Blachman  and  Crystal  Dennis 
represented  themselves  in  the  limited  areas  where  they  had  conflicts  with  other  teachers. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  parties  stipulated  that: 

1. 

a. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2004,  Dr.  Diane  Scheerhorn  (Dr.  Scheerhorn), 

Superintendent  of  the  School  District  (Superintendent),  served  written  notices  on  respondents 
that  pursuant  to  Resolution  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  School  District  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  therefor,  as 
required  by  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

b. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  [pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44949(b)]. 

c. 

The  Superintendent  had  the  Accusation  timely  served  upon  respondents.  (Dr. 

Scheerhorn  acted  in  her  official  capacity  in  making,  signing  and  serving  the  Accusation.) 

d. 

Respondents  timely  signed  and  served  their  Notice  of  Defense  [pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44949(c)(1)  and  Government  Code  section  11506]. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  School  District. 

3. 

On  February  10,  2004,  the  Superintendent  sent  a  written  recommendation  to 
the  Governing  Board  for  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  school 
year.  She  made  the  recommendation  solely  for  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  of 
the  School  District. 

4. 

On  February  10,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  found  that  there  had  been  a 

» 

decline  in  average  daily  attendance  during  the  first  6  months  of  the  current  school  year  and 
that  it  was  necessary,  in  the  best  interests  of  the  School  District  and  the  students,  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services.  As  a  result,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No. 
2003/04-14  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  by  42.3  full-time  equivalent  certificated 
positions  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  acted  pursuant  to 
the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  And  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of 

  

       

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  Governing  Board  instructed  the 
Superintendent  to  give  Notices  of  Recommendation  Not  to  Re-Employ  to  the  affected 
certificated  employees  (teachers). 

On  February  24,  2004,  the  Governing  Board  reconsidered  the  matter  and  again  found 
that  there  had  been  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  during  the  first  6  months  of 
the  current  school  year  and  that  it  was  necessary,  in  the  best  interests  of  the  School  District 
and  the  students,  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services.  As  a  result,  the  Governing  Board 
adopted  Amended  Resolution  No.  2003/04-14  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  by  42.3 
fuli-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year. 
The  Governing  Board  acted  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 
And  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the 
Governing  Board  instructed  the  Superintendent  to  give  Notices  of  Recommendation  Not  to 
Re-Employ  to  the  affected  certificated  employees. 

The  certificated  positions  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  are  as  follows: 

0.5  FTE 
Preschool  Special  Education  Teacher...........cccccccsssesesseessssessssesscseeecseeseeeeeeesenetenenees 
K-5  Self-contained  Classroom  Teacher  ...........cccccscscssessescsssseescesseceeceeceeesseeneseeseseeetes  33.0  FTE 
K-5  Elementary  Title  I  Teacher  ..0.......c.cccccccssssssssssscscesesssseesesecsesseseeaeeecseseeaeseeeeeeeseeseeaes  1.5  FTE 
K-5  Resource  Specialist  Teacher ..........ccsccessessssesscesseseesssssescessecseeseaesaseeeeessaseeeeaseeesees  0.5  FTE 
Grades  6-8  Offerings 

- 

6  Grade  Teacher...cs.csccccssscsesssscssscsssecssecsusesssccssecsscssesssssavessucssecssessssssssssaseesesesseeess  1.0  FTE 
Opportunity  Class  Teacher  .......c.ccccccecccsssscssccsccssssccsssesscescssccseeesssseessesseeseesorsesenes  1.0  FTE 
Special  Day  Class  Teacher  ...........ccccccccscesscsscsscssscsscsseessseacessesssseeecaeeseesseseaeeaeeseterees  1.0  FTE 

Grades  9-12  Offerings 

Physical  Science  Teacher  ......ccccscccsssscsesssssccscsssecsssscscssscsvscssssssesscsssssssesscscseseesseeees  0.2  FTE 
English  (1-2)  Teacher  .......cccccccssssssssesssescescesesscsscsscsssssessesessassesensecseeseeseasenseaseeescens  0.2  FTE 
English  (3-4)  Teacher  .........ccccsssssscsessssecsscsscsscsecseesecseessessceecesesssssesseesecsensenssesecens  0.2  FTE 
9"  Grade  Fundamentals  of  Algebra  Teacher  ........ecscessscesecserecesessesssssscerseessesseees  0.2  FTE 
Computer  Literacy  Teacher  ............cccccccssescssescsscssesesscsesscsecsssecsecsesecsceseseeesacensatenees  0.2  FTE 
Independent  Study  Teacher  ..........cccccccsscsssscssescescssssssscsessesecseeceeeceeseseeeaseaseesseesaees  0.8  FTE 
Mount  Tallac  Teacher.........ccccccsscscscssssscescsscssssecseesseescsessccsecsesseseesseesees aateeeaneesneees  1.0  FTE 
Elementary  Principal  ...........cccccscscsssssscssescescecesessssessesscsessssesesesaeesesssceesesecseesescesesacseeeeee  1.0  FTE 

5. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  that  the  School 

a. 

District  would  withdraw  the  Accusation  against  a  number  of  respondents,  with  the  agreement 
that  the  remaining  respondents  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  would  not  contest  the 
placement  of  those  former  respondents  above  the  remaining  respondents  on  the  seniority  list. 
With  that  agreement,  the  Accusation  was  withdrawn  in  the  amounts  shown  against: 

Lisa  Irving-Peterson,  #228  on  Seniority  List,  0.8  of  1.0  FTE; 

Nannette  Niven  (Nivens),  #201  on  Seniority  List,  0.8  of  1.0  FTE;  

b. 

  

  

C. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

g. 

h. 

Nancy  Dalton,  #  249  on  Seniority  List,  0.8  of  1.0  FTE; 

Beth  Botto,  #  204  on  Seniority  List,  0.6  of  1.0  FTE; 

George  Allister,  #234  on  Seniority  List,  1.0  FTE; 

Susan  Mcallister,  #  180  on  Seniority  List,  1.0  FTE; 

Cheryl  Williams,  #  185  on  Seniority  List,  1.0  FTE; 

Tisha  Siems,  #  256  on  Seniority  List,  1.0  FTE; 

These  withdrawals  total  7.0  FTE  certificated  positions,  which  thereby  reduce  the  total 

number  subject  to  the  layoff  from  42.3  FTE  to  35.3  FTE  certificated  positions. 

Later  in  the  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  that  the  School  District  had  over  noticed  the 

layoff  by  0.4  FTE  positions  but  had  not  determined  who  was  affected.  The  School  District 
will  rescind  (withdraw)  0.4  FTE  of  the  Accusation  against  the  most  senior  respondent  who  is 
credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  the  class.  This  stipulation  reduced  the  layoff  from  35.3 
FTE  to  34.9  FTE  certificated  positions. 

During  the  hearing,  it  was  discovered  that  three  certificated  staff  members  had  turned 

in  notices  of  retirement  in  early  March  of  2004  and  those  retirements  had  been  accepted  by 
the  Governing  Board  on  March  9,  2004.  As a result,  the  parties  stipulated  that  the  School 
District  would  rescind  (withdraw)  the  Accusations  against  the  three  most  senior  respondents 
who  are  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  the  classes  taught  by  the  retirees.  Two  of  the 
positions  are  in  self-contained  classes  and  the  other  is  an  8"  grade  history  and  elective 
position.  This  stipulation  reduced  the  proposed  layoff  from  34.9  FTE  to  31.9  FTE 
certificated  positions. 

;: 

6. 

With  the  above  change  the  School  District  has  considered  all  positively 

assured  attrition  when  determining  which  teachers  will  be  laid  off  due  to  the  reduction  in 
particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.  The  decline  in 
average  daily  attendance  causes  a  decline  in  revenues,  so  the  School  District  needs  to  reduce 
the  certificated  staff  (teachers)  because  of  the  decline  in  revenues. 

7. 

The  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  will  not  cause  those  services  to 

fall  below  the  level  necessary  to  provide  such  services  to  the  students  nor  will  the  reduction 
violate  any  mandate  regarding  the  provision  of  such  services. 

8. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2003/04-12  and  created  a 
system  to  break  ties  among  certificated  staff  (teachers)  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service.  The  Governing  Board  acted  within  its  discretion  in  creating  the  tie  breaking  criteria. 

     

After  soliciting  input  from  the  teachers  regarding:  their  first  date  of  paid  service;  their 

credentials;  their  graduate  hours,  advanced  degrees  and  specialized  training;  their  bilingual 
skills;  their  years  of  teaching  experience;  and  their  assistance  with  extracurricular  activities, 
the  School  District  applied  the  tie  breaking  criteria  to  those  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service  to  determine  their  individual  ranking  and  thus  created  a  seniority  list  on  which  it 
noted  all  of  the  above  information.  The  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  was  fair  and 
appropriate. 

To  determine  which  teachers  would  be  affected  by  the  lay  off,  the  School  District  first 

bumped  those  teachers  in  temporary  or  provisional  positions,  then  worked  its  way  up  the 
seniority  list. 

9. 

Beth  Delacour,  the  School  District’s  Director  of  Human  Resources,  testified 

that  it  has  been  the  School  District’s  practice  to  bring  appropriately  credentialed  teachers  off 
the  rehire  list  to  temporarily  fill  the  positions  of  those  on  leaves  of  absence. 

10. 

The  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  for  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
and  the  pupils,  and  is  the  sole  cause  for  not  re-employing  respondents.  The  particular  kinds 
of  services  can  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s 
decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. . 

11. 

With  the  changes  noted  above,  especially  in  Factual  Finding  number  5,  no 

permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is  being  retained  to 
perform  a  service  which  respondents  are  credentialed  and  competent  to  render.  Those 
certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  being  retained  will  provide  services  which 
respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS. 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing  board 

that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in 
Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the 
superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no 
superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or  has  waived  his 
or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not 
be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.

However,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in any 
manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this 
section. 

. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying 

him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be 
delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date 
specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  on  which 
the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before 
the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her 
right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the 
provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

_ 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be  conducted 
and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part 
1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the 
power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five  days  after 
service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day 
period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code  shall  be 

available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service  of  the  accusation,  and 
the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall  prepare  a 
proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as  to  whether  the  charges 
sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. The 
proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition. 
However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the 
cause  and  disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained 
in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be  binding  on  the 
governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges 
unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to 
the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the 
proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the 
administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not  inconsistent  with 

provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate  this  section. 

  

 
  
  

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in  person  to  the 
employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  . 
postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continuance  is  granted 
pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the  dates  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c) 
which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in 
subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  shall 
be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other  than 
those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no 
probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as 
specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools  of  a  district 
for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  have  declined  below  the 
corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing 
board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of 
the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of 
curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have 
become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of permanent 
employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the 
services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this  section  for  a  newly 
formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school  of  the  district  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
been  a  school  of  the  newly  formed  or  reorganized  district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school 
years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the 
governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of 
termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five 
days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the. 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the

group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

@ 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in 
the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent 
or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in 
Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee 
to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not 
have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a 
subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 
certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course 
of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in 
either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee 
has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

3. 

In  the  course  of reducing  or  discontinuing  a  particular  kind  of  service,  the 

Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services 
which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  see  Moreland  Teachers  Ass’n 
v.  Kurze  (1980)  167  Cal.Rptr.  343,  109  Cal.App.3d  648. 

4. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

5. 

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  and  for  the 

reduction  of  31.9  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004 
school  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Therefore,  cause  exists 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  notice  to  the  affected 
respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2004-2005. 

  

 
  

  

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  in  31.9  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions 
at  the  end  of  the  2003-2004  school  year  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  the  inverse  order  of  seniority 

Dated: 

Link  LE.  ALOY 

Let Zp 

LEONARD  L.  SCOTT 
' 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

