*w 
: 

eos 

: 

|  @ 

| 

: 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
VENTURA  COUNTY  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of The  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2005030069 

Toni  Allen 

| 

and 

Victor  Fuentes, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Julie  Cabos-Owen,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  26,  2005,  at  the  Ventura  County  Community  College 
District,  in  Camarillo,  California. 

@ 

Warren  S.  Kinsler  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo  represented  the  Ventura 

County  Community  College  District. 

Lawrence  Rosenzweig,  attorney  at  law, >  represented  Victor  Fuentes  and  Toni  Allen 

(collectively  Respondents). 

Oral  and documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record  was 

closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  26,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Complainant,  Dr.  James  Meznek,  filed  the  Accusation  while  acting  in  his  official 

capacity  as  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ventura  County  Community  College  District  (District). 

Respondents  are  academic  employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  the  District  gave  notice  to  each  Respondent  that 

their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  On  that  same  date,  the 
District  served  the  Accusation  against  each  Respondent. 

4  Respondents  timely  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for 
not  reemploying  them  for  the  2004-2005  school  year.  They  filed  their  Notices  of  Defense  at  the  | 
same  time  they  filed  their  Requests  for  Hearing. 

@ 

 

5. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted 

~  Resolution  A-12  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  academic  services 

no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year: 

_— 

English  as  Second  Language  Instruction 
French  Instruction 
German  Instruction 

Ceramics  Instruction 
Reduced 
Reduced 
College  Strategies  Instruction 
Discontinued  Companion  Animal  Pet  Studies  Instruction 
Computer  Information  Systems  Instruction 
Reduced 
Counseling  Services 
Reduced 
Reduced 
Disabled  Student  Programs  &  Services 
Education  Instruction 
Reduced 
Discontinued  Electronics  Instruction 
Discontinued  Electronics  Technology  Instruction 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4, 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  .  Reduced 
Reduced 
11. 
Reduced 
12... 
Discontinued  Horticulture  Instruction 
13. 
Discontinued  Hotel  Management  Instruction 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 

Japanese  Instruction 
Reduced 
Journalism  Instruction . 
Reduced 
Discontinued  Machine  Tool  Technology  Instruction 
Matriculation  Services 
Reduced 
Intercollegiate  Men’s  &  Women’s 
.  Reduced 
Cross-Country  Instruction 
Reading  Instruction 
Spanish  Instruction 
Theater  Arts  Instruction 

Reduced 
21 
22. 
Reduced 
23.  —  Reduced 

.  Discontinued  Interpretation  Instruction 

TOTAL  SERVICES  REDUCED  = 

39.48  FTE 

FTE! 

1.00 
1.00 
40 
425 
11.79 
40 
60 
70 
1.00. 
3.20 
1.00 
~  99 
1.19 
1.33 
60 
33 
1.19 
1.85 
1.00 

~~ 

20 
3.13 
80 
1.53 

The  Board  further  determined  that  the  reduction  in  services  necessitated  a  decrease in  the 
number  of  academic  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  num- 
ber  of  FTE  positions,  and  directed  the  Chancellor  to  notify  the  appropriate  employees  to  imple- 
ment  the  Board's  determination. 

6. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  5  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which 

may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  87743. 

7. 

Board  Resolution  A-12  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the 

individuals  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

  

‘Full  Time  Equivalent  

8. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither 

_  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

9. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  seniority  number’,  current  assignments  and  locations,  tenure  status, 
and  faculty  service  areas.  ° 

10. 

Each  District  faculty  member  is  assigned  one  or  more  faculty  service  areas 

(FSAs)  in  which  he/she  is  certified  as  competent  to  teach.  The  faculty  member  is  assigned  to 
courses  or  duties  falling  within  the  ambit  of  his/her  FSA(s).  A  faculty  member  will  be 
considered  “competent”  to  render  service  in  a  FSA  if  the  faculty  member  satisfies  the  state 
minimum  qualifications  of  competency  to  teach  in  that  FSA.’  Certification  in  a  particular  FSA  is 
initially  made  at  the  time  a  faculty  member is  hired.  Thereafter,  a  faculty  member  may.  apply  for 
further  FSA  certifications. 

11. 

Inimplementing  the  Board’s  resolution,  the  District  first  notified  all  temporary 

employees  performing  services  in  the  identified  reduction  areas  that  their  services  would be 
terminated  at  the  end  of  the  current  school  year  and  not  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 
The  District  also  notified  all  full-time  employees  performing “extra  assignments”?  that  their  extra 
assignments  in  the  identified  reduction  areas  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  current  school . 
year  and  not  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

_ 

12. 

With  regard  to  its  tenured  and  probationary  employees,  the  District  used  the 

Seniority  List  to  develop a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned 
in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  determined  that  nobody  less  senior  than 
Respondents  was  being  retained  to  render  services  in  the  FSAs in  which Respondents  are 
competent  to  serve. 

13.  .  The  District  provides  classes  at  Oxnard,  Ventura  and  Moorpark  Colleges. 

14. 

(a)  Respondent  Victor  Fuentes  (Respondent Fuentes)  currently  teaches  PC  Repair 
and  Upgrade  at  Oxnard  College.  Electronics  Instruction  and  Electronics  Technology  Instruction 
are  being  discontinued.  The  District  records  reflect  that  his  FSA  is  Electronic  Technology, 
which  includes  radio,  television,  computer  repair  and  avionics.  He  holds  an  Instructor  Credential 

  

*  If  employees  share a first  date  of  paid  service,  seniority  is  determined  by  a  lottery  conducted  upon  their  first  date  of 
paid  service.  The  lottery  results  in  the  assignment  of  seniority  numbers  indicating  their  seniority  placement  in  rela- 
tion  to  other  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service.  The  employee’  s  seniority  number  remains  the  same 
throughout  their  employment  with  the  district. 
*  “Faculty  service  area’  means  a  service  or  instructional  subject  area  or  group  of  related  services  or  instructional 
subject  areas  performed  by  faculty  and  established  by  a  community  college  district.”  (Ed.  Code  section  87743.1.) 
*  Pursuant  to  Education-Code  section  87743.  2,  FSAs  must  be  established  through  the  collective  bargaining  process, 
The  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  between  the  District  and  the  Ventura  County  Federation  of  College  Teachers, 
AFT  Local  1828,  AFL-CIO,  section  5.7,  provides  that  the  list  of  FSAs in  the  District  shall  be  the  same  as  the 
minimum  qualifications.  list  defined  by  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  California  Community  Colleges. 
°  “Extra  assignments”  are  assignments  in  addition  to  a  full  time  faculty  member’s  one  FTE.  .

  

in  the  subject  matter  area  of  Industrial, Machine  and  Related  Technologies,  but  does  not  possess 
any  degrees  or  certificates. 

(b)  Respondent  Fuentes  argued  that,  since  PC  Repair  and  Upgrade  appears  in  the 
Oxnard  College  Schedule  of  Classes  under  the  umbrella  category  of  “Engineering  Technology,” 
his  FSA  is  Engineering  Technology.  He  further  argued  that  he  is  competent  to  teach  at  least  one 
of  the  Engineering  Technology  classes  which is  currently  being  taught  by  someone  less  senior 
than  him.  These  arguments  are  not  persuasive.  A  faculty  member’s  FSA is  not  determined  using 
the  Schedule  of  Classes,°  but  by  satisfaction  of  the  minimum  qualifications  for  that  FSA. 
Respondent  Fuentes  does  not  satisfy  the  minimum  qualifications  for  competency  to  render 
service  in  the  FSA  of  Engineering  Technology. 

(c)  No  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  in  the 
FSA  in  which  the  records  of  the  District  reflect  that  Respondent  Fuentes  is  competent  to  serve. 

15. 

(a)  Respondent  Toni  Allen  (Respondent  Allen)  teaches  journalism  at  Oxnard 

College.  Journalism  Instruction  is  being  reduced  by  1.19  FTE.  The  District  intends  to  reassign 
Respondent  Allen  to  a  .33  FTE  assignment  at  Moorpark  College,  where  she  would  assume  a  load 
previously  carried  by  a  part-time  employee.  The  District  records  reflect  that  Respondent  Allen’s 
FSAs  are  Journalism  and  Mass  Communication.  She  holds  master’s  degrees  in  journalism  and 
mass  communication,  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  business  organization  management  and  an 
associate’s  degree  in  journalism. 

(b)  Respondent  Allen  contends  that  she  should  be  retained  to  fill  a  new  full-time 

listing  for  the  “Position  Title”  of  “Humanities/Film  Instructor”  at  Moorpark 

“Humanities/Film  Instructor”  position  at  Moorpark  College.  Between  March  15  and  April  4, 
2005,  Respondent  Allen  received  a  notice  of  “Full-Time  Academic  Transfer  Opportunities,” 
which  included a 
College.  Attached  to  the  notice  was  a  job  announcement  for  a  “Humanities/Film  Instructor,  Full- 
time  Tenure  Track  Position,”  for  the  Fall  2005  semester.  Respondent  Allen  did  not  meet  the 
minimum  education  requirements  for  the  position.  While  she  did  submit  a  supplemental 
questionnaire  claiming  that  her  qualifications  were  equivalent  to  the  required  qualification,  the 
District  declined  her  application,  noting  that  it  was  seeking  an  applicant  with  more  film 
experience,  There  was  no  evidence  that  a  less  senior  teacher  had  been  retained  to  the  transfer 
position. 

(c)  No  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  in  the  - 

FSA  in  which  the  records  of  the  District  reflect  that  Respondent  Allen  is  competent  to  serve. 

Hf 

Mf 

Hf 

Hf 

  

°  Tt  is  noted  that  the  Moorpark  College  Schedule  of  Classes  listed  PC  Repair  and  Upgrade  under  the  umbrella  cate- 
gory  of  “Electronics.” 

.

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

ls 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth in  Education  Code  sections 

87740  and  87743  were  met.  ‘(Factual  Findings  |  through  4.) 

2. 

The  services  listed in  Factual  Finding  5  are  each  determined  to  be  a  particular 
(Factual  Findings  5  and 

kind  of  service  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  87743. 
6.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  academic  employees  of  the  District  due  to 
Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743.  (Factual  Findings  5  through  8.) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  87743  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

[t]he  services  of  no  tenured  employee  may  be  terminated  ..  .  while  any  proba- 
tionary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  ren- 
. 
der  a  service  in  a  faculty  service  area  in  which  the  records  of  the  district  . 
reflect  that  the  tenured  employee  possesses  the  minimum  qualifications  pre- 
scribed  by  the  board  of  governors  and is  competent  to  serve  under  district 
competency  criteria. 

. 

SS. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  con- 
In  doing  so,  the  senior  em- 

tinuing  position  which  he  or  she  js  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
ployee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v.  Rich- 
mond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  In  the  case  at  hand,  Respondent 
Allen  sought  transfer  to  a  position  outside  her  FSA  and  which  she  was  not  competent  to  fill. 
Additionally,  even  if  her  qualifications  were  deemed  equivalent  to  those  required  for  the  transfer 
position,  there  is  no  evidence  that  a  junior  teacher  has  been  retained  to  the  transfer  position. 
Therefore,  at  this  time,  Respondent  Allen  cannot  “bump”  an  unknown  person  with  unspecified 
seniority  and  qualifications  for  purposes  of  avoiding  the  reduction in  her  employment. 

Re 

- 

6. 

‘No  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being retained  to  render  a  service  in  the  FSA  in 
which  the  records  of  the  District  reflect  that  Respondents  are  competent  to  serve.  (Factual  Find- 
ings  9  through  15.) 

7. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743  for 
(Factual 

terminating  or  reducing Respondents’  employment  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 
Findings  | 1  through  15.) 

If 
If 
If 
Hf 
Hil

@ 

| 

ORDER 

The  Accusations  served  on  the  Respondents  are  sustained.  Notice  may  be  given  to  Re- 
spondents  before  May  15,  2005,  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  terminated  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

Dated:  May  4,  2005 

   

————Ss 

fC» 
E  CAB 
inistrative  Law  Judge 

Office*efLAdministrative  Hearings 

 

      

