BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CULVER  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

DOROTHY  SMITH,  Respondent, 

and  ELAINE  TOWNSEND,  Precautionary 
Respondent. 

    

OAH  No.  L2005030147 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Michael  A.  Scarlett,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  21,  2005,  at  the  Culver  City  Unified  School 
District,  in  Culver  City,  California. 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Culver  City  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

Lawrence  Rosenzweig,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  members  of  the 

California  Teachers  Association. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  matter  argued,  and  case  was  submitted  on  April  21,  2005. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby  makes  his  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and 
orders  as,  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Culver  City  Unified  School  District  (District)  operates  elementary,  junior 

high,  and  high  schools,  and  an  adult  school. 

2. 

Dr.  Laura  McGaughey  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  (Superintendent). 
The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  her  official  capacity  against  each  of 
the  certificated  employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusation  with  required 

 

3. 

4. 

7. 

8. 

accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those 
certificated  employees. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

On  March  1,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  two 

Resolutions:  Board  Resolution  No.  23-2004-2005  and  Resolution  No.  25-2004-2005,  which 
proposed  a  layoff  of  5.5  and  1.5  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees, 
respectively,  to  reduce  and  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  no  later  than 
the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year 

5. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  6.5  FTE  employees  be  given  notice  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

On  March  14,  2005,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted 
that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  6.5  FTE  positions. ' 
The  District  also  served  respondents  the  with  Notice  of  the  Accusation  and  the  Accusation, 
including  exhibits,  and  other  necessary  jurisdictional  documents. 

Notice  was  served  by  personal  delivery  or  certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested. 
Certificated  employees  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  respondents. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  and  there  is  no 

jurisdictional  dispute  at  issue  in  this  matter. 

9. 

Board  Resolution  No.  23-2004-2005  and  Resolution  No.  25-2004-2005, 
adopted  on  March  1,  2005,  proposed  a  layoff  of  5.5  and  1.5  FTE  certificated  employees, 
respectively.  Specifically,  the  Resolutions  provided  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 
following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Adult  School  Office  Training  Center  Teaching  Services  —  1.5  FTE 

1. 
2.  Community  Day  School  Teaching  Services  -  1.0  FTE 
3.  NJROTC  Teaching  Services  -  1.0  FTE 

  

'  The  district  noticed  five  employees,  Wai  Kwan  Burger,  William  Michael  DeVoy,  Dorothy  Smith,  Elaine  Town- 
send,  and  Dr.  Josephine  Basel.  However,  only  respondents  Smith  and  Townsend  filed  requests  for  hearings.

At  Risk  Counseling  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

4. 
5.  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment/Elem.  BTSA  Support  Provider  Services  -  1.0  FTE 
6.  Administrator  on  Special  Assignment  Services  -  1.0  FTE  (Resolution  No.  25) 
TOTAL  SERVICES  REDUCED  =  6.5  FTE 

10. 

|  Subsequent  to  adoption  of  the  Board’s  Resolutions,  the  District  identified 

vacancies  due  to  retirements,  release  of  temporary  teachers,  and  resignations.  In 
implementing  the  Board’s  Resolutions,  the  district  has  taken  into  account  attrition  known  at 
the  time  of  the  Resolutions.  Two  employees  currently  serving  in  positions  that  are  to  be 
eliminated  will  be  reassigned  to  other  vacancies,  one  created  by  the  release  of  a  temporary 
employee,  the  other  created  by  retirement,  eliminating  the  need  for  a  2.0  FTE  reduction. 
With  regards  to  the  original  five  employees  notified  of  layoffs  to  accomplish  the  remaining 
4.5  FTE  reduction,  one  employee  submitted  his  resignation,  and  two  others  decided  not  to 
request  a  hearing  and  accepted  the  layoff,  accounting  for  3.0  FTE.  Thus,  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  required  to  be  terminated  pursuant  to  this  proceeding  is  1.5  FTE  for 
the  Adult  School  Office  Training  Center  Teaching  Services.  The  Board  resolved  in 
Resolution  No.  23  to  eliminate  the  Adult  School  Office  Training  Center  program. 
Respondent  Smith  and  Respondent  Townsend  are  the  only  employees  serving  in  this 
program. 

11. 

Board  Resolution  No.  26,  adopted  on  March  1,  2005,  established  tie-breaker 

criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The  District  applied  these  criteria  to  break  seniority  ties 
through  the  seniority  list;  however,  no  employees  being  laid  off  in  this  proceeding  share  the 
same  seniority  dates.  Thus,  the  tie  breaker  criteria  are  not  specifically  referenced  in  this 
decision. 

12. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates,  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations. 
Credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  records  of  the  County  Office  of 
Education,  at  which  certificated  employees  must  register  such  documents.  Dr.  Cecelia  Hale, 
the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the 
technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

13. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 

"bumping"  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in 
another  area  and  were  entitled  to  "bump"  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be 
laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not 
covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse 
order  of  seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and 
whether  these  individuals  could  “bump”  other  employees. 

From  the  overall  Seniority  List,  the  District  developed  a  Seniority  List  of  the 
nine  probationary  or  permanent  employees  currently  employed  in  the  adult  school  program.

14. 

 

This  Seniority  List  was  developed  because  the  1.5  FTE  at  issue  in  this  matter  involved  only 
layoffs  in  the  adult  school  program.  The  layoff  and  bumping  rights  of  tenured  adult  school 
employees  are  similar  to  those  of  tenured  employees  serving  in  the  regular  K-12  programs  of 
the  school  district,  except  that  adult  school  employees  may  only  “bump”  or  be  bumped  by 
other  adult  school  employees,  and  are  not  eligible  to  bump  junior  employees  serving  in  the 
regular  K-12  programs  of  the  District.  Respondents  do  not  assert  that  they  have  “bumping” 
rights  in  the  K-12  programs  of  the  school  district. 

Respondent  Dorothy  Smith 

15.  |  Respondent  Smith  is  the  most  senior  employee  in  the  adult  school  and  has  a 
hire  date  of  September  19,  1996.  Respondent  Smith  has  a  Vocational  Education  and  a  Life 
Adult  credential.  She  has  taught  in  the  Office  Skills  Training  Center  program  in  the  adult 
school  the  entire  time  she  has  been  employed  by  the  District.  Respondent  Smith  teaches 
clerical  skills,  keyboard  data  entry,  filing,  and  computer  courses  including  Microsoft  Word 
and  Microsoft  Excel  applications.  Respondent  Smith  contends  that,  although  the  adult 
school  Office  Skills  Training  Center  program  is  being  eliminated  by  the  District,  computer 
courses  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  will  continue  to  be  offered  by  the 
District  in  the  next  school  year.  She  claims  that  junior  employees,  specifically  Leila 
Rosemberg,  have  been  retained  to  teach  such  computer  classes. 

16.  |  Respondent  Smith  relies  on  a  brochure  prepared  by  the  District  entitled  “Adult 

School  Spring/Summer  2005”  schedule  of  classes,  which  indicates  that  some  computer 
courses  may  be  taught  in  programs  other  that  the  Office  Skills  Training  Center  in  the 
Spring/Summer  session  of  the  2004-2005  school  year.  A  course  entitled  “Introduction  to 
Computers”  is  scheduled  to  be  taught  as  an  elective  in  the  Independent  Learning  Center 
(ILC)  and  some  “computer  education”  courses  may  be  taught  as  part  of  the  “Community 
Education  Classes.”  It  was  not  established,  however,  that  these  computer  courses  will  be 
offered  in  the  2005-2006  school  year,  the  year  the  proposed  layoffs  are  to  take  effect. 
Furthermore,  all  of  the  computer  classes,  except  the  Introduction  to  Computer  class  in  the 
ILC,  are  “fee-based  classes,”  which  are  only  offered  contingent  on  sufficient  student 
enrollment  in  a  particular  class,  and  are  taught  by  temporary  employees  or  teachers  who  have 
no  tenured  status  with  the  District.  It  can  not  be  determined  whether  any  of  these  courses 
would  be  offered  in  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

17. 

Respondent  Smith  also  contends  that  Leila  Rosemberg,  a  tenured  permanent 

employee  in  the  adult  school,  is  being  retained  to  teach  a  computer  class,  even  though 
Rosemberg  is  junior  to  Respondent  Smith.  Although,  Ms.  Rosemberg  is  junior  to 
Respondent  Smith  in  seniority,  Ms.  Rosemberg  has  credentials  that  allow  her  to  teach 
subjects  that  Respondent  is  not  certificated  and  competent  to  teach.  Ms.  Rosemberg  teaches 
in  the  ILC  of  the  adult  school  program  and  has  a  Professional  Clear  Single  subject  credential 
in  life  science,  and  a  Ryan  Adult  Education  Designated  Subject  credential  in  basic  education 
and  science. 

18. 

The  Adult  School  Spring/Summer  2005  schedule  of  classes  indicates  that  Ms. 

Rosemberg  will  teach  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  Geometry,  Graphs,  test  taking  strategies,  and 
time  management.  Under a  section  entitled  “Courses  Offered”  in  the  ILC,  Ms.  Rosemberg 
and  two  other  instructors  are  indicated  as  the  teachers  for  several  categories  of  courses 
including:  Science,  Social  Studies,  English,  Math,  and  Electives.  The  Introduction  to 
Computers  course  is  listed  as  an  elective.  This  section  of  the  schedule  does  not  indicate  the 
specific  course  each  of  the  three  instructors  will  teach.  However,  given  Ms.  Rosemberg’s 
credentials  and  the  fact  she  is  specifically  listed  as  teaching  math  courses  in  a  section  of  the 
schedule  immediately  following  the  “Courses  Offered”  section,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude 
that  Ms.  Rosemberg  teaches  math  and  science  courses,  classes  which  Respondent  Smith  is 
not  certificated  or  competent  teach. 

19. 

Nocertificated  employee  junior  to  Respondent  Smith  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  Respondent  Smith  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Respondent  Elaine  Townsend 

20. 

The  District  classified  Respondent  Elaine  Townsend  as  a  temporary  employee. 

Respondent  Townsend  contends  that  she  is  not  a  temporary  employee  and  should  be 
designated  a  probationary  or  permanent  employee,  and  placed  on  the  District’s  Seniority  List 
and  afforded  the  rights  of  a  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employee.  The  District 
maintains  that  Respondent  Townsend  is  a  temporary  employee  because  she  did  not  complete 
two  consecutive  years  working  75%  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district 
were  maintained  in  order  to  achieve  probationary  or  permanent  employee  status. 

21.  |  Respondent  Townsend  began  working  for  the  District  as  an  adult  school 

substitute  teacher  on  June  30,  1998.  On  September  5,  2000,  she  began  working  as  a 
temporary  teacher  working  23  hours  per  week.  During  the  2000-2001  school  year, 
Respondent  worked  23  hours  per  week  the  entire  school  year,  which  constituted  75%  of  the 
number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained.  Working  that  number  of 
hours  would  have  qualified  as  one  year  of  probationary  status.  During  the  2001-2002  school 
year,  Respondent  Townsend  worked  25  of  the  possible  36  weeks  of  the  school  year,  taking 
leave  for  an  injury  from  January  14,  2002  through  March  2002.  From  April  2002  until  the 
date  of  hearing,  Respondent  Townsend  has  been  working  only  15  hours  per  week,  making 
her  ineligible  to  attain  permanent  status  under  the  District’s  collective  bargaining  agreement 
with  the  teachers. 

22. 

Under  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the  District  and  the  Culver 
City  Federation  of  Teachers,  thirty  (30)  hours  per  week  is  considered  a  full-time  assignment 
in  the  adult  school.  More  than  18  hours  per  week  must  be  worked  by  an  employee  to  receive 
permanency  status.  To  attain  permanency,  a  bargaining  unit  member  must  teach  a  minimum 
of  19  hours  per  week  for  75%  of  the  scheduled  weeks  in  the  school  year,  excluding  summer 
school,  for  three  (3)  consecutive  years.  Respondent  Townsend  has  not  attained  permanent 
employee  status  because  she  did  not  work  the  required  number  of  years  as  a  full-time  adult 
school  employee  working  19  hours  per  week  or  more  for  75%  of  the  scheduled  school  year.

23. 

Section  44915  of  the  Education  Code  provides  that:  “Governing  boards  of 

school  districts  shall  classify  as  probationary  employees,  those  persons  employed  in  positions 
requiring  certification  qualifications  for  the  school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified 
permanent  employees  or  as  substitute  employees.”  Section  44918,  subdivision  (a),  provides 
that:  “any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee,  who  serves  during  one 
school  year  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district 
were  maintained  in  that  school  year  and  has  performed  the  duties  normally  required  of  a 
certificated  employee  of  the  school  district,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete 
school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  for  the 
following  year.” 

24. 

Arguably,  under  section  44918,  subdivision  (a),  because  Respondent 

Townsend  did  not  work  75%  of  the  scheduled  school  year  in  2001-2002,  she  did  not  have 
two  consecutive  years  working  75%  of  the  school  year,  and  thus,  may  not  be  considered  a 
probationary  employee.  However,  section  44915  suggests  that  an  employee  who  is  not 
classified  as  a  permanent  or  substitute  employee,  must  be  considered  a  probationary 
employees.  Respondent  Townsend  is  not  a  substitute  teacher  or  permanent  teacher  and  may 
conceivably  be  deemed  a  probationary  employee  under  section  44915. 

25. 

We  need  not,  however,  resolve  the  probationary  status  issue  in  this  case 

because  Respondent  Townsend,  even  if  considered  a  probationary  employee,  would  not  have 
greater  seniority  rights  than  any  of  the  nine  tenured  employees  in  the  adult  school. 
Respondent  Townsend’s  earliest  possible  seniority  date  would  be  September  5,  2000,  when 
her  status  changed  from  a  substitute  teacher  to  a  temporary  teacher  in  the  adult  school 
program.  “The  permanent  teacher  with  the  least  seniority  currently  on  the  adult  school 
Seniority  List  has  a  seniority  date  of  February  16,  2000.  More  importantly,  as  a  probationary 
employee,  Respondent  Townsend  would  not  have  bumping  rights  against  any  of  the  adult 
school  teachers,  who  are  all  permanent  tenured  teachers.  (See  Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Assoc.,  Inc.  v  Gordon  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

26. 

Nocertificated  employee  junior  to  Respondent  Townsend  was  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  Respondent  Townsend  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  Nos.  23-2004-2005  and  25-2004- 
2005  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education 
Code  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services 
Cause  for 
was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools 
and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b), 

“either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179. 

_ 

In  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assoc.,  Inc.  v  Gordon,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  at 

812,  the  court  held: 

It  is  true  that  a  district  may  not  dismiss  an  employee  pursuant  to  section  13477 
[now,  44955]  and  yet  continue  the  identical  service  and  position  held  by  the 
terminated  employee.  But  the  particular  kind  of  service  of  the  employee  may 
be  eliminated  even  though  a  service  continues  to  be  performed  or  provided  in 
In  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  Dist.,  supra  2 
a  different  manner  by  the  district. 
Cal.2d  770,  the  governing  board  discontinued  the  service  performed  by  so- 
called  traveling  art  teachers-experts  who  went  from  school  to  school  giving 
instruction  in  art.  Thereafter,  the  district  continued  to  offer  art  instruction  but 
The  court  affirmed  the  judgment 
only  by  the  regular  departmental  teachers. 
denying  a  writ  of  mandate  to  compel  reinstatement  of  one  of  the  traveling  art 
teachers  on  the  ground  that  the  particular  service  performed  by  the  petitioner 
had  in  fact  been  discontinued  even  though  the  teaching  of  art  was  a  service 
Where,  as  here,  the  district 
still  being  performed  by  the  school  district. 
apparently  contemplated  a  change  in 
the 
particular  kind  of  service  in  teaching  a  subject,  there  was  a  discontinuance  of 
the  former  particular.  [Emphasis  added  by  court;  citations  omitted. ] 

the  method  of  teaching  or 

in 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 
The  District  identified 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 
the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed 
be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

The  District  determined  that  the  Adult  School  Office  Training  Center  program  would 

eliminated,  a  reduction  of  1.5  FTE.  Respondents  Smith  and  Townsend  were  the  only  adult 
school  teachers  employed  in  that  program  providing  that  particular  kind  of  service.  That  the 
District  may  offer  “computer  courses”  in  some  other  adult  school  programs  is  not 
determinative  of  respondents’  right  to  be  retained.  The  particular  kind  of  service  respondents 
were  performing  has  been  eliminated  by  the  District.  Moreover,  there  is  insufficient 
evidence  to  conclude  that  “fee-based”  computer  courses  offered  contingent  upon  student 
enrollment,  constitute  a  teaching  position  for  which  respondents  are  entitled  to  be  retained  to 
teach.  The  District  has  discretion  to  offer  fee-based  courses,  to  be  taught  by  temporary 
teachers,  if  the  necessity  for  the  courses  does  in  fact  materialize.  The  provision  of  contingent 
fee-based  courses  constitutes  the  provision  of  a  particular  service  in  a  different  manner  than 

services  respondents  provided  in  the  Office  Training  Center  program.   

as 

4. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local 
2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d 
831. 

Section  44929.25  provides,  in  part,  that  services  for  which  an  employee  serving  in  the 

adult  school  has  obtained  tenure  “may  be  reduced  in  conformity  with  sections  44955  and 
44956.”  Section  44955  prohibits  the  termination  of  services  due  to  layoff  of  a  permanent  or 
probationary  employee  if  there  is  a  junior  employee  being  retained  to  render  a  service  that 
the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Pursuant  to  sections  44929.25 
and  44929.26,  and  subject  to  exceptions  that  are  not  relevant  to  Respondents  here,  a  teacher 
who  serves  the  required  probationary  period  in  the  adult  school  obtains  tenure  as  a  teacher  of 
classes  for  adults,  but  does  not  advance  towards  tenure  as  a  teacher  in  the  regular  K-12 
programs  of  a  school  district.  Thus,  an  adult  school  employee  can  have  no  rights  to  displace 
junior  employees  in  the  regular  K-12  program  in  the  context  of  a  layoff. 

As  stated  above,  there  is  no  dispute  here  that  respondents  are  not  entitled  to  bump  any 

employee  in  the  K-12  school  program  for  the  District.  Respondent  Smith  is  also  not 
certificated  and  competent  to  bump  any  junior  teacher  retained  by  the  District  in  the  adult 
school.  Respondent  Townsend,  even  if  considered  a  probationary  employee,  would  not  be 
more  senior  than  any  of  the  permanent  tenured  teachers  retained  by  the  District  in  the  adult 
school. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondent  Dorothy  Smith  and  Respondent  Elaine 
Townsend,  employees  occupying  1.5  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  in  the  Adult 
School  Office  Training  Center  program  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005- 
2006  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  May  6,  2005 

  

Michael  A.  Scarlett 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

