BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
HOLLISTER  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment 
of  41  Full-Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N2005030047 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  18,  2005,  in  Hollister,  California. 

Guy  A.  Bryant,  Bryant  &  Brown,  represented  the  Hollister  School  District. 

Joseph  A.  Cisneros,  Law  Offices  of  Lawrence  E.  Biegel,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  18,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Judith  Barranti,  Ed.D.,  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as 

Superintendent  of  the  Hollister  School  District  (District). 

Respondents  are  listed  on  Appendix  A,  attached  hereto  and  by  this  reference 

incorporated  herein.  They  are  certificated  employees  of  the District. 

On  February  15,  2005,  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  20:04-05  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing 
the  Superintendent  or  her  designated  representative  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  certificated 
employees  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06 
school  year. 

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  the  Superintendent  or  her  designated 

representative  gave  written  notice  to  an  unknown  number  of  certificated  employees, 
including  the  79  respondents,  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2005-06  school  year.

5. 

Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

terminating  their  services  for  the  2005-06  school  year.  An  accusation  was  served  on 
respondents,  all  of  whom  are  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  notices  of  defense.  All  prehearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  services  for  the 

2005-06  school  year: 

SERVICES 

| 

FTE! 

Elementary  Instruction  at  Grades  K-6’ 
Middle  School  Instruction  at  Grades  7-8 
Middle  School  Counseling 

Total 

36.0 
4.0 
10 
41.0 

7. 
District’s  budget. 

The  Board’s  reduction  of  services  was  prompted  by  the  projected  deficit  in  the 

8. 

Pursuant  to  the  Board’s  resolution,  the  District  intends  to  retain  regardless  of 
seniority  (i.¢.,  “skip”  in  the  layoff  process)  certificated  employees  who  possess  qualifications 
needed  for  Special  Education,  Middle  School  Math,  Middle  School  Science,  Music  and 
Administration.  The  District  sent  preliminary  layoff  notices  to  employees  who  are  entitled  to 
be  skipped  under  the  above  provision,  but  the  affected  respondents  understand  that  they  will 
not  receive  final  layoff  notices. 

. 

9. 

Before  March  15,  the  District  had  not  received  notification  from  any 

certificated  employees  that  they  would  be  retiring  or  resigning  before  the  2005-06  school 
year.  Since  March  15,  one  employee  has  notified  the  District  of  an  impending  retirement  or 
resignation  and  two  other  employees  are  considering  leaving.  Bill  Jordan,  the  District’s 
Director  of  Human  Resources,  did  not  know  whether  the  attrition  of  one  position  would  be 
taken  into  account  in  determining  how  many  teachers  will  receive  final  layoff  notices. 
Respondents  argue  that  the  District  should  be  required  to  take  that  positively  assured  attrition 
into  account,  but  this  contention  is  without  merit.  Under  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627,  635,  a  school  district  is  not  required  to  consider  positively 
assured  attrition  occurring  after  March  15. 

10. 

The  Board’s  resolution  contains  the  following  provision  for  determining 

relative  seniority  among  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary 
status  in  the  District: 

  

'  Full-time  equivalent  positions. 

2  Elementary  instruction  at  Grade  6  takes  place  at  the  District’s  two  middle  schools,  which 

include  Grades  6,  7  and  8. 

 

Order  of  lay  off  for  teachers  with  the  same  date  of  first  paid 
service  shall  be  determined  according  to  the  following  criteria: 

1.  Breadth  of  credential  authorization. 
2.  Advanced  degrees  in  assignment  or  credential-related 

subject  areas. 
Greatest  number  of  post-BA  accredited  college  units  on 
file  with  the  District  in  assignment  or  credential-related 
subject  areas. 

4.  Teaching  experience  at  more  than  one  school  site  within 

the  District. 
Greatest  number  of  years  teaching  in  California  public 
elementary  and  secondary  schools  outside  the  District. 

3. 

5. 

11. 

The  District  has  not  yet  applied  the  above  criteria  to  break  seniority  ties,  but  it 

intends  to  do  so  before  issuing  the  final  layoff  notices.  The  criteria  will  be  applied 
sequentially,  i.e.,  if  a  tie  can  be  broken  utilizing  the  first  criterion  the  District  will  not 
consider  the  other  criteria,  and  the  District  will  utilize  the  criterion  next  in  order  only  if 
application  of  the  previous  criterion  does  not  break  the  tie.  The  District  does  not  believe  that 
any  ties  will  be  unbroken  after  application  of  these  criteria. 

12. 

Respondents  challenge  the  tie-breaking  criteria  as  being  impermissibly  vague. 

The  criterion  to  which  they  point  as  vague  is  the  first  one  —  “breadth  of  credential 
authorization.”  When  the  District  developed  the  tie-breakers,  its  intent  was  to  give  seniority 
preference  to  employees  who  are  credentialed  to  teach  in  multiple  areas,  for  maximum 
flexibility  in  future  assignments.  In  applying  the  first  tie-breaker,  the  District  will  look  at 
how  many  credentials  and  authorizations  an  employee  has  and  whether  the  credentials  are  for 
a  single  subject  or  multiple  subjects.  The  number  of  areas  in  which  each  employee’s 
credentials  and  authorizations  enable  him  or  her  to  teach  will  determine  relative  seniority 
ranking,  with  a  greater  number  of  areas  corresponding  to  greater  seniority. 

The  Board  has  broad  latitude  in  establishing  and  applying  tie-breaking  criteria. 
Education  Code  section  44955°  requires  only  that  the  District  determine  the  order  of  seniority 
for  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  “solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof,”  and  the  District  will  meet  this  mandate  when  it  implements 
the  Board’s  criteria.  The  “breadth  of  credential  authorization”  tie-breaker  is  not 
impermissibly  vague,  even  though  the  resolution  does  not  detail  exactly  how  such  breadth  is 
to  be  determined.  It  is  implicit  that  breadth  of  credential  authorization  corresponds  to  the 
number  of  different  areas  which  an  employee’s  credentials  and  authorizations  enable  him  or 
her  to  teach. 

. 

& 

  

>  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

-3-

13. 

Although  the  Board’s  resolution  does  not  specify  what  subject  areas  of  Middle 
School  Instruction  at  Grades  7-8  will  comprise  the  reduction  of  4.0  FTE,  the  District  plans  to 
make  all  of  the  reductions  in  Language  Arts.  According  to  Bill  Jordan,  Language  Arts  was 
targeted  for  reduction  after  analyzing  the  middle  school  enrollment  and  class  size  numbers 
and  reviewing  the  seniority  list. 

14. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  4.0  FTE  reduction  in  Middle  School  Instruction 

at  Grades  7-8  must  be  disallowed  because  this  generic  service  is  not  a  “particular  kind  of 
service”  that  may  be  reduced  under  section  44955.  On  this  point,  respondents  must  prevail. 
With  elementary  instruction,  where  one  teacher  teaches  many  subjects  to  the  same  students,  a 
school  district  is  not  required  to  be  more  specific  in  identifying  the  particular  kind  of  service 
to  be  reduced.*  However,  instruction  at  Grades  7.and  8  in  the  middle  school  is  in  a 
departmentalized  setting  where  students  have  different  teachers  for  different  subjects,  and 
there  is  no  practical  impediment  to  specifically  identifying  particular  kinds  of  services  within 
the  broad  category  of  middle  school  instruction.  Reflecting  the  fact  that  such  instruction  is 
subject-specific,  middle  school  teachers  are  identified  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  by  the 
subject  they  teach  (unlike  elementary  teachers,  who  are  identified  by  the  grade  they  teach). 
Section  44955  does  not  allow  a  school  district  to  use  the  “particular  kind  of  service”  layoff 
process  to  reduce  the  number  of  teachers  in  general.  Layoffs  must  be  incidental  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District’s  determination, 
after  the  fact,  that  the  reductions  in  middle  school  instruction  will  be  made  in  Language  Arts 
does  not  cure  the  defect  in  the  Board’s  resolution. 

. 

| 

15. 

Elementary  Instruction  at  Grades  K-6  and  Middle  School  Counseling  are 
particular  kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
section  44955. 

16.  |  A  number  of  respondents  taught  in  the  District  under  an  emergency  permit,  an 

intern  credential  or  a  pre-intern  certificate  (some  for  as  long  as  six  years)  before they 
obtained  their  preliminary  or  clear  teaching  credential.  However,  the  District  did  not  classify 
these  employees  as  probationary  until  they  submitted  verification  of  their  teaching  credential 
or  an  affidavit  from  a  university  attesting  to  their  completion  of  the  requirements  and 
application  for  the  credential.”  Accordingly,  the  District  assigned  each  of  these  employees  a 
seniority  date  of  their  first  date  of  paid  service  after  the  District  received  the  credential 

  

*  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  y.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  at  pp.  637-638. 

°  Shortly  after  respondents  Brenda  Starks-Jones  and  Jose  Anaya  started  teaching  under 

emergency  permits  in  1997,  they  each  received  a  “Statement  of  Certificated  Employment”  from  the 
District  which  listed  their  employment  status  as  “Prob1.”  This  purported  classification  in  1997  apparently 
was  a  mistake,  since  the  District’s  seniority  list  shows  these  respondents’  first  date  of  paid  service  ina 
probationary  status  to  be  the  date  they  submitted  their  credential  or  affidavit  of  credential  some  four  or 
five  years  later.  The  1997  documents  also  contain  the  proviso  that  “[t]his  statement  of  employment 
confers  no  legal  or  equitable  rights.” 

,

verification  or  affidavit.  These  respondents  now  contend  that  their  seniority  dates  should  be 
changed  to  reflect  their  first  dates  of  paid  service  under  an  emergency  permit,  an  intern 
credential  or  a  pre-intern  certificate.  The  claims  of  these  respondents  to  earlier  seniority 
dates  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

In  the  parties’  briefs,  there  is  extensive  discussion  of  various  statutes  and  cases,  but 

none  of  these  statutes  and  cases  can  be  construed  to  authorize  a  credentialed  teacher  to 
retroactively  add  service  under.an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential  to  acquire 
greater  seniority  during  a  layoff.  In  California  Teachers’  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of 
the  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369,  the  court  allowed  a 
teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  to  be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee  and 
held  that  such  a  teacher  is  entitled  to  the  statutory  protections  governing  the  mid-year 
dismissal  of  a  probationary  employee.  However,  the  Golden  Valley  court  agreed  with  the 
ruling  in  Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026,  that 
time  spent  teaching  under  an  emergency  permit  cannot  be  counted  toward  accruing  tenure  as 
a  permanent  employee.  It  is  logical  to  conclude  that  such  service  also  should  not  count  for 
seniority  purposes.  This  conclusion  finds  support  in  Summerfield  —  although  the  teacher 
there  had  been  employed  under  an  emergency  permit  for  the  1997-1998  school  year  and  had  - 
been  classified  by  her  district  as  a  probationary  employee,  the  court  referred  to  “her  first 
probationary  year”  as  the  1998-1999  school  year,  when  she  was  first  employed  as  a 
probationary  employee  under  a  preliminary  credential. 

Interns  and  pre-interns  also  do  not  acquire  tenure  under  their  provisional  credentials, 

although  section  44466,  in  effect,  gives  former  interns  credit  of  one  year  toward  tenure  if 
they  keep  teaching  in  the  same  district  where  they  completed  the  internship  program.  (This  is 
why  several  respondents  with  seniority  dates  of  August  18,  2004  are  designated  as  “Prob2” 
employees.) 

Allowing  employees  teaching  under  an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential  to 
accrue  seniority  could  lead  to  the  absurd  result  of  such  employees  being  retained  in  a  layoff 
situation  over  fully-credentialed  teachers  with  less  school  district  service.  While  respondents 
are  not  asserting  that  this  should  happen,  there  is  no  legal  justification  for  their  position  that 
upon  becoming  fully-credentialed  an  employee’s  prior  service  retroactively  accrues  seniority. 

17. 

.  The  District  discovered,  during  the  hearing,  that  it  had  made  a  mistake  when  it 
assigned  respondent  Elena  Hatchett  a  seniority  date  of  August  18,  2004.  Hatchett  was  hired 
as  a  pre-intern  in  August  2000,  and  she  submitted  to  the  District  an  affidavit  of  credential  on 
May  24,  2004.  The  District  agreed  to  change  Hatchett’s  seniority  date  to  May  24,  2004. 
Although  no  mistakes  of  this  nature  were  identified  in  other  employees’  seniority  dates,  the 
District  will  correct  such  mistakes  if  they  are  found. 

18. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained 

by  the  District  to  perform  services  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 

render.  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955, 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  Elementary  Instruction  at 

Grades  K-6  by  36.0  FTE  and  Middle  School  Counseling  by  1.0  FTE  for  the  2005-06  school 
year. 

3. 

Cause  does  not  exist  for  the  District  to  reduce  Middle  School  Instruction  at 

Grades  7-8  by  4.0  FTE  for  the  2005-06  school  year. 

4. 

Cause  exists  for  the  District  to  change  the  seniority  date  of  respondent  Elena 

Hatchett  from  August  18,  2004  to  May  24,  2004. 

5. 

Cause  exists  for  the  District  to  retain  regardless  of  seniority  those  respondents 

who  possess  qualifications  needed  for  Special  Education,  Middle  School  Math,  Middle 
School  Science,  Music  and  Administration. 

6. 

Cause  exists  for  the  District  to  apply  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in  Board 

Resolution  No.  20:04-05  prior  to  issuing  final  layoff  notices,  as  necessary  to  determine 
relative  seniority  among  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary 
status. 

7. 

Subject  to  the  limitations  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  3  and  5,  cause  exists 

because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to  section 
44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  in  37.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  District  shall  not  reduce  Middle  School  Instruction  at  Grades  7-8  for  the 

2005-06  school  year. 

2. 

The  District  shall  change  the  seniority  date  of  respondent  Elena  Hatchett  from 

August  18,  2004  to  May  24,  2004. 

3. 

The  District  shall  identify,  and  dismiss  the  accusations  against,  those 

respondents  who  possess  qualifications  needed  for  Special  Education,  Middle  School  Math, 
Middle  School  Science,  Music  and  Administration.

4. 

Prior  to  issuing  final  layoff  notices,  the  District  shall  apply  the  tie-breaking 

criteria  set  forth  in  Board  Resolution  No.  20:04-05  as  necessary  to  determine  relative 
seniority  among  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  status. 

5. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  in  37.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  that 

their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 
DATED: _  Lipast  ZF,  2005 

PVWartad.  (Crier eetre 
NANCY I{, RASMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

RESPONDENTS 

Jose  Anaya 
Hilda  Baldovinos 
Jane  Bambrick 
Judith  Belden 
Angela  Bellino 
Stacie  Bonura 
Debora  Boothe 
Fred  Brewster 
Eric  Carlson 
Minerva  Carson 
Kimberly  Casillas 
Cynthia  Castro 
Susan  Catanzaro 
Stacey  Chan 
Dolores  Chavez 
Jennifer  Cole 
Mona  Cortez 
Joan  Crawford 
Pamela  Cruz 
Marsha  Cuellar 
Laura  Dang 
Donald  Gauvreau  III 
Jananne  Gaver 
Ronna  Gilani 
Luz  Gomez  Thatcher 
Richard  Guzman 
Wendy  Harris 
Elena  Hatchett 
Heidi  Hawkins 
John  Hawkins 
William  Jacinto 
Lori  Kashiwagi 
Mistee  Koch 
Mary  Langstaff 
Jennifer  Liversage 
Carol  Maddock 
Denae  Marci 
Suzette  Martin 
Robin  McGinnis 
Molly  Moniz 
Meghan  Muscato 

Megan  Ottobani 
William  Parcell 
Andrew  Parra 
Yolanda  Parra 
Jennifer  Patterson 
Virginia  Pender 
Barbara  Penney 
Sadie  Rabusin 
Jeanne  Ramos 
Poonam  Rao 
Jesse  Richards 
Laura  Richards 
Maria  Rios 
Erica  Robledo-Dickens 
Andrea  Rodriguez 
Patricia  Rodriguez 
Caroline  Romero 
Nancie  Ross 
William  Sachau 
Maritza  Salcido 
Rosa  Sanchez 
Susan  Shahenian 
Pamela  Smith 
Frances  Sneddon 
Brenda  Starks-Jones 
Angela  Steindorf 
Jeff  Steindorf 
Martha  Tomlinson 
Andrew  Tuttle 
Lisa  Uccello 
Maria  Ureno 
Gabriella  Vallejo 
Steven  Vasquez 
Maria  Villegas 
Kip  Ward 
Susan  Warner 
Brandi  Waxler 
Anne  Ziegler 

Appendix  A

