@ 
| 

: 

7 

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
FORTUNA  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

SARA  R.  DIXON 
RACHEL  HEAVILIN 
ERIC  HELMS 
KIM  PETERSON, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2005030680 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Michael  C.  Cohn,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Eureka,  California,  on  April  19,  2005. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Associate  General  Counsel,  School  and  Colleges  Legal  Services 
:  @  of  California,  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California  95501,  represented  the  Fortuna  Union 

ais 

High  School  District. 

Anne  M.  Rudolph,  Attorney  at  Law,  Roberts,  Hill,  Bragg,  Angell  &  Perlman,  LLP, 

434  Seventh  Street,  Eureka,  California  95502-1248,  represented  respondents. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  1,  2005,  the  governing  board  of  the  Fortuna  Union  High  School 

District  adopted  Resolution  No.  374,  in  which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
following  particular  kinds  of  services  as  of  the  end  of  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

1 
 
S
D
A
A
D
N
A
N
A
N

Community  Day  School 
Social  Science 
English 
Science 
Mathematics 
Spanish 

The  resolution  directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designee  to  initiate 

procedures  to  not  reemploy  four  full-time  equivalent  certificated  employees  pursuant  to 

@  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.

2. 

On  March  3,  2005,  the  superintendent sent  notice  to  seven  certificated 

employees  of  his  recommendation  that  their  services  be  reduced  or  discontinued  for  the 
2005-2006  school  year.  Five  of  those  employees  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  - 
was  cause  to  not  reemploy  them.  One  of  those  five  subsequently  withdrew  his  request  for 
hearing.  The  remaining  four  employees  —  Sara  R.  Dixon,  Rachel  Heavilin,  Eric  Helms,  and 
Kim  Peterson  —  are  the  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

a 

3. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  the  district  has  complied  with  all  procedural 

requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  parties  further  stipulated 
that  only  two  issues  are  in  dispute:  1)  the  district’s  determination  to  skip,  and  therefore 
retain,  junior  employee  Heather  Brown,  and  2) 
the  application  of  tie-breaking  criteria  in 
relation  to  respondent  Heavilin. 

Skipping  Heather  Brown 

4. 

Heather  Brown  is a  full-time  teacher  at  East  High  School,  the  district’s 

continuation  school.  Brown  shares  a  seniority  date  with  respondent  Rachel  Heavilin.  She  is 
junior  to  respondents  Sara  Dixon,  Eric  Helms,  and  Kim  Peterson.  Brown  did  not  receive  a 
layoff  notice.  The  district  asserts  that  it  may  retain  Brown  because  she  possesses  the  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  in  the  continuation  school  that  senior  employees 
do  not  possess.  Respondents  dispute  this  and  contend  that  respondents  Dixon,  Peterson,  and 
Helms  are  all  credentialed  and  competent  to  perform  the  services  being  provided  by  Brown. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  provides  that  “the  services  of 
no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  . 
. 
.  while  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority, 
is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.”  However,  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  provides  that  a  district  may  deviate 
from  seniority  order  and  retain  a  junior  employee  when  it  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for 
personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  . 
.  and  that  the  certificated  employee 
has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study... 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  In  making  a  determination  whether  an 
employee  is  “competent”  to  render  a  given  service  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b)(1),  courts  have  recognized  that  school  districts  have  discretion  to  establish 
competency  standards,  provided  that  those  standards  must  relate  to  the  specific  skills  and 
qualifications  required  for  the  position,  and  not  to  the  quality  of  an  employee’s  work 
performance.’ 

. 

6. 

This  is  the  second  year  in  which  the  district’s  determination  to  retain  Brown 

over  senior  employees  has  been  in  dispute.  The  district  issued  layoff  notices  in  March  2004. 
Among  those  receiving  notices  at  that  time  were  Brown  and  respondents  Dixon  and  Peterson. 
Although  Brown  had  received a  notice,  the  district  intended  to  retain  her  to  teach  in  the 

  

'  Forker  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Whittier  High  School  District  (1984)  160  Cal.App.3d  13,  19;  See 
also,  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555.

  

:  © 
. 

continuation  school  and  at  last  year’s  hearing  both  Dixon  and  Peterson  contended  they  were 
certificated  and  competent  to  bump  into  Brown’s  position  at  East  High  School.  Adopting  the 
decision  of  an  administrative  law  judge  in  May  2004,  the  board  rejected  Dixon’s  and 
Peterson’s  contentions,  finding  that  the  superintendent  had  “reasonably  determined  that 
respondents  Kim  Peterson  and  Sara  Dixon  do  not  possess  the  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  the  course  taught  by  respondent  Brown  at  East  High  School.”  In  reaching 
_  this  conclusion,  the  board  made  the  following  findings: 

[Brown]  holds  a  professional  clear  single  subject  credential  in 
biological  sciences.  She  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in 
marine  biology. 

. 

[S]tudents  at  East.  High  School  work  with  the  same  teacher  on  a 
variety  of  subjects  at  the  same  time.  Students  typically  select  a 
study  subject  for  a  set  period  of  time  —  sometimes  for  hours, 
other  times  for  days  or  even  weeks.  . 
.  Brown  teaches  life 
science,  physical  science,  mathematics  through  algebra  and 
economics.  Because  teachers  at  East  High  are  expected  to  teach 
multiple  subjects  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  feasible  to  split  the 
assignments  by  subject  matter  between  teachers.  Mr.  Hanson 
[then  both  the  district  superintendent  and  the  principal  of  East 
High  School]  finds  that...  Brown  has  demonstrated  the  ability 
to  teach  multiple  subjects  at  East  High  School  and  that  based 
upon  his  review  of  District  personnel  files  no  respondents  senior 
to  her.  . 
she  provides.  He  also  notes  that...  Brown  holds  a  CLAD 
certificate,  something  he  believes  is  particularly  useful  at  East 
High  School  where  he  estimates  there  are  twenty-two  Hispanic, 
one  Southeast  Asian  and  seven  English  learners  on  campus. 
This  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  he  opted  to  retain  her. 
Brown  is  fluent  in  Spanish  and  she  is  able  to  connect  well  with 
students. 

.  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  service 

. 

. 

. 

Respondent  Peterson  holds  a  clear  single  subject  credential  in 
mathematics  and  a  clear  single  subject  credential  in  chemistry. 
He  is  enrolled  in  the  CLAD  Certificate  Program  and  expects  to 
complete  it  later  this  summer.  He  is  also  pursuing  graduate 
studies  involving  mathematical  modeling.  Mr.  Hanson  does  not 
believe  that  respondent  Peterson  possess  the  necessary 
experience  or  Competence  to  teach  the  science  portion  of  the 
East  High  School  assignment.  He  notes  that  chemistry  hardly 
fits  the  setting  at  East  High  School. 

[Respondent  Dixon]  currently  teaches  five  sections  of  science  at 
Fortuna  High  School.  She  holds  a  professional  clear  single 

   

subject  credential  in  life  sciences  and  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science 
degree  in  biology.  ...  She  does  not  hold  a  math  credential  but 
has  some  experience  teaching  math  in  a junior  high  level 
remedial  math  program.  She  is  enrolled  in  a  CLAD  Certificate 
Program  and  is  expected  to  receive  her  certificate  by  month’s 
end. 

East  High  School  is  structured  very  differently  from  more 
traditional  settings  such  as  Fortuna  High  School.  Some  of  the 
toughest  and  most  at  risk  students  are  enrolled  there.  Teachers 
assigned  to  East  High  School  must  possess,  in  addition  to 
necessary  certification,  special  training  and  experience  to  teach 
multiple  subjects  in  a  self-contained  venue.  Mr.  Hanson...  is 
well  positioned  to  evaluate  whether  teachers  possess  the  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  provide  classroom 
instruction  in  such a  setting.  He  does  not  believe  that 
respondent  Peterson’s  chemistry  and  other  science  background 
~  qualify  him  to  provide  the  type  of  hands  on  outdoor  education 

life  science  curriculum  now  being  used.  In  contrast,  respondent 
Brown  has  a  marine  biology  background  with  prior  independent 
study  outdoor  [education]  and  teaching  experience  in  the  Florida 
Keys  and  Monterey.  She  developed  a  curriculum  based  on  these 
experiences.  §  Similarly,  Mr.  Hanson  does  not  believe  that  Ms. 
Dixon  possesses  requisite  experience  to  teach  a  combination 
science,  math  and  economics  curriculum  based  on  a  review  of 
her  current  assignment  and  records  on  file  with  the  District. 

7. 

The  district  contends  that  the  board’s  2004  layoff  decision  has  res  judicata 

effect in  two  areas.  The  first is  to  show  the  relative  training  and  experience  between  Brown, 
Peterson,  and  Dixon  as  of  May  2004.  The  second is  to  show  the  “needs  and  requirements”  of 
the  continuation  school. 

8. 

The  board’s  May  2004  decision  is  entitled  to  the  res  judicata  effect  the  district 

asserts.  However,  this  does  not  preclude  respondents  from  attempting  to  demonstrate  that 
they  currently  possess  the  skills,  experience,  and  training  necessary  to  teach  in  the 
continuation  school. 

9. 

In  its  May  2004  decision,  the  board  found  that  the  ability  “to  teach  multiple 

subjects in  a  self-contained  venue” is  necessary  to  teach  at  East  High  School.  While  the 
board  found  possession  of  a  CLAD  certification  “useful”  and  noted  Brown’s  fluency in 
Spanish,  her  marine  biology  background,  and  her  outdoor  education  and  hands-on  teaching 
experience,  it  did  not  specifically  find  these  or  any  other  skill,  special  training,  or  experience 
necessary  to  teach  at  the  continuation  high  school.  At  the  present  hearing,  the  district 
demonstrated  that  the  ability  to  work  with  the  kinds  of  students  who  attend  East High

  

School  —  those  who  have  fallen  behind  in  their  progress  towards  graduation,  often  because  of 
personal,  family,  drug,  or  legal  problems  — is  also  a  necessity  for  assignment  at  the 
continuation  school. 

. 

Thus,  the  district  has  demonstrated  only  two  skills  that  are  “necessary  to 

teach”  at  the  continuation  school:  the  ability  to  teach  multiple  subjects  in  a  self-contained 
venue  and  the  ability  to  work  with  the  kinds  of  at-risk  students  who  make  up  most  of  East 
High  School’s  population.  The  district  has  shown  that  Brown  possesses  these  skills.  The 
district  has  also  shown  that  Brown  has  other  skills  and  attributes  that  help  make  her  an 
effective  teacher  at  East  High  School,  but  which  were  not  shown  to  be  “necessary  to  teach” 
there.  Much  emphasis  was  placed  on  Brown’s  Spanish  skills.  But  none  of  the  classes  at  East 
High  School  are  taught  in  Spanish  and  no  matter  how  useful  it  might  be,  the  ability  to  speak 
Spanish  cannot  be  used  as  a  basis  to  skip  a  junior  teacher  unless  the  teacher  is  teaching  ina 

_  bilingual  program.*  And  although  Brown  has  skill  and  experience  in  teaching  outdoor 
education,  in  marine  biology,  and  in  using  a  hands-on  approach  to  teaching  science,  none  of 
those  skills  is  “necessary”  to  teach  at  East  High  School. 

10. 

David  Moss  has  been  superintendent  of  the  district  since  July  5,  2004.  He  was 

not  employed  in  the  district  at  the  time  of  the  2004  layoff  proceedings  and  therefore  had  no 
involvement  in  the  determination  made  at  that  time  that  Brown  possessed  special training 
and  experience  that  entitled  her  to  be  retained  over  Dixon  and  Peterson.  The  evidence 
showed  that  in  making  a  similar  determination  this  year,  Moss  relied  almost  entirely  upon  the 
board’s  prior  decision.  He  made  little,  if  any,  effort  to  determine  whether  the  senior 
employees  over  which  Brown  was  being  retained  this  year  —  Dixon,  Peterson,  and  Helms  — 
possessed  the  requisite  special  training  and  experience  that  would  permit  them  to  bump  into 
Brown’s  position  at  East  High  School.  Other  than  reviewing  the  senior  employees’ 
personnel  files  and  speaking  to  each  of  them  briefly,  he  made  no  inquiry  into  any  training  or 
experience  any  of  them  might  possess.  In  fact,  he  did  not  give  any  of  them  an  opportunity  to 
explain  why  they  felt  qualified  to  teach  at  the  continuation  school;  he  essentially  told  them 
that  last  year’s  decision  “stood.” 

. 

11. 

Helms  is  the  most  senior  respondent.  He  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in 

math.  He  is  currently  pursuing  a  master’s  degree  in  kinesiology.  He  is  also  currently 
enrolled  in  a  CLAD  program.  Before  becoming a  full-time  math  teacher  at  Fortuna High 
School  in  1998,  Helms  taught  for  one  year  in  Orange  County,  where  he  taught  Algebra  I  and 
Consumer  Applied  Math.  In  this  latter  class,  24  of  the  28  students  were  English  learners. 
Helms  taught  the  class  without  a  bilingual  aide. 

12. 

.  Peterson  is  the  next  most  senior  respondent,  As  a  result  of  last  year’s  layoff, 

Peterson’s  position  was  reduced  from  1.0  FTE  to  his  current  position  of  0.4  FTE.  He  teaches 
math  at  Fortuna  High  School.  He  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  math  with 

  

2  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d 
567.

supplementary  authorizations  in  chemistry  and  biology.  He  is  awaiting  an  additional 
supplementary  authorization  in  introductory  science.  Since  last  year’s  layoff,  Peterson  has 
obtained  an  SB  395  certificate,  which  is  similar  to  a  CLAD  certification.  Peterson  is  also 
employed  in  a  0.5  FTE  position  in  the  Rio  Dell  Elementary  School  district,  where  he  teaches 
middle  school  math  and  science.  At  Christian  Life  High  School,  a  private  school,  Peterson 
previously  taught  earth  science,  life  science  and  biology.  These  courses  involved  many 
hands-on  activities.  He  also  worked  as  a  math  and  science  tutor  at  College  of  the  Redwoods 
and  while  pursuing  a  masters  degree  in  environmental  systems  at  Humboldt  State  University 
Peterson  taught  a  math  and  integrated  science  class  there.  Peterson  has  worked  with  at-risk 
youth  in  volunteer  positions  in  boys  and  girls  clubs,  taking  them  backpacking  in  the  Trinity 
Alps.  He  also  spent  three  summers  working  with  at-risk  youth  supervising  them  in 
completing  a  number  of  projects  through  the  Private  Industry  Council. 

In  April  2002,  Hanson,  then  the  district  superintendent  and  principal  of  East 

High  School,  offered  Peterson  an  assignment  that  would  have  seen  him  teaching  three 
periods  of  math  at  Fortuna  High  School  and  one  period  of  “math,  science  and  economics”  at 
East  High  School.  In  his  memo  offering  this  assignment,  Hanson  spoke  of  some  of  the 
unique  aspects  of  East  High  School  and  advised  Peterson  that  the  assignment  could  change  if 
there  was  a  change  in  enrollment  at  Fortuna  High  School.  Peterson  spent  two  or  three  days 
observing  the  methods  used  at  East  High  School.  Ultimately,  Peterson  was  not  assigned  to 
the  split  position  offered  by  Hanson.  Instead,  he  was  given  a  full-time  position  at  Fortuna 
High  School.  The  position  at  East  High  School  that  Peterson  was  initially  offered  for  the 
2002-2003  school  year  was  the  same  one  in  which  Brown  has  taught  (although  full-time,  not 
just  one  period)  since  the  start  of  the  2003-2004  school  year. 

13. 

Dixon  is  junior  to  Peterson  and  senior  to  Brown.  She  holds  a  single  subject 
credential  in  life  science.  Since  last  year’s  layoff,  Dixon  has  obtained  a  CLAD  certificate. 
She  holds  a  1.0  FTE  position  at  Fortuna  High  School,  where  she  teaches  two  sections  of 
integrated  science,  two  sections  of  life  science,  and  one  section  of  basic  life  science.  Two 
days  a  week  during  her  prep  period  Dixon  also  tutors  Algebra  I  students  at  Fortuna  High 
School.  Before  coming  to  the  district,  Dixon  taught  7th  and  8th  grade  science  for  four  and  a 
half  years  in  the  Ferndale  Unified  School  District.  Before  that,  Dixon  taught  for  a  year  at 
Triple  Junction  High  School  in  the  Mattole  Unified  School  District.  Triple  Junction  High 
School  is  located  in  a  very  rural  area  of  Humboldt  County.  When  Dixon  was  there,  the 
school  served  48  students,  many  of  whom  experience  the  same  types  of  personal  and  family 
problems  that  East  High  School  students  experience. 

Dixon’s  science  students  at  Fortuna  High  School  participate  in  the  Reaches  to 
Beaches  program,  which  involves  an  outdoor  hands-on  curriculum  that  includes  field  trips  to 
conduct  water  quality  tests  in  watershed  areas.  Her  classes  are  also  raising  salmon  fry  that 
will  be  released  to  the  creek  near  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

14. 

The  three  respondents  senior  to  Brown  have  shown  that  they  possess  a  number 

of  skills  and  experiences  that  might  qualify  them  to  serve  in  the  continuation  school. 
Respondents  Peterson  and  Dixon,  in  particular,  possess  many  of  the  same  attributes  that 

 

make  Brown  an  effective  continuation  high  school  teacher.  Both  hold  CLAD  or  CLAD- 
equivalent  certificates,  both  have  experience  with  the  type  of  hands-on  outdoor  education  life 
science  curriculum  used  at  East  High  School.  But  none  of  the  three  senior  respondents  has 
demonstrated  that  they  possess  one  of  the  two  skills  found  necessary  to  teach  in  the 
continuation  high  school  —  the  ability  to  teach  multiple  subjects  in  a  self-contained  venue. 
That  is  a  skill  that  Brown  has  shown.  And  while  it  might  seem  incongruous  that  Peterson  is 
now  being  passed  over  even  though  he  was  in  the  past  offered  the  position  (or  at  least  a 
portion  of  the  position)  that  Brown  now  holds,  that  prior  offer  does  not  demonstrate  that  he 
possesses  the  special  competence  the  district  currently  deems  necessary  to  teach  at  the 
continuation  school.’  Therefore,  the  district’s  determination  that  Brown  is  entitled  to  be 
skipped  under  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  because  she  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  in  the  continuation  school  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess  must  be  sustained. 

Application  of  Tie-Breaking  Criteria 

15. 

The  district  has  adopted  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  among 

employees  having  the  same  seniority  date.  Those  criteria  provide  that  employees  may  be 
awarded  points  in  eight  categories,  labeled  A  through  H.  The  employee  with  the  fewest  total 
points  becomes  the  first  employee  within  that  seniority  date  subject  to  layoff. 

16. 

Respondent  Rachel  Heavilin  shares  a  seniority  date  with  Robin  Pickering.‘ 

Both  teach  social  science.  Pickering  did  not  receive a  layoff  notice  and  the  district  intends  to 
retain  her  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  In  determining  to  retain  Pickering  while  laying  off 
Heavilin,  the  superintendent  applied  the  district’s  tie-breaking  criteria  and  determined  that 
Pickering  was  entitled  to  seven  points  and  Heavilin  to  five  points.  At  the  hearing,  errors  in 
the  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  pointed  out.  The  superintendent  then 
reapplied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  and  determined  that  Pickering  was  entitled  to  six  points 
and  Heavilin  to  three  points. 

17. 

Heavilin  and  Pickering  received  the  same  number  of  tie-breaking  points  in 

four  categories:  A,  D,  E,  and  G.  Pickering  received  one  more  point  than  Heavilin  in  each  of 
three  categories:  B,  C,  and  F.  Heavilin  disputes  the  superintendent’ s  awarding  points  to 
Pickering  in  categories  B  (years  of  teaching  experience  previous  to  current  employment)  and 

  

>  While  it  probably  would  have  been  in  the  district’s  interest  to  have  formally  adopted  a  competency 
standard  for  teaching  at  the  continuation  school  (see  Factual  Finding  5,  above),  it  cannot  be  found  that  it 
was  required  to  have  done  so. 

, 

* 
Also  sharing  a  seniority  date  with  Heavilin  and  Pickering  is  Heather  Brown.  Because  the  district  had 
previously  determined  to  retain  Brown  for  the  2005-2006  school  year,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  not 
applied  to  her.  Heavilin  did  not  present  evidence  to  show  that  she  possesses  the  special  skill  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  in  the  continuation  school.  Therefore,  the  district’s  failure  to  determine  the 
relative  seniority  between  Heavilin  and  Brown  is  of  no  consequence;  regardless  of  their  rankings  on  the 
tie-breaking  criteria,  Brown  would  have  been  retained  over  Heavilin.

  

  

© 
. 

F  (multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  district  need).  However,  is  not  necessary  to  determine 
whether  Pickering  was  properly  awarded  points  in  those  categories.  For  even  if  those  points 
were  disregarded,  Pickering  was  properly  awarded  one  point  in  category  C  (supplementary 
authorizations)  while  Heavilin  was  awarded  none.  Both  employees  possess  a  single  subject 
social  science  credential,  but  Pickering  has  a  supplemental  authorization  in  literature  while 
Heavilin  has  no  supplemental  authorizations.  Thus,  Pickering  was  entitled  to  at  least  one 
more  point  than  Heavilin  on the  tie-breaking  criteria.  The  district  properly  determined  that 
Heavilin  was  subject  to  layoff  before  Pickering. 

18. 

Heavilin’s  contention  that  the  district  failed  to  comply  with  Education  Code 
section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  because  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  not  properly  applied 
before  the  layoff  notices  were  sent  is  rejected.  First,  nothing  in  section  44955  requires  that 
tie-breaking  criteria  be  applied  before  layoff  notices  are  sent.  Second,  even  if  there  was  such 
a  requirement,  and  even  if  the  superintendent’s  first  erroneous  calculation  (awarding 
Pickering  seven  points  and  Heavilin  five)  were  to  be  considered  a  failure  to  properly  apply 
the  criteria,  because  the  proper  application  of  the  criteria  resulted  in  the  same  order  of 
termination,  the  erroneous  first  calculation  would  be  considered  a  nonprejudicial  procedural 
error  that  would  not  require  the  district  to  retain  Heavilin.° 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  4.0  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 

@ 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Cause  further  exists  to  give  respondents  notice 
~  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  This  cause  relates  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949, 

Notice  may  be  given  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005- 

ORDER 

2006  school  year. 

patep: 

(Vig,  3  260% 

t 

J 

7 

(uLod  CER 

MICHAEL  C.  COHN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

®@ 

° 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(3).

