BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
BENICIA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Termination  of  Services. 

OAH  No.  N2005030353 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stewart  A.  Judson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Benicia,  California,  on  April  22,  2005. 

Melanie  A.  Peterson,  Esq.  represented  complainant  Shalee  Cunningham,  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Benicia  Unified  School  District  of  the  State  of  California. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Esq.  represented  the  respondents. 

Submission  of  the  matter  was  deferred  to  April  25  and  extended  to  April  29,  2005,  for 
the  receipt  of  written  argument  that  was  duly  filed  and  marked  as  complainant’s  Exhibit  4  for 
identification  and  respondents’  Exhibit  A  for  identification.  The  matter  is  deemed  submitted 
on  said  date. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Shalee  Cunningham  (complainant)  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Benicia 
Unified  School  District  (the  District)  and  made  and  filed  the  accusations  in  her  official 
capacity  as  said  officer. 

2. 

Each  of  the  respondents  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March 10,  2005,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  the  Governing 
Board  (the  Board)  of  the  District  of  her  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents 
that  their  services  will  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year. 

4, 

On  March  14,  2005,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  of 

her  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the 
close  of  the  current  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.

eo 

5. 

Respondents  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  terminating  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6. 

Complainant  recommended  that  the  following  services  and  programs  for  the 

2005-06  school  year  be  reduced: 

K-5 
Adapted  Physical  Education 
Art 
Language  Arts 

.  Mathematics 

. 

Physical  Education 
Science 
Social  Studies/History 
Spanish 
German 
French 
Computer  Technology 
Home  Economics 
Transitions  (6"  Grade  Electives) 

4.0  FTE 
.3  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
5.0  FTE 
4.4  FTE 
.2  FTE 
2.6  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.4  FTE 
AFTE 
.2  FTE 
.2  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
AFTE 

, 

TOTAL 

23.1  FTE 

@ 

— 

7. 

The  services  sought  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  are  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  and  will  be  reduced 
or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  2005-2006. 

8. 

Complainant  avows  the  reductions  are  necessitated  by  a  budgetary  shortfall 

for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  that  no  mandatory  services  are  being  reduced  below  required 
levels.  The  District  sent  out  more  layoff  notices  than  required.  Before  establishing  its 
seniority  list,  the  District  sought  input  from  its  certificated  employees  regarding  their 
credentials  and  seniority  dates.  In  determining  its  needs  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the 
Board  enacted  Resolution  No.  04-05-16  containing  the  criteria  to  be  applied  for  establishing 
the  ranking  of  certificated  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date.  The  criteria  awards 
points  to  said  employees  on  the  following  bases: 

A.  Credentials,  certificates  to  teach  one  or  more  of  the  following  particular 

programs  or  provide  a particular  kind  of  service: 

RATING:  +1  (B-CLAD,  CLAD,  SB  1969  or  SB  395) 

B.  Special  Education  Credential 

© 

RATING:  +2

C.  Number  of  teaching  and/or  specialist  service  credentials  in  addition  to 

primary  credential  of  current  assi gnment  (K-12) 

RATING:  +1  per  credential 

9. 

When  applying  criterion  C,  the  District  awarded  one  rating  (point)  per 

additional  teaching  and/or  service  credentials  beyond  the  employee’s  primary  credential  of 
current  assignment.  In  other  words,  the  employee’s  primary  credential  of  current  assignment 
did  not  warrant  a  rating.  The  District  considered  all  resignations  and  retirements  as  attrition 
and  will  continue  to  do  so  until  the  Board  makes  its  final  decision. 

10. 

The  following  respondents  challenged  their  seniority  dates: 

a.  Rebecca  Dunavent  was  assigned  a  seniority  date  of  August  19,  2004. 
This  is  her  fifth  year  in  the  District.  She  possesses  a  biological  science  credential. 
According  to  the  District’s  employment  records,  Dunavent  served  more  than  75%  of  the 
2003-04  school  year  under  an  emergency  credential.  If  she  were  assigned  a  seniority  date 
for  her  employment  last  year,  she  believes  she  can  “bump”  Marcus  Tessier,  whose  seniority 
date  is  August  19,  2004  and  who  teaches  sixth  grade  science  this  year. 

Dunevant  is  not  entitled  to  credit  for  her  2003-04  employment  in  the  District  because 
she  only  possessed  an  emergency  credential.  Time  spent  teaching  under  an  emergency 
credential  may  not  count  toward  attainment  of  permanent  status  (Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  District  (2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070;  Smith  v.  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District 
(2004)  120  Cal.App.4th  563;  Culbertson  v.  San  Gabriel  Unified  School  District  (2004) 
121  Cal.  App.4th  1392). 

b.  Verena  Huebner  was  assigned  a  seniority  date  of  August  19,  2004.  She 
was  employed  by  the  District  the  previous  year  under  an  emergency  credential  and  served 
more  than  75%  of  the  school  year  as  a  long-term  substitute.  She  has  a  credential  authorizing 
her  to  teach  physical  science,  biological  science  and  a  CLAD!  embedded  certificate.  She  is 
not  entitled  to  credit  for  her  2003-04  employment  in  the  District  because  she  only  possessed 
an  emergency  credential  (see  citations  under  F inding  10a). 

c.  Daniel  Biro  was  assigned  a  seniority  date  of  August  19,  2004.  He  was 
employed  the  previous  school  year  to  teach  biology  under  an  emergency  credential  and 
served  for  more  than  75%  of  that  school  year.  As a  result,  he  is  not  entitled  to  credit  for  his 
2003-04  employment  in  the  District  (see  citations  under  F inding  10a). 

Il. 

applied: 

The  following  respondents  challenged  the  manner  in  which  criterion  C  was 

  

S 

!  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development. 

3

a.  Janet  Lord’s  seniority  date is  August  22,  2002.  She  possesses  one 

credential  authorizing  her  to  teach  introductory  English,  journalism,  psychology  and  health 
science.  Because  she  has  only  one  credential,  she  received  no  ratings  (points)  under 
criterion  C.  She  was‘awarded  one  point  under  criterion  A  because  she  also  holds  a  CLAD 
certificate.  Other  certificated  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date  as  Lord  are  being 
retained  simply  because  they  possess  more  than  one  credential  and,  therefore,  were  awarded 
points  for  each  credential  beyond  their  primary  credential  of  current  assignment  despite  the 
fact  that  Lord’s  single  credential  authorizes  her  to  teach  some  of  the  same  subjects  as  they. 
She  challenges  the  fairness  of  this  criterion. 

b.  Respondent  Sandra  Sutter’s  seniority  date  is  August  22,  2002.  She  was 

awarded  one  point  under  criterion  C  though  she  holds  authorizations  to  teach  mathematics, 
multiple  subjects  (self-contained  classroom),  physical  science,  psychology  and  literature.  As 
a  result,  others  with  the  same  seniority  date  are  being  retained  because  they  possess  more 
than  one  credential  beyond  their  primary  credential  of  current  assignment  despite  the  fact 
that  Sutter’s  single  credential  authorizes  her  to  teach  some  of  the  same  subjects  as  they. 

The  evidence  shows  that  the  District  applied  the  criteria  equally  throughout  its 
In  previous  years,  the  District  employed  different  criteria  to  those  having 

12. 
certificated  staff. 
the  same  seniority  date.  As  a  result,  the  individual  rankings  for  those  with  the  same  seniority 
date  may  have  been  different  for  those  years  than  their  current  year’s  placement. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

L. 

Respondents  posture  that  once  having  properly  ranked  employees  in  a  prior 

year,  it  is  unreasonable  and  arbitrary  to  re-rank  them  in  a  subsequent  year  citing  Aebli  v. 
Board  of Education  (1944)  62  Cal.App.2d  706. 

Education  Code  section  44955(b)  authorizes  governing  boards  to  “determine  the 
order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.”  As 
respondents  note  in  their  brief  (Exhibit  A  for  identification,  p.  2):  “The  order  of  termination 
thus  determined  ranks  employees  with  the  same  hire  date  relative  to  one  another,  creating 
seniority  rights  vis-a-vis  other  employees  in  the  group.”  Respondents  omit  that  the  rankings 
are  based  upon  “the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof”  for  that  year.  It 
cannot  reasonably  be  contended  that  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  do  not  change 
from  year  to  year.  Boards  are  granted  the  discretion  to  determine  the  needs  of  the  districts 
and  the  students  thereof  on  an  annual  basis.  Re-rankings  do  not  affect  seniority  dates. 
Accordingly,  it  is  not  unreasonable  or  arbitrary  to  re-rank  employees  with  the  same  seniority 
date  on  a  yearly  basis in  accord  with  a  board’s  determination  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and 
the  students  thereof  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Aebli,  supra,  is  inapposite  since  it  dealt  with 
placing  teachers  on  a  salary  schedule in  a discretionary  manner  with  no  statutory  authority. 

2. 

Respondents  urge  that  criterion  C,  adopted  by  the  Board  to  determine  the 

ranking  of  those  with  the  same  seniority  date,  is  not  related  solely  to  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  the  students  thereof.  Respondents  argue  that  “applying  C  to  credit  pieces  of  paper

  

instead  of  authorizations  cannot  have  served  solely  the  interests  of  the  Districts  and  its 
students  (Exhibit  A  for  identification,  p.  8).  Respondents  do  not  argue,  nor  is  there  any 
evidence  to  establish,  that  criterion  C  was  applied  unfairly  or  arbitrarily.  While  the  Board  is 
granted  broad  discretion  under  Education  Code  section  44955  when  determining  the  needs 
of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof,  it  may  not  act  arbitrarily  or  unreasonably.  It  is 
understandable  that  respondents  might  differ  with  the  Board  as  to  what  the  needs  of  the 
District  and  students  will  be  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  evidence,  however,  does  not 
justify  a  conclusion  that,  by  enacting  criterion  C,  the  Board  acted  in  excess  of  its  authority 
under  section  44955. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  reducing  or 

3. 

4. 

5. 

discontinuing  23.10  FTE  positions. 

the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

Cause  for  not  reemploying  23.10  FTE  positions  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 

The  District  may  notify  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 

ORDER 

ensuing  school  year. 

paten:  Hea,  200  D_ 

  

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

