BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ORO  GRANDE  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2005040052 

FREDERICK  D’ALO  AND  LUANNE 
BORQUE, 

and 

ORO  GRANDE  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

Respondents, 

Complainant. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  was  assigned  to  decide  this  matter  in  San  Diego,  California  on  May  12,  2005. 
Mark  Thompson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  complainant  Oro  Grande  School 

District,  a  public  entity. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Fred  D’Alo. 
The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  20,  2004,  following  the  filing  of  a  stipulation 

establishing  foundational  facts  and  the  filing  of briefs. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Employment  Status 

Frederick  D’  Alo  (D’  Alo),  Luanne  Borque  (Borque),  Anna  Hill  (Hill)  and 

Catherine  Aure  (Aure)  were  certificated  employees  of  the  Oro  Grande  School  District  (the

1. 

  

District).  Each  was  a  probationary  employee  under  Education  Code  section  44929.23, 
subdivision  (a). 

The  Economic  Layoff 

2. 

On  March  8,  2005,  Superintendent  Kenneth  L.  Larson  recommended  to  the 
District’s  Governing  Board  (the  Board)  that  it  adopt  a  resolution  reducing  or  eliminating 
particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  in  accordance  with  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955.'  Superintendent  Larson  specifically  recommended  the 
reduction  of  two  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher  full-time  equivalents  (known  as  F.T.E.s). 
He  recommended  D’ Alo  and  Hill  be  given a  layoff  notice  advising  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  2005-2006  school  year,  and  that  Aure  and  Borque  be  given 
a  precautionary  notice  advising  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
upcoming  2005-2006  school  year. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  7-2004-2005,  which 

provided  as  follows: 

“WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Oro  Grande  School  District  has 
determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  herein  must  be  reduced  or 
discontinued;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the  aforementioned 
reason  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  that  the  number  of  regular  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  services  of  regular 
certificated  employees  based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily  attendance  during  the 
past  two  years. 

  

Notice  is  taken  that  Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major 
! 
source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education.  After  the  passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts 
have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the  state  budget  is 
chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school  district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps 
to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case  financial  scenario  develops. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers,  administrators  or  other 
certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices,  warning  them  that  their  professional  services  will  not  be 
required  in  the  next  school  year.  These  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the  retention  of  senior 
employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent  employees  over  probationary  employees  and 

others  with  less  seniority.

  

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 

Oro  Grande  School  District  as  follows: 

That  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  below  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

A. 
commencing  in  the  2005-06  school  year. 

2  F.T.E. 
  Elementary  Classroom  Teacher 
2  F.T.E. 
TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES 
That  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  the 
B. 
legal  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  be  terminated  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44955. 

That  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  be  achieved  by  the  termination  of 
C. 
regular  employees  and  not  by  terminating  temporary  and  substitute  employees. 
That  the  District  Superintendent  or  designee  is  directed  to  initiate  layoff 
D. 
procedures  and  give  appropriate  notice  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44955 
and  44949, 
PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  at  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Education  held  on 
March  8,  2005. 

AYES: 
NOES: 
ABSENT: 

3 
0 
0 

/S/ 

President 
Board  of  Education” 

4. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  6-2004-2005,  which 

provided  as  follows: 

“WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subsection  (b),  related  to 
certificated  layoffs,  provides,  in  relevant  part,  ‘Ta]s  between  employees  who first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall 
determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  need  of  the  district  and  the 
students  thereof’ 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  based  upon  the  needs  of  the 
District  and  the  students  thereof,  the  following  criteria  shall  be  applied  in  order,  one 
step  at  a  time  until  the  tie  is  broken  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  between  certificated 
employees:

@ 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Number  of  years  credentialed  teaching  experience  in  the  District 
prior  to  seniority  date  (substitute  or  temporary  service). 

Number  of  years  of  credentialed  teaching  experience  outside  the 
District. 

Teaching  experience  in  different  grades  of  subjects. 

Number  of  additional  credentials  or  supplemental 
authorizations. 

Possession  of  a  Masters  Degree  —  earliest  date  prevails. 

Authorization  to  teach  English  Language  Learners  (CLAD, 
BCLAD,  SB395,  SDAIE,  etc.). 

7. 

Ifa tie  still  exists  after  applying  steps  one  through  six  (1-6) 
above,  seniority  shall  be  determined  based  upon  a  comparison 
of  the  most  recent  employee  evaluations. 
PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  at  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Education  held  on 
March  8,  2005. 

ry 
f é ‘ 
& 

AYES: 
NOES: 
ABSENT: 

3 
0 
0 

/S/ 

President 
Board  of  Education” 

Jurisdictional  Matters 

5. 

On  March  9,  2005,  D’Alo,  Borque,  Hill  and  Aure  were  served  with  a  “Notice 
-  of  Recommendation  that  Services  Will  Not  Be  Required.”  Each  was  advised  of  the  right  to 
request  a  hearing.  An  Accusation  dated  March  9,  2005,  together  with  other  required 
jurisdictional  documents,  was  enclosed  with  the  notice. 

6. 

Respondents  D’ Alo  and  Borque  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  a 

Request  for  Hearing  under  Government  Code  section  11506.”  Hill  and  Aure  did  not  request 
a  hearing  or  file  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

  

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  only  as  to  respondents  D’Alo  and  Bourque,  the  only  employees  who 

.  © 

2 
requested  a  hearing.

7. 

Respondents  D’ Alo  and  Borque  were  timely  served  with  a  Notice  of Hearing 
under  Government  Code  section  11509,  which  advised  each  of  them  that  a  hearing  was  set 
for  April  27,  2005. 

8. 

On  April  26,  2003,  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  received  a 

continuance  request  from  counsel  for  respondents,  who  advised  of  a  conflict  that  compelled 
counsel  to  withdraw  and  which  requested  time  for  respondents  to  seek  other  representation. 
Thereafter,  Mark  Thompson,  Attorney  at  Law,  Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  and 
Annette  DeBellefeuille,  Attorney  at  Law,  participated  in  the  telephonic  conference  related  to 
the  continuance  request.  There  was  no  objection  to  a  continuance,  and  good  cause  having 
been  established,  Steven  V.  Adler  (PALJ  Adler),  Presiding  Administrative  Law  Judge, 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  continued  the  administrative  hearing. 

9. 

On  May  5,  2005,  PALJ  Adler  conducted  a  telephonic  hearing  in which 

Attorney  Thompson,  Attorney  Perez  and  Attorney  DeBellefeuille  participated.  Attorney 
Perez  stated  he  would  represent  all  respondents  after  waivers  were  received.  The  parties 
agreed  to  submit  evidence  by  stipulation.  The  parties  agreed  to  a  schedule  setting  deadlines 
It  was  agreed  and  ordered  that 
for  the  submission  of  the  stipulation  and  the  filing  of  briefs. 
the  matter  be  submitted  for  decision  on  May  19,  2005. 

Thereafter,  the  date  for  the  submission  of  the  matter  was  extended  to  May  20,  2005 
by  stipulation,  briefs  were  received,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

Stipulated  and  Undisputed  Matters 

The  parties  stipulated  to  the  truth  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1! 

through  7.  Notice  is  taken  of  Factual  Findings  2,  8  and  9. 

The  formal  “Stipulation  to  Jurisdictional  and  Contested  Facts”  contained  the 

10. 

11. 

following  statements: 

e 

e 

Fred  D’Alo  has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  August  25,  2003  under  a 
professional  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential.  Respondent  Luanne  Borque 
has  been  employed  by  the  District  since  August  27,  2002  under  an  emergency  30-day 
substitute  teaching  permit,  two  pre-intern  certificates,  and  an  internship  multiple 
subject  teaching  credential . 
The  parties  have  elected  to  waive  a  hearing  in  this  matter  and  proceed  with  the  filing 
of  briefs,  addressing  the  following  issues  of  law: 

. . 

a. 

Taking  as  fact  that  all  certificated  employees  within  the  District  are 
probationary  employees,  can  employees  who  serve  with  emergency,  pre-intern  and 
intern  credentials  acquire  seniority  while  serving  with  those  credentials?

b. 

Does  Fred  D’Alo  have  priority  over  Luanne  Borque  in  the  order  of  lay 
off  within  the  District  because  he  was  employed  under  a  professional  clear  multiple 
subject  credential? 

c. 

Does  Luanne  Borque  have  priority  over  Fred  D’Alo  on  the  basis  of  her 

earlier  seniority  date  with  the  District? 

Arguments 

12. 

The  District  argued  that  each  respondent  has  a  probationary  (non-permanent) 
status  with  the  District,  “seniority”  is  the  only  statutory  basis  for  retaining  one  employee  over 
another  in  an  economic  layoff  proceeding,  and  since  respondent  Borque  has  an earlier 
seniority  date  than  respondent  D’ Alo,  respondent  Borque’s  services  must  be  retained. 

13. 

Respondent  D’Alo  argued  respondent  Borque’s  early  employment  with  the 
District  was  under  emergency  permits  and  pre-intern  certificates,  that  respondent  Borque 
does  not  hold  a  preliminary  or  clear  teaching  credential,  that  respondent  D’ Alo  has  always 
been  employed  by  the  District  under  a  professional  clear  credential,  that  no  legal  authority 
provides  pre-interns  and  interns  with  seniority  (except  in  circumstances  not  present  here)  and 
respondent  Borque  cannot  acquire  a  seniority  date  until  she  concludes  her  intern  year. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 

Jurisdiction:  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  mandated  by  those  sections 
were  satisfied  as  to  respondent  certificated  employees. 

2. 

Reduction  of Particular  Kinds  of Services:  A  school  board’s  decision  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical 
computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  students.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion, 
subject  to  the  minimum  level  required  by  law,  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  a  reduction  of 
services  is  necessary  and  proper  under  the  circumstances.  The  board’s  decision  is  made  at 
the  time  of  the  final  notice.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627, 
635-636. 

3. 

“Elementary  Classroom  Teacher”  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  which  can  be 
reduced  or  eliminated.  See,  Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  of Ferndale  Unified  School  District 
(2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  854. 

4. 

-Permanent/Probationary  Status:  In  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District  (2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  the  appellate  court  considered  the  right  of  a  teacher  to 
claim  permanent  status  dating  back  to  the  date  she  received  her  teaching  credential.  In 
reaching  its  decision,  the  appellate  court  held  the  Education  Code  does  not  explicitly  or  by 
implication  tie  the  effective  date  of  a  teaching  credential  to  a  teacher’s classification.

Fine  noted  there  are  only  four  possible  teacher  classifications:  permanent, 
probationary,  substitute  and  temporary.  The  Education  Code  does  not  refer  to  or  classify 
teachers  as  “provisional”  and  refers  only  to  service  by  a  person  under  a  provisional 
credential.  The  Education  Code  requires  school  districts  to  classify  as  probationary 
employees  those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications  for  the 
school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified  as  permanent  employees  or  as  substitute 
employees.  [bid.,  at  1077. 

Fine  also  noted  that  Education  Code  section  44917  provides  that  a  person  employed 

for  one  complete  school  year  as  a  temporary  employee,  if  reemployed  for  the  following 
school year,  must  be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee,  and  the  previous  year’s 
employment  is  deemed  employment  as  a  probationary  employee.  Education  Code  section 
44918  has  the  same  effect.  Ibid.,  at  p.  1081. 

5. 

Those  employees  not  classified  as  permanent  or  substitute  employees  are 
classified  by  section  44915  as  probationary  employees.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.  App.  3d  627,  640. 

6. 

The  stipulation  specifically  provided,  “Taking  as  fact  that  all  certificated 

employees  within  the  District  are  probationary  employees...  a8 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  part: 

7. 
“(a)  ...  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause 
other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  . 
employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of the  order  in  which  they  were 
employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections 
44844  and  44845...  .”  (Emphasis  added.) 

.  and  services  of such 

. 

8. 

The  general  rule  is  that  junior  employees  may  be  given  retention  priority  over 
senior  employees  only  if  they  possess  special  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior 
counterparts  lack.  The  manifest  intent  of  the  Legislature  is  that  the  discontinuance  ofa 
position  must  result  in  termination  of  the  most  junior  qualified  employee.  See,  Poppers  v. 
Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399,  406. 

  

A  stipulation  is  an  agreement  between  opposing  counsel  ordinarily  entered  into  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding 
> 
delay,  trouble,  or  expense  in  the  conduct  of  the  action  and  serves  to  obviate  need  for  proof  or  to  narrow  [the]  range 
of  litigable  issues.  A  stipulation  in  proper  form  is  binding  upon  the  parties  if  it  is  within  the  authority  of  the 
attorneys.  Mileikowsky  v.  Tenet  Healthsystem  (2005)  128  Cal.App.4th  262,  279.

.
 
.

 

9, 

“Seniority”  is  not  an  inherent  or  constitutional  right.  Seniority  itself  confers 
no  rights  on  employees  but  entitles  them  to  preferential  treatment  only  to  the  extent  that  a 
statute  or  collective  bargaining  agreement  so  provides.  Seniority  rights  may  be  limited  by 
subsequent  legislation.  However,  “respect  for  seniority  rights”  has  been  emphasized  in  the 
interpretation  of  tenure  statutes. 
567,  572. 

See,  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d 

10. 

“Seniority”  appears  to  be  directly  related  to  an  employee’s  first  date  of  paid 
service  in  a  probationary  position.  This  common  sense  interpretation  is  consistent  with  the 
Legislative  intent  expressed  in  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b), which 
specifically  refers  to  “employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date... 

11.  |  Respondent  D’ Alo  argued  the  decision  in  Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified 
School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026  [time  worked  under  a  provisional  teaching 
credential  does  not  count  toward  acquisition  of  permanent  status]  “should  [by  analogy]  apply 
to  accruing  seniority  while  working  as  either  a  pre-intern  or  an  intern.”  While  this  is  as  good 
an  argument  as  can  be  made  under  the  circumstances,  the  decision  in  Summerfield  was  based 
on  an  entirely  different  set  of  facts  and  involving  entirely  different  issues.  Summerfield  is  of 
no  real  assistance  to  respondent  D’ Alo  in  this  matter. 

12. 

|  What  respondent  D’Alo  essentially  argued  is  that  he  was  more  competent  by 
reason  of  his  professional  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  than  respondent  Bourque 
(who  did  not  have  such  a  credential)  and  for  that  reason  he  should  be  given  “seniority”  over 
respondent  Bourque. 

However,  the  economic  layoff  statutes  require  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  (i.e.,  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  position  requiring  a  credential)  and  do  not 
establish  seniority  based  upon  the  earliest  date  an  employee  received  a  teaching  credential. 

13. 

Conclusions:  Within  the  context  of  this  particular  economic  layoff 

proceeding,  respondent  Borque  established  seniority  over  respondent  D’ Alo  because  of  her 
earlier  employment  date  with  the  District.  Respondent  Borque’s  first  date  of  paid  service  as 
an  Elementary  School  Teacher,  a  position  requiring  a  credential,  was  about  one  year  earlier 
than  the  first  date  of  employment  of  respondent  D’ Alo,  also  a  probationary  Elementary 
School  Teacher. 

  

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  [the  tie-breaking  statute]  does  not  apply  in  this  matter 
‘ 
If 
because  respondent  Borque  and  respondent  D’ Alo  did  not  render  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date. 
they  had,  their  order  of  termination  would  be  based  “‘on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  andthe  students  thereof.” 
The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  in  this  matter  are  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  4  and  specifically  included, 
“Number  of  years  credentialed  teaching  experience  in  the  District  prior  to  seniority  date  (substitute  or  temporary 
service.”

The  District’s  determination  of  seniority  was  appropriate  under  existing  law, 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  respondent  D’  Alo  held  a  professional  clear  multiple  subject 
teaching  credential  when  his  service  began  with  the  District  and  respondent  Borque  did  not. 
This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Oro  Grande  School  District  issue 

final  layoff  notices  so  that  the  employment  of  respondent  Fred  D’ Alo  is  terminated  before 
the  employment  of  respondent  Luanne  Bourque. 

DATED: LMG DE, 2008. 

ES  AHLER 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

