BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PALMDALE  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L  2005030148 

WARREN  ALBERTSON,  SNYDER 
RONAY,  KISHA  LANGFORD, 
JACQUELINE  NAGLE,  MAGALI 
CASTILLO,  EVETTE  GONZALEZ, 
SHARI  BAKER,  REBECA  MOIR,  LISA 
SEELEY,  ROSALIE  MATALON,  TERRI 
GOFF,  MICHELLE  MOKLEBUST, 
CARMEN  ROSE,  JOAN  WILLIAMSON, 
and  JEFF  GUIDA,! 

Respondents 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Carolyn  D.  Magnuson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25  and  26,  2005,  at  the  offices  of  the 
Palmdale  School  District  in  Palmdale,  California.  Oral  arguments  were  heard  on  April  29, 
2005  via  telephonic  conference. 

Michael  Garrison  and  Brooke  Nelson,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

School  District. 

Richard  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  the  Respondents  except  Lisa 

Seely,  who  did  not  request  a  hearing. 

The  record  was  left  open  until  May  2,  2005  for  the  District  to  file  additional 
documentation.  The  District’s  submission  was  received  on  May  2,  2005.  The  record  was 
closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  2,  2005. 

/// 

  

In  the  course  of  the  hearing,  the  Accusations  against  some  of  the  Respondents  were  withdrawn  by  the  District. 

' 
Therefore,  those  individuals  are  no  longer  included  in  the  heading.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Jack  J.  Gyves  is  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  Palmdale 

School  District  (District). 

2. 

In  each  of  the  four  prior  school  years,  the  District  has  had  to  cut  costs  in  the 
aggregate  amount  of  approximately  $23  million  in  order  to  balance  its  budget.  Forty  percent 
of  the  cost  savings  were  achieved  by  reducing  classified  staff  positions;  thirty-two  percent  of 
the  cost  savings  were  achieved  by  reducing  management  positions;  and  8.5  percent  of  the 
cost  savings  were  achieved  by  reducing  certificated  positions. 

3.  By  December  2004,  the  Superintendent  and  his  staff  were  aware  that  the 
District  would  probably  be  required  to  further  reduce  its  costs  for  the  2005  —  2006  school 
year.  From  December  2004  through  February  2005,  the  District’s  staff,  at  various  levels  of 
responsibility  and  in  various  forums,  discussed  the  District’s  financial  situation  and 
considered  options  to  address  the  projected  shortfall.  Anyone  who  was  interested  could  have 
participated  in  these  discussions. 

. 

4.  Eighty  percent  of  the  District’s  budget  is  spent  on  salaries/wages  and 

benefits.  After  four  consecutive  years  of  budget  reductions,  the  District  has  few  remaining 
options  for  cutting  costs  other  than  reducing  its  staff. 

5. 

In  February  2005,  each  teacher  was  given  notice  of  the  seniority  date  and 
credential  information  shown  for  that  teacher  in  the  District’s  records  and  was  instructed  to 
notify  the  District  of  any  errors  in  the  information.  From  then  until  March  15,  2005,  the 
District  revised  its  seniority  and  credential  information  as  the  teachers  provided  additional 
information. 

6.  On  March  1,  2005,  the  District’s  Board  met  and  was  informed  that  the 

District’s  projected  budget  shortfall  for  the  2005  —  2006  school  year  was  approximately  six 
million  dollars.  To  reduce  the  shortfall,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Board  that  it 
discontinue  or  reduce  the  following: 

Head  Start/State  Preschool  Services  (Reduce) 
Nurses  Services  (Reduce) 
Music  Teachers  Services  (Reduce) 
Psychologists  Services  (Reduce) 
Counselors  Services  (Eliminate) 
Early  Childhood  Special  Education  Services  (Reduce) 
Deaf  and  Hard  of  Hearing  Services  (Reduce) 
SDC  Mild/Moderate  Services  (Reduce) 
SDC  Moderate/Severe  Services  (Reduce)

7.  These  services  were  chosen  for  reduction  because  the  existing  staffing  ratio 
was  lower  than  required,  so  class  size  could  be  increased  and  the  District  would  still  meet  its 
teacher  to  student  ratio  obligations.  In  addition,  the  District  projected  a  reduction  in  the 
number  of  special  education  students  it  would  be  serving. 

8. 

In  response  to  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation,  the  Board  passed  a 

number  of  resolutions  on  March  1,  2005,  including  a  resolution  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
certificated  services  by  37  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions”  (Resolution  #36-2004/05),  a 
resolution  establishing  seniority  dates  and  credentialing  status  (Resolution  #37-2004/05), 
and  a  resolution  establishing  seniority  date  tie  breaking  criteria  (Resolution  #38-2004/05). 

9.  On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  the  District  served  on  each  Respondent  a 

written  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  stated  that  the  Board  had  passed  a 
resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  services  at  the  close  of  the  2004  —  05  school 
year,  which  would  result  in  the  elimination  of  37  full  time  equivalent  positions  (FTE)  for 
certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

10.  Notice  was  served  on  the  Respondents  as  required  by  law.  The 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

11.  Thereafter,  the  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of 

the  employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations,  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

12.  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  some  of  the  Respondents  herein. 
However,  Respondents  Ronay,  Langford,  Nagle,  Castillo,  Gonzalez,  Moir,  Bowder,  Rivera, 
and  Wences  did  not  file  Notices  of  Defense. 

. 

13.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

14.  The  seniority  list  created  by  the  District  was  based  entirely  on  the 

employees’  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  certificated  position. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

15.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code 

sections  44944  and  44945  have  been  met. 

  

*  Ultimately,  the  District  sought  to  layoff  only  fourteen  certificated  employees. 

 

16.  The  Complainant  challenges  the  participation  in  the  instant  hearing  of 

nine  of  the  preschool  teachers  designated  to  be  laid  off.  Those  individuals  failed  to  file 
timely  Notices  of  Defense.  The  teachers  reported  they  had  been  told,  either  directly  or 
indirectly,  by  the  President  of  their  California  Teachers’  Association  (CTA)  chapter  that  they 
did  not  need  to  file  the  notices.  The  President  testified  she  had  been  told  by  an  assistant  to 
the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  finance  that  the  teachers  did  not  need  to  file  a  Notice  of 
Defense.  That  assistant  acknowledges  having  a  telephone  conversation  with  the  CTA 
chapter  President,  but  denies  discussing  Notices  of  Defense  in  any  way. 

17.  Education  Code  section  44549  provides,  in  part: 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be 
conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with 
Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the 
governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all 
of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five 
days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be 
notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code 
shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefore  within  15  days  after  service 
of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  so  indicate. 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall 
prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as 
to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

Therefore,  except  as  specifically  modified  by  the  Education  Code,  proceedings  under 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  are  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Administrative 
Practice  Act. 

18.  Government  Code  11506  provides,  in  part: 

(a)  Within  15  days  after  service  of  the  accusation  the  respondent  may  file  with  the 
agency  a  notice  of  defense... 

(b)  Within  the  time  specified  respondent  may  file  one  or  more  notices  of  defense  upon 
any  or  all  of  these  grounds  but  all  of  these  notices  shall  be  filed  within  that  period 
unless  the  agency  in  its  discretion  authorizes  the  filing  of  a  later  notice.

(c)  The  respondent  shall  be  entitled  to  a  hearing  on  the  merits  if  the  respondent  files  a 
notice  of  defense,  and  the  notice  shall  be  deemed a  specific  denial  of  all  parts  of  the 
accusation  not  expressly  admitted.  Failure  to  file  a  notice  of  defense  shall  constitute  a 
waiver  of  respondent's  right  to  a  hearing,  but  the  agency  in  its  discretion  may 
nevertheless  grant  a  hearing.  Unless  objection  is  taken  as  provided  in  paragraph  (3) 
of  subdivision  (a),  all  objections  to  the  form  of  the  accusation  shall  be  deemed 
waived. 

19.  Respondents  argue  that  the  phrase  “within  the  time  specified  respondent 

may  file  one  or  more  notices  of  defense”  found  in  Government  Code  section  11506, 
subdivision  (b),  makes  filing  a  Notice  of  Defense  optional,  not  mandatory. 

20. 

If  that  phrase  were  the  entirety  of  the  Government  Code  provision, 

Respondents’  argument  might  be  well  taken,  but  subdivision  (c)  of  the  section  makes  a 
respondent’s  entitlement  to  a  hearing  contingent  on  his  or  her  filing  a  notice  of  defense  and 
further  states  that  failing  to  file  the  notice  of  defense  constitutes  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a 
hearing. 

21.  Respondents  argue  that  relief  should  be  granted  under  Code  of  Civil 

Procedure  473,  which  authorizes  a  court  to  allow  a  party  to  correct  a  mistake  as  long  as  the 
error  does  not  involve a  jurisdictional  issue.  Complainant  maintains  that  filing  a  notice  of 
defense  is  jurisdictional.  Complainant  is  correct.  The  relevant  provision  creates  a  condition 
precedent  to  becoming  entitled  to  a  hearing,  which  is  expressed  in  mandatory  language  and 
provides  consequences/punishment  for  failing  to  meet  the  condition.  Thus,  if  there  is  no 
notice  of  defense,  there  is  no  jurisdiction. 

22.  Moreover,  even  if  the  requirement  were  merely  directive,  the  Respondents 
have  also  failed  to  provide  the  court  with  a  copy  of  the  document  each  is  proposing  to  submit 
as  required  by  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  section  473,  subdivision  (2)  (b)  and  are,  thereby, 
barred  from  the  relief  they  seek. 

23.  Respondents  further  argue  that  they  did  not  file  notices  of  defense  because 

they  detrimentally  relied  on  representations  made  to  them  by  Complainant’s  representative 
and  that  Complainant  should,  therefore,  be  estopped  from  raising  the  issue  to  bar  their 
participation  in  these  proceedings. 

24.  Assuming,  without  deciding,  that  a  District  representative  told  the 

teachers’  representative  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  file  a  notice  of  defense,  Respondents  are 
not  entitled  to  the  relief  sought.  One  of  the  elements  of  establishing  detrimental  reliance  is 
that  the  reliance  must  be  reasonable.  In  this  case,  it  was  not. 

25.  Initially,  every  citizen  is  presumed  to  know  the  law,  and  the  law  clearly 

requires  any  teacher  who  wants a  hearing  on  an  accusation  in  a  reduction  in  force  (RIF) 
matter  to  file  a  notice  of  defense. 

 

26. 

In  addition,  the  letter  sent  to  the  teachers  with  the  Accusation  clearly 

states  that  a  notice  of  defense  had  to  be  filed  within  5  days  if  the  teacher  wanted  a  hearing. 
In  light  of  the  unambiguous  language  of  the  letter,  it  was  not  reasonable  for  the  teachers  to 
accept  a  representation  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  file  a  notice  of  defense. 

27.  Therefore,  Snyder  Ronay,  Kisha  Langford,  Jacqueline  Nagle,  Magali 

Castillo,  Evette  Gonzalez,  and  Rebeca  Moir,  none  of  whom  filed  notices  of  defense,  are  not 
entitled  to  participate  in  this  hearing.  The  testimony  of  those  individuals,  which  was 
provisionally  received,  is  stricken  from  the  record. 

28.  Shari  Baker  is  a  Head  Start/State  preschool  teacher  who  did  file  a  notice 

of  defense.  She  did  not  challenge  her  position  on  the  seniority  list,  but  argued  she  should  be 
retained  because  of  her  experience  and  contributions  to  the  children.  However,  the 
legislature  has  decided  that  RIFs  will  be  determined  solely  on  the  basis  of  seniority  and  has 
made  no  provision  for  assessing  the  quality  of  the  work  being  done  by  those  teachers  being 
laid  off.  Therefore,  there  is  no  basis  for  changing  Ms.  Baker’s  status. 

29.  Rosalie  Matalon  did  not  contest  her  seniority  date.  She  pointed  out  that 

she  is  very  close  to  qualifying  for  her  preliminary  credential,  that  she  is  an  effective  teacher, 
and  that  she  has  experience  which  the  District  needs.  Ms.  Matalon  entered  the  special 
education  field  at  the  urging  of  the  District  after  being  told  by  District  staff  that  there  was  a 
shortage  of  special  education  teachers,  which  carried  the  implied  promise  that,  if  Ms. 
Matalon  became  a  special  education  teacher,  she  would  not  have  to  worry  about  being  laid 
off. 

30.  Ms.  Matalon  is  being  laid  off  because  she  was  bumped  by  Cheri  Dietzen. 

Ms.  Dietzen  was  served  with  the  preliminary  notice  of  non-retention  prior  to  March  15, 
2005.  She  filed  a  request  for  hearing  within  the  mandated  time.  However,  Ms.  Dietzen  was 
not  served  with  an  Accusation  until  the  week  prior  to  the  instant  hearing,  and  she  then  filed  a 
timely  notice  of  defense.  Ms.  Matalon  believes  the  late  service  on  Ms.  Dietzen  was 
ineffective  and  that  therefore,  the  District  cannot  lay  off  Ms.  Dietzen,  which  in  turn  means 
Ms.  Matalon  would  also  be  retained. 

31.  A  review  of  the  relevant  statutes  does  not  disclose  a  time  frame  within 
which  an  accusation  must  be  served  on a  certificated  employee.  Obviously,  there  must  be 
sufficient  time  that  the  individual  is  provided  the  opportunity  to  appear  and  participate  in  the 
proceedings.  However,  it  is  Ms.  Dietzen,  not  Ms.  Matalon,  who  has  standing  to  object  to  the 
procedural  anomaly,  but  Ms  Dietzen  did  not  protest. 

32.  Ms.  Matalon  failed  to  provide  evidence  and/or  authority  that  would  justify 

changing  her  layoff  status. 

33.  Michelle  Moklebust  has  been  recommended  by  her  college  or  university 

for  a  preliminary  credential.  She  provided  a  copy  of  the  notification  letter  to  the  District

around  April  11,  2005.  When  the  credential  is  issued,  it  will  be  effective  April  1,  2005.  Ms. 
Moklebust  believes  this  change  in  her  credential  status  should  also  change  her  layoff  status. 

34.  The  Board  is  entitled  to  make  its  retention  determinations  based  on  the 

credentialing  information  it  has  for  each  credentialed  employee  as  of  March  15th  of  any  year. 
Existing  credentials  that  have  not  been  properly  registered  with  the  county  board  of 
education  and  credentials  that  are  obtained  subsequent  to  March  15th,  even  if  all  the 
prerequisites  for  the  credential  have  been  completed  prior  to  that  date,  cannot  be  used  to 
challenge  a  school  district’s  retention  decisions.  (Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689,  698.) 
does  not  change  her  status  vis-a-vis  the  instant  layoff. 

Therefore,  Ms.  Moklebust’s  entitlement  to  a  preliminary  credential 

35.  Terri  Goff  is  a  deaf  and  hard  of  hearing  (DHH)  teacher.  She  believes  the 

proposed  reduction  in  DHH  services  is  not  justified  and  that  the  District  has  chosen  to  reduce 
those  services  in  order  to  terminate  her. 
credential  which  expired  the  beginning  of  April  and  cannot  be  renewed.  She  is  working 
toward  obtaining  a  multi-subject  credential  and  is  fairly  close  to  completing  the  course  work. 

Ms.  Goff  has  been  teaching  on  an  emergency 

36.  Respondents’  attorney  suggested  that,  because  the  District  knew  it  might 
be  laying  people  off,  it  should  have  done  all  it  could  to  place  Ms.  Goff  and  others  at  risk  of 
being  let  go  in  the  best  possible  position  to  be  retained  by  hiring  them  for  those  teaching 
positions  the  District  filled  in  early  2005  that  are  not  subject  to  the  RIF  or  by  enrolling  them 
in  an  internship  program.  Respondents’  attorney  also  suggested  that  the  District’s  failure  to 
protect  the  teachers’  interests  reflects  a  hostility  toward  the  teachers  because  of  the  labor 
impasse  that  exists  between  the  two  groups.  The  District  denied  any  malevolent  intent.  And 
no  direct  evidence  of  such  a  motive  was  provided.’ 

37.  The  fact  is  that  the  District  faces  a  six  million  dollar  shortfall;  inevitably 
If  the  District  acted  to  protect  one  set  of  teachers,  that  would 
some  teachers  will  be  laid  off. 
put  others  at  greater  risk  of  being  laid  off.  Either  way,  the  District  would  be  faulted  for  what 
it  did  or  did  not  do,  and  it  certainly  had  no  affirmative  duty  to  act  as  Ms.  Goff  suggests  it 
should  have. 

38.  Ms.  Goff’s  bottom  line  is  that,  because  her  emergency  credential  has 

expired  and  cannot  be  renewed,  the  District  could  not  hire  her  to  teach  DHH  students  next 
year  even  if  there  were  no  RIF  proceedings.  Therefore,  she  is  in  no  different  position 
because  of  the  RIF  than  she  would  have  been  otherwise. 

39.  Joan  Williamson  did  not  dispute  her  seniority  date  or  credential  status. 
She  did  challenge  the  District’s  projection  of  a  declining  enrollment  in  special  education 

  

> 
If  the  purpose  of  the  RIF  were  to  punish  the  teachers  and/or  the  union,  one  would  expect  a  disproportionate  share 
of  the  cuts  would  affect  the  teachers.  In  fact,  nearly  four  times  as  many  classified  employees  as  teachers  are  being 

discharged.    

 

programs,  felt  that  enlarging  the  class  sizes  would  be  detrimental,  and  believed  she  should  be 
retained. 

40.  The  evidence  established  that  the  District  has  considered  the  need  to  meet 

statutorily  mandated  teacher/student  ratios  in  the  special  education  and  preschool  programs 
and  has  made a sufficient  showing  that  it  will  be  able  to  meet  its  statutory  obligations  with 
the  retained  staff. 

41. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  more 

senior  employee  was  retained  to  perform  any  service  which  a  more  senior  employee  was 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

42.  Cause  exists  to  affirm  the  Board’s  reduction  of  certificated  positions  as  a 

result  of  reducing  or  eliminating  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  by  the  Board  in 
the  resolutions  adopted  by  it  on  March  1,  2005.  The  Board’s  decision  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious,  but  constituted  a  valid  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  reduction  and 
elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its 
students. 

43.  Asa  result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

service,  cause  exists  to  give  final  notice  to: 

Warren  Albertson,  Snyder  Ronay,  Kisha  Langford,  Jacqueline  Nagle,  Magali  Castillo, 
Evette  Gonzalez,  Shari  Baker,  Rebeca  Moir,  Lisa  Seeley,  Rosalie  Matalon,  Terri 
Goff,  Michelle  Moklebust,  Carmen  Rose,  Joan  Williamson  and  Jeff  Guida. 

ORDER 

Wherefore,  it  is  hereby  ordered  that  notice  may  be  given  to  Warren  Albertson, 

Snyder  Ronay,  Kisha  Langford,  Jacqueline  Nagle,  Magali  Castillo,  Evette  Gonzalez,  Shari 
Baker,  Rebeca  Moir,  Lisa  Seeley,  Rosalie  Matalon,  Terri  Goff,  Michelle  Moklebust,  Carmen 
Rose,  Joan  Williamson  and  Jeff  Guida  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  May  8,  2005 

  

CAROLYN  D.  MAGNUSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

