BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MENDOCINO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Douglas  S.  Nunn, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  N2005030697 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Steven  C.  Owyang,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Mendocino,  California,  on  April  26,  2005. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Associate  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal  Services, 

represented  the  Mendocino  Unified  School  District. 

Respondent  Douglas  S.  Nunn  was  present  and  represented  by  James  D.  Allen,  Esq. 

The matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Jim  Shock,  Superintendent,  Mendocino  Unified  School  District,  made  and 

filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  Douglas  S.  Nunn  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  district.  He  is 

credentialed  to  teach  English,  German,  and  history.  He  currently  teaches  English  and  history 
at  Mendocino  High  School.  His  seniority  date  with  the  district  is  J anuary  18,  2000. 
Respondent  is  not  credentialed  to  teach  in  a  self-contained  classroom. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2005,  upon  the  recommendation  of  Superintendent  Shock,  the 

governing  board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2005-06,  in  which  it  resolved  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  for  the  2005-2006  school  year 
and  directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  notice  to  certificated  employees  that 
their  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  2004-2005  school  year: 

5.4  FTE  classroom  teaching  positions

© 

The  resolution  identified  the  positions  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  as  “classroom  teaching 
positions”  and  did  not  identify  the  positions  as  “English,”  “history,”  or  other  specific 
subjects. 

4. 

The  superintendent  recommended  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services 

because  of  declining  enrollment  and  revenue  in  the  district.  His  recommendation  was  not 
based  on  respondent’s  competency  as a  teacher. 

5. 

The  superintendent  timely  served  respondent  with  a  notice  of  layoff. 

Respondent  was  timely  served  an  accusation,  statement  to  respondent,  notice  of  defense, 
notice  of  hearing,  and  relevant  statutes.  Respondent  made  a  timely  request  for  hearing  and 
timely  notice  of  defense. 

6. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  for  which  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent. 

7. 

That  the  governing  board’s  resolution  referred  to  the  reduction  or 

discontinuation  of  “classroom  teaching  positions”  rather  than  enumerating,  for  example, 
“English”  or  “history”  teaching  positions  did  not  result  in  respondent  being  unaware  of,  or 
being  unable  to  prepare  a  defense  to,  the  charges  against  him.  Respondent  concedes  that  he 
was  not  prejudiced  by  the  specification  of “classroom  teaching  positions.” 

© 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  not 

reemploying  respondent  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  The  cause  for  not  reemploying 
respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  district  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondent  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005- 

ORDER 

2006  school  year. 

DATED:  Wray  At,  260s. 

   

Wee 
STEVEN  C.  OWYANG  SF 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

