BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CLOVERDALE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation Against: 

LEANN  HENRIE,  MARY-ELIZABETH 
KELLY,  JANEL  MORRIS,  GINA  ROMAN, 
EDITH  SANCHEZ-CARDENAS,  REBECCA 
VOELKEL  AND  DEBRA  WHITE, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2005030696 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  27,  2005,  in  Cloverdale,  California. 
Margaret  M.  Merchat,  Associate  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal 
Services,  5350  Skylane  Boulevard,  Santa  Rosa,  California  95403  represented  the  Cloverdale 
Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  726  College  Avenue,  Santa  Rosa,  California  95404 

represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  27,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Claudia  Rosatti  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents  in  her 
official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  Cloverdale  Unified  School 
District  (District). 

2. 

. 

Respondents  LeAnn  Henrie,  Mary-Elizabeth  “Maribeth”  Kelly,  Janel  Morris, 
Gina  Roman,  Edith  Sanchez-Cardenas,  Rebecca  Voelkel  and  Debra  White  are  all  certificated 
employees  of  District.! 

a 

  

'  Suzanne  Charles  Engelkel  and  Marisol  Hernandez  were  also  served  with  layoff  notices  but  did 

not  request  a  hearing  and  therefore  have  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing.  

©} 

3. 

On  March  9,  2005,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Board  of  Trustees 
of  District  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  discontinued  for  the 
2005-2006  school  year: 

Title  I  Elementary  Instructional  Services  grades  K-3 
Elementary  Instructional  Services  prep  period  coverage 

4"-6"  grade  (.40  F.T.E.  P.E.  4"-6"  grade  and 
1.4  F.T.E.  Science  4"-6"  grade) 

Independent  Study  Instructional  Services 
Transitional  Opportunity  Program  (TOPS)  Instructional 

Services-9"  grade 

Language  Arts/Social  Studies  (LASS)  7/8"  grade 
Physical  Education  7/8"  grade 
Conversational  Spanish  7°/8"  grade 
Yearbook  Elective  7/8"  grade 
Physical  Education  9"-12"  grade 

2.0  F.T.E. 

1.8F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 

1.0  F.T.E. 
40  F.T.E. 
.20  F.T.E. 
.20F.T.E. 
.20  F.T.E. 
.20  F.T.E. 

7.0  F.T.E. 
The  Superintendent  proposed a  total  reduction  of  seven  full-time  positions.’ 

Total 

© 

4. 

On  March  9,  2005,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  District  adopted  a  resolution 

finding  it  was  necessary  to  terminate  certain  employees  due  to  a  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  The  resolution  authorized 
the  Superintendent  to  initiate  and  pursue  procedures  necessary  to  not  reemploy  the  equivalent 
of  seven  full  time  equivalent  certificated  employees  of  District. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2005,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  her  recommendation  that  notice  be 
given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  written 
notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

6. 

Respondents  each  made  a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

7. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

  

2  At  hearing  the  Superintendent  testified  that  the  District  is  in  “dire  financial  straits.”  She  noted 
that  District  has  filed  a  qualified  budget  and  that  District’s  budget  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  will  be 
$300,000  less  than  the  budget  for  the  current  school  year.  Due  to  District’s  financial  condition,  it  was 
determined  that  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  for  the  upcoming  2005-2006 

6  school  year

  

8. 

At  hearing District  withdrew  the  Accusation  against  Gina  Roman,  Edith 

Sanchez-Cadenas,  Rebecca  Voelkel  and  Debra  White,  all  of  whom  will  be  retained  for  the 
2005-2006  school  year. 

9. 

The  Board  of  Trustees  of  District  has  approved  criteria  for  determining  the 
_  order  of  layoff  of  employees  having  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service.  Under  the  system 
adopted,  more  points  are  awarded  to  employees  holding  a  BCLAD’  certificate  than  are 
awarded  to  employees  holding  a  CLAD‘  certificate. 

Respondent  LeAnn  Henrie  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Clear  Teaching  Credential  for 

grades  K-12,  with  CLAD,  a  Single  Subject  Credential  in  English  and  a  Supplemental 
Authorization  in  English.  District  currently  employs  Henrie  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  teacher.  District 
has  assigned  Henrie  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2001.  Henrie  is  being  bumped  by  a  more 
senior  employee  due  to  elimination  of  the  1.0  F.T.E.  Independent  Study  Instructional 
Services  position  for  grades  K  through  12. - 

. 

Henrie  has  the  same  seniority  date  as  Jeffrey  McCoy,  who  holds  a  Multiple  Subject 

Teaching  Credential  for  grades  K-12,  with  BCLAD.  McCoy  currently  teaches  English 
language  classes  (i.e.,  primary  language  instruction)  at  District’s  high  school.  McCoy  is 
listed  as  senior  to  Henrie  because  he  has  a  BCLAD  certificate.  Henrie  contends  there  is  no 
difference  between  a  BCLAD  certificate  and  a  CLAD  certificate,  and  therefore  District  failed 
to  make  a  fair  assessment  of  seniority  as  between  her  and  McCoy. 

10. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  provides  in  pertinent  part:  “As 

between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the 
governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of. 
the  district  and  students  thereof.”  Section  44955  clearly  gives  school  districts  discretion  in 
establishing  tiebreak  criteria.  The  exercise  of  that  discretion  will  be  upheld  if  the  criteria 
established  are  based  upon  a  good  faith  evaluation  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students 
and  is  evenly  applied.  (See  Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002) 
98  Cal.App.4th  838,  854-855.) 

In  this  case  the  evidence  shows  that  District  engaged  in  an  evaluation  of  its  needs  and 

then  established  and  consistently  applied  objective  written  tiebreak  criteria.  District’s 
interpretation  and  application  of  its  tiebreak  criteria  included  awarding  more  points  for  a 
BCLAD  certificate,  which  requires  fluency  in  a  second  language  and  authorizes  the  holder  to 
provide  primary  language  instruction  to  non-English  speakers,  than  for  a  CLAD  certificate, 
which  simply  authorizes  the  holder  to  provide  instruction  to  English  Language  Learners. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  District’s  tiebreak  criteria  was  established  and  applied  other  than  in 
good  faith;  therefore  the  tiebreak  criteria  and  its  application  must  be  upheld. 

  

3  Bilingual-Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development. 
‘  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development.

  

© 

It  is  also  worth  noting  that  Henrie’s  CLAD  certificate  does  not  qualify  her  to  teach  the 
classes  McCoy  is  currently  teaching,  which  require  BCLAD  certification.  Therefore,  even  if 
Henrie  were  found  to  be  senior  to  McCoy,  she  would  not  be  qualified  to  teach  his  class. 

11. 

Henrie’s  Multiple  Subject  Clear  Teaching  Credential  authorizes  her  to  teach  a 

self-contained  class  in  grades  K-12,  and  her  Supplemental  Authorization  in  English 
authorizes  her  to  teach  English  in  grades  seven  through  nine. 

Respondent  Janel  Morris  holds  similar  credentials.  Morris  holds  a  Multiple  Subject 

Clear  Teaching  Credential  for  grades  K-12,  with  CLAD,  a  Single  Subject  Credential  in 
Physical  Education  and  a  Supplemental  Authorization  in  English.  The  Supplemental 
Authorization  in  English  authorizes  her  to  teach  English  in  grades  seven  through  nine. 
District  currently  employs  Morris  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  teacher.  District  has  assigned  Morris  a 
seniority  date  of  August  27,  2002.  Morris  received  a  1.0  F.T.E.  layoff  notice,  which 
— 
represents  0.4  F.T.E.  of  the  4"  through  6%  grade  science  position  that  is  being  eliminated,  the 
0.40  F.T.E.  7°/8"  grade  language  arts/social  studies  position  that  is  being  eliminated  and  the 
0.20  F.T.E.  7°/8"  grade  yearbook  elective  position  that  is  being  eliminated.  Morris  either 
teaches  the  eliminated  classes  or  is  being  bumped  from  her  position  by  a  more  senior 
employee. 

@ 

Wendy  Conner  holds  a  Single  Subject  Credential  in  Social  Science,  with  CLAD,  and 

a  Supplemental  Authorization  in  Literature  and  Introductory  English.  District  currently 
employs  Conner  as  a  0.60  F.T.E.  social  studies  teacher.  Conner  is  less  senior  than  both 
Henrie  and  Morris.  Conner  has  been  retained  by  District  to  teach  social  studies  and English. 

Both  Morris  and  Henrie  concede  that  they  are  not  credentialed  to  teach  a 

departmentalized  social  studies  class:  therefore  neither  is  qualified  to  teach  the  social  studies 
class  currently  taught  by  Conner.  However,  both  contend  that  they  are  credentialed  and 
qualified  to  teach  any  high  school  class  or  English  class  that  Conner  is  qualified  to  teach.  At 
hearing  District  conceded  that  if  it  retains  Conner  to  teach  a  high  school  class,  it  will  also 
have  to  retain  Henrie.  However,  District  asserts  the  high  school  schedule  has  not  yet  been 
set. 

12. 

When  laying  off  an  employee  who  is  certificated  to  perform  services  provided 

by  a  junior  employee,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  district  to  establish  that  the  senior 
employee  is  not  competent  to  perform  those  services.  (Davis  v.  Gray  (1938)  29  Cal.App.2d 
403,  408;  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  Dist.  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  566-567.) 
District  cannot  meet  that  burden.  It  concedes  that  Henrie  is  qualified  to  teach  any  high 
school  class  Conner  is  qualified  to  teach.  Henrie’s  credentials  also  authorize  her  to  teach  any 
English  class  Conner is  qualified  to  teach.  Accordingly,  if  Conner  is  retained  to  teach  a  high 
school  class  or  an  English  class,  Henrie,  as  the  most  senior  qualified  employee  noticed  for 
layoff,  must  also  be  retained  for  an  equivalent  F.T.E.  position. 

. 

. 

@  Credential.  District  currently  employs  Kelly  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  physical  education  teacher  at

|  Respondent  Mary-Elizabeth  Kelly  holds  a  Single  Subject  Physical  Education 

13. 

Cloverdale  High  School  and  Washington  Middle  School.  District  has  assigned  Kelly  a 
seniority  date  of  August  28,  1997.  Kelly  received  a  0.8  layoff  notice,  which  represents  the 
0.40  F.T.E.  reduction  in  physical  education  services  in  grades  4  through  6,  the  0.20  F.T.E. 
reduction  in  physical  education  services  in  grades  7  and  8,  and  the  0.20  F.T.E.  reduction  in 
physical  education  services  in  grades  9  through  12. 

Kelly  testified  that  the  size  of  the  physical  education  classes  that  she  teaches  ranges 
from  28  to  40  students.  Her  sixth  grade  class  this  year  is  larger  than  her  eight  grade  class, 
therefore  Kelly  expects  there  to  be  a  continuing  need  for  her  services.  Kelly  questions 
whether  District  will  be  able  to  meet  the  mandated  level  of  physical  education  services  if  she 
is  laid  off. 

District  has  retained  four  employees  senior  to  Kelly  who  are  qualified  to  provide 

physical  education  services.  It  therefore  expects  to  be  able  to  provide  the  mandated  level  of 
services.  Moreover,  it  must  be  presumed  that  District  will  perform  its  official  duties  and 
comply  with  legislative  mandates.  If  District  finds  it  difficult  to  provide  mandatory  services 
next  year,  it  has  the  option  of  changing  the  manner  or  method  of  offering  the  service. 
(Campbell  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Gallup  v.  Loma  School  Dist.  (1996)  41 
Cal.App.4th  1571.) 

14. 

‘Keith  Bergman  holds  a  Single  Subject  Physical  Education  Credential  and 
Supplemental  Authorizations  in  Introductory  General  Science  and  Introductory  Health 
Science.  He  also  holds  a  Certificate  of  Completion  of  Staff  Development.  District  currently 
employs  Bergman  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  teacher.  Bergman  teaches  sports  medicine  under  District’s 
health  curriculum.  District  has  assigned  Bergman a seniority  date  of  August  28,  2000. 

Marsha  Bailey-Henning  holds  a  Single  Subject  Physical  Education  Credential,  a  Clear 

Adapted  Physical  Education  Special  Credential,  a  Clear  Special  Instruction  Credential  in 
Special  Education  Authorization:  Severely  Handicapped,  and  a  Clear  Resource  Specialist 
Certificate  of  Competence.  -  District  currently  employs  Bailey-Henning  as  a  1.0  F.T.E. 
teacher.  Bailey-Henning  teaches  adaptive  physical  education.  District  has  assigned  Bailey- 
Henning  a  seniority  date  of  September  2,  2003. 

Both  Bergman  and  Bailey-Henning  are  less  senior  than  respondent  Kelly.  Kelly 
argues  she  must  be  retained  if  either  Bergman  or  Bailey-Henning  is  retained  to  provide 
physical  education  services.  Although  Bergman  holds  a  physical  education  credential,  he  is 
not  currently  teaching  physical  education.  He  is  teaching  sports  education  under  a  special 
credential,  which  Kelly  does  not  possess.  Kelly  is  therefore  not  qualified  to  bump  into 
Bergman’s  position. 

Bailey-Henning  is  teaching  adaptive  physical  education,  which  requires  a  special 
credential.  Kelly  does  not  possess  the  necessary  special  credential.  Kelly  is  therefore  not 
qualified  to  bump  into  Bailey-Henning’s  position.  Neither  Bergman  nor  Bailey-Henning  is 
being  retained  to  provide  services  that  Kelly  is  credentialed  and  qualified  to  provide.

15. 

Citing  Moreland  Teachers  Association  y.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648, 
respondents  next  contend  that  District  acted  arbitrarily  and  abused  its  discretion  by  failing  to 
consider  all  positively  assured  attrition.  District  admits  that  when  it  issued  preliminary  layoff 
notices  it  did  not  consider  the  resignation  of  Michelle  Frankel,  a  0.40  F.T.E.  probationary 
employee  who  gave  notice  of  her  resignation  prior  to  March  15,  2005.  However,  District 
maintains  it  was  not  required  to  consider  Frankel’s  resignation  because  it  had  not  occurred 
and  therefore  was  not  assured  prior  to  March  15,  2005.  District  also  asserts  respondents’ 
argument  is  moot  since  District  has  now  considered  all  assured  attrition,  as  evidenced  by 
District’s  withdrawal  of  notices  equivalent  to  2.4  F.T.E.  positions  (i.e.,  withdrawal  of  the 
Accusation  against  Gina  Roman,  Edith  Sanchez-Cadenas,  Rebecca  Voelkel  and  Debra 
White)  on  the  day  of  hearing. 

In  Moreland  Teachers  Association  vy.  Kurze,  supra,  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  654,  the 

court  held  that  a  school  district  had  to  consider  all  positively  assured  attrition  when 
calculating  the  number  of  employees  to  be  laid  off.  The  court  explained  that  this  required  the 
school  district  to  consider  assured  attrition  occurring  prior  to  issuance  of  the  March  15, 
preliminary  layoff  notices,  as  well  as  “actual  attrition  occurring  between  March  15  and  May 
15,”  the  date  of  final  layoff  notices.  District’s  actions  in  this  case  were  consistent  with  the 
requirements  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze.  Although  District  did  not  consider 
Frankel’s  resignation  (which  was  not  assured  prior  to  March  15,  2005)  during  its  initial 
calculation  of  the  number  of  employees  to  be  laid  off,  as  of  the  date  of  the  hearing  District 
had  considered  all  assured  attrition.  It  is  therefore  found  that  respondents  have  not  been 
prejudiced  by  any  failure  of  District  to  consider  Frankel’s  resignation  prior  to  issuance  of  . 
preliminary  layoff  notices. 

16. 
ensuing  school  year. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the 

17. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

18. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3  is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  v.  Abbo,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  Degener  v.  Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  for  termination  of  7.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  as  a  result  of 

the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to  Education  Code

section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Finding  12  notice  may  not  be  given  to 

respondent  LeAnn  Henry  for  any  portion  of  a  F.T.E.  position  that  Wendy  Conner  is  retained 
to  teach  which  Henrie  is  also  credentialed  and  qualified  to  teach. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 

2005-2006  school  year,  except  that  notice  shall  not  be  given  to  respondent  LeAnn  Henry  for 
any  portion  of  a  F.T.E.  position  that  Wendy  Conner  is  retained  to  teach  which  Henrie  is  also 
credentialed  and  qualified  to  teach. 

DATED:  May  6,  2005 

  -—— 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

    

