BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
COAST  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SAN  LUIS  OBISPO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against 

OAH  NO.  L2005030490 

KOLYNN  YOUNGER 
JAN  M.  BOUGHTER 

Respondents. 

  

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  18,  2005,  at  Paso  Robles,  California. 

Peter  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Administration  of  the  Coast  Unified 

School  District  (District). 

John  F.  Sachs,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Dr.  Pamela  Martens,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District,  filed  the  Accusations 

in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  or  before  February  24,  2005,  Superintendent  Martens  recommended  that 
the  Governing  Board  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 
for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  Superintendent  Martens  recommended  the  reduction  and/or 
elimination  of  2  full  time  equivalency  certificated  employees  (“FTE’s”)  as  follows: 

Elementary  Education 
Self-contained  Classrooms  —  Grades  K-5 

2  FTEs    

4, 
05-8  (Resolution). 

The  Board  agreed  with  the  recommendations  and  adopted  Resolution  No.  04- 

5. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955,  Superintendent  Martens  notified  Respondents  by  mail  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification. 

6 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Respondents  made  timely  requests  for  hearing. 

On  March  24,  2005,  the  Superintendent  made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against 

each  of  the  employees  who  requested  a  hearing. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  all  of  the  employees  who  appeared  for 

the  hearing.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

10. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  current  assignments  and 
locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  There  were  a  number  of 
certificated  employees  with  later  dates  of  hire  than  respondents,  however,  these  employees 
are  credentialed,  experienced  and  are  needed  to  teach  certain  classes  that  respondents  are  not 
credentialed  or  qualified  to  teach.  These  certificated  employees  were  properly  retained 
despite  having  later  dates  of  hire  than  respondents. 

11.  |  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  sections  44949  and  44955  were  met. 

Therefore,  jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all  Respondents. 

2. 

Cause  was  established  as  required  by  section  44955  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees.  The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  identified  services 
were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decisions  relate  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District’s  schools  and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949.  This  conclusion  is 
based  on  factual  findings  3  through  9. 

3. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  based  on 
factual  findings  10  and  11. 

 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Kolynn  Younger  and  Jan  M.  Boughter  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

Dated: 

  

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

