BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BANGOR  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
BUTTE  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

DARLENE  KUKRAL, 

Respondent 

OAH  No.  N2005040286 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  M.  Amanda  Behe,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  26,  2005,  at  the  Bangor  Union  Elementary 
School  District,  Bangor,  California. 

Janna  L.  Lambert,  Attorney  at  Law,  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of  California, 

represented  the  Bangor  Union  Elementary  School  District. 

Joan  Marie  Maredyth,  Attorney  at  Law,  Maredyth  and  Fischer,  represented  respon- 

-  dent  Darlene  Kukral  who  was  present  at  the  hearing. 

The  record  remained  open  for  receipt  of  the  parties’  closing  briefs.  Respondent’s 

Closing  Brief,  Exhibit  A,  was  filed  electronically  on  April  28,  2005.  The  District’s  Closing 
Brief,  Exhibit  12,  was  filed  electronically  on  May  2,  2005. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Board  of  Education  of  the  Bangor  Union  Elementary  School  District  determined 

to  reduce  the  particular  kind  of  service  of  elementary  teaching  provided  by  one  teacher  for 
budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of 
respondent  Darlene  Kukral,  and  the  District  regrets  the  necessity  of  the  proposed  reduction. 
Respondent  Darlene  Kukral  is  the  least  senior  elementary  teacher  in  the  District.  The 
reduction  in  force  was  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Education 
Code. 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Bangor  Union  Elementary  School  District  (hereinafter  “the  District”) 

provides  an  elementary  school  in  Bangor,  California.  The  student  population  is 
approximately  155  at  present,  and  has  gradually  decreased  over  the  past  several  years. 

2. 

David  Severson,  Ed.D.,  is  the  District’s  Superintendent  and  Principal,  as  well 

as  a  full-time  teacher. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  was  given  notice  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  of  Superintendent  Severson’s  recommendation  that 
one  (1.0)  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employee  be  notified  that  her  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

On  March  16,  2005,  the  respondent  filed  a  timely  and  proper  Request  for 

Board  Resolution  No.  04-05-7,  adopted  on  March  10,  2005,  proposed  a  layoff 
_  of  one  (1.0)  FTE  certificated  employee.  Specifically,  the  Board  Resolution  provided  for  the 

4, 

reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  of  elementary  teaching. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2005,  by  personal  delivery  the  District  served  teacher  Darlene 
Kukral  (respondent)  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  her  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

The  notice  further  advised  the  respondent  of  her  right  to  a  hearing,  including  that  such 

a  request  must  be  delivered  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination,  and 
that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

7. 

On  April  11,  2005,  Superintendent  Severson  filed  an  Accusation  which  was 

personally  served  on  the  respondent  on  that  date  as  required  by  the  Education  Code,  and  the 
information  that  a  Notice  of  Defense  must  be  filed  within  five  days  pursuant  to  Education 

-  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c). 

On  April  11,  2005,  the  respondent  filed  a  timely  and  proper  Notice  of  Defense. 

On  July  31,  2003,  Superintendent  Severson  was  employed  for  four  years  as  the 

In  the 
District’s  Superintendent  pursuant  to  a  written  “Superintendent/  Principal  Contract.” 
2003-2045  School  Year  he  taught  eighth  grade  algebra  and  song  flutes  to  the  fourth  graders. 

On  October  14,  2004,  the  Board  approved  an  addendum  to  his  contract  for  the  2004- 
2005  School  Year  to  provide  that  “Because  of  special  circumstances,  the  Superintendent  will 
receive  a  teaching  stipend  of  $20,000  for  filling  a  classroom  assignment  for  the  entire  school 
year.” 

   

6. 
Hearing. 

8. 

9. 

  

10. 

There  are  approximately  19  empty  seats  in  the  lower  grades  and a  total  population 

Superintendent  Severson  described  that  Board  Resolution  No.  04-05-7  was 
required  by  the  District’s  need  to  reduce  services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of 
students. 
of  approximately  155  students.  The  Board  is  particularly  concerned  about  the  inter-district 
transfer  students.  There  is  no  assurance  that  the  current  level  of  such  transfer  students  will 
continue,  and  at  least  two  will  be  moving  out  of  state  before  the  next  School  Year.  In 
addition,  14  eighth  graders  will  matriculate  but  only  8  kindergarten  students  are  expected. 

A  teacher’s  position  represents  approximately  $40,000-50,000  per  year  in  a  District 
budget  of  one  million  dollars.  In  prudent  consideration  of  the  expected  student  enrollment 
for  School  Year  2005-2006  the  Board  decided  to  reduce  services  by  one  teacher.  Including 
the  superintendent,  the  District  has  eight  full  time  teachers.  Other  than  the  special  education 
teacher,  they  all  teach  in  multi-age  self-contained  classrooms.  Because  the  student 
population  for  School  Year  2005-2006  is  unknown,  the  District  at  present  does  not  know  if 
combined  classes  for  next  year  will  be  kindergarten  with  first  grade,  first  and  second  grade, 
etc. 

— 

11. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  identifies  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments,  and  credentials.  Prior  to  implementing 
the  layoff  called  for  by  Board  Resolution  No.  04-05-7  Superintendent  Severson  had  the 
Seniority  List  posted  in  the  staff  room  and  verified  with  the  teachers  the  information 
regarding  their  credentials  and  first  dates  of  paid  service. 

The  respondent,  whose  first  date  of  paid  service  is  August  21,  2001,  holds  a 
professional  clear  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  clear  cross-cultural  language  and 
academic  development  (C-CLAD)  certificate.  She  is  currently  teaching  a  first  and  second 
grade  combination  class. 

Superintendent  Severson,  whose  first  date  of  paid  service  is  August  11,  2003,  holds  a 

professional  administrative  services  credential  and  a  professional  clear  multiple  subject 
credential.  In  the  current  School  Year  he  is  teaching  full-time  in  grades  6,  7,  and  8.  A  full- 
time  teaching  load  will  be  part  of  his  job  duties  in  the  upcoming  2005-2006  School  Year. 
His  position  as  Superintendent  requires  an  administrative  credential,  and  his  teaching 
responsibilities  require  a  teaching  credential. 

12. 

Superintendent  Severson  testified  that  although  his  seniority  date  is  more 

recent,  respondent  was  noticed  for  layoff  because  he  is  in  an  administrative  position,  holds 
both  administrative  and  teaching  credentials,  has  special  competencies  and  experience  in 
teaching  and  administration,  and  is  serving  under  the  multi-year  contract  described  in 
Finding  9,  above.  There  are  no  employees  proposed  for  layoff  who  have  Superintendent 
Severson’s  administrative  credential  and  experience. 

Superintendent  Severson  acknowledged  that  an  administrative  credential  is  not 

required  for  his  full-time  teaching  responsibility,  and  that  work  could  be  performed  with  a

professional  clear  multiple  subject  credential.  Respondent  is  credentialed  to  provide  the 
teaching  services  Superintendent  Severson  will  provide  next  year,  but  does  not‘have  an 
administrative  credential. 

13. 

The  respondent  acknowledged  that  except  for  Superintendent  Severson  she  is 

the  least  senior  person  teaching  at  the  District.  In  the  current  School  Year  she  is  paid 
$43,000. 

The  respondent  expressed  her  concern  that  the  teacher  laid  off  last  year  was  not 
brought  back  for  unknown  reasons  and,  although  that  teacher  was  on  a  rehire  list,  the  Board 
instead  put  the  superintendent  in  the  classroom. 

14. 

The  District  has  no  temporary  teachers  or  teachers  on  leave  of  absence  in  the 

current  School  Year.  For  the  2005-2006  School  Year  the  District  does  not  expect  any 
teachers  to  be  on  leave  of  absence  or  any  positively  assured  attrition. 

” 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

L. 

Education  Code  section  44944  provides  that: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 
board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  writ- 
ten  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of 
_a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary-of  the  governing 
board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and 
stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or  has 
waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor  shall  be  confi- 
dential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the 
performance  of  duties.  However,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality, 
in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the.validity  of  any 
hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reem- 
ploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in  writing 
and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a), 
on  or  before  a  date  specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven 
days  after  the  date  on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee 
-  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so 
shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided 
for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision.

@ 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be  con- 
ducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section 
11500  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the  governing 
board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  fol- 
lowing  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five 
days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be  no- 
tified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code 
shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service 
of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  so  indicate. 

- 

@ 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall 
prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as 
to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for 
the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of 
the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing 
board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and 
disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  con- 
tained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall _ 
be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  commit- 
ted  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not 
constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  er- 
rors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing 
board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  pro- 
ceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the 
administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  dis- 
trict  funds. 

   

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in 
person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the 
United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known 
address  of  the  employee.  ... 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not  incon- 
sistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate  this 
section. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part  that: 

@ 

2. 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes 
other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to 
44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclu- 
sive. 

. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  ...  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  re- 
duced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year,  ...,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall 
have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the 
number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  ter- 
minate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certifi- 
cated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close 
of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the 
same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely 
on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request 
of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing 
board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commence- 
ment  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the 
specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  applica- 
tion  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in 
the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a 
written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not 
be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 
not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of 
May in  the  manner  prescribed in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employ- 
ees  shall  be  terminated in  the inverse  of  the  order in  which  they  were  em- 
ployed,  as  determined  by  the  board in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sec- 
tions  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  em- 
ployee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Sec- 
tion  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a 
manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  sen- 
iority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or 
reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has 
not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  cre-

dential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee 
to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  termi- 
nating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 
reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to-teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  cre- 
dential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
schoo]  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  ex- 
perience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

3. 
ceeding. 
44944  and  44945  were  met. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this  pro- 

The  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

4. 

Elementary  teaching  is  a  particular  kinds  of  service  that  could  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  A  school  board  has  the  discretion 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service,  and  its  decision  need  not  be  tied  to  any 
~  statistical  computation,  such  as  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  students.  San  Jose  Teachers 

Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.  A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within 
the  meaning  of  statute  either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  per- 
formed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services. 
Rutherford  y.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d 
167. 

A  school  district  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivi- 
sion  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter, 
be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered  ser- 
vices  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the 
pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees;  supra;  California  Teachers  Association  v. 
Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32. 

Here  the  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  service  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 

capricious,  and  was  reluctantly  made  for  financial  reasons.  In  consequence,  the  reduction  of 
elementary  teaching  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  was  a  proper 
exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.

5. 

Respondent’s  Closing  Brief  argues  that:  “it  would  be  improper  to  discontinue 

her  teaching  services  while  allowing  the  Superintendent  to  continue  to  teach.”  The 
respondent  proposes  that  the  portion  of  the  superintendent’s  position  which  she  is  certificated 
to  perform  be  severed  from  the  remainder  of  his  post,  and  that  she  be  retained  in  that 
position.  The  contention  is  not  supported  by  the  facts  or  the  applicable  law. 

Dr.  Severson’s  position  is  not  severable  into  an  administrative  function  and a full- 

time  teacher  compensated  as  is  the  respondent  ($43,000  per  year).  Rather,  his  position  is  a 
set  of  responsibilities  including  full-time  teaching,  which  was  added  for  an  additional 
$20,000  per  year.  Factually,  there  is  no  portion  of  his  position  which  consists  of  a  standard 
teacher’s  job  compensated  at  $43,000,  as  the  respondent  proposes. 

The  District  persuasively  argued  in  its  Closing  Brief  that  the  Board  in  the  subject  very 

small  District  had  determined  that  its  Superintendent’s  job  duties  cannot  and  are  not  to  be 
divided.  Teaching  has  been  required  as  part  of  his  Superintendent/Principal  job  since  he  ar- 
rived  at  the  District.  The  respondent  does  not  have  the  necessary  credentials,  special  exper- 
tise,  competency  and  training  to  be  a  Superintendent/Principal.  As  set  forth  in  Moreland 
Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  “where  competency  is  not  dem- 
onstrated  by  a  senior  employee,  a  junior  employee  having  the  ability  to  serve  the  needs  of  a 
program  may  be  retained  by  the  school  district  even  though  it  may  result  that  the  senior  em- 
ployee  lacking  such  competence  must  be  terminated.”  (Moreland,  supra  at  p.  655) 

6. 

ORDER 

a  service  which  the  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  the  respondent is  being  retained  to  render 

The  Board’s  decisions  regarding  the  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  its  Superinten- 

Notice  was  properly  given  to  respondent  Darlene  Kukral  that  her  services  will  not  be 

dent/Principal  are  a  proper  exercise  of  its  authority.  The  Education  Code  does  not  require 
that  a  fraction  of  his  responsibilities  be  allotted  to  an  employee  to  prevent  a  layoff.  The 
-Board’s  layoff  determination  is  within  its  authority  under  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (d)(1),  35160,  and  35160.1. 

   

Led  q 
:  Le  Lf.  . 
PT LEA 
“M. AMANDA  BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

required  for  the  2005-2006  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of 
service  of  elementary  teaching. 

pas  Afay  YooDAB  _ 
f 

4) 
a 
Ls 
fo 
   
Lhe  fe; 

  

    

Je 
a 

/ 

  

ay 

, 

? 

. 

