BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OAKLAND  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Molly  Aigner,  et  al., 

: 

OAH  No.  N2005030072 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  26  and  27,  2005,  in  Oakland,  California. 

Deborah  Cooksey,  Nicholas  T.  Calderon  and  Edward  Holtz,  of  Ruiz  &  Sperow,  LLP, 

represented  the  Oakland  Unified  School  District. 

Dale  L.  Brodsky,  David  N.  Weintraub  and  Sharon  Seidenstein,  of  Beeson,  Tayer  & 

Bodine,  represented  some  of  the  respondents.  These  respondents  consisted  of  K-12  teachers, 
counselors  and  contracted  adult  education  teachers. 

Stewart  Weinberg  and  Vincent  A.  Harrington,  Jr.,  of  Weinberg,  Roger  &  Rosenfeld, 
represented  some  of  the  respondents.  .These  respondents  consisted  of  hourly  adult  education 
teachers. 

The  record  was  held  open  for  the  parties  to  submit  additional  exhibits.  On  April  28, 
2005,  Mr.  Weintraub’s  updated  list  of  respondents  represented  by  his  firm  was  received  by 
facsimile  transmission  and  marked  as  Exhibit  O  for  identification.  On  April  29,  2005,  the 
District’s  list  with  the  final  numbers  of  teachers  to  be  laid  off  was  received  by  facsimile 
transmission  and  marked  as  Exhibit  40  in  evidence.  On  May  2,  2005,  the  administrative  law 
judge  sent  Ms.  Cooksey a letter  requesting  clarification  of  the  numbers  on  Exhibit  40.  Mr. 
Calderon’s  letter  in  response  received  by  facsimile  transmission  later  that  day  was  marked  as 
Exhibit  41  in  evidence.’  On  May  2,  2005,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  deemed 
submitted. 

  

'  When  the  original  of  Exhibit  41  was  received  on  May  3,  2005,  that  document  was  substituted 

for  the  facsimile  copy.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Randolph  E.  Ward  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as 

State  Administrator  of  the  Oakland  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

On  February  23,  2005,  State  Administrator  Ward  approved  Resolution  No. 

0405-0078  and  Resolution  No.  0405-0091  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of 
services  and  directing  that  appropriate  notices  in  accordance  with  Education  Code’  sections 
44949  and  44955  be  sent  to  all  employees  whose  positions  will  be  lost  as  a  result. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  Deputy  Superintendent  Amold  W. Carter  gave 

written  notice  to  approximately  562  certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  of  the 
recommendation  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06  school  year. 

' 

5. 

The  District  served  an  accusation  on  all  respondents  who  filed  timely  requests 
for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  terminating  their  services  for  the  2005-06  school 
year.  Most  or  all  of  the  respondents  filed  notices  of  defense.  The  parties  stipulated  that 
every  employee  who  received  a  layoff  notice  who  submitted  a  written  request  for  hearing 
and/or  a  notice  of  defense  by  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  would  be  deemed  a 
respondent  in  this  proceeding.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6, 

In  Resolution  No.  0405-0078,  State  Administrator  Ward  took  action  to  reduce 

or  discontinue  the  following  services  for  the  2005-06  school  year: 

SERVICES 

Elementary  and  Middle  School  Self-Contained 
and  Core  Program  Classroom  Teachers 

Middle  and  Secondary  School  Counseling 

Elementary,  Middle  and  Secondary  School  Art 

Regional  Occupational  Program/V  ocational 
Education  Program  in  Electronics 

Elementary  Preparation  Program 

FTE’ 

200 

47 

15 

] 

50 

15 

Elementary,  Middle  and  Secondary  School  Music 

  

*  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

>  Full-time  equivalent  positions.

  

7. 

In  Resolution  No.  0405-0091,  State  Administrator  Ward  took  action  to  reduce 

or  discontinue  the  following  services  for  the  2005-06  school  year: 

TOTAL 

328 

SERVICES 

| 

. 

All  Certificated  Employees  Teaching  in  the  Adult 
Education  Program 

FTE  © 

360 

8. 

Before  the  layoff  notices  were  sent  out,  the  District  determined  that  funding 

was  available  to  avert  the  reduction  of  services  in Elementary,  Middle  and  Secondary  School 
Music.  No  Music  teachers  received  layoff  notices. 

9. 

As  of  the  time  of  the  hearing,  the  District  had  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  to 

approximately  61  employees.  The  rescissions  announced  at  the  hearing  (which  were  not 
listed  on  the  District’s  Exhibit  29)  were  for  Anna  Ponce,  Ken  Epstein,  Eldicia  Miler,  Diana 
MacDonald,  Heywood  Dousseaux,  Rosa  Maria  Corsico  Perez  and  Justin  Kimball. 

10. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  District  had  reduced  the  number  of 

teachers  it  intended  to  lay  off  to  those  set  forth  below.  It  is  not  known  how  many  FTE’s 
these  teachers  represent. 

Elementary  and  Middle  School  Self-Contained 
and  Core  Program  Classroom  Teachers 

Middle  and  Secondary  School  Counseling 

Elementary,  Middle  and  Secondary  School  Art 

- 

Regional  Occupational  Program/V ocational 
Education  Program  in  Electronics 

Elementary  Preparation  Program 

Adult  Education  Contracted  Teachers 

Adult  Education  Hourly  Teachers 

164 

24 

6 

0 

 

o

l

58 

234 

 
s
r

 
)
i

Sub-total 

196 

Sub-total 

292 

Grand  Total  486

11. 

The  District  took  into  account  all  positively  assured  attrition  as  of  March  15  in 

determining  how  many  teachers  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices.  Respondents 
contend  that  the  District  should  be  required  to  take  into  account  positively  assured  attrition 
occurring  between  March  15  and  May  15,  when  final  layoff  notices  must  be  issued,  but  this 
contention  is  without  merit.  Under  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d 
627,  635,  a  school  district  is  not  required  to  consider  positively  assured  attrition  occurring 
after  March  15. 

Attrition 

Skipping 

12. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  0405-0078,  the  District  intends  to  retain  regardless 
of  seniority  (i.e.,  “skip”  in  the  layoff  process)  certificated  employees  who  possess  credentials 
and  qualifications  needed  for  Special  Education,  Secondary  Mathematics,  Secondary 
Science;  Bilingual  Education  certificated  employees  who  possess  BCLAD*  and  who  are 
currently  serving  in  the  District’s  bilingual  programs;  District  Nurses;  and  District 
Psychologists.  The  employees  being  skipped  are  all  in  areas  where  the  District  has  a 
shortage  of  certificated  employees. 

13. 

Section  44955  allows  a  school  district  to  deviate  from  terminating  a 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  if  the  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for 
personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study  and  the  employee  has  special  training 
and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study.  Respondents  do  not  dispute 
the  District’s  need  to  skip  employees  in  the  areas  identified  in  the  resolution.  They  contend, 
however,  that  the  category  of  “Bilingual  Education  certificated  employees  who  possess 
BCLAD  and  who  are  currently  serving  in  the  District’s  bilingual  programs”  is  too  restrictive. 
Respondents  assert  that  teachers  who  are  in  BCLAD  training  are  allowed  to  teach  Bilingual  - 
Education,  so  they  should  be  skipped  along  with  teachers  possessing  BCLAD  certification. 
This  assertion  lacks  merit.  Whether  to  skip  BCLAD  trainees  is  a  matter  within  the  District’s 
discretion.  The  District  did  not  abuse  its  discretion  when  it  limited  the  Bilingual  Education 
teachers  subject  to  skipping  to  those  teachers  who  have  completed  BCLAD  training  and 
received  their  certificates. 

Seniority 

14. 

In  February  2005,  the  District  delivered  to  each  certificated  employee  an 

Annual  Statement  of  Intent  form  prepared  by  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Department. 
These  forms  listed  each  employee’s  credentials,  seniority  date  and  “permanency” 
information.  Besides  asking  employees  to  indicate  whether  they  intended to  return,  resign  or 
request  a  leave  of  absence  for  the  2005-06  school  year,  these  forms  asked  employees  to 
notify  the  District  if  they  believed  the  listed  information  regarding  their  credentials,  seniority 

  

‘  Bilingual,  Cross-Cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development. 

  

-4-

date  or  permanency  was  inaccurate.  The  Human  Resources  Department  researched  and 
responded  to  all  submissions  of  corrections  and  made  modifications  to  the  District’s  records 
if  warranted.  The  District  prepared  a  revised  seniority  list  which  it  utilized  to  determine 
which  employees  would  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

15. 

Many  of  the  District’s  certificated  employees  taught  under  an  emergency 

permit,  an  intern  credential  or  a  pre-intern  certificate  before  they  obtained  their  preliminary 
or  clear  teaching  credential.  The  District  does  not  classify  such  employees  as  probationary 
until  they  submit  verification  of  their  teaching  credential  or  verification  that  they  have 
completed  the  requirements  and  application  for  the  credential.  Once  they  are  classified  as 
probationary,  the  District  gives  these  employees  one  year  of  credit  for  purposes  of  seniority 
and  tenure  if  they  served  at  least  75  percent  of  the  previous  school  year.  According  to 
Dorothy  Epps,  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Coordinator,  this  practice  is  pursuant  to  the 
collective  bargaining  agreement  and  has  been  going  on  for  the  five  years  she  has  worked  in 
the  District.  Employees  who  taught  under  an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential  for 
more  than  one  year  before  obtaining  their  preliminary  or  clear  teaching  credential  do  not  get 
credit  for  their  additional  service. 

16. 

|  Many  respondents  fall  into  the  category  of  certificated  employees  who  taught 
under  an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential  for  more  than  one  year  before  obtaining 
their  preliminary  or  clear  teaching  credential.  These  respondents  now  contend  that  their 
seniority  dates  should  be  changed  to  reflect  their  first  dates  of  paid  service  under  an 
emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential.  These  claims  to  earlier  seniority  dates  are 
without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

In  support  of  their  position,  respondents  cite  California  Teachers’  Association  v. 

Governing  Board  of the  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369, 
but  this  case  cannot  be  construed  to  allow  credentialed  teachers  to  retroactively  add  service 
under  an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential  to  acquire  greater  seniority  during  a 
layoff.  In  Golden  Valley,  the  court  allowed  a  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  to 
be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee  and  held  that  such a  teacher  is  entitled  to  the 
statutory  protections  governing  the  mid-year  dismissal  of  a  probationary  employee. 
However,  the  court  agreed  with  the  ruling  in  Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District 
(2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026,  that  time  spent  teaching  under  an  emergency  permit  cannot  be 
counted  toward  accruing  tenure  as  a  permanent  employee.  It  is  logical  to  conclude  that  such 
service  also  should  not  count  for  seniority  purposes.  This  conclusion  finds  support  in 
Summerfield  —  although  the  teacher  there  had  been  employed  under  an  emergency  permit  for 
the  1997-1998  school  year  and  had  been  classified  by  her  district  as  a  probationary  employee, 
the  court  referred  to  “her  first  probationary  year”  as  the  1998-1999  school  year,  when  she 
was  first  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  under  a  preliminary  credential. 

Interns  and  pre-interns  also  do  not  acquire  tenure  under  their  provisional  credentials, 

although  section  44466  and  section  44885.5,  subdivision  (b),  in  effect,  give  former  interns

(university  interns  and  district  interns,  respectively)  credit  of  one  year  toward  tenure  if  they 
keep  teaching  in  the  same  district  where  they  completed  the  internship  program. 

Allowing  employees  teaching  under  an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential  to 
accrue  seniority  could  lead  to  the  absurd  result  of  such  employees  being  retained  in  a  layoff 
situation  over  fully-credentialed  teachers  with  less  school  district  service.  While  respondents 
are  not  necessarily  asserting  that  this  should  happen,  there  is  no  legal  justification  for  now 
changing  their  seniority  dates  to  retroactively  give  them  seniority  for  their  service  before  they 
became  fully-credentialed  (beyond  the  one  year  of  credit  the  District  gives  them  under  the  — 
collective  bargaining  agreement). 

17. 

Respondents  also  ask  that  the  District  be  required  to  go  back  and  re-order  the 
seniority  list,  making  sure  that  all  employees  who  are  entitled  under  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement  to  one  year  of  seniority  credit  for  service  under  an  emergency  permit  or 
provisional  credential  actually  received  such  credit.  Respondents  assert  that  the  District  has 
not  been  consistent  in  giving  such  credit.  This  assertion  is  based  upon  the  hearsay 
declaration  of  respondent  Diana  MacDonald  (whose  layoff  notice  was  rescinded).  According 
to  MacDonald,  she  was  hired  to  teach  in  the  District  under  an  emergency  permit  on  April  5, 
1999,  and  she  has  been  teaching  in  various  assignments  since  then.  Although  she  received 
her  professional  clear  credential  on  August  21,  2001,  her  seniority  date  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  is  August  28,  2001  (presumably  her  first  date  of  paid  service  after  receiving  her 
credential),  rather  than  August  28,  2000.  In  view  of  the  testimony  of  Dorothy  Epps  that  the 
one-year  credit  has  been  given  to  employees  who  were  entitled  to  it,  MacDonald’s  hearsay 
information  is  not  sufficient  to  support  a  finding  to  the  contrary.  Furthermore,  even  if  the 
District  did  make  some  mistakes  on  the  seniority  list,  each  employee  was  given  ample 
opportunity  to  notify  the  District  and  obtain  a  correction.  There  is  no  basis  for  requiring  the 
District  to  now  go  back  and  re-order  the  seniority  list. 

Authority  of State  Administrator 

18. 

To  address  the  District’s  fiscal  insolvency  during  the  2002-03  school  year,  the 

Legislature  in  May  2003  passed  Senate  Bill  No.  39  (SB  39).  The  Governor  approved  this 
bill,  and  it  was  chaptered  on  June  2,  2003,  taking  effect  immediately  as  an  urgency  statute. 
SB  39  required  the  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction  to  “immediately  assume  all  of  the 
rights,  duties,  and  powers  of  the  governing  board  of  the  Oakland  Unified  School  District.” 
(Section  4,  subdivision  (a).) 
of  Public  Instruction,  in-consultation  with  the  Alameda  County  Superintendent  of  Schools, 
shall  appoint  an  administrator  to  act  on  behalf  of  the  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction  in 
exercising  the  authority  described  in  this  act.”  The  District’s  governing  board  was  stripped 
‘of  its  rights,  duties  and  powers,  and  required  to  serve  as  an  advisory  body  reporting  to  the 
administrator. 
emergency  loan  to  the  District,  in  the  form  of  a  line  of  credit  from  which  funds  could  be 

(Section  5,  subdivision  (b).)  SB  39  appropriated  $100  million  as  an 

Section  4,  subdivision  (b),  provided  that:  “The  Superintendent 

disbursed  “only  if  the  administrator  and  the  County  Office  Fiscal  Crisis  and  Management  

Assistance  Team  jointly  determine  that  the  disbursement  is  necessary.”  (Section  9, 
subdivisions  (a)  and  (b).) 

19. 

On  June  16,  2003,  pursuant  to  SB  39,  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction 

Jack  O’Connell  appointed  Randolph  Ward  to  be  the  administrator  of  the  District.  Ward  has 
served in  that  capacity  since  then. 

20. 

The  agenda  for  the  February  23,  2005,  public  meeting  at  which  the  layoff 

resolutions,  No.  0405-0078  and  No.  0405-0091,  were  approved  by  Ward  indicated  that  the 
meeting  was  of  the  State  Administrator  and/or  the  Board  of  Education  (the  District’s 
governing  board).  Ward  does  not  recall  if  any  Board  members  attended  the  hearing.  The 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  to  lay  off  teachers  was 
made  by  Ward  alone.  The  Board  did  not  vote  on  the  layoff  resolutions  or  authorize  Ward  to 
act  on  its  behalf. 

. 

21. 

|  Respondents  contend  that  this  entire  proceeding  is  defective  because  State 
Administrator  Ward  lacks  the  authority  to  lay  off  teachers.  Section  44955  provides  that 
“when in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  [the 
planned  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services] . .  .  to  decrease  the 
number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the 
services  of  . 
.  certificated  employees  of  the  district  ....”  (Italics  added.)  Respondents 
assert  that  SB  39  did  not  specifically  take  away  the  Board’s  authority  under  this  statute,  and 
if  it  did  so  by  implication,  then  SB  39  infringes  on  Oakland’s  constitutional  right  to  local 
control  of  its  public  schools.  Respondent’s  arguments  are  without  merit.  SB  39’s  transfer  of 
all  of  the  Board’s  rights,  duties,  and  powers  to  the  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction 
included  the  Board’s  authority  under  section  44955.  When  the  Superintendent  of  Public 
Instruction  appointed  Ward  to  act  on  his  behalf  as  administrator,  Ward  assumed  the  Board’s 
authority  under  Section  44955.  The  provisions  of  the  California  Constitution  cited  by 
respondents,  Article  IX,  Section  16,  and  Article  XI,  Section  3,  do  not  support  a  determination 
that  SB  39  is  unconstitutional. 

22. 

State  Administrator  Ward  has  the  authority  to  act  in  place  of  the  Board  in 

pursuing  a  layoff  of  certificated  employees  under  section  44955. 

Reasons for  Layoff 

23. 

One  of  State  Administrator  Ward’s  primary  responsibilities  is  to  shore  up  the 
fiscal  integrity  of  the  District.  Of  the  $100  million  line  of  credit  from  the  state,  the  District 
has  borrowed  $65  million,  which  it  is  repaying  over  a  20-year  period.  As  of  the  second 
interim  report  for  the  2004-05  school  year,  the  District  had  a  budget  deficit  of  $6.7  million. 
For  the  last  four  years,  student  enrollment  has  declined  in  the  District,  causing  a 
corresponding  decline  in  ADA  (Average  Daily  Attendance)  revenue  from  the  state.  The 
District  projects  that  enrollment  for  the  2005-06  school  year  will  decline  by  approximately

2,000  students.  The  District  does  not  yet  have  the  final  figures  on  its  budget  for  the  2005-06 
school  year,  but  there  is  no  question  that  the  District’s  fiscal  crisis  is  ongoing. 

24, 

In  looking  for  areas  where  service  cuts  could  be  made,  Ward  focused  on  areas 
with  less  direct  impact  on  students.  He  felt  that  eliminating  the  elementary  “teacher  prep  _ 
period”  program  would  have  the  least  direct  impact  on  students.  Ward  apparently  determined 
to  eliminate  all  counseling  positions,  but  he  reasoned  that  counseling  services  could  still  be 
provided  next  year.  School  principals  are  allowed  to  create  their  own  budgets  under 
“Results-Based  Budgeting,”  and  they  can  choose  to  hire  counselors.  Ward  expects  many  of 
the  resources  for  counseling  next  year  to  come  from  categorical  funds  that  historically  have 
gone  unspent. 

25. 

Thirteen  elementary  schools  in  the  District  are  in  Program  Improvement  Year 
4  (PI-4)  under  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  (NCLB).  NCLB  requires  that  such  schools  be 
restructured  to  effect  major  changes  in  their  operation.  Restructuring  options  include  closing 
the  schools  and  reconstituting  them  with  new  staff  or  reopening  the  schools  as  charter 
schools.  Charter  schools  can  be  either  within  the  District  or  outside  the  District.  In  order  for 
a  school  to  be  “charterized,”  over  50  percent  of  the  tenured  teachers  at  the  school  must  sign  a 
petition  requesting  District  approval  of  the  charter.  In  the  two  charter  petitions  that 
respondents  submitted  in  evidence,  the  teachers  who  signed  the.petition  were  also  certifying 
that  they  “are  meaningfully  interested  in  teaching  at  the  school.”  The  problem  created  by  a 
school  becoming  charterized  is  that  the  present  teachers  who  do  not  want  to  teach  in  the 
charter  school  must  be  reassigned  within  the  District,  creating  a  potential  surplus  of 
certificated  employees. 

26. 

In  February  2005,  when  State  Administrator  Ward  was  considering  whether  to 
reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  and  lay  off  teachers,  the  District  did  not  know  what  would 
happen  with  the  PI-4  schools  and  their  teachers.  Ward  had  his  staff  analyze  various  plausible 
scenarios  to  determine  the  possible  surplus  of  certificated  employees  for  the  2005-06  school 
year.  By  the  time  the  layoff  resolutions  were  drafted,  the  District  had  determined  that  five  of 
the  13  schools  would  definitely  stay  with  the  District,  but  what  would  happen  with  the  other 
eight  schools  was  still  up  in  the  air.  No  petitions  to  charterize  any  of  the  schools  had  been 
received,  but  Ward  proceeded  on  the  assumption  that  all  eight  schools  could  be  charterized. 

_ 

27. 

The  decision  to  reduce  Elementary  and  Middle  School  Self-Contained  and 

Core  Program  Classroom  Teachers  by  200  FTE  was  the  result  of  an  analysis  of  the  projected 
number  of  surplus  teachers  holding  multiple  subject  credentials  offset  by  the  projected 
number  of such  teachers  leaving  the  District  for  various  reasons.  The  largest  component  of 
the  surplus  was  the  198  teachers  projected  to  be  released  from  the  eight  PI-4  schools  in  the 
event  they  became  charterized.  (There  are  409  teachers  in  those  eight  schools,  and  assuming 
that  51  percent  of  the  teachers  signed  the  charter  petitions,  it  was  projected  that 
approximately  49  percent  would  come  back  to  the  District  for  reassignment.)

28. 

Charter  petitions  for  two  of  the  PI-4  schools,  Cox  and  Hawthorne,  were 

submitted  to  the  District  at  the  April  13,  2005  meeting  of  the  State  Administrator  and/or  the 
Board  of  Education.  As  of  the  hearing,  Ward  had  not  yet  reviewed  these  petitions.  There  is 
no  legal  deadline  for  submitting  charter  petitions,  but,  as  a  practical  matter,  it  would  be 
impossible  after  a  certain  point  to  create  a  charter  school  program  in  time  for  the  2005-06 
school  year.  Ward  hopes  to  know  by  mid-May  how  many  teachers  will  be  affected  by 
charter  school  creation. 

29. 

Hearsay  evidence  suggests  that  none  of  the  PI-4  schools  besides  Cox  and 
Hawthorne  will  submit  petitions  to  become  charter  schools  for  next  year.  In  light  of  this, 
respondents  argue  that  it  was  an  abuse  of  discretion  for  the  State  Administrator  to 
recommend  the  layoff  of  200  teachers.  This  argument  does  not  have  merit.  In  determining 
how  to  allocate  its  resources,  a  school  district  is  given  broad  discretion  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  lay  off  teachers.  As  of  February  23,  2005,  when 
the  layoff  resolutions  were  approved,  and  up  to  the  March  15  deadline  for  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  it  was  not  unreasonable  for  State  Administrator  Ward  to  assume  that  eight  schools 
could  be  charterized  and  to  base  projections  of  a  teacher  surplus  on  that  assumption.  If  it 
turns  out  that  a  large  number  of  teachers  are  laid  off  only  to  be  later  rehired,  it  will  have  been 
an  unfortunate  exercise,  but  this  is  the  reality  of  a  statutory  scheme  that  requires  a  school 
district  to  make  layoff  decisions  at  a  point  when  it  does  not  know  how  much  money  it  will 
have  the  following  year,  or,  as  in  this  case,  when  it  does  not  know  how  big  a  teacher  surplus 
at  will  have  by  reason  of  charter  school  creation.  Ward  acted  within  its  discretion  in  reducing 
Elementary  and  Middle  School  Self-Contained  and  Core  Program  Classroom  Teachers  by 
200  FTE. 

Adult  Education 

30. 

State  Administrator  Ward  made  the  decision  to  discontinue  the  District’s  Adult 

Education  Program  after  receiving  budget  figures  from  the  director  of  the  program,  Alan 
Kern,  showing  that  expenditures  exceed  revenues  for  the  2004-05  school  year  (by  some  $2.6 
million  dollars  in  the  first  interim  budget)  and  are  projected  to  do  so  for  the  2005-06  school 
year.  A  budget  shortfall  in  the  adult  school  requires  the  District  to  take  funds  away  from  the 
K-12  program.  Ward  felt  that  the  Adult  Education  Program  threatened  the  financial  stability 
of  the  District,  so  he  decided  to  discontinue  the  program  and  lay  off  all  the  adult  school 
teachers. 

31. 

Respondents  claim  that  the  budget  figures  provided  to  Ward  are  not  accurate. 
Respondent  Patricia  Jensen  is  a  28-year  adult  school  employee  who  in  2002  got  involved  in 
oversight  of  the  Adult  Education  Program  as  a  stakeholder.  She  has  been  on  a  committee  to 
make  sure  the  program  does  not  have  a  deficit,  as  it  had  several  years  ago.  During  collective 
bargaining  negotiations  in  early  March,  Jensen  saw  the  budget  document  that  was  provided 
to  Ward.  She  was  shocked  to  see  that  it  showed  a  deficit,  since  a  preliminary  budget  she  saw 
in  October  2004  showed  a  surplus.  According  to  Jensen,  Kern  admitted  that  a  $500,000 
capital  outlay  item  included  on  the  preliminary  second  interim  budget  for  2004-05  was  a

mistake.  Jensen  also  takes  issue  with  the  amounts  shown  for  other  expenditure  items. 
Although  she  did  not  have  access  to  the  District’s  budget  information,  Jensen  put  together  her 
own  budget  figures,  utilizing  salary  information  available  to  her  as  well  as  historical 
spending  data.  By  her  calculations,  the  Adult  Education  Program  will  have  a  budget  surplus 
this  year  and  next.  Also,  Jensen  asserts  that  the  adult  school’s  ADA  generates  money  from 
the  Lottery  that  goes  to  the  District’s  general  fund,  and  this  has  amounted  to  millions  of 
dollars  over  the  years. 

32.  |  Respondents  contend  that  the  Adult  Education  Program  is  financially  self- 
sufficient  and  actually  gives  back  money  to  the  District,  through  the  Lottery.  They  assert  that 
the  elimination  of  the  program  would  constitute  an  abuse  of  discretion,  since  the  stated 
reason  for  the  action  —  that  the  program  has  a  budget  deficit  —  is  not  true.  Respondents 
believe  that  Ward’s  real  agenda  is  to  pressure  the  teachers  to  ratify  his  proposed  collective 
. 
bargaining  agreement,  which  apparently  contains  pay  and/or  benefit  concessions  by  the 
teachers.  Jensen  cited  reports  in  the  press  that  Ward  had  said  he  would  restore  the  Adult 
Education  Program  if  the  contract  was  ratified. 

33. 

State  Administrator  Ward  did  not  abuse  his  discretion  when  he  decided  to 

eliminate  the  Adult  Education  Program.  He  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  budget  document  he 
received  from  the  program  director  without  having  to  question  the  accuracy  of  the  numbers. 
Based  on  the  financial  picture  painted  by  that  document,  Ward’s  decision  to  cut  the  program 
was  reasonable.  If  Patricia  Jensen  is  correct,  and  the  Adult  Education  Program  actually 
makes  money  for  the  District,  Ward  has  the  opportunity  to  rescind  the  layoff  notices  and 
restore  the  program.  It  was  not  established  that  he  acted  in  bad  faith  in  eliminating  the  Adult 
Education  Program. 

34.  |  Respondents  also  contend  that  the  District  cannot  discontinue  providing  adult 

education  services  when  there  is  no  plan  for  a  community  college  district  to  take  over 
providing  these  state-mandated  services.  This  contention  is  lacking  in  merit.  The  issue  of 
how  adult  education  services  will  be  provided  if  the  District  eliminates  its  Adult  Education 
Program  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  proceeding.  State  law  does  not  require  a  school  district 
to  provide  adult  education  services. 

Particular  Kinds  of Services 

35. 

The  services  identified  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Resolution  No.  0405- 
0078  and  Resolution  No.  0405-0091  are  particular  kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of 
section  44955. 

-  Counseling 

36. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  Middle  School  and 
Secondary  School  Counseling  should  be  disallowed  because  the  District  has  not  established 
that  counseling  services  will  actually  be  reduced  or  provided  in  a  different  manner  next  year. 

-10-

On  this  point,  respondents  must  prevail.  The  evidence  is  somewhat  sketchy,  but  there  is  no 
doubt  that  counseling  services  will  be  provided  next  year.  School  principals  are  allowed  to 
hire  counselors,  and  at  least  one  high  school  and  one  middle  school  have  notified  Human 
Resources  that  they  need  counselors  for  next  year.  It  is  unknown  whether  counseling 
services  will  be  provided  next  year  with  fewer  counselors  than  this  year.  The  fact  that 
counseling  services  may  be  provided  in  a  different  manner  next  year  is  insufficient  to  justify 
the  proposed  reduction  or  elimination  of  counseling  positions. 

Reductions  in  Art 

37. 

Respondents  raised  the  issue  of  whether  the  District’s  reduction  in  Art  at  the 

secondary  school  level  will  leave  enough  course  offerings  to  allow  students  to  meet  the 
Visual  and  Performing  Arts  (VPA)  entry  requirement  for  the  University  of  California.  The 
District  established  that  there  will  be  enough  high  school  courses  next  year  in  dance,  drama, 
music  and  visual  art  to  allow  students  to  meet  the  VPA  requirement. 

Bumping  by  Part-Time  Teachers 

38. 

Section  44955  requires  a  school  district  to  “make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which 
their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  To  meet  this  requirement,  the 
District  has  worked  out  a  “bumping”  chart  whereby  teachers  whose  current  positions  are 
-being  eliminated  will  be  retained  if  they  are  qualified  to  teach  in  an  area  not  impacted  by  the 
reduction  of  services  or  if  they  have  more  seniority  than  another  employee  teaching  in  an 
area  impacted  by  the  reduction  of  services.  (In  the  latter  case,  the  less  senior  employee 
would  be  subject  to  layoff,  unless  he  or  she  had  bumping  rights.) 

39.  |  Respondents  Kathleen  Buty,  Eric  Gahm  and  Donna  Lee  Luiz  are  part-time 

employees  (.60,  .80  and  .80  FTE,  respectively)  who  have  received  layoff  notices  when 
numerous  employees  with  less  seniority  are  not  being  laid  off.  The  District  does  not  allow  a 
part-time  employee  to  bump a  full-time  employee.  The  District  also  does  not  allow a  part- 
time  employee  to  bump a part-time  employee  who  is  on  leave  for  part  of  his  or  her  position 
and  who  has  the  right  to  return  next  year  to  a  full-time  position,  or  to  bump  a  part-time 
employee  who  is  sharing  a  position  with  someone  on  leave  for  part  of  his  or  her  position. 
During  cross-examination,  it  was  pointed  out  to  Dorothy  Epps  that  various  part-time 
employees  with  less  seniority  than  Buty,  Gahm  and  Luiz  are  not  being  laid  off.  Epps  did  not 
know  the  particulars  of  these  employees’  assignments  and  she  did  not  have  the  opportunity  to 
research  District  records  to  determine  whether  Buty,  Gahm  or  Luiz  should  have  been  allowed 
to  bump  any  of  them. 

40. 

It  cannot  be  determined  from  the  available  evidence  that  respondents  Buty, 
Gahm  or  Luiz  should  have  been  allowed  to  bump  a  part-time  teacher  with  less  seniority. 
Sufficient  questions  have  been  raised,  however,  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  require  the 
District  to  re-examine  this  issue  before  sending  out  final  layoff  notices.  It  is  noted  that  the 

-11-

three  part-time  respondents  would  not  be  allowed  to  bump a part-time  teacher  with  a  greater 
percentage  FTE.  For  example,  respondent  Buty  (with  a  .60  position)  would  not  be  allowed  to 
bump a  teacher  in  a  .80  position. 

Temporary  Employees 

41. 

None  of  the  District’s  hourly  adult  education  teachers  is  employed  to  teach  for 
more  than  60  percent  of  the  hours  per  week  considered  a  full-time  assignment  for  permanent 
employees.  Accordingly,  section  44929.25  requires  that  these  teachers  be  classified  as 
temporary  employees,  and  the  District  has  so  classified  them.  Despite  the  fact  that  temporary 
certificated  employees  may  be  dismissed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  governing  board,  the  District 
sent  its  hourly  adult  education  teachers  “precautionary”  layoff  notices. 

42. 

At  the  hearing,  counsel  for  the  hourly  adult  education  teachers  asserted  that 

one  such  teacher,  respondent  Margaret  Clement,  might  be  entitled  to  classification  as  a 
probationary  employee  under  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911.  (In  that  case,  the  California  Supreme  Court  held  that  under 
section  44916”  a  teacher  who  was  not  given  written  notice  of  her  status  as  a  temporary 
employee  on  or  before  her  first  day  of  paid  service  must  be  considered  a  probationary 
employee.)  No  evidence  was  taken  on  this  issue,  however,  because  Clement  does  not  have 
standing  to  challenge  her  classification  in  this  proceeding.  The  provisions  of  sections  44949 
and  44955  are  to  protect  permanent  and  probationary  employees  from  being  laid  off  without 
cause.  The  precautionary  layoff  notices  sent  to  Clement  and  other  employees  classified  as 
temporary  cannot  serve  to  enlarge  the  governing  board’s  jurisdiction  to  permit  such 
employees  to  contest  their  classification  in  this  forum.  — 

Other  Matters 

43. 

All  contentions  made  by  respondents  not  specifically  addressed  above  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

  

°  Section  44916  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

..  At  the  time  of  initial  employment  during  each  academic  year,  each 
new  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall  receive  a  written 
statement  indicating  his  employment  status  and  the  salary  that  he  is  to  be 
paid.  Ifa  school  district  hires  a  certificated  person  as  a  temporary 
employee,  the  written  statement  shall  clearly  indicate  the  temporary 
nature  of  the  employment  and  the  length  of  time  for  which  the  person  is 
being  employed.  Ifa  written  statement  does  not  indicate  the  temporary 
nature  of  the  employment,  the  certificated  employee  shall  be  deemed  to 
be  a  probationary  employee  of  the  school  district,  unless  employed  with 
permanent  status. 

-12- 

 

44. 

With  the  possible  exception  of  respondents  Kathleen  Buty,  Eric  Gahm  and 

Donna  Lee  Luiz,  no  certificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  any  respondent  is  being 
retained  by  the  District  to  perform  services  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Motion  to  Dismiss 

1. 

Respondents  made  a  motion  to  dismiss  this  proceeding  on  the  basis  that  State 

Administrator  Ward  lacks  the  authority  to  lay  off  teachers  under  section  44955.  For  the 
reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  21  and  22,  this  motion  is  denied. 

Motion  to  Compel  District  to  Assign  Proper  Seniority  Dates 

2. 

Respondents  made  a  motion  to  compel  the  District  to  give  teachers  seniority 

credit  for  all  their  service  under  an  emergency  permit  or  provisional  credential.  For  the 
reasons  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  16,  this  motion  is  denied. 

%  ok  ok  Ok 

3. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955, 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

4. 

In  accordance  with  Factual  Findings  39  and  40,  cause  exists  to  require  the 

District  to  review  its  records  to  determine  whether  respondents  Kathleen  Buty,  Eric  Gahm  or 
Donna  Lee  Luiz  have  the  right  to  bump a  part-time  teacher  with  less  seniority.  These 
respondents  do  not  have  the  right  to  bump a  full-time  employee  (or  a  part-time  employee 
with  a  greater  percentage  FTE).  Neither  do  they  have  the  right  to  bump  a  part-time  employee 
who  is  on  leave  for  part  of  his  or  her  position  and  who  has  the  right  to  return  next  year  to  a 
full-time  position,  or  to  bump  a  part-time  employee  who  is  sharing  a  position  with  someone 
on  leave  for  part  of  his  or  her  position.  If  respondents  Kathleen  Buty,  Eric  Gahm  or  Donna 
Lee  Luiz  have  the  right  to  bump  a  part-time  teacher  with  less  seniority,  the  respondent(s) 
with  bumping  rights  shall  be  retained  by  the  District  for  the  2005-06  school  year. 

5. 

In  accordance  with  Factual  Finding  36,  cause  does  not  exist  for  the  District  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  Middle  School  and  Secondary  School  Counseling  for  the  2005-06 
school  year. 

6. 

Subject  to  the  limitation  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  5,  cause  exists  because 
of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to  section  44955 
to  give  notice  to  certificated  employees  corresponding  to  the  numbers  of  persons  set  forth  in 
Factual  Finding  10  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06  school  year.  The 

-13-  

cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
section  44949, 

ORDER 

1, 

In  accordance  with  Legal  Conclusion  4,  the  District  shall  review  its  records  to 
determine  whether  respondents  Kathleen  Buty,  Eric  Gahm  or  Donna  Lee  Luiz  have  the  right 
to  bump  a  part-time  teacher  with  less  seniority.  If  any  of  these  respondents  have  the  right  to 
bump a part-time  teacher  with  less  seniority,  he  or  she  shall  be  retained  by  the  District  for  the 
2005-06  school  year. 

2. 

3. 

In  accordance  with  Legal  Conclusion  5,  the  District  shall  not  reduce  Middle 

School  and  Secondary  School  Counseling  for  the  2005-06  school  year. 

Subject  to  the  limitation  set  forth  in  2,  notice  may  be  given  to  certificated 

employees  corresponding  to  the  numbers  of  persons  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  10  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  Nae  5  L00S- 

NANCY/(I/,  RASMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

-14-

