BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
PASADENA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

. 

OAH  No.  L2005030489 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

KENNETH  BANKS,  TERRY  MARIE 
BOEHMER,  and  LEABETH  GANADEN 

YICK, 

Respondents. 

  

_  PROPOSED  DECISION | 

-  This. matter  was  heard  by Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

.  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  22,  2005,  in  Pasadena. 

James  B.  Fernow,  Esq.,  Lozano  Smith,  represented  Complainant. 

Glenn  Rothner,  Esq.,  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  represented  Respondents. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  made.  The  record  was 

closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

SUMMARY  OF  DECISION 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  Pasadena  Unified  School  District  determined  to  reduce 

or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  teachers  and  other  certificated 
employees  for  budgetary  reasons, totaling  7.00  full-time  equivalent  positions.  The  decision 
~  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  to  be 
~  -reduced  or  eliminated.  The  process  of  selecting  the  less  senior  certificated  employees  for 
layoff  was  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Education  Code.  The  Accusations 
against  Respondents  are  SUSTAINED. 

Parties  &  Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Complainant  Percy  Clark,  Jr.,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Pasadena 
Unified  School  District  (District),  and  he  signed  the  Accusations  in  that  official  capacity. 

  

2. 

Respondents  were  at  all  times  mentioned  certificated  District  employees.  

3. 

On  March  3,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 
Resolution  No.  1726,  which  proposed  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  © 
services  encompassing  7.00  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  at  the  end  of  the  current 
school  year. 

4. 

By  no  later  than  March  10,  2005,  Complainant  recommended  to  the  Board  that 
notice  be  given  to  Respondents  and  others  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the  end  of 
the  current  school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

5. 

On  March  10,  2005,  after  notification  to  the Board,  Respondents  and  others 

were  given  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

6. 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

terminating  their  services  next  school  year.  Each  was  served  with  an  Accusation. 
Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense,  requesting  the  hearing  that  ensued. 

| 

7. 
assured  attrition. 

After  adoption  of  Resolution  No.  1726,  the  Board  considered  all  known 

. 

8. 

Out  of  seven  (7)  certificated  District  employees  initially  identified  for  layoff, 

only  the  three  (3)  Respondents  herein  remained  by  the  time  of  the  hearing.  Erica  Civitate 
had  been  given  the  above  notice,  but  she  failed  to  request  a  hearing.  The  District  therefore 
terminated  her  employment,  effective  June  30,  2005.  The  above  layoff  notice  was 
subsequently  rescinded  as  to  the  following  three  (3)  certificated  District  employees:  Armine 
Aghani,  Richard  M.  Alpert  and  Kevork  Hovsep  Halladjian. 

The  District’s  Layoff Decision 

9. 

Board  Resolution  No.  1726  specifically  provides  for  the  reduction  or 

elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  Positions  (FTE) 

  

_  Secondary  Counselors 
Nurses 

Adult  Education 

TOTAL  FTE  REDUCTION 

4.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

7.0  FTE 

10... 

Board  Resolution  No.  1726  also  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to  determine 

the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same 
date.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  did  not  become  necessary  touse. 

_ 

 

11... 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the two  (2)  nurse  FTE  positions  will  not 

reduce  nursing  services  below  mandated  levels. 

12... 

The  decision  to  reduce  the  seven  (7)  FTE  positions  was  based  on  fiscal 

problems  caused  by  the  current  budget,  anticipated  future  budget  problems  that  may  result 
from  decisions  of  the  California  Department  of  Education,  leaves  of  absence,  and  other 
events  causing  uncertainty  with  the  District’s  budget  for  the  next  school  year.  A  small  part 
of  the  budget  problem  is  the  decrease  in  revenue  that  will  result  from  an  expected  decline  of 
approximately  300  students  (out  of  approximately  23,000  students  throughout  the  District) 
next  school  year.  In  terms  of  the  layoff  decision,  the  District’s  Director  of  Certificated  and 
Classified  Personnel,  Dr.  Debra  Jenkins  DeBose,  characterized  the  student  decline  as  the 
least  important  of  the  various  factors  considered. 

13. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  containing  employees’  seniority  dates, 

. 

current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  The 
information  on  the  Seniority  List  is  accurate. 

14. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  In 
determining  who  would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  each  kind  of  particular  service  reduced,  the 
District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  attrition,  and 
determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

15... 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described  particular 

kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion. 

16. 

|  The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds  - 

_ 

of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  pupils.  — 

17. 

. No  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  will be  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  the  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

lL 

All  notice  and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met.  Factual  Findings  1-8. 

a 

2. 

Respondents  argue  the  District’s  layoff  decision  is  invalid  because  part  of  the 

decision-making  included,  in  very  small  part,  the  anticipated  reduced  revenue  from  the 
decrease  of  300  students  next  school  year.  Respondents  cite  Cousins  v.  Weaverville 
Elementary  School  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846  for  the  proposition  that  if  reduced  student  — 
attendance  has  any  part  in  a  district  layoff  decision,  the  notice  must  specifically  include  that 
the  decision  is  based  on  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  as  a  ground  for a  layoff. 
The  District’s  notice  focused  solely  on  the  need  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS).

Respondents’  argument  is  unconvincing.  The  Cousins  case  did  not  involve  a 
layoff  but  rather the  non-election  of  a  probationary  employee.  The  court  in  that  case  simply 
held  that  although  a  district  may  ordinarily  elect  not  to  retain  a  probationary  employee  and 
that  it  need  not  assert  a  reason,  where  it  is  undisputed  that  such  a  termination  was  prompted  . 
by  economic  conditions  described  in  Education  Code  section  44955  regarding  layoffs,  the 
district  must  provide notice  and a  right  to  a  hearing  pursuant  to  section  44955.  Cousins  v. 
Weaverville  Elementary  School,  supra,  24  Cal.App.4th  1846. 

In  this  case,  the  weight  of  the  evidence  established  the  instant  layoff  decision 

was  caused  by  overall  budget  concerns  and  not  a  simple  reduction  in  average  daily 
attendance  (ADA).  Thus,  the  reason  for  the  layoff,  i.e.  the  reduction  or  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS),  was  correctly  stated  in  the  pertinent  notices.  There  is 
nothing  in  Education  Code  section  44955  prohibiting  an  expected  decline  in  student 
attendance  from  being  one  factor  of  many  in  the  overall  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
particular  kinds  of  services.  In  any  event,  Respondents  were  provided  notice  and  a  hearing 
under  Education  Code  section  44955,  as  required  by  Cousins.  Factual  Findings  1-12. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  1726  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Services  will  not  be  reduced  below 
mandated  levels.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  those  particular  services  relates 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of Education  Code 
section  44949,  Factual  Findings  1-16. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Factual  Findings  1-16. 

5. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

that  a  more  sénior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Factual  Findings  1-17. 

ORDERS 

1. 

2. 

The  Accusations  are  SUSTAINED  against Respondents  KENNETH  BANKS, 

TERRY  MARIE  BOEHMER,  and  LEABETH  GANADEN  YICK. 

os 

Notice  SHALL  be  given  to  those  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 

_ 

Tequired  for  the  2005-2006  school  year,  and  such  notice  SHALL  be  given  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority. 

Dated:  April  28,  2005 

  ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

  

