BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CHAWANAKEE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

LANA  JACKSON 
MICHELLE  PIOTROWSKI 
DIANE  JACKSON 
STEFANIE  FERGUSON 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2005030589 

\  @ 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2005,  in  Madera,  California. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Bryan  G.  Martin  and  K.  La  Hatlavongsa,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Govern- 

ing  Board  of  the  Chawanakee  Unified  School  District. 

Emest  H.  Tuttle,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  parties  were  given  leave  to  file  written  argument  on  or 

before  May  2,  2005.  Only  the  District  filed  written  argument  which  was  marked  exhibit  10 
and  made  a  part  of  the  record.  The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  2,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Stephen  Foster  is  the  Superintendent  for  the  Chawanakee  Unified  School 

District.  He  made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

2  Respondents  are  employed  by  the  Superintendent  as  permanent  certificated 

employees. 

 

  

3. 

On  or  about  March  9,  2005,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the 

Governing  Board  that  it  take  action  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  resulting  in  notice 
to  affected  employees  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  approved 
the  recommendation. 

4. 

On  or  about  March  10,  2005,  respondents  were  given  written  notice  of  the 

Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.  Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  a  hearing 
to  determine  if  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

5. 

The  Accusations  each  allege  the  cause  for  notice  as  the  reduction  or 

discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  described  in  Governing  Board’s  Resolution 
number  16-2004/05,  attached  to  the  Accusations.  The  Resolution  describes  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  as  follows: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

144FTE' 

4.0  FTE 

6.60  FTE 

5  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

1.0FTE 

XK  through  8  Independent  Study  Certificated  teaching  positions  at  the 
Chawanakee  Academy. 
K  through  12  Independent  Study  Certificated  teaching  positions at  the 
Chawanakee  Academy. 
K  through  Adult  Independent  Study  Certificated  teaching  positions  at 
the  Chawanakee  Academy. 
9 through  Adult  Independent  Study  Independent  Study  Certificated 
teaching  positions  at  the  Chawanakee  Academy. 
9  through  12  Social  Science  Certificated  teaching  position  at  Mountain 
Oaks  High  School. 
9  through  12  Math  Certificated  teaching  position  at  Mountain  Oaks 
High  School.” 

6. 

The  Chawanakee  Academy  is  an  independent  study  facility  operated  by  the 

District  which  draws  approximately  75  to  80  percent  of  its  students  from  outside  the  District. 
The  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  for  this  school  year  is  approximately  350  and  the 
student  population  has  been  increasing  every  year  because  of  the  popularity  of  the  program 
and  the  teachers  assigned  to  it.  The  student-teacher  ratio  is  similar  to  that  of  a  conventional 
classroom,  approximately  one  teacher  for  every  25  students,  and  some  classes  meet  at  the 
school  site  once  per  week.  Many  of  the  students  are  “home-schooled.”  All  of  the 
respondents  teach  at  the  Chawanakee  Academy. 

  

'  This is  the  acronym  for  full  time  equivalent  teaching  positions. 
*  According  to  documents  received in  evidence,  the  Superintendent  and  the  Governing  Board  also  resolved  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  1.0  FTE  District  certificated  Library  Media  teaching  position  and  2.0  FTE  District  Reading  teacher 
positions.  These  reductions  are  not  relevant  to  the  respondents  in  this  matter. 

 

7. 

Superintendent  testified  at  the  administrative  hearing  and  described  his  reasons 
for  the  planned  reductions  and  discontinuation  of  services  at  the  Academy.  There  are  at  least 
three  reasons  for  the  changes.  First,  in  November  of  2004,  an  election  determined  that  three 
elementary  schools  and  a  high  school  would  be  transferred  from  the  District  to  an  adjoining 
school  district.  By  law,  tenured  teachers  can  elect  to  remain  with  the  District,  rather  than 
following  the  shift  of  schools.  Seven  teachers  elected  to  remain  with  Chawanakee  Unified 
School  District.  These  elementary  school  teachers  are  relatively  senior  and  their  re- 
assignments  will  likely  result  in  the  involuntary  reassignment  of  less  senior  teachers  to  the 

_  Chawanakee  Academy.  This  scenario  provides the  basis  for  the  Superintendent’s  second 

reason  for  the  planned  reductions  and  discontinuation  of  services.  The  Superintendent  felt 
that  teachers  involuntarily  reassigned  to  the  academy  to  make  room  in  the  conventional 
school  setting  for  the  seven  teachers  who  have  elected  to  stay  with  the  District  may  be  less 
enthusiastic  about  the  Academy  model.  This,  he  felt,  would  result  in  fewer  students  being 
attracted  to  the  Academy  next  year.  His  best  educated  guess  was  a  potential  enrollment  drop 
of  approximately  20  percent.  The  Superintendent’s  third  reason  is  a  threatened  lawsuit  by 
Clovis  Unified  School  District  and  Fresno  Unified  School  District,  who  have  lost  a  combined 
total  of  37  students  to  the  Academy,  along  with  the  ADA  state  funds  which  are  now  paid  to 
the  District.  The  Superintendent  explained  that  he  calculated  that  the  loss  of  the  37  students 
would  mean  a  1.5  FTE  reduction  in  teaching  services.  Superintendent  estimated  the  total 
impact  of  possible  reductions  in  enrollment  at  the  Academy  to  be  4.0  FTE  certificated 
teaching  positions. 

8. 

The  approximately  4.0  FTE  planned  reductions  in  Academy  services  is  clearly 

significantly  fewer  than  the  stated  12.54  stated  in  the  resolution.  The  Superintendent 
explained  that  he  came  up  with  the  total  by  adding  together  the  seven  positions  attributable  to 
the  elementary  school  teachers  electing  to  stay  with  the  District,  the  three  positions  in  library 
media  and  reading  specialist  services,  and  the  four  anticipated  reductions  at  the  Academy. 
Obviously,  these  figures  are  not  in  accord,  and  there  was  no  reason  offered  for  including  the 
three  FTEs in  library  and  media  services  and  reading  specialist  services.  What is  significant 
is  the  planned  reduction  of  four  FTE  in  the  Academy,  rather  than  the  12.54  stated  in 
Resolution  .16-2004/05.  Further,  this  was  not  a  situation  in  which  the  Governing  Board’s 
resolution  reflected  a  policy  decision  to  reduce  a  larger  number  of  positions  at  the  Academy. 
than  contemplated  by  the  Superintendent.  The  Superintendent  spent  more  than  40  hours 
discussing  the  planned  reduction  with  Governing  Board  members. 

* 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

ISSUES  PRESENTED  BY RESPONDENT 

Respondent  raised  the  following  contention  at  hearing: 

District  noticed  to  too  many  certificated  employees  based  on  planned  reduc- 

tions  and  discontinuation  of  services  in  school  year  2005-2006. 

 

APPLICABLE  LAW 

Education  Code  section  44949  reads: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by 
the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing 
"board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superinten- 
dent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district 
which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing 
board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  em- 
ployee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

~ 

,. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision 
(b)  or  has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  rea- 
sons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  per- 
son,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.  How- 
ever,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  it- 
self,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of 
any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  causé 
for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a 
hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent 
the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in 
that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date 
on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails 
to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to 
do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding 
shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5 
(commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of 
the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power 
granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  ap- 
ply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within 
five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days 
after  service  of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section 
11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. 

 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who 
‘shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  de- 
termination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  re- 
lated  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed 
decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation 
as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition.  None 
of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in  the 
proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be 
binding  on  the  governing  board.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall 
be  submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before 
May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses 
of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the  administrative  law  judge,  shall 
be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not 
inconsistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  ef- 
 fectuate  this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  deliv- 
ered  in  person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  de- 
posited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  ad- 
dressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

-  (e)  Ifafter  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continu- 
ance  is  granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the 
dates  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of 
granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  of 
Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance - 
shall  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance.  (Em- 
phasis  added.) 

    

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  reads: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of 
the  schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in 
session  shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of 
the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board  deter- 
mines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a 
result  of  the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined 
in  Section  46304,  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced 
or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification 
of  curriculum,  and.  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the 

 

district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  condi- 
tions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corre- 
sponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  per- 
manent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except 
_as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  em- 
ployee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certifi- 
cated  and  competent  to  render. 

In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this 
section  for  a  newly  formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school 
of  the  district  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  a  school  of  the  newly 
formed  or  reorganized  district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school 
years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termi- 
nation  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination 
is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later 
than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accor- 
dance  with  Section  44949,  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board 
provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the 
order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees 
any  legal  right  or  interest that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  require- 
ment.  (Emphasis  added.) 

APPLICATION  OF  LAW  TO  FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

3, 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution,  based  upon  the  Superintendent’s 

recommendation,  presumptively  establishes  the  extent  to  which  the  District  intends  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  this 
matter,  that  presumption  was  overcome  by  the  testimony  of  the  Superintendent  that 
his  intent-communicated  to  the  Governing  Board-  was  to  reduce  services  at  the  Cha- 
wanakee  Academy  by  only  4.0  FTE.  Clearly,  the  Superintendent,  with  the  approval 
of  the  Governing  Board,  could  have  made  a  policy  determination  to  reduce  a  greater 
number  of  positions  at  the  Academy  based  on  rational  concerns  about  a  possible  de- 
cline  in  enrollment.  And,  as  pointed  out  by  respondents,  they  could  have  resolved  to 
reduce  services  in  the  conventional  elementary  school  program  based  on  the  loss  of 
more  than  300  students  to  the  adjoining  school  district.  However,  had  they  reduced 
elementary  school  classroom  teaching  by  seven  FTE,  this  would  have  triggered  the 
exercise  of  “bumping”  by  incumbents,  which  almost  certainly  would  have  led  to  a  dif-

ferent  group  of  teachers  to  whom  notices  were  given  because  of  credentialing  and 
competence  issues. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955  requires  that  the  District  establish  that  the  no- 

tices  of  non-reemployment  are  necessitated  by  reason  of  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
services.  District  has  established  that  4.0  FTE  will  be  reduced  at  the  Chawanakee  Academy 
-in  school  year  2005-2006.  Respondents  are  among  approximately  15  certificated  employees 
provided  notice,  including  those  whose  notices  are  unrelated  to  reductions  at  the  Academy. 
At  this  point,  District  will  have  to  ascertain  which  four  Academy  teachers  are  least  senior  in 
order  to  determine  to  whom  notices  shall  be  provided  on  or  before  May  15,  2005. 

LEGAL  CAUSE  FOR  NOTICE 

5. 

to  provide  no- 
Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
tice  to  4.0  FTE  certificated  teachers  at  the  Chawanakee  Academy  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  4.0  FTE  certificated  employees  assigned  to  the 

Chawanakee  Academy  in  inverse  order  of  their  seniority. 

| 

ous  Meg 

L  de  a 

  

- 

judge 

KARL  S.  ENGE 
Administrative  Law 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

    

  

ferent  group  of  teachers  to  whom  notices  were  given  because  of  credentialing  and 
competence  issues. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955  requires  that  the  District  establish  that  the  no- 

tices  of  non-reemployment  are  necessitated  by  reason  of  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
services.  District  has  established  that  4.0  FTE  will  be  reduced  at  the  Chawanakee  Academy 
_in  school  year  2005-2006.  Respondents  are  among  approximately  15  certificated  employees 
provided  notice,  including  those  whose  notices  are  unrelated  to  reductions  at  the  Academy. 
At  this  point,  District  will  have  to  ascertain  which  four  Academy  teachers  are  least  senior  in 
order  to  determine  to  whom  notices  shall  be  provided  on  or  before  May  15,  2005. 

LEGAL  CAUSE  FOR  NOTICE 

5. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide  no- 
tice  to  4.0  FTE  certificated  teachers  at  the  Chawanakee  Academy  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  4.0  FTE  certificated  employees  assigned  to  the 

Chawanakee  Academy  in  inverse  order  of  their  seniority. 

Dated 

ag  b,  deol 

—\-   

  KARL  S.  ENGE 
Administrative  Law 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

Rudge 

  

