BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
WEST  CONTRA  COSTA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Certificated  Reduction 
In  Force,  West  Contra  Costa  Unified  School 
District: 

_ 

Certain  Certificated  Employees, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N2005010640 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stewart  A.  Judson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Richmond,  California,  on  April  20,  2005. 

Laurie  Juengert,  Esq.  represented  complainant  Cynthia  Le  Blanc,  the  Chief  Academic 

Officer  of  the  West  Contra  Costa  Unified  School  District. 

Margo  Feinberg,  Esq.  represented  those  respondents  listed  on  respondents’  Exhibit  A 

for  Identification,  incorporated  herein,  and  whose  numerical  designations  thereon  are 
encircled. 

All  other  respondents  were  neither  present  nor  otherwise  represented. 

_  The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  20,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  parties  stipulated  to  the  following: 

1.  Cynthia  Le  Blanc  (complainant)  is  the  Chief  Academic  Officer  of  the  West  Contra 
Costa  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  and  made  and  filed  the  accusations  in  her  official 
capacity  as  said  officer. 

2.  Each  of  the  respondents,  all  of  whom  are  listed  on  complainant’s  Exhibit  1, 

Revised  List  of  Respondents,  incorporated  herein  by  this  reference,  are  certificated 

employees  of  the  District.  

3.  On  March  7,  2005,  the  Board  of  Education  (the  Board)  of  the  District  adopted 
Resolution  No.  65-0405  directing  complainant  or  her  designated  representative  to  give 
notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06 
school  year. 

4.  On  January  19,  2005,  the  Board  adopted  the  criteria  for  establishing  the  order  of 

termination  among  respondents  who  have  the  same  date  of  first  rendering  paid  service. 
5.  On  March  7,  2005,  the  Board  adopted  criteria  to  deviate  from  terminating  or 
reappointing  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  least  seniority  to  fill  a  demonstrated  need  for 
fully  credentialed  personnel  and  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  Deviation  from  terminating  or 
reappointing  in  order  of  least  seniority  will  include,  but  not  be  limited  to,  teachers  who 
currently  hold  a  BCLAD  authorization  or  prior  equivalent  and  are  currently  assigned  to  teach 
in  a  bilingual  classroom. 

6.  On  March  11,  2005,  the  Board  was  given  written  notice  by  complainant  of  her 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  respondents  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  or 
reduced  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year. 

7.  On  March  11,  2005,  respondents  were  given  written  notice  by  complainant  of  her 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  respondents  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the 
close  of  the  current  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

8.  Respondents  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 

for  not  terminating  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

9.  No  permanent  or  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  any  of  the  respondents  are  certified  and  competent  to  render  except  as 
authorized  by  the  criteria  for  deviating  from  terminating  in  order  of  least  seniority. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Cause  for  terminating  respondents’  employment  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 

schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

2.  Cause  exists  under Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for 

reducing  or  discontinuing  those  positions  set  forth  in  complainant’s  Exhibit  2  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 
. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  those  Tespondents  listed  in  complainant’s  Exhibit  2,  save 
respondent  Rana  Stewart,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year 
to  the  extent  that  is  indicated  in  said  Exhibit.

  

2.  The  accusations  against  all  other  respondents  are  dismissed. 

DATED: (pele  ne  ASS 

\  ons  ret 
STEWART  A.  JUDSO 
Administrative  Law  Judgé 
Office  of  Administrative Hearings

Cs 

