BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
SANTA  CLARA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against 
Paula  Arnold,  et  al. 

OAH  No.  N2005020379 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stewart  A.  Judson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Santa  Clara,  California,  on  April  11,  12  and 
13,  2005. 

Richard  M.  Noack,  Esq.  represented  complainant  Rod  Adams,  the  Superintendent  of 

the  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  of  Santa  Clara  County,  State  of  California. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Esq.  represented  respondents. 

Submission  of  the  matter  was  deferred  to  April  25,  2005,  for  the  receipt  of  written 
argument  that  was  duly  filed  and  marked  as  complainant’s  Exhibit  8  for  identification  and 
respondents’  Exhibit  CC  for  identification.  Thereafter,  submission  was  deferred  to  May  10, 
2005,  to  resolve  certain  issues  raised  in  Counsel  Noack’s  letter  dated  May  4,  2004,  marked  as 
complainant’s  Exhibit  9  for  identification.  No  resolution  having  been  reached,  the  matter  is 
deemed  submitted  as  of  said  date. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l, 

Rod  Adams  (complainant)  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Santa  Clara  Unified 
School  District  (the  District)  and  made  and  filed  the  accusations  in  his  official  capacity  as 
said  officer. 

2. 

Each  of  the  respondents,  all  of  whom  are  listed  in  Complainant’s  Exhibit  A  for 
identification,  incorporated  herein  by  this  reference,  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

3. 

~ 

On  March  10,  2005,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  the  Governing 

Board  (the  Board)  of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.

4, 

On  March  11,  2005,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  of 
his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.! 

6. 

On  February  10,  2005,  the  Board  enacted  Resolution  No.  05-06  (Tie-Breaker 
Resolution)  for  the  determination  of  seniority  among  certificated  employees  with  the  same 
seniority  date. 

, 

7. 

On  February  10,  2005,  the  Board  enacted  two  Resolution  No.  05-05.  The 

intent  of  the  Board  was  to  add  one  FTE”  Wilson  High  School  Teacher  to  the  list  of  services 
being  reduced  or  eliminated.  Accordingly,  the  Board  intends  at  this  time  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  the  following  services  of  the  District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006 
school  year: 

Multiple  Subject  Classroom  Teachers 
Teachers  on  Special  Assignment  (TOSAs) 
Secondary  Math  Teachers 
Secondary  English  Teachers 
Nurses 
Opportunity  Program  Teachers 
Wilson  High  School  Teacher 
Music  Teachers 
Psychologists 
Secondary  Counselors 

85.0  FTE 
10.0  FTE 
5.0  FTE 
5.0  FTE 
3.4  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
2.5  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
5.0  FTE 

TOTAL 

120.9  FTE 

8. 

The  following  respondents  challenge  the  seniority  dates  assigned  them  by  the 

District,  as  indicated  in  complainant’s  Exhibit  5,  incorporated  herein  by  this  reference, 
because  they  attended  certain  training  and/or  a  new  teacher  orientation,  prior  to  the  first  day 
of  school: 

  

'  As  to  those  who  received  a  layoff  notice  and  who  failed  to  request  timely  a  hearing  under  Edu- 

cation  Code  section  44949(b),  they  are  not  parties  to  this  proceeding.  As  to  those  who  failed  to  file  timely 
a  Notice  of  Defense  under  Government  Code  section  1  1506,  the  District’s  motions  to  consider  this  a 
waiver  of  a  right  to  a  hearing  are  granted. 

*  Full  Time  Equivalent.

Kristy  Chocholaty 

Tatiana  Rogier 
Alison  Scherling  |  Melissa  Dimiao 
Jennifer  Petros 
Jamie  Govoni 
Michelle  Romo 
Pamela  Skilj 
Kendall  Schomberg  Isabel  Sousa 
Leanne  Thomas 
Kristina  Chang 
Laura  Stott 
Kathleen  Chau 

Patricia  Susnitzky 
Nicole  Syth 
Chandra  Frazier 
Daphne  Jenkins 

Susan  Carroll 
Molly  Smith 
Tyler  Vogel 
Robyn  Janis 
Kelly  Leach 
Andrew  Waddel 
Susanna  Kwan 
Amy  Nord 
Kourtney  Hungerholt 

Daniel  Guilfoy 
Janelle  Marsalli 
Caitlain  O’Brien 
Jovanah  Bonilla 
Paula  Arnold 
Karen  Onyett 

9. 

Seniority  dates  were  determined  on  the  basis  of  the  first  date  of  paid  service  in 
a  probationary  status.  Status,  in  turn,  was  determined  by  the  employee’s  contract  that,  in  the 
case  of  the  above-noted  respondents,  indicated  probationary  status  commencing  on  the  first 
date  of  school.  Since  their  requests  for  earlier  seniority  dates  are  based  upon  attendance  at 
training  sessions  or  orientations  that  occurred  before  the  first  date  of  school,  they  are  not 
deemed  to  have  been  in  a  probationary  status  when  attending  said  training  or  orientation, 
whether  or  not  the  training  was  mandatory  and  whether  or  not  they  received  compensation 
for  their  attendance.? 

10. 

ECRW‘  training  is  sponsored  by  the  Noyce  Foundation,  which  assists  the 
District  in  improving  the  quality  of  teaching  in  grades  kindergarten  through  fifth.  This 
training  is  offered  prior  to  the  opening  date  of  school  and  at  other  times  throughout  the 
school  year.  Attendees  are  paid  a  stipend  of  $50  per  day.  Noyce  reimburses  the  District 
for  this  compensation. 

11. 

 BTSA°  training,  that  has  now  become  BTSA-Induction,  was  funded  by  the 

State  prior  to  this  school  year  if  the  District  submitted  a  grant.  This  year,  the  District 
became a  credential  provider.  If  employed,  the  employee  could  select  the  District  as  the 
credentialing  agency.  The  service  is  provided  by  the  District  before  school  starts  and  is 
on-going  the  first  two  years  of  employment.  If  the  employee  is  obtaining  a  credential  in 
this  manner,  pay  is  at  the  rate  of  $25  per  hour. 

12. 

GLAD®*  and  CLAD’  training  is  required  for  those  teachers  assigned  to  schools 
under  said  programs.  Teachers  are  encouraged  to  attend  during  the  summer.  The  training  is 

  

*  In  certain  cases,  some  were  not  recompensed  though  they  may  have  been  entitled  to  payment. 

That  is  a  matter  between  those  affected  and  the  District  to  resolve. 

4  Every  Child  a  Reader  and  a  Writer. 

°  Beginning  Teacher  Support  in  Assessment. 

°  Guided,  Language  and  Academic  Development. 

”  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development. 

 

also  offered  during  the  school  year.  Ifa  teacher  attends  in  the  summer,  a  stipend  is  paid.  If 
the  teacher  elects  to  attend  during  the  school  year,  a  substitute  is  provided,  and  the  teacher  is 
paid  the  full  contract  salary  rate. 

13. 

Attendance  at  the  new  teacher  orientation  is  required  for  all  new  certificated 

employees.  A  per  diem  rate  is  paid. 

14. 

Attendance  at  ECRW  training  is  not  mandatory.  It  is  an  eight-day  program 

that  is  on-going  throughout  the  year.  New  teachers  are  encouraged  to  attend  their  first  year. 

15. 

BTSA  training  is  offered  for  both  new  and  experienced  teachers.  Attendance 

is  not  required.  The  training  is  intended  to  provide  an  overview  of  the  curriculum.  The 
training  is  offered  during  the  school  year  during  and  after  school  hours. 

16. 

The  following  respondents  raised  issues  regarding  their  credentials: 

a.  Paula  Arnold:  She  has  a  Supplemental  Authorization  in  English. 

b.  Kristy  Chocholaty:  She  received  a  letter  prior  to  the  hearing  from  the 

Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (the  Commission)  stating  that  she  would  received  a 
Supplemental  Authorization  in  Art.  This  letter  was  in  the  possession  of  the  District  prior 
to  March  15,  2005.°  However,  the  authorization  was  not  registered  with  the  Santa  Clara 
County  Office  of  Education  or  the  District  prior  to  said  date.  Since  the  District  was  unaware, 
prior  to  March  15,  that  this  authorization  had,  in  fact,  been  issued,  it  was  not  required  to 
consider  it  in  determining  respondent  Chocholaty’s  placement  on  the  seniority  list. 

c.  Daphne  Jenkins:  She  has  a  Supplemental  Authorization  in  English. 

d.  Patricia  Susnitzky:  She  has  a  Supplemental  Authorization  in  Art.  She  did 

not  file  a  request  for  a  hearing. 

NURSES 

17. 

The  District  seeks  to  layoff  3.4  FTE  nurse  positions.  Currently,  the  District 

_ 

has  5.0  FTE  nurse  positions.  The  evidence  established  the  mandated  services,  requirements, 
those  permitted  to  perform  said  services,  legal  citations  for  said  services,  components, 
numbers  of  students  served  and  nurse  days  to  perform  said  services,  rendered  by  the  nursing 
staff  of  the  District  in  respondents’  Exhibit  X,  incorporated  herein  by  this  reference.  The 
evidence  shows  that  the  mandated  services  performed  in  the  District  require  742  days 
equaling  the  services  of  4.1  FTE  credentialed  school  nurses.  If  the  reduction  sought  by  the 
District  is  accomplished,  the  District  will  retain  1.6  FTE  nurse  positions  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

  

8  See  Education  Code  sections  44857  and  44330. 

 

18. 

In  2003,  the  District  reviewed  its  mandated  health  services  program  and 
concluded  that  it  could  provide  said  services  with  2.0  FTE  nurse  positions.  Aside  from 
noting  that  mandated  hearing  services  could  be  contracted  out,  the  District  offered  no 
evidence  as  to  how  all  other  mandates  will  be  accomplished  with  1.6  FTE  nurse  positions. 
The  District  provided  no  evidence  explaining  how  the  mandated  services  will  be  performed 
next  year  with  two  nurses  on  staff. 

19. 

It  is  found  that,  by  reducing  its  nurse  staff  to  1.6  FTE  positions,  the  District  did 

not  establish  that  it  will  be  able  to  render  all  mandated  health  services  in  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

OTHER  MATTERS 

20. 

The  services  sought  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  are  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  and  will  be  reduced 
or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  2005-20006. 

21.  |  No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Cause  for  terminating  3.4  FTE  nurse  positions  does  not  exist. 

I. 

2. 

3. 

l. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  reducing  or 

discontinuing  117.5  FTE  positions. 

Cause  for  not  reemploying  117.5  FTE  positions  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 

the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

ORDER 

The  accusations  against  nurses  Eileeen  Bowden,  Amy  Davis,  Karen  Kimieck, 

Lillian  Lum-Kaku,  Carolyn  Riley  are  dismissed. 

The  District  may  notify  all  other  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

DATED:  Vu  Il,  200  J 

         

STEWART  A.  JUDSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   

  

  

 

