BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
LASSEN  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

NANCY  BENGOA-BETERBIDE 

and 

KAM  VENTO 

    

Respondents.. 

OAH  No.  N2005030461 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  12  and  26,  2005,  in  Susanville,  California. 

Rex  Randall  Erickson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Las- 

sen  Community  College  District. 

Donald  A.  Selke,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  record  left  open  for  the  submission  of  post-hearing  let- 

ter  briefs  from  the  parties.  Briefs  were  received  from  the  District  and  respondents,  marked 
exhibits  ZZ  and  3,  respectively,  and  made a  part  of  the  record.  The  matter  was  submitted  on 
May  2,  2005,  with  receipt  of  the  briefs. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Dr.  Homer  Cissel,  is  the  President/Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  Lassen 

Community  College  District.  He  made  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  Superintendent  by  written  contract  as 

certificated  employees. 

 

3, 

On  or  about  March  8,  2005,'  the  Superintendent  gave  notice  to  the  Governing 
Board  of  the  Lassen  Community  College  District  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  87740 
and  87743  of  his  recommendation  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced 
or  discontinued  for  the  2005-06  school  year:  Business,  2.0  FTE”;  Counseling,  1.5  FTE;  and 
Journalism,  1  FTE.  The  Superintendent  also  recommended  that  the  Governing  Board 
authorize  service  of  the  notice  required  by  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743  on 
affected  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 
Governing  Board  adopted  the  recommendations  on  March  8,  2005S. 

4, 

On  March  11,  2005,  respondents  were  given  notice  by  the  Superintendent  that 

their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefore.  More  specifically,  respondent  Bengoa-Beterbide  was  informed  that  the  reason  for  | 
the  notice  to  her  was  the  discontinuation  of  1.5  FTE  Counseling  in  school  year  2005-2006 
and  respondent  Bento  was  informed  that  the  reason  for  notice  to  him  was  discontinuation  of 
2.0  FTE  Business  in  school  year  2005-2006. 

5. 

Respondents  requested  a  hearing  and  the  Accusations  were  filed  on  March  21, 

2005.  The  Accusation  served  upon  respondent  Bengoa-Beterbide  incorrectly  identified,  as 
the  basis  for  not  employing  her  in  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  discontinuation  of  the 
following  particular  kinds  of  service  (PKS):  “Business  2.0  FTE  Positions.”  Over  objection 
by  respondent  Bengoa-Beterbide,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  permitted  Superintendent  to 
amend  the  Accusation  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11507  to  reflect  the  correct 
PKS  discontinuation  as  “Counseling  1.5  FTE  Positions.”  Respondent  declined  the 
_ 
Administrative  Law  Judge’s  offer  to  continue  the  matter  to  respond  to  the  amendment. 

6. 

On  the  first  day  of  hearing,  it  was  revealed  that  Superintendent  had  not  pre- 

pared  tentative  course  offerings  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  including  tentative  teaching  as- 
signments  for  those  probationary  or  permanent  instructors  junior  to  respondent  with  shared 
faculty  service  areas  (FSAs).  Over  respondents’  objections,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge 
provided  Superintendent  approximately  two  hours  to  make  such  assignments  and  convey 
them  to  respondents.  This  was  completed  before  the  hearing  resumed  after  the  lunch  recess 
and  a  chart  which  includes  six  junior  instructors  and  their  tentative  class  assignments  for  the 
fall  semester  of  2005-2006  was  received  in  evidence. 

. 

7. 

Superintendent  has  not  determined  which  courses  will  be  offered  in  the  Busi- 
ness  and  Counseling  areas  in  school  year  2005-2006.  This  will  depend,  in  part,  on  the  pref- 
erence  of  instructors.  At  this  point,  it  cannot  be  determined  which  courses  among  those  cur- 
rently  offered,  will  not  be  offered  next  year.  Thus,  presently,  the  only  policy  decision  made 
by  the  Superintendent  is  to  reduce,  in  some  fashion,  the  courses  offered  in  the  business  and 
counseling  by  2.0  FTE  and  1.5  FTE,  respectively.  The  reductions  are  based  on  the  economic 

  

'  The  Bengoa-Beterbide  Accusation  incorrectly  recites  the  dates  on  which  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recom- 
mendation  was  given  to  her  and  the  Governing  Board,  the  adoption  of  the  recommendation  by  the  Governing  Board, 
and  service  of  the  preliminary  notice  on  her.  The  actual  documents,  received  in  evidence  without  objection,  include 
the  dates  recited  herein.  Thus,  there  was  no  prejudice  to  respondent  by  reason  of  the  obvious  typographical  errors. 
*  This  is  the  acronym  for  a  full  time  equivalent  teaching  position.

situation  of the  college  district  which  is  in  a  continuing  deficit  position,  owing  to  reduced  en- 
rollment  and  anticipated  loss  of  revenue  resulting  from  an  ongoing  audit  by  the  Chancellor  of 
the  community  college  system.  After  the  District’s  obligatory  termination  of  the  services  of 
temporary  instructors,  respondents  are  the  least  senior  instructors  in  the  affected  areas. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

ISSUES  PRESENTED  BY  RESPONDENT _  - 

1, 

Respondent  raised  the  following  contentions  at  hearing: 

_ 

A. 
The  amendment  of  the  Accusation  against  respondent  Bengoa- 
Beterbide  to  correct  the  alleged  legal  basis  for  not  reemploying  her  in  the  en- 
suing  school  year  violated  her  right  to  due  process. 

B. 
Superintendent’s  failure  to  make  tentative  assignments  for  instructors 
junior  to  respondents  with  shared  FSAs  before  the  hearing  deprived  respon- 
dents  of  their  ability  to  assert  “bumping”  rights  against  such  instructors. 

Superintendent  has  not  established  the  requisite  discontinuation  or  re- 
C. 
duction  of  PKS in  the  absence  of  evidence  reflecting  a  reduction in  courses  in 
2005-2006  as  compared  with  the  current  school  year. 

APPLICABLE  STATUTORY  PROVISIONS 

2. 

Education  Code  section  87740  reads: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by 
the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  desig- 
nee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk 
or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that 
the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

If  a  contract  employee  has  been  in  the  employ  of  the  district  for  less 
than  45  days  on  March  15,  the  giving  of  the  notice  may  be  deferred  un- 
til  the  45th  day  of  employment  and  all  time  periods  and  deadline  dates 
prescribed  in  this  subdivision  shall  be  coextensively  extended. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision 
(b)  or  has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  rea- 
sons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  per- 

 

  

son,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.  How- 
ever,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  it- 
self,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of 
any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 
for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a 
hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent 
the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in 
that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date 
on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails 
to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  this  failure  to  do  so 
shall  constitute  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  pro- 
vided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the  provisions 
of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding 
shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  ChapterS 
(commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  - 
the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power 
granted  to  an  agency  in  that  chapter,  except  that  all  of  the  following 
shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within 
five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days 
after  service  of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section 
11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. 

   

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who 
shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  de- 
termination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  re- 
lated  to  the  welfare  of  the  colleges  and  the  students  thereof.  The  pro- 
posed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  con- 
tain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommen- 
dation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the 
final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition. 
None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in 
the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be 
binding  on  the  governing  board  or  on  any  court  in  future  litigation. 
Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing 
board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the 

proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the 
cost  of  the  administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing 
board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt,  from  time  to  time,  rules  and  procedures  not  in- 
consistent  with  this  section  that  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate  this  sec- 
tion. 

(d)  The  governing  board's  determination  not  to  reemploy  a  contract 
employee  for  the  ensuing  college  year  shall  be  for  cause  only.  The  de- 
termination  of  the  governing  board  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause 
pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  conclusive,  but  the  cause  shall  relate 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  colleges  and  the  students  thereof  and  pro- 
vided  that  cause  shall  include  termination  of  services  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  87743.  The  decision  made  after  the  hearing  shall 
be  effective  on  May  15  of  the  year  the  proceeding  is  commenced. 

‘(e)  Notice  to  the  contract  employee  by  the  governing  board  that  the 
employee's  service  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  shall  be 
given  no  later  than  May  15. 

(f)  If  a  governing  board  notifies  a  contract  employee  that  his  or  her  ser- 
vices  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year,  the  board,  within  10 
days  after  delivery  to  it  of  the  employee's  written  request,  shall  provide 
him  or  her  with  a  statement  of  its  reasons  for  not  reemploying  him  or 
her  for  the  ensuing  college  year. 

(g)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  deliv- 
ered  in  person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  de- 
posited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  ad- 
dressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

(h)  If  the  governing  board  does  not  give  notice  provided  for  in  subdivi- 
sion  (e)  on  or  before  May  15,  the  employee  shall  be  deemed  reem- 
ployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

(i)  If,  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b),  any  continu- 
ance  is  granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the 
dates  prescribed  in  subdivisions  (c),  (d),  (e)  and  (h)  that  occur  on  or  af- 
ter  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  shall  be  extended  for  a  period 
of  time  equal  to  the  continuance.  (Emphasis  added.)

Education  Code  section  87743  reads: 

No  tenured  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes 
other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  87453,  87467,  and  87484,  and 
Sections  87732  to  87739,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee 
shall  be  deprived  of his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than.as  specified 
in  Section  87740  except  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Section 
87463  and  Sections  87743  to  87762,  inclusive. 

Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the 
schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  ses- 
sion  shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the 
previous  two  school  years,  or  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to 
be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following 
school  year,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  dis- 
trict  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  either  of  these  condi- 
tions  to  decrease  the  number  of  tenured  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corre- 
sponding  percentage  of  the  employees  of  the  district,  tenured  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  However,  the  services  of 
no‘tenured  employee may  be  terminated  under  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tamed  to  render  a  service  in  a  faculty  service  area  in  which  the  records 
of  the  district  maintained  pursuant  to  Section  87743.4  reflect  that  the 
tenured  employee  possesses  the  minimum  qualifications  prescribed  by 
-  the  board  of  governors  and  is  competent  to  serve  under  district  compe- 
tency  criteria. 

Notice  of  the  termination  of  services  either  for  a  reduction  in  atten- 
dance  or  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  a  particular  kind  of  service  to 
take  effect  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year, 
shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Sec- 
tion  87740  and  services  of  the  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  in- 
verse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the 
board  in  accordance  with  Sections  87413  and  87414.  In  the  event  that 
a  tenured  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a  right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  87740,  he  or  she  shall  be 
deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority 
and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  (Emphasis  added.)

4. 

Government  Code  section  11507  reads: 

At  any  time  before  the  matter  is  submitted  for  decision  the  agency  may 
file  or  permit  the  filing  of  an  amended  or  supplemental  accusation.  All 
parties  shall  be  notified  thereof.  If  the  amended  or  supplemental  accu- 
sation  presents  new  charges  the  agency  shall  afford  respondent  a  rea- 
sonable  opportunity  to  prepare  his  defense  thereto,  but  he  shall  not  be 
entitled  to  file  a  further  pleading  unless  the  agency  in  its  discretion  so 
orders.  Any  new  charges  shall  be  deemed  controverted,  and  any  objec- 
tions  to  the  amended  or  supplemental  accusation  may  be  made  orally 
and  shall  be  noted  in  the  record.  (Emphasis  added.) 

APPLICATION  OF LAW  TO  FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

5. 

The  allowed  amendment  to  the  Bengoa-Beterbide  Accusation  was  authorized 
by  applicable  law  and  did  not  violate  due  process.  This  issue  was  addressed  by  the  Adminis- 
trative  Law  Judge  on  the  record  at  the  hearing  in  the  context  of  denying  respondent’s  objec- 
tion  to  the  amendment  to  the  Bengoa-Beterbide  Accusation.  Ifa  hearing  is  requested  by  an 
employee  following  the  preliminary  notice,  the  matter  enters  the  hearing  stage  and,  except 
where  the  Education  Code  provides  an  exception,  the  process  is  governed  by  the  Administra- 
tive  Procedure  Act.  (Ed.  Code  §  87740,  subd.  (c)  and  Karbach  v  Bd.  of Educ.  of the  Lawn- 
dale  Sch.  Dist.  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355,  363.)  The  preliminary  notice  was  served  upon  — 
respondent  Bengoa-Beterbide  on  or  about  March  11,  2005,  and  correctly  recited  the  basis  for 
providing  notice  to  her  that  she  would  not  be  employed  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  error 

-  Inthe  Accusation  was  inadvertent.  She  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  appeared,  through 
counsel,  at  the  administrative  hearing.  The  amendment  was  granted  in  accordance  with 
Government  Code  section  11507  which  permits  such  amendments  at  any  time  before  the 
submission  of  the  matter.  Although  the  amendment  did  not  really  present  a  “new”  charge 
© 
because  of  the  fairly  obvious  error,  respondent  was  offered  a  continuance  which  she,  through 
counsel,  declined.  For  other  reasons,  the  matter  was  continued  for  approximately  two  weeks 
so  respondent  had  ample  time  to  respond  to  the  change.  Respondent  demonstrated  no  preju- 
dice  in  her  ability  to  defend  against  the  amended  cause  for  notice  to  her. 

6. 

Respondents  were  not  disadvantaged  by  the  Administrative  Law  Judge’s  deci- 

sion  to  permit  the  Superintendent  to  make  tentative  teaching  assignments  in  school  year 
2005-2006  for  those  instructors  junior  to  respondent  with  shared  FSAs.  The  assignments 
were  communicated  to  respondents  before  the  administrative  hearing  commenced in  the  af- 
ternoon.  The  Superintendent  testified  and  established  that  neither  respondent  was  competent 
by  his  or  her  FSA  to  “bump”  into  courses  being  assigned  the  junior  instructors.  He  was  cross 

  

>  Respondent’s  related  estoppel  argument  is  not  separately  addressed,  given  the  absence  of  the  required  element  of 
prejudice.  (Evid.  Code  §  623  and  California  School  Employees  Assn.  v.  Jefferson Elementary  School  District  (1975) 
45  Cal.  App.  3d  683,  692.) 

 

examined  on  this  topic.  Moreover,  any  temporary  disadvantage  from  the  mid-hearing  as- 
signments  was  cured  with  the  continuation  of  the  hearing  for  approximately  two  weeks  for 
presentation  of  respondents’  case  in  chief.  Respondents  demonstrated  no  prejudice  in  their 
ability  to  defend  by  reason  of  the  late  notice  of  the  teaching  assignments  for  junior  instruc- 
tors. 

7. 

Superintendent  was  sufficiently  specific  in  his  identification  of  the  discon- 

~ 

_  tinuation  or  reduction  of  PKS  which  led  to  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  would  not 
be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  It  was  not  necessary  to  identify  affected  course  offer- 
ings  by  reason  of  the  staff  reductions.  Services  may  be  reduced  either  by  determining  that  a 
certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not  be  performed  or  by  reducing  providing  fewer  em- 
ployees  to  provide  the  service.  (Rutherford  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  of the  Bellflower  Unif.  Sch. 
Dist.  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179;  Degener  v.  Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d 
689,  695;  Campbell  Elem.  Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.,  v.  Gordon,  et  al  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796, 
810-811.)*  In  PKS  cases,  the  determination  of  the  level  by  which  services  are  to  be  discon- 
tinued  or  reduced  is  reflected  in  the  number  of  positions  to  be  eliminated.  (San  Jose  Teachers 
Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  636;  Zalac  v.  Gov.  Bd.  of  the  Ferndale 
Unif.Sch.Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  854;  C.7.A.  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  of  the  Goleta  Union 
Sch.  Dist,  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32,  36.) 

LEGAL  CAUSE  FOR  NOTICE 

8. 

ae 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743  to  provide  no- 
tice  to  respondents  Nancy  Bengoa-Beterbide  and  Kam  Vento  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

   

“  These  cases  all  deal  with  the  application  of  statutory  provisions  relating  to  the  lay  off  of  teachers  in  grades  K. 
through  12.  However,  prior  to  1997,  those  provisions  also  governed  layoffs  of  community  college  instructors.  Thus, 
the  cases  interpreting  the  provisions  are  relevant  in  both  settings.  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  Dist.  (1987) 
196  Cal.  App.  3d  555,  563,  fn.2.) 

  

ORDER 

Respondents  Nancy  Bengoa-Beterbide  and  Kam  Vento  shall  be  given  notice  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  School  Year. 

pact Mag  ©,  Qoos 

KARL  S.  ENGE 
Administrative  Law 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

Sud 

