BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PALOMAR  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against  a 
Contract  Academic  Employee  of  the  Palomar 
Community  College  District: 

OAH  No.  L2005040096 

Roya  Lahijani, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Vallera  J.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Marcos,  California  on  April  26,  27,  28  and  May 
2,  2005. 

Andrea  Naestad,  Esq.,  Currier  &  Hudson,  represented  the  Palomar  Community 

College  District. 

Paul  Jordan,  Field  Representative,  California  Federation  of  Teachers,  represented 

Respondent  Roya  Lahijani,  who  was  present  during  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  2,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

A. 

On  behalf  of  Robert  P.  Deegan,  Superintendent/President  (Deegan)  of  the 
Palomar  Community  College  District  (District),  Jack  Miyamoto,  Ph.D.  (Dr.  Miyamoto), 
Interim  Assistant  Superintendent/Vice-President  (Assistant  Superintendent),  Human 
Resources  of  the  District  made  and  filed  the  Accusation,  dated  March  17,  2005,  against  Roya 
Lahijani  (Respondent)  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  fourth  year  contract  probationary  academic  employee  of  the 
District  serving  her  third  probationary  contract  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  87608.5, 
subdivision  (b).

  

, 

. 

(  omar  ; 

. 

i 

3. 

Based  on  a  review  and  consideration  of  all  relevant  documents  during  her  four 
years  as  a  contract  employee  of  the  District,  the  Tenure  and  Evaluations  Review  Committee 
(Committee),  in  its  Professor  Tenure  and  Evaluations  Review  Report  (4  year  Report) 
provided  to  Respondent  on  February  25,  2005,  rated  Respondent’s  performance  as  an 
instructor  as  unsatisfactory  and  recommended  that  she  not  be  rehired  and  therefore  denied 
tenure. 

4, 

On  March  3,  2005  the  District’s  Tenure  and  Evaluation  Review  Board  (TERB) 

met,  examined  information  and  evaluation  statements  presented  and  determined  that 
Respondent’s  4"  year  Report  conforms  to  the  procedures  set  forth  in  Section  173  of  the 
District’s  Faculty  Manual  (Faculty  Manual)  and  notified  Deegan  and  Respondent  of  the 
foregoing  on  March  4  and  8,  2005  respectively. 

5. 

In  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  87607,  subdivision  (c),  on  March 

8,  2005,  Deegan  delivered  to  the  District’s  Governing  Board  his  recommendation  not  to 
employ  Respondent  as  a  tenured  faculty  member  for  the  2005-2006  academic  year.  Deegan 
relied  on  the  the  Committee’s  recommendation  that  Respondent  not  be  rehired  and  therefore 
denied  tenure  based  on  the  4"  year  Report.  In  his  opinion,  his  recommendation  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  college  and  the  students  thereof. 

6.. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  reviewed  Deegan’s 

recommendation,  dated  March  8,  2005,  and  the  statements  of  evaluations  reviewed 
previously  by  the  Committee  and  thereafter  by  TERB,  including  but  not  limited  to  the 
following: 

1*  year  full  evaluation  and  supporting  documents; 
2"  year  full  evaluation  and  supporting  documents; 
3"  year  student  evaluations  and  supporting  documents 
4"  year  full  evaluation  and  supporting  documents; 
letter  from  tenure  and  evaluation  review  coordinator,  dated  March 
4,  3005; 
etter  from  Respondent  to  Robert  Deegan,  President,  dated  February 
25,  20005;  and 
letter  from  tenure  and  evaluation  review  coordinator,  dated  March 
8,  2005. 

e 

e 

The  Governing  Board  determined  that  Respondent’s  performance  was  evaluated  in 
accordance  with  the  evaluation  standards  and  procedures  set  forth  in  Article  4  of  the 
Education  Code,  commencing  with  section  87660. 

-  After  consideration  of  the  information  set  forth  in  this  Finding  6,  the  District’s 
Governing  Board  voted  not  to  re-employ  Respondent  as  a  regular  (tenured)  employee  for  the 
2005-2006  academic  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  87607,  87609,  subdivision 
(b)  and  87610,  subdivision  (b)  and  to  direct  Dr.  Miyamoto  to  send  Respondent  a  Notice  of

  

_™ 

f 
f 

A 

—~ 

-_ 

Suede 

wi  Ab  Salva DR  EWS  eee 

ake  |  EASES  TEE  Sato 

Bae 

, 
© 

Decision  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  87607,  87609,  subdivision  (b)  and  87610, 
subdivision  (b).  The  Notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  decision  of  the  Governing  Board. 

7. 

Dr.  Miyamoto  served  Respondent  with  “Notice  of  Decision  Pursuant  to 

Education  Code  Sections  87607,  87609(b)  and  87610(b)  Not  to  Re-Employ  You  as  a  Regular 
Employee  for  the  2005-2006  Academic  Year  and  All  Subsequent  Years”  personally  and  by 
certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested,  at  Respondent’s  last  known  address. 

8. 

9. 

On  March  14,  2005  Respondent  appealed  the  Governing  Board’s  Decision  not 

to  re-employ  Respondent  as  a  regular  tenured  academic  employee  of  the  District. 

. 

In  August  2001  the  District  hired  Respondent  as  an  assistant  professor  in  the 

Life  Sciences  Department.  She  was  a  probationary  faculty  member  (contract)  who  had  a 
tenure-track  contract  to  become  a  regular  faculty  member  but  had  not  been  granted  tenure  by 
the  District. 

10. 

Respondent  described  her  relevant  education,  training  and  experience.  She 
received  two  degrees  from  the  University  of  Oklahoma,  a  bachelor’s  of  science  degree  in 
Chemistry  in  1982  and  a  master’s  of  science  degree  in  Biochemistry  in  1984;  thereafter 
Respondent  obtained  a  Ph.D.  in  Cellular  and  Molecular  Biology  in  1990.  She  did  two  years 
of  postdoctoral  work  at  the  San  Diego  Zoo  Center  for  Reproductive  and  Endangered  Species. 
In  addition,  Respondent  worked  in  private  industry  with  three  different  companies  as  a 

© 

, 
6  research  scientist  in  the  field  of  biotechnology. 

At  the  time  that  she  was  hired  by  the  District,  Respondent  had  limited  teaching 

experience;  she  had  taught  a  one  semester  science  course  at  three  different  colleges  in  the 
San  Diego  County  area. 

In  the  Position  Announcement  for  Respondent’s  position,  the  duties  and 

responsibilities  of  the  position  are  to: 

e 

e 

e 

e 

teach  future  Biotechnology  courses  and  courses  such  as  General  Biology, 
Genetics  or  Zoology; 
develop  molecular  biology/biotechnology  curriculum  and  coordinate  the 
planning  of  the  biotechnology  offerings  at  Palomar  College; 

. 

e  involve  Palomar  College  in  the  network  of  biotechnology  programs  in 

other  local  colleges  and  local  industry; 
write  grants  to  purchase  equipment  and  supplies  to  ensure  up-to-date 
curriculum;  and 
assist  in  the  coordination  of  lecture  and  laboratory  instruction  among 
adjunct  faculty. 

. 
‘  @ 

11. 

|  Respondent  was  subject  to  tenure  and  evaluations  review,  a  four  year 

evaluation  process  intended  for  probationary  faculty.  The  District’s  procedures  for  tenure 

 

and  evaluations  review  of  probationary  faculty,  required  by  Education  Code  section  87607 
are  set  forth  in  the  Faculty  Manual. 

The  Faculty  Manual  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

© 

e 

Tenure  and  evaluations  review  is  a  four-year  evaluation  process  intended  for 
probationary  faculty.  The  faculty  member  is  evaluated  during  the  fall  and 
spring  semesters  of  his/her  first  three  years  and  during  the  fall  semester  of 
his/her  fourth  year.  The  full  evaluation  process  is  conducted  during  the  fall 
semester  of  the  first,  second  and  fourth  years  of  employment.  During  the 
spring  semester  of  the  first  three  years  of  employment  and  during  the  fall 
semester  of  the  third  year  of  employment,  only  student  evaluations  occur,  with 
the  findings  appropriately  contributing  to  the  decisions  made  during 
completion  of  the  full  evaluation  process  in  the  fall  semesters  of  the  second 
and  fourth  years  of  employment. 

Diiinig' the  first  year,  by  March  15;  the  Governing  Board  will  either  enterinto 
a  contract  for  the  follawing  academic  year  or  not  enter  into  a  contract  for  the 
following  academic  year  and  state  the  reasons  for  the  decision.'  During  the 
second  year,  by  March  15,  the  Governing  Board  will  either  enter  into  a 
contract  for  the  following  two  academic  years  or  not  enter  into  a  contact  for 
the  following  academic  year  and  state  the  reasons  for  the  decision.”  During 
the  fourth  year,  by  March  15,  the  Governing  Board  will  either  grant  tenure  or 
not  employ  the  probationary  employee  as  a  tenured  employee  and  state  the 
reasons  for  the  decision.  Because  the  decision  to  grant  tenure  must  be  made  in 
time  to  meet  the  March  15  deadline,  no  student  evaluations  are  required  during 
the  spring  semester  of  the  fourth  year.’ 

12. 

According  to  the  Faculty  Manual,  the  evaluation  of  probation  faculty, 

mandated  by  Education  Code  section  87663,  is  achieved  through  the  tenure  and  evolutions 
review  committee.  Among  other  things,  the  Faculty  Manual  states  that  each  tenure  and 
evaluations  committee  shall  consist  of  five  members,  designates  the  qualifications  of  each 
member,  the  procedures  for  replacement  of  a  member,  the  duties  of  the  committee 
chairperson,  the  responsibilities  of  the  tenure  and  evaluations  review  committee,  the  criteria 
for  tenure  and  evaluations  review  and  the  method  for  tenure  and  evaluations  review. 

13. 

According  to  the  Faculty  Manual’s  Method  for  Tenure  and  Review,  the 

committee  member  is  required  to  review: 

e 

The  Professional  Improvement  Form  submitted  by  the  evaluee  describing 
goals  for  student  contact,  institutional  service,  professional  service  and 

  

!  Education  Code  sections  87608  and  87610 
2  Education  Code  sections  87608.5  and  87610 
3  Education  Code  sections  87609  and  87610 

 

- 
\  © 

q 
@ 

e 

e 

e 

@ 

© 

e 

© 

e 

e 
e 

e 
e 

e 

other  activities.  A  copy  of  the  evaluee’s  current  approved  Professional 
Development  Contract  must  be  attached  to  this  form  when  submitted. 
Materials  submitted  by  the  evaluee  that  are  used  in  the  classroom  or 
workplace,  such  as  syllabi,  exams,  etc. 
Evaluations  by  the  appropriate  constituency.  For  instructor  evaluees, 
student  evaluations  are  obtained  from  all  contract  classes  taught  by  the 
evaluee. 
Classroom  or  workplace  observation  by  committee  members  beginning  in 
the  first  semester  of  the  tenure  and  evaluations  review  process.  An 
observation  report  must  be  completed  by  each  observer.  During  the  full 
evaluations  conducted  in  the  fall  semesters  of  the  first,  second,  and  fourth 
years,  at  least  three  committee  members  will  make  separate  observations.  _ 
Written  evaluation  of  the  evaluee  referencing  the  Standards  of  Performance 
for  Faculty  by  the  department  chair. 

14. 

Among  other  things,  according  to  the  Faculty  Manual,  the  committee  chair  is 

required  to: 

Coordinate  the  activities  of  the  committee  to  adhere  to  the  Evaluations 
-Calendar  and  contact  the  Tenure  and  Evaluations  Review  Coordinator  if 
there  are  problems. 
Collect  and  critically  review  the  required  and  supporting  evaluations 
materials. 
Write  the  Tenure  and  Evaluations  Review  Report  only  after  consultation 
with  the  members  of  the  tenure  and  evaluations  review  committee. 
Meet  with  the  evaluee  to  discuss  the  results  of  the  evaluation  process. 

15. 

|  In  accordance  with  the  Faculty  Manual,  committee  members  are  required  to: 

Discuss  the  evaluation  materials. 
Assist  the  committee  chairperson  in  writing  the  Tenure  and  Evalutions 
Review  Report  that  describes  the  evaluee’s  job  performance. 
Suggest  improvements  as  appropriate 
Recommend  (in  the  first,  second  and  fourth  years)  that  the  evaluee  be 
rehired,  not  be  rehired  or  be  granted  tenure,  as  appropriate. 
Determine  re-evaluation  frequency  to  monitor  progress  in  area(s)  needing 
remediation. 

16. 

During  her  tenure  at  Palomar  College,  in  addition  to  her  duties  related  to  the 

development  of  the  biotechnology  program,  Respondent  taught  the  following  courses: 

e 

first  year,  fall  semester  2001  —  Biology  200  (Biology  for  maj  ors)  and 
Biology  101  (Biology  for  nonmajors);  spring  semester  2002  —  two  sections 

© 

- 

of  Biology  100  

  

second  year,  fall  semester  2002  —  two  sections  of  Biology  100;  spring 
semester  2003  —  two  sections  of  Biology  100 
third  year,  fall  semester  2003  —  Biology  160  (the  biotechnology  course  that 
she  developed)  and  one  section  of  Biology  100;  spring  semester  2004  — 
two  sections  of  Biology  100 
fourth  year,  fall  semester  2004  —  Biology  102  (Molecules  and  Cells)  and 
Biology  160;  and  spring  semester  2005  —  two  sections  of  Biology  102. 

17. 

Following  her  first  year,  the  Committee  received  and  evaluated  the  required, 
appropriate  materials,  determined  that  she  had  deficiencies,  completed a  full  evaluation  and 
issued  the  1‘t  Year  Report  that  described  her  performance  and  included  comments  and 
recommendations  for  improvement.  In  the  14  areas  evaluated,  Respondent  received  a  rating 
of  Standard  Professional  Performance  or  above,  with  the  exception  of  the  following 
performance  expectations: 

The  professor  presents  material  in  a  clear,  well-organized  and  informative 
manner,  using  teaching  methods  and  materials  that  are  appropriate  to  the 
sebject  matter  and  to  the  needs  of  the  students. 
The  professor  demonstrates  effective  communication  skills  in  the 
classroom,  presenting  course  material  in  an  interesting  and  engaging 
manner. 
The  teacher  treats  students  with  respect  and  tolerance,  demonstrating 
patience  and  a  willingness  to  help  when  needed,  and  encouraging  student 
participation  and  questions. 

e 

e 

° 

e 

e 

e 

Respondent  received  a  rating  of  Substandard  Professional  Performance  for  the  foregoing 
items.  The  Committee’s  overall  recommendation  was  Standard  Professional  Performance 
and  recommended  that  she  be  rehired. 

18. 

Following  her  second  year,  the  Committee  received  and  evaluated  the 

required,  appropriate  materials  and  completed  the  full  evaluation.  The  Committee 
determined  that  her  performance  had  improved.  In  the  14  areas  evaluated,  Respondent 
received  a  rating  of  Standard  Professional  Performance  or  above,  including  in  the  three  areas 
that  had  been  rated  as  Substandard  Professional  Performance  in  her  1  Year  Report.  The 
Committee  recommended  that  she  be  rehired  and  receive  a  two  year  contact. 

19. 

During  her  third  year,  the  Committee  received  only  student  evaluations. 

James  Gilardi  (Gilardi),  the  Committee’s  chair,  received  two  copies  of  the  fall  2003 
student  evaluations  in  November  2003;  he  was  disturbed  by  the  results  and  requested  that 
TERB  expedite  the  release  of  Respondent’s  student  evaluations  for  spring  2004.  Gilardi  and 
In  their  opinion, Respondent 
the  Committee  were  “shocked  and  disturbed”  about  the  results. 
had  been  provided  with  specific  recommendations  for  improvement  in  her  1  Year  Report; 
she  had  shown  improvement  in  her  2™  Year  Report;  however  her  student  evaluations  for  fall 
2003  reflected  deficiencies  noted  in  her  1  Year  Report;  of  specific  concern  to  the 

  

 

WV  aa 

AES 

S  MA 

S 

REM 

OE 

BER 

dh  BEE  EDC ER,  ADIN 

EO 

Committee  was  that,  despite  three  years  of  teaching,  Respondent  continued  to  demonstrate 
that  she  is  impatient,  disrespectful  toward,  belittles  and  intimidates  many  students  who  are 
slow  to  grasp  concepts  or  skills.  The  Committee  agreed  that  the  foregoing  was 
unsatisfactory,  that  Respondent  did  not  accept  responsibility  for  her  role  and  therefore  could 
not  or  would  not  make  the  changes  necessary  for  her  to  be  an  effective  instructor. 

At  that  time,  the  Committee  decided  that  Respondent  would  not  be  granted  tenure. 

Gilardi,  Berta  Cuaron  (Cuaron)*  and  Sara  Thompson  (Thompson)°  met  with  Sheryl  Amador 
(Amador)  to  discuss  the  issue;  on  the  date  of  the  meeting,  Amador  was  the District’s 
President/Superintendent.  Based  on  the  discussions  in  the  meeting,  Gilardi  Cuaron  and 
Thompson  learned  that  Respondent’s  contract  could  not  be  terminated  and  that  the  tenure 
process  must  proceed  and  be  completed.  On  May  19,  2004  Gilardi  and  Thompson  met  with 
Respondent  and  explained  that  if  her  student  evaluations  did  not  improve  that  she  would  not 
be  granted  tenure. 

20. 

On  May  20,  2004  Respondent  requested  that  she  be  allowed  to  teach  a  summer 

school  class.  Gilardi  authorized  her  to  teach  a  summer  school  class  and  agreed  to  consider 
the  student  evaluations.  These  student  evaluations  reflected  significantly  higher  scores,  the 
scores  the  Committee  expected  an  instructor  to  receive,  including  in  the  Committee’s  areas 
of  concern.  These  evaluations  were  considered  by  the  Committee.  It  is  not  clear  from  the 
evidence  whether  TERB,  the  District’s  President  or  Board  of  Trustees  was  aware  of  or 
considered  the  summer  2004  student  evaluations. 

21. 

In  fall  2004  Ralph  Ferges  joined  the  Committee.  After  his  review  of  the 

available  documentation,  he  reached  the  same  conclusion  as  the  other  Committee  members. 
In  the  4"  year  Report  the  Committee  described  Respondent’s  Professional  Performance  as 
Unsatisfactory  and  recommended  that  she  not  be  rehired  and  therefore  denied  tenure.  The 
District  contends  that  based  on  the  foregoing  Respondent  did  not  meet  the minimum 
professional  standards  of  Palomar  Community  College. 

22. 

Respondent  argues  that  the  District  failed  to  comply  with  the  evaluation 

standards  and  procedures  set  forth  in  Article  4  (commencing  with  Education  Code  section 
87660)  of  this  chapter  and  the  Faculty  Manual.  The  Committee  must  evaluate  Respondent 
for  the  three  and  one-half  year  period,  in  a  fair,  objective  manner,  applying  consistent 
standards  and  providing  notice  to  Respondent  of  these  standards.  The  Committee  did  not 
comply  with  the  foregoing. 

© 

The  decision  of  the  Committee  not  to  rehire  Respondent  and  to  deny  tenure  is 
based  solely  on  the  student  evaluations.  Though  an  important  factor, 
according  to  Sections  173A  and F of  the  Faculty  Manual  (Findings  11  and  13), 
the  Committee  was  required  to  consider  other  factors  as  well  as  part  of  the 
tenure  and  evaluations  review. 

  

4  Vice-President  of  Instruction 
>  Dean,  Division  of  Mathematics,  Natural  &  Health  Sciences 

  

7

  

  

e 

e 

e 

Gilardi,  the  Committee  and  Judy  Crowe,  the  TERB  coordinator,  all  determined 
that  Respondent’s  student  evaluations  were  below  the  average  score  for  the 
District’s  instructors.  The  District  established  that  each  of  the  foregoing  has 
significant  experience  with  the  District  and  have  reviewed  a  reasonable 
number  of  student  evaluations  previously.  Most,  if  not  all,  explained  that  they 
have  reviewed  sufficient  student  evaluations  to  know  that  the  majority  of  the 
District’s  instructors  receive  scores  of  3.0  or  higher,  on  a  scale  of  1.0  to  4.0 
with  1.0  lowest  and  4.0  highest,  on  issues  related  to  respect,  approachability 
and  patience.  There  is  no  evidence  that  anyone,  orally  or  in  writing,  informed 
Respondent  of  this  standard  and  that  it  was  an  instrumental  part  of  her 
evaluation. 

Neither  Gilardi,  any  of  the  Committee  members  nor  anyone  from  TERB 
informed  Respondent  of  her  poor  student  evaluations  for  fall  semester  2003 
until  May  2004;  thereby  depriving  her  of  any  opportunity  to  attempt  to  modify 
and/or  correct  her  conduct.  Her  only  notice  prior  to  that  time  was  that  her 
performance  was  satisfactory. 

The  Committee  decided  that  Respondent  would  be  denied  tenure  without 
consideration  of  the  required  documentation  and  without  giving  her  a  timely 
opportunity  to  remediate.  After  review  of  the  third  year  student  evaluations  in 
May  2004,  the  Committee  determined  that  Respondent  would  be  denied  tenure 
and  attempted  to  begin  procedures  to  terminate  her  employment.  According  to 
Gilardi  and  other  Committee  members,  once  the  Committee  determined  that 
they  could  not  terminate  employment  at  that  time,  they  resumed  the  tenure 
evaluation  process.  The  foregoing  statement  is  not  credible.  According  to  the 
evidence,  in  and  after  May  2004  there  is  nothing  that  Respondent  could  have 
done  to  change  the  decision  of  the  Committee.  Gilardi  authorized  Respondent 
to  teach  a  summer  school  class  and  agreed  that  the  student  evaluations  would 
be  considered  as  part  of  her  tenure  evaluation.  Though  her  summer  school 
student  evaluation  scores  in  the  areas  of  concern  exceed  3.0,  the  score  the 
Committee  expected  to  see,  Gilardi  characterized  these  scores  as  “slightly 
higher”.  Though  her  student  evaluation  scores  improved  in  fall  2004,  the 
response  of  the  Committee  was  the  same,  too  little  too  late.  Finally, 
Thompson  performed  an  observation  of  Respondent’s  class  on  December  2, 
2004,  the  same  date  that  Gilardi  made  a  statement  before  the  faculty  senate 
that  the  Committee  had  decided  not  to  grant  Respondent  tenure,  the  issuance 
of  the  4"  year  Report.  Given  the  foregoing,  the  Committee  made  the  decision 
regarding  Respondent’s  in  or  about  May  2004  and  did  not  objectively  evaluate 
data  or  information  received  thereafter. 

The  District  argued  that  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  college  and  the  students  not  to 
reemploy  Respondent  and  to  deny  her  tenure.  Given  the  facts  set  forth  in  Findings  9,  10,  11, 

@  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22  and  23,  insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to 

ss 
@ 

. 
\  @ 

 

o> 

. 

- 

Gr 

RE 

ASRS  Ee  DP  SME OE Be  A  ES  SRL  RE  ONE  a  EOF 

establish  that  the  cause  exists  not  to  rehire  Respondent  and  therefore  to  deny  tenure  and/or 
that  the  foregoing  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  college  and  its  students. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  section  87740. 

All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  this  section  were  satisfied. 

The  District  failed  to  establish  that  cause  exists  not  to  rehire  Respondent  Roya 

Lahijani  as  a  regular  tenured  academic  employee.  The  Tenure  and  Evaluation  Committee 
failed  to  evaluate  Respondent’s  performance  in  accordance  with  the  tenure  and  evaluation 
procedures  set  forth  in  Section  173  of  the  District’s  Faculty  Manual,  required  by  Education 
Code  section  87607,  subdivision  (a)  and  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  Article  4 
(commencing  with  section  87660)  of  this  chapter,  by  reason  of  Findings  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14, 
15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22  and 23. 

3. 

Given  the  facts  set  forth  in  Findings  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19, 

20,  21,  22  and  23  and  Legal  Conclusions  1  and  2,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  87740, 
the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  cause  exists  not  to  rehire  Roya  Lahijani  and  to  deny  her 
tenure and that  this  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  college  and  the  students  thereof. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Roya  Lahijani  is  dismissed. 

Respondent  Roya  Lahijani  shall  be  retained  for  the  2005-2006  academic  year, 

and  she  shall  become  a  regular  tenured  academic  employee. 

1, 

2. 

l. 

2. 

DATED:  Mer  G,  20CF 

VALLERA  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

  

