BEFORE  THE 
ALPINE  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

RITA  LOVELL, 

Respondent. 

    

OAH  No.  N2005040064 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  11,  2005,  in  Woodfords,  California. 

Allen  R.  Vinson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Alpine  County  Superintendent  of 

Schools. 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  11,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

James  W.  Parsons,  Ed.D,  is  the  Alpine  County  Superintendent 
(Superintendent)  of  Schools.  He  made  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  is  employed  by  the  Superintendent  as  a  probationary  certificated 

employee  and  first  rendered  paid  service  for  the  Superintendent  on  January  25,  2001. 

3, 

On  or  about  March  1,  2005,  the  Superintendent  recommended  that  notice  be 
given  respondent,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  her  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore.  The 
Superintendent  determined  to  discontinue  one  (1.0)  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  position  by 

 

elimuniating  the  Library  Media  Coordinator  position  in  school  year  2005-2006.  Notice  of  the 
decision  was  sent  to  the  Alpine  County  Board  of  Education  on  the  same  day. 

4. 

On  March  10,  2005,  respondent  was  given  notice  by  the  Superintendent  that 

her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  by  reason  of  the 
Superintendent’s  elimination  of  the  Library  Media  Coordinator  position  in  school  year  2005- 
2006.  Respondent  is  the  only  Library  Media  Coordinator  employed  by  the  Superintendent. 
The  stated  reason  for  the  elimination  of  the  position  was  “the  lack  of  support  funding  for  the 
program.”  In  the  notice,  respondent  was  invited  to  address  questions  about  the  layoff  to  the 
Superintendent.  Nowhere  in  the  notice  was  respondent  apprised  of  her  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

On  a  date  not  established  by  the  evidence,  but  somewhere  between  March  10, 
2005,  and  April  1,  2005,  respondent  learned  that  certificated  teachers  for  the  Alpine  County 
Unified  School  District  who  had  been  noticed  for  layoff  were  entitled  to  a  hearing.  She 
conferred  with  representatives  for  her  collective  bargaining  unit  who  contacted  legal  counsel. 
On  April  1,  2005,  Ms.  Curtis  presented  Mr.  Vinson  with  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  Request  for 
Discovery  on  behalf  of  respondent.  On  the  same  day,  the  Superintendent  served  the 
Accusation  and  related  documents  on  respondent.  A  Notice  of  Hearing  was  included. 

6. 

The  Superintendent  is  also  the  Superintendent  for  the  Alpine  County  Unified 
School  District.  There  is  one  Governing  Board  for  both  the  County  Office  of  Education  and 
the  school  district.  For  at  least  the  last  five  years,  the  Superintendent  has  provided  library 
media  services  to  the  school  district  for  a  “charge  back”  of  approximately  $65,000.  Faced 
with  the  District’s  inability  to  fund  such  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  Superinten- 
dent  decided  to  return  to  the  previous  arrangement  whereby  Alpine  County  provided  library 
services  to  the  school  district  and  the  Superintendent  supplied  one  or  more  non-certificated 
library  aides  to  perform  oversight  and  routine  library  services  in  school  libraries.  These  du- 
ties  will  include  checking  books  in  and  out,  shelving  library  books  and  maintaining  order  in 
the  libraries.  When  this  arrangement  was  last  used,  the  cost  to  the  school  district  was  ap- 
proximately  $7,500  annually. 

7. 

Respondent  now  performs  the  usual  duties  of  a  school  librarian.  She  is  based 
at  Diamond  Valley  Elementary  School.  She  conducts  weekly  library  classes  for  each  of  the 
classes  in  grades  K  through  5.  She  supervises  the  students  during  these  classes  while  their 
classroom  teachers  are  generally  occupied  elsewhere.  She  provides  one-on-one  help  to  stu- 
dents  in  grades  6  through  8  when  they  use  the  library  during  their  free  time.  She  orders 
books,  catalogs  them,  and  otherwise  maintains  library  resources.  While  she  rarely  visits  the 
other  schools  in  the  district,  she  does  compile  books  and  other  resources  for  research  projects 
upon  demand  and  sends  the  materials  to  the  other  school  sites.  Respondent  is  also  responsi- 
ble  for  maintaining  media  equipment  such  as  videotaping  devices  and  the  distribution  of  such 
equipment  for  use  in  the  county’s  public  schools. 

8. 

Approximately  six  months  after  her  first  date  of  paid  service,  respondent  was 
asked  to  team  teach  a  computer  course  with  the  Office  of  Education’s  technology  coordina- 
tor.  She  agreed  to  do  so  and  has  been  teaching  the  course  for  one  hour  each  school  day.  The 

  

2

course  is  provided  to  students  in  grades  6  through  8  and  includes  keyboarding,  word  process- 
ing,  data  bases,  spreadsheets,  and  Power  Point.  The  classes  are  not  required  by  the  school 
district  but  are  offered  to  accommodate  students  who  will  attend  high  school  in  nearby  Doug- 
las  County,  Nevada.  Nevada  requires  incoming  high  school  students  to  demonstrate  compe- 
tency  in  the  listed  computer  software  programs.  The  classes  are  conducted  in  a  computer 
lab.  The  skills  required  to  teach  the  courses  are  unrelated  to  respondent’s  usual  library  and 
media  coordinator  duties  and  the  duties  of  librarians  generally.’  Respondent  was  asked  to 
team  teach  the  course  because  a  certificated  teacher  is  required  and  the  technology  coordina- 
tor  does  not  have  a  credential.  Respondent’s  work  day  is  from  7:30  a.m.  to  3:30  p.m.  The 
school  day  extends  from  8:00  to  3:00  p.m.  While  the  evidence  did  not  establish  the  number 
of  classroom  hours  in  the  school  district’s  normal  day,  official  notice’  is  taken  of  the  gener- 
ally  accepted  fact  within  the  Superintendent’s  special  field  that  a  conventional  school  day  is 
six  or  seven  periods  long.  Thus,  respondent’s  position  for  the  last  approximately  two  and  ~ 
one-half  years  has  included  either  approximately  .167  (assuming  a  six  course  day)  or  .148 
(assuming  a  seven  course  school  day)  of  computer  instruction.?  Superintendent  did  not  spec- 
ify  any  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  (PKS)  relating  to  com- 
puter  software  instruction  and  at  least  implied  that  the  courses  would  be  continued  in  the  en- 
suing  school  year. 

9, 

Respondent  called  as  a  witness  the  Superintendent’s  business  manager  who- 
also  serves  as  the  business  manager  for  the  unified  school  district.  This  was  an  attempt  to 
establish  that  the  school  district  budget  projections  for  the  ensuing  school  year  include  suffi- 
cient  funds  to  avoid  elimination  of  respondent’s  position  by  the  County  Office  of  Education. 
The  testimony  of  the  business  manager  did  establish  considerable  projected  budget  “re- 
serves”  but  most  of  these  funds  are  allocated  for  anticipated  future  expenses  including  cafete- 
ria  expenses,  deferred  maintenance,  and  capital  outlay.  There  is  a  category  entitled  “eco- 
nomic  uncertainty”  which  more  accurately  reflects  the  true  reserve  required  by  the  California 
Department  of  Education.  However,  the  school  district  is  in  the  last  year  of  special  outside 
funding  designated  Forestry  Revenues,  which  will  reduce  revenue  by  approximately 
$411,000 in  the  ensuing  school  year.  With  this  reduction  and  considering  the  school  dis- 
trict’s  true  reserves,  the  school  district  is  projected  to  be  in  a  deficit  position  in  the  next 
school  year.  Moreover,  this  Accusation  involves  the  elimination  of a  County  Office  of  Edu- 
cation  position  based  on  the  school  district’s  disinclination  to  fund  the  Library  Media  Coor- 
dinator  position.  The  school  district  is  not  required  to  fund  such  services  nor  is  the  County 
Office  of  Education  required  to  provide  them. 

  

"In  this  regard,  see  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  16040  defining  “School  library  services”  and 
other  related  terms. 
*  Government  Code  section  11515. 
*  The  percentage  could  be  higher  if  time  is  allocated  for  teacher  preparation  or  other  functions  which  would  relate  to 
either  of  respondent’s  duties,  The  Order  directs  the  Superintendent’s  office  to  calculate  a  more  precise  percentage 
based  on  amount  of  time  allocable  to  computer  classes  relative  to  respondent’s  actual  teaching  and  librarianship  re- 

sponsibilities,  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

APPLICABLE  LAW 

.  Education  Code  section  44949  reads: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by 
the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing 
board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superinten- 
dent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district 
which  has  no  superintendent by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing 
board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  em- 
ployee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore. 

‘Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision 
(b)  or  has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  rea- 
sons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  per- 
son,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.  How- 
ever,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  it- 
self,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of 
any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 
for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a 
hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent 
the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in 
that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date 
on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails 
to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to 
do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing. 
The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of 
the  provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding 
shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5 
(commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of 
the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power 
granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  ap- 
ply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice.of  defense,  if  any,  within 
five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation.

  

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days 
after  service  of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section 
11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. ° 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who 
shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  de- 
termination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  re- 
lated  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed 
decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation 
as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition.  None 
of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in  the 
proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be 
binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors 
committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  dis- 
trict  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  er- 
rors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be 
submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before 
May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding is  commenced.  All  expenses 
of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the  administrative  law  judge,  shall 
be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district:  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not 
inconsistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  ef- 
fectuate  this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  deliv- 
ered  in  person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  de- 
posited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  ad- 
dressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continu- 
ance  is  granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the 
dates  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of 
granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  prescribed in  subdivision  (c)  of 
Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance 
shall  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance.  (Em- 
phasis  added.) 

Education  Code  section  4495 Ssubdivision  (b),  reads,  in  pertinent  part: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of 

the  schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  

session  shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of 
the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board  deter- 
mines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a 
result  of  the  termination  of  an  inter-district  tuition  agreement  as  defined 
in  Section  46304,  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced 
or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification 
of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  condi- 
tions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than a  corre- 
sponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  per- 
manent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except 
as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  em- 
ployee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certifi- 
cated  and  competent  to  render.  (Emphasis  added.) 

3, 

Education  code  section  18139  reads: 

With  the  consent  of  the  county  board  of  education,  in  those  counties  in 
which  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  performs  library  services 
for  the  school  library  of  any  district,  the  governing  board  of  the  school 
district  may  agree  with  the  proper  authorities  of  the  county  to  terminate 
the  affiliation  of  the  district  with  the  county  superintendent  of  schools 
with  respect  to  library  services.  The  proceedings  shall  be  terminated* 
prior  to  the  first  day  of  February  of  the  school  year  in  which  begun  and 
may  provide  for  either  of  the  following: 

(a)  The  complete  withdrawal  of  affiliation  effective  on  the  first  day  of. 
July  next  succeeding. 

(b)  A  gradual  withdrawal  over  a  period  of  not  to  exceed  five  years  be- 
ginning  on  the  first  day  of  July  next  succeeding  the  termination  of  pro- 
ceedings. 

The  county  board  of  education  shall  adopt  rules  and  regulations  gov- 
erning  a  gradual  withdrawal,  including  the  period  to  be  covered,  not  to 
exceed  five  years,  the  amount  of  payment  for  each  year,  and  the 

  

@  *  Another  section,  Education  Code  section  18138,  makes  it  clear  that  “proceedings”  in  the  underlined  phrase  refers 

to  the  negotiations  between  the  school  district  and  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  to  end  their  relationship  and 
the  time  table  for  the  withdrawal  of  affiliation. 

@ 

® 

 

amount  of  service  to  be  rendered.  The  terms  of  the  gradual  withdrawal 
shall  comply  with  the  rules  and  regulations.  (Emphasis  added.) 

APPLICATION  OF  LAW  TO  FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

4. 

Respondent  raises  three  legal  contentions.  First,  respondent  contends  that  the 

March  10,  2005,  letter  did  not  contain  any  language  apprising  respondent  of  her  right  to  a 
hearing.  This,  according  to  respondent,  is  a  jurisdictional  defect  which  cannot  be  cured  by 
the  issuance  of  an  accusation  and  timely  provision  of  a  hearing.  Second,  respondent  con- 
tends,  in  essence,  that  the  reasons  for  the  elimination  of  respondent’s  position  are  specious, 
given  the  economic  condition  of  the  school  district.  Third,  respondent  contends  that  the  por- 
tion  of  respondent’s  duties  which  involve  teaching  a  computer  course  require  a  separate  re- 
duction  of  discontinuation  of  a  PKS  as  the  duties  fall  outside  those 
ordinator. 

of  a  library  and  media  co- 

5. 

Superintendent  did  fail  to  apprise  respondent  of  her  right  to  a  hearing  in  the 
March  10,  2005,  communication.  He  conceded  the  oversight  in  his  testimony.  However, 
respondent  learned  of  her  right  to  a  hearing  and,  through  counsel,  requested  a  hearing  by  fil- 
ing  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  Discovery  Request  in  anticipation  of  the  filing  of  an  Accusation. 
The  Accusation  was  filed  on  April  1,  2005,  and  served  on  respondent  along  with  a  Notice  of 
Hearing.  Respondent  appeared  with  counsel  at  the  hearing  and  demonstrated  no  prejudice 
resulting  from  the  omission  in  the  March  10,  2005,  letter. 
In  summary,  the  omission  was  a 
nonsubstantive  procedural  error  which  caused  no  prejudice  to  respondent.  The  case  of  Balen 
v.  Peralta  Junior  College  District  (1974)  11  Cal.3d  821,  cited  by  respondent,  is  readily  dis- 
tinquishable.  In  that  case,  the  Court  held  that  the  district  could  not  assert  as  an  affirmative 
defense  in  the  judicial  review  action  that  Balen  did  not  request  an  administrative  hearing 
within  the  time  allowed  by  statute  when  the  district  had  failed  to  apprise  Balen  of  that  right. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  18139  does  not  preclude  the  Superintendent  from 

eliminating  the  position  of  Library  and  Media  Coordinator.  As  the  Superintendent  correctly 
points  out,  the  affiliation  with  the  district  is  not  being  terminated.  The  Superintendent  will 
supply  one  or  more  library  aides  and  other  librarian  services  will  be  provided  by  contract 
with  Alpine  County. 

7. 

The  third  issue  presented  by  respondent  is  the  most  troublesome.  The  class- 
_Toom  instruction  provided  by  respondent  in  computer  technology  is  clearly  outside  her  nor- 
mal  duties  as  a  librarian  and  media  coordinator.  Respondent  was  asked  to  team  teach  the 
class  because  she  has  the  requisite  credential  which  the  technology  coordinator  does  not  pos- 
sess.  There  was  no  indication  that  the  Superintendent  intends  in  the  ensuing  school  year  to 
either  reduce  or  eliminate  the  computer  classes  which  are  required  for  the  students  attending 
school  in  Nevada.  For  approximately  two  and  one-half  years,  respondent’s  assignment  has 
been  split  between  her  duties  as  the  Library  and  Media  Coordinator  and  teaching  a  computer 
software  course.  Although  the  computer  course  occupied  just  one  hour  of  respondent’s 

workday,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge is  unaware  of  any  provision  of  law  which  sets  out  a  

minimum  teaching  assignment  required  to  trigger  the  statutory  obligation  to  demonstrate  a 
PKS  change  as  legal  cause  for  a  layoff  notice.  Therefore,  respondent  is  entitled  to  retain 
whatever  percentage  of  her  assignment  is  allocable  to  her  computer  course  work. 

LEGAL  CAUSE  FOR  NOTICE 

12. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide  notice  to  respondent 

Rita  Lovell  that  her  services  as  the  Library  and  Media  Coordinator  will  not  be  required  in  the 
ensuing  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  the  pupils 
thereof. 

13. 

Cause  does  not  exist  under  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide  notice  to  re- 

spondent  Rita  Lovell  that  her  services  as  a  computer  software  program  teacher  will  not be 
required in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondent  that  her  services  as  the  Library  and  Media 

Coordinator  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  School  Year  because  of  the 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

Notice  shall  not  be  given  respondent  for  her  services  as  a  computer  class 

instructor.  The  Superintendent,  or  his  designee,  shall  determine  the  percentage  of 
respondent’s  1.0  FTE  allocable  to  each  function. 

Dated:  Leth  1  00 

  KARL  S. ENGEM 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

  

