BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  LAKEPORT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

SANDRA  CORNELL,  STACY  HOLLAND 
and  TARA  MARTZ 

OAH  No.  N  2005020727 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  22,  2005,  in  Lakeport,  California,  within  the  Board  Room  of  the 

Administrative  Office  of  the  Lakeport  Unified  School  District  at  2508  Howard  Street, 
Lakeport,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Chesley  D.  Quaide,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  and  Romo, 

5776  Stoneridge  Mall  Road,  Pleasanton,  California  94588,  represented  Superintendent 
Elizabeth  Robinson,  Ph.D. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  726  College  Avenue,  Santa  Rosa  ,  California 

95404,  represented  respondents  Sandra  Cornell,  Stacy  Holland  and  Tara  Martz. 

On  April  22,  2005,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  21,  2005,  in  her  official  capacity,  Elizabeth  Robinson, 

Superintendent  (the  Superintendent),  Lakeport  Unified  School  District  (the  District),  made 
and  filed  the  Accusation  regarding  respondents  Sandra  Cornell,  Stacy  Holland  and  Tara 
Martz  (respondents). 

. 

| 

2. 

Respondents  Sandra  Cornell  and  Tara  Martz  are  fully  credentialed  and 

certificated  employees  of  the  District.  The  District  extends  classification  to  each  of  those 
respondents  as  either  permanent  or  probationary  teachers. 

Respondent  Stacy  Holland  began  the  school  year  under  an  emergency  credential  and 

consequently  held  status  with  the  District  as  a  probationary  zero  certificated  employee.

@ 

3, 

On  or  before  March  10,  2005,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s 
Governing  Board  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of 
services  (“PKS”),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District 
for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2005-2006). 

4. 

On  March  10,  2005,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  03-05-01. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  it  has  become 
necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
2005-2006  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of  5.0  full  time  equivalent 
(“FTE”)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

3.0 
1.0 
1.0 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

Kindergarten  to  6"  Grade  Elementary  Teaching  positions; 
Independent  Study  (Multiple  Subject)  Teaching  Position;  and 
Director  of  Instructional  Support  Services 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  11,  2005,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices'  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  discontinue 
the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the 
prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the 
District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named 
individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked  over  the  past  school  year. 

@ 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  11,  2005,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s  resolution 
and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no  certificated  employee  of 
the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective  respondent  would  be  retained  for  the 
2005-2006  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  each  respondent,  as  of  March  15,  2005,  was 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency  criteria. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  Superintendent  and  the 

District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s  Board’s  intent  to 
eliminate  the  course  as  taught  by  respondents.: 

7. 

8. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the  Accusation,  dated 

March  21,  2005,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

9. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

  

®  ' 

“Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services  Shall  Be  Reduced  or  Discontinued.”  

10.  _  Dr.  Elizabeth  Robinson,  in  her  capacity  as  the  Superintendent,  appeared  at  the 

hearing.  She  provided  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2005-2006  school 

year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s  budget.  Also,  the 
prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the  declining  pupil  census  for 
the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a 
reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s  Superintendent  recommended 
that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of 
teachers’  work  within  District  schools. 

The  Superintendent  established  that  neither  the  District’s  governing  board  nor  the 

senior  executives  of  the  District  as  directed  by  the  Superintendent  directed  teachers  to  attend 
in  August  2004  a  seminar  on  techniques  to  teach  reading  to  elementary  pupils  or  to  attend  a 
retreat  before  commencement  of  the  school  year.  Rather,  individual  school  site  principals 
recommended  that  teachers  attend  such  programs,  and  the  decision  to  pay  stipends  to  attend 
the  program  fell  within  the  discretion  and  authority  of  local  school  site  administrators,  who 
organized  the  several  days  of  training.  The  Superintendent  showed  that  attendance  by 
teachers  on  the  dates  of  the  training  seminar  and  the  retreat  for  teacher  planning  before  the 
commencement  of  the  official  school  years  could  not  be  deemed  as a  first  day  of  paid  service 
on  behalf  of  the  District. 

Moreover,  the  Superintendent  showed  that  staff  development  days  or  “buy-back 
days,”  as  used  for  a  retreat  for  teacher  planning,  were  set  or  established  through  consultation 
between  school  site  administrators  and  the  majority  of  teachers  at  particular  school  sites. 

And,  the  Superintendent  established  that  Terrace  Heights  Elementary  School  and 
Terrace  Middle  School  are  separate  and  distinct  schools.  Although  the  schools  share  the 
same  building  on  property  in  the  City  of  Lakeport,  and  pupils  of  each  school  use  the  same 
library  and  cafeteria,  the  schools  are  distinct  entities.  Each  school  has  a  respective  principal 
_  and  site  administrators.  Each  school  principal  interviews  and  recommends  for  employment 
of  a  separate  corps  of  teachers.  Each  school,  through  negotiations  between  site 
administrators  and  the  majority  of  teachers,  agree  upon  the  first  day  instructional  service 
shall  begin  for  the  school  year  relative  to  the  required  180  days  that  pupils  are  on  a  school 
site  for  instruction. 
Each  school  site  determines  the  dates  for  use  of  the  three  (3)  buy-back 
or  staff  development  days  teachers  are  to  use  during  the  employment  contract  term  of  185 
days  in  the  school  year.  Also,  each  site  sets  the  two  dates  for  teacher  meetings/work  days  for 
respective  teachers  at  a  school  site. 

The  Terrace  Heights  Elementary  School,  which  consists  of kindergarten  through  sixth 

grade,  began  the  2004-2005  school  year  on  September  7,  2004. 

Terrace  Middle  School,  which  is  made  up  of  grades  six  through  eight,  began  the 
2004-2005  school  year  on  September  8,  2004,  which  was  one  day  after  work  began  for 

 

teachers  at  Terrace  Heights  Elementary  School  so  as  to  give  the  elementary  school  teachers  a 
first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  September  7,  2004. 

11. 

|  The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District  was 

required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  her  staff,  effected  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers. 

The  Superintendent  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teachers  who 

were  properly  designated  as  provisional  employees  and  temporary  teachers.  She  studied  and 
set  forth  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid 
service  for  each  teacher  of  the  District. 

On  March  11,  2005,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  personally  placed  in  the  mail  all 

notices  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary  teachers  that  their  services  would  not  be 
needed  by the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 

12. 

|  The  Superintendent  showed  that  the  District  had  three  teachers  —  Kerry  Lopez, 

Karen  Maki  and  Carissa  Smith — who  were  hired  to  work  at  Terrace  Heights  Elementary 
School  and  each  of  those  elementary  school  teachers  acquired  a  first  day  of  paid  service  to 
the  District  on  September  7,  2004.  Accordingly,  those  three  teachers  had  seniority  by  one 
day  as  measured  against  respondents. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

13. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective  and 

improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does  not 
fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of  credentialed 
employees  who  are  junior  in  time,  or  equal  in  time,  in  service  to  respondents.  Respondents 
aver  that  the  District  incorrectly  applied  seniority  dates  for  each  respondent  by  failing  to 
account  for  the  dates  in  August  2004  that  each  respondent  attended  (i)  the  McDougall-Little 
teachers’  seminar  on  teaching  reading  to  pupils,  and  (ii)  a  teacher  retreat  for  planning  of  the 
school  year. 

Also,  respondents  contend  that  because  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  did  not 

specify  that  the  proposed  teacher  layoff  was  due,  in  part,  to  declining  attendance  by  pupils 
and  because  testimony  from  the  Superintendent  did  indicate  that  the  PKS  lay-off  proceeding 
was  due  to,  in  part,  to  declining  enrollment  of  pupils,  that  respondents  were  not  afforded 
proper  notice  of  such  basis  for  the  layoff. 
afforded  them  to  develop  a  defense  to  the  superintendent’s  testimony  regarding  declining 
pupil  enrollment  so  that  the  entire  layoff  proceeding  should  be  dismissed. 

Hence,  respondents  aver  sufficient  notice  was  not 

Respondents  further  contend  that  Respondent  Stacy  Holland,  who  began  the  school 

year  as  a  teacher  under  an  emergency  credential,  but  later  during  the  school  year,  yet  after  the 
dispatch  of  the  March  15  preliminary  lay-off  notice,  she  was  able  to  have  registered  with  the

County  Office  of  Education  a  clear  credential,  should  have  greater  status  on  the  seniority  list. 
Hence,  respondents  assert,  the  District  erred  when  it  did  not  provide  Respondent  Stacy 
Holland  with  an  earlier  seniority  date  that  correspond  with  her  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the 
District  as  provisional  or  emergency  credentialed  teacher. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Individual  Respondents 

14. 

Respondent  Sandra  Cornell  (“Respondent  Cornell”)  holds  a  clear,  multiple 

subject  credential.  She  is  a  sixth  grade  teacher  at  Terrace  Middle  School.  She  has a  first  date 
of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  September  8,  2004.  Respondent  Cornell  holds  status  as  a 
probationary-one  teacher-employee  to  the  District. 

Respondent  Cornell  was  not  persuasive  that  the  date  in  June  2004  when  she  signed  a 
contract  of  employment  was  determinative  as  to  setting  a  date  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

Respondent  Cornell  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 
teacher  Junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Cornell  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently  competent 
to  teach. 

% 

15.  |  Respondent  Tara  Martz  (“Respondent  Martz”)  has  a  first  date  of  paid  service 

as  a  probationary-one  teacher  as  of  September  8,  2004.  She  now  holds  a  clear,  multiple 
subject  credential.  Respondent  Martz  worked  during  the  past  school  year  at  Terrace  Middle 
School  as  a  sixth  grade  teacher. 

Respondent  Martz  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 

teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Martz  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently  competent  to 
teach. 

16. 

As  of  March  15,  2004,  Respondent  Stacy  Holland  (“Respondent  Holland”) 

was  a  probationary-zero  employee  with  a  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on 
September  8,  2004.  During  the  past  school  year,  she  worked  as a  sixth  grade  teacher  at 
Terrace  Middle  School.  She  worked  under  an  emergency  credential  for  most  of  the  past 
school  year. 

_ 

When  the  governing  board  authorized  dispatch  of  the  teacher  lay-off  notices, 
Respondent  Holland  was  waiting  for  receipt  of  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential.  On 
April  12,  2005,  the  Lake  County  Office  of  Education  was  first  able  to  register  the  California 
Commission  of  Teacher  Credentialing-approved  credential  for  Respondent  Holland. 

Respondent  is  not  persuasive  when  she  contends  that  she  believed  that  a  letter  issued 
by  her  college  acted  as  a  form  of  credential  that  warranted  the  District  to  designated  her  as  a 
probationary-one  teacher  as  of  her  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  September  8, 
2004.

Respondent  Holland  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 
any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms  Holland  possesses  a  credential  and  is  competent  to 
teach. 

Respondents  generally 

17. 

From  August  2  to  August  6,  2004,  at  the  recommendation  of  the  principal  of 
the  Terrace  Middle  School,  each  respondent  attended  in  Chico,  California,  a  seminar  on  the 
McDougall-Littel  reading  skills  program  for  teaching  elementary  school  pupils.  The  school 
site  paid  each  teacher a  stipend  of  $100  for  each  day  at  the  seminar,  and  reimbursed  each 
teacher  the  costs  of  hotel  accommodations  and  meals.  Respondent  unpersuasively  argued 
that  by  attending  the  seminar  in  August  2004,  each  respondent  acquired a first  date  of  paid 
service  to  the  District  as  of  August  2,  2004. 

Respondents  further  argue  that  by  attending  a  retreat  in  Upper  Lake  over  three  days  in 

August  to  plan  for  the  then  ensuing  school  year  that  each  teacher  gained a 
service  to  the  District  before  September  7,  2004,  which  was  the  date  three  other  teachers 
began  work  at  Terrace  Heights  Elementary  School.  Each  teacher  acknowledged  that  the 
Terrace  Middle  School  principal  recommended  attendance  at  the  program  and  that  each 
teacher  was  paid  a  stipend  of  $100  for  each  day  of  the  retreat. 

first  day  of  paid 

But,  the  District’s  Superintendent  is  clear  that  the  reading  seminar  was  not  a  part  of 
the  regular  school  year,  and  that  teachers  were  not  required  by  the  District  as  a  term  of  the 
contract  of  employment  to  attend  the  seminar/training  program.  Also,  those  teachers  who 
attended  the  course  in  August  2004,  were  paid  a  special  stipend,  rather  than  being 
compensated  the  regular  wage  because  the  time  of  the  seminar  was  not  part  of  teachers’ 
respective  salaries  under  the  District’s  employment  contract.  And,  as  to  the  three-day  retreat, 
those  teacher  planning  days  were  selected  by  the  school  principal  and  were  neither  directed 
nor  required  by  the  District’  governing  board  or  Superintendent  as  mandatory  days  for 
participation  by  respondent-teachers. 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

18. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the  District 

faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State  of  California 
may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board  has  determined 
that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of  teacher  and 
administrator  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including 
the  positions  held  by  respondents. 

19.  |  No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed 
elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  the  District 
will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services  for  which

  

respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE  positions 
for  the  next  school  year. 

20. 

The  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision  to 

eliminate  or  discontinue  a  total  of  5.0  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions  held  by  each 
respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

21. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

22. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth 
in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 

duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been  regularly 
performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the  District  has 
properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non  reemployment  of 
respondents. 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955  establishes,  in  part,  that  the  order  of  teacher 

layoff  must  occur  “in  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  [the  employee  teachers]  were  employed, 
as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  [Education  Code  section]  ... 
44845....”  And,  Education  Code  section  44845,  in  part,  states:  “Every  probationary  or 
permanent  employee  employed  ...  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed  on  the  date  upon 
which  [she  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.”  [Emphasis  added.] 

— 

Also,  Education  Code  section  44911  sets  out:  “Service  by  a  person  under  a 
provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a 
prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a 
schoo!  district.”  [Emphasis  added.]

Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026,  reflects 

the  underpinning  of  the  law  with  “the  numerous  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  [that 
express]  the  legislative  preference for fully  credentialed  teachers  and  the  goal  of  reducing 
the  number  of  teachers  employed  under  temporary  or  emergency  credentials.”  Summerfield 
shows  that  an  emergency  credential  does  not  accrue  time  in  service  for  the  attainment  by 
such  a  classified  teacher  of  permanent  status.  Summerfield  cites  Education  Code  section 
45023.1,  subdivision  (a)(1)  (which  limits  salary  increases  to  credentialed  teachers  but  not 
such  increases  for  those  holding  emergency  credentials),  and  Education  Code  section 
44225.7,  subdivision  (c)  (which  directs  assignment  of  interns  to  classrooms  so  as  to  diminish 
a  District’s  reliance  on  teachers  on  emergency  permits). 

It  is  important  to  note  that  Education  Code  section  44300  requires  school  districts  to 

certify  that  the  affected  district  is  unable  to  recruit  a  sufficient  number  of  credentialed 
teachers  or  interns  before  employing  teachers  on  emergency  credentials.  And,  Education 
Code  section  44225.7  demands  that  “state  policy  directs  the  assignment  of  fully  prepared 
teachers  to  California  classrooms....” 

The  scheme  devised  by  the  California  Legislature  would  be  violated,  and  grave 

wrongs  would  be  visited  upon  credentialed  teachers  with  a  later  hire  date  than  the  subject 
provisional  or  emergency  credentialed  teachers,  under  the  arrangement  sought  by  respondent 
Holland  who  gained  fully  credentialed  status  in  the  midst  of  the  school  year.  Probationary 
status  is  not  retroactively  conferred  to  the  beginning  of  employment  of  a  teacher  who  secures 
a  clear  credential  during  the  school  year  after  an  initial  contract  is  executed  by  the  teacher  in 
a  status  other  than  probationary. 

Respondent  Stacy  Holland  had  not  acquired  status  as  a  probationary-one  teacher  until 
after  March  15,  2005.  The  credential  as  approved  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing  was  not  registered  with  the  District  or  the  County  Board  of  Education  until 
well  after  the  District’s  personnel  mailed  teacher  lay-off  notices  to  respondents  in  this  matter. 

5. 

Respondents  correctly  argue  that  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 

(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  does  establish  that  “(f)or  seniority  purposes,  certificated 
employees  who  [work  as  teachers  in  a  particular  program]  are  deemed  to  have  first  been 
employed  by  the  district  on  the  date  that  they  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary 
position  in  [the  particular  instructional  program.]”  But,  respondents  offered  no  competent 
evidence  that  the  District  paid  wages  to  teachers  who  attended  a  training  program  on  a 
specialized  reading  program  or  participated  in  a  three  day  retreat  for  planning  of  the  then 
ensuing  school  year.  Rather  each  teacher  was  paid a  stipend  of  $100  for  each  day  and  that 
money  was  paid  through  the  authority  and  discretion  of  a  school  site  principal.  No  evidence 
established  that  attendance  by  respondents  at  either  the  reading  seminar  in  August  2004  or 
the  retreat  in  August  2004  was  required  by  the  District.  However,  competent  evidence  does 
show  that  each  respondent  had  as  the  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  the  date  of 
September  8,  2004.

  

  

6. 

Board  Resolution  03-05-01,  as  adopted  on  March  10,  2005,  stated  that  it  was 

the  Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  A  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  was  not  cited 
as  a  basis  for  eliminating  five  full  time  equivalent  certificated  positions  in  the  District’s  corps 
of  teachers  and  single  administrative  position. 

The  preliminary  layoff  notice,  dated  March  10,  2005,  stated  that  the  reason  for  the 

notice  was  due  to  a  decision  “to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  District  beginning 
not  later  than  at  the  commencement  of  the  2005-2006  school  year.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
Governing  Board,  it  therefore  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees  in  the  District.”  The  preliminary  notice  did  not 
mention  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  authorizes a  district’s  governing  board 

to  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  employees 
whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  for  all  schools  in  the  first  six 
months  has  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  school  year  or 
whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year. 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a)  requires  that  no  later  than  March  15 

and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by  the 
superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be  given  to  employees 
and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation. 

The  preliminary  notice  is  intended  to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed 

of  the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be 
reemployed.  The  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
(Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355 

A  notice  that  specifies  both  grounds,  that  is  PKS  reduction/elimination  and  declining 

average  daily  attendance,  is  suspect.  (See,  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.  3d  648.)  And,  where  a  notice  specifies  one  of  the  two  statutory  reasons  for  a 
teacher  layoff,  a  governing  board  may  not  later  attempt  to  justify  dismissal  on  the  other 
ground.  (Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education,  supra,  39  Cal.App.3d  355°  .) 

  

In  Karbach,  the  governing  board  gave  notice  to  probationary  teachers  that  such  employees  would  not  be 

? 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  on  the  ground  of  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.  But,  at  the  adminis- 
trative  adjudication  hearing,  the  presiding  officer  allowed  the  board  to  present  evidence  justifying  the  decision  to 
eliminate  positions  of  the  affected  probationary  teachers  on  the  new  theory  of  reduction  in  particular  services.  The 
Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  governing  board  had  no  authority  to  terminate  the  teachers  for  any  reason  not  specified 
in  the  original  preliminary  notice  and  that  the  proposed  terminations  on  the  ground  of  reduction  in  services  were  not 

valid.  

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services 

need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number 
of  students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number  of  terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within  the 
Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a  particular 
service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

The  procedural  defect  or  error  in  Karbach  may  be  distinguished  from  the  facts  - 
pertaining  to  this  matter.  Unlike  Karbach,  the  Lakeport  Unified  School  District’s  Governing 
Board  did  not  propose  layoffs  for  any  reason  not  specified  in  the  preliminary  notice  as  sent  to 
certificated  employees.  The  projection  of  declining  pupil  attendance  or  enrollment,  as 
offered  in  evidence  by  the  superintendent,  was  one  of  a  few  reasons  for  consideration  by  that 
professional  education  administrator  offered  as  the  ground  for  teacher  lay-off  to  the  subject 
governing  board  for  its  decision  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services.  In  this  matter,  the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  a  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious  action. 
(Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  vy.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

The  Lakeport  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  five  (5.0)  F.T.E.  positions  for 
the  2005-2006  school  (which  may  have  been  based  in  some  measure  on  a  projected  decline 
in  enrollment  of  pupils  for  the  2005-2006  school  year)  was  a  discretionary  decision  that 
constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  service  under  the  Education 
Code. 

7. 

Respondents  and  the  Superintendent  cite  as  supposed  persuasive  authority 

proposed  decisions  from  past  years  by  administrative  law  judges,  as  adopted  by  other  school 
districts  as  a  decision  of  such  other  districts.  But,  such  proposed  decisions  from  past  years 
have  no  precedential?  effect  on  the  Lakeport  Unified  School  District  in  reaching 
determinations  or  an  order  in  this  matter. 

8. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in 
Factual  Findings  10  to  12  inclusive,  14  to  20  inclusive  and  22. 

9. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  each 
respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in  Factual  Finding  21. 

  

3 
decisions. 

Government  Code  section  11425.60  establishes  the  authority  for  the  adoption  of  a  system  for  precedent 

10

  

. 

. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained. 

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Sandra  Cornell,  Stacy  Holland  and 
Tara  Martz  that  their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  4,  2005 

  PERRY  ©.  JOHNSON 
‘Administrativ;  Law  Judge 
Office of Administrative  Hearings 

  

11

  

