© 

BEFORE  THE 
LOS  ANGELES  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
LOS  ANGELES  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against:  | OAH  No.  L2005030067 

FLORENCE  AVIGNON,  et  al., 

Respondents. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Timothy  S.  Thomas,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  11,  12 
and  27,  2005,  at  Downey,  California. 

@ 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell  and  Warren  S.  Kinsler,  Attorneys  at  Law, 
represented  the  Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education  (hereinafter 
LACOE). 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  teachers. 

Respondents  Jackie  Brendlinger,  Kristen  Lai  and  Bon  Silva  attended  the 
hearing. 

By  stipulation  of  the  parties,  counsel’s  oral  arguments  were 
supplemented  by  written  briefs.  LACOE’s  and  respondents’  closing  briefs 
were  received  on  April  22,  2005,  and  marked  as  Exhibit  30  and  Exhibit  D, 
respectively. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  27,  2003. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

   

1. 

LACOE  employs  1,381  certificated  employees,  of  whom  984 

are  currently  serving  as  teachers,  who  deliver  educational  services  to  Los 
Angeles  County  students  who  are  not  served  by  traditional  school  districts. 
The  primary  areas  of  services  include  special  education  and  alternative 
education  services  delivered  in  juvenile  halls  and  camps.  Darline  P.  Robles, 

© 

Ph.D.,  Los  Angeles  County  Superintendent  of  Schools,  determined  that  it  was 
necessary  due  to  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  level  of  funding  that  will  be 
available  to  LACOE  for  school  year  2005-2006  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  teachers  and  other  certificated 
employees.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the  competency  or  dedication  of 
the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 
Pursuant  to  the  recommendation  of  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human 
Resource  Services,  the  Superintendent  issued  Resolution  No.  26  on  February 
28,  2005.  The  Resolution  provided  that  182.80  full-time  equivalent  positions 
(FTE)  within  LACOE  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2005/2006  school  year, 
as  follows: 

I.  Educational  Programs 

A.  Division  of  Special  Education 

B.  Santa  Clarita  Special  Education  Local  Plan  Area  (SELPA) 

1.  SELPA  Director 

1.00  FTE 
1.  Assistant  Principal 
.20 
2.  Counselor 
2.00 
3.  Principal 
3.60 
4.  School  Psychologist 
2.00 
5.  Sr.  Program  Specialist 
1.00 
6.  Teacher  Career  Education 
8.00 
7.  Teacher  Emotionally  Disturbed 
4.00 
8.  Teacher  Home  and  Hospital 
1.00 
9.  Teacher  Language  Speech 
10.  Teacher  Multiple  Disabilities 
1.00 
11.  Teacher  Orthopedically  Handicapped.  4.00 
1.00 
12.  Teacher  Trainable  Mentally  Retarded 

   

1.  Coordinator 
2.  Coordinator  in  Charge 
3.  Counselor 
4.  Director  III 
5.  Program  Administrator 
6.  School  Psychologist 
7.  Sr.  Program  Specialist 
8.  Sr.  Project  Director 
9.  Teacher  Peer  Assistance  and  Review 
10.  Teacher  Resource  Specialist  Program  18.00 

5.00 
2.00 
7.00 
1.00 
3.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 

1.00 

C.  Educational  Programs  Support/LACOE  SELPA 

D.  Division  of  Alternative  Education 

1.  Assistant  Principal 
2.  Principal 
3.  School  Nurse 
4.  Sr.  Program  Specialist 
5.  Teacher-Alternative  Schools 
6.  Teacher  Community  Day  School 

E.  Division  of  Juvenile  Court  and  Community  Schools 

1.  Assistant  Principal 
2.  Sr.  Program  Specialist 
3.  Teacher 

II.  Educational  Services 

A.  Division  of  Curriculum  and  Instructional  Services 

1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
3.00 
1.00 

6.00 
2.00 
43.00 

8.00 
1.00 
1.00 
6.00 
5.00 

1.  Consultant 
2.  Coordinator  in  Charge 
3.  Project  Coordinator 
4.  Sr.  Program  Specialist 
5.  Sr.  Project  Director 

B.  Division  for  School  Improvement 

1.  Consultant 
2.  Coordinator  in  Charge 
3.  Sr.  Project  Director 

C.  Head  Start  —  State  Preschool 

1.  Assistant  Director 
2.  Consultant 
3.  Coordinator 
4.  Coordinator  in  Charge 
5.  Head  Start  Specialist 
6.  Program  Specialist 

D.  Parent  and  Community  Services 

1.  Project  Director 

4.00 
1.00 
2.00 

   

1.00 
2.00 
3.00 
1.00 
6.00 
2.00 

E.  Student  Support  Services 

1.  Counselor 
2.  Sr.  Project  Director 

IU.  Human  Resource  Services 

A.  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment 

1.  Coordinator 
2.  Sr.  Project  Director 

B.  Human  Resource  Services 

1.  Sr.  Program  Specialist 

4.00 
1.00 

2.00 
1.00 

1.00 

Total 

182.80  FTE 

2. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  1  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44955.  The  reduction  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of 
LACOE  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
employees  by  182.80  FTE.  LACOE  identified  86  teaching  positions  for 
elimination.’ 

3. 

LACOE  maintains  a  seniority  list  that  contains  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations, 
advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  Credential  and 
authorization  data  of  record  as  of  March  15,  2005,  were  obtained  from  the 
records  of  LACOE,  where  certificated  teachers  must  register  such  documents. 

4. 

LACOE  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 
“bumping”  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
services  being  reduced  or  eliminated.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off 
for  each  kind  of  service  reduced  or  eliminated,  LACOE  conducted  a  “top 
down”  approach;  that  is,  for  each  position  to  be  eliminated,  the  most  senior 
person  was  identified  and  a  matrix  constructed  that  showed  where  the  person 
could  be  placed  based  on  his  or  her  credential  and  competence.  Some  were 
placed  in  vacant  positions  that  had  not  been  identified  for  elimination,  while 

  

'  The  majority  of  the  182.80  FTE  positions  identified  for  reduction  or  elimination  involve 
administrators  or  other  non-teachers  who  are  not  protected  by  the  Education  Code  sections 
applicable  to  this  hearing.  However,  according  to  LACOE  policy,  an  administrator  with  a 
teaching  credential  may  revert  to  teaching  and  “bump”  less  senior  teachers  if  the  administrator 
achieved  tenure  as  a  teacher  and  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  same  services  as  the 
junior  teacher. 

 

others  “bumped”  less  senior  teachers  in  the  same  or a  different  position.  The 
teacher  bumped  then  was  looked  at  similarly  to  determine  if  he  or  she  could  be 
placed  elsewhere,  or  could  bump  someone  even  less  senior.  When  any  such 
employee  could  not  be  placed  in  that  fashion,  he  or  she  was  identified  for 
layoff  and  given  notice  by  March  15. 

5. 

By  resolution  adopted  by  the  County  Superintendent  of  Schools 
on  March  4,  2005,  LACOE  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the 
relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to 
LACOE  on  the  same  date.  It  provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be 
based  on  the  needs  of  the  programs  administered  by  the  County 
Superintendent  and  the  students  participating  in  those  programs.  The  tie- 
breaking  criteria  meet  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b),  and  are  not  challenged  by  respondents  either  in  terms  of  their 
validity  or  their  specific  application  to  them. 

6. 

In  the  process  of  compiling  the  seniority  list  used  to  identify 

teachers  subject  to  layoff,  LACOE  modified  certain  seniority  dates  in  light  of 
Smith  v.  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District  (2004)  120  Cal.App.4th  563  (Elk 
Grove).  Prior  to  that  decision,  LACOE  credited  employees  who  were  teaching 
a  subject  under  an  emergency  or  other  provisional  credential  with  their  time 
toward  seniority  and  tenure  if  they  also  held  a  regular  credential  in  another 
subject.  The  seniority  dates  of  many  teachers  were  adjusted  to  delete  any 
credit  for  such  service  as  a  result  of  the  decision  in  E/k  Grove,  but  only  three 
respondents  were  thus  affected:  Eduarte,  Orona  and  Reyes.  While 
respondents’  counsel  objected  to  any  “retroactive”  application  of  Elk  Grove, 
neither  Eduarte,  Orona  nor  Reyes  attended  the  hearing,  and  no  evidence  was 
offered  to  establish  what  their  seniority  dates  were  prior  to  the  adjustments. 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  LACOE  served  on  each  employee 

identified  for  layoff  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice 
be  given  to  him  or  her  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
to  the  effect  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year.  The  notices  were  served  by  certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested.  The 
notices  stated  that  the  reason  for  the  recommendation  was  that  the  services 
enumerated  in  Resolution  No.  26,  a  copy  of  which  was  enclosed  to  each 
respondent,  were  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of 
the  2005/2006  school  year.  The  notices  further  represented  that  “no 
permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than  you 
is  being  retained  to  render  services  which  you  are  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.” 

8. 

LACOE  chose  to  modify  the  steps  outlined  in  Education  Code 
section  44944  for  the  giving  of  notice  and  provision  for  respondents’  hearing 
rights.  To  all  but  two  of  the  recipients  of  notices,  the  packets  sent  to 

 

employees  subject  to  layoff  were  mailed  on  March  14,  2005,  and  included  a 
form  entitled  “Request  for  Hearing/Notice  of  Defense.”  The  employees  were 
given  14  days,  until  March  28,  2005,  to  return  the  document  and  request  a 
hearing.  In  other  words,  rather  than  send  Accusations  and  Notice  of  Defense 
forms  only  to  those  who  returned  a  Request  for  Hearing  in  response  to  the 
initial  March  14  notice,  LACOE  included  an  Accusation  in  the  initial  mailing 
and  combined  the  statutory  time  limits  of  section  44944  for  requesting  a 
hearing  (seven  days)  and  serving  a  Notice  of  Defense  (five  days).  Of  the  72 
teachers  receiving  notices  dated  March  14,  30  teachers  timely  served  a 
Request  for  Hearing/Notice  of  Defense. 

9. 

Two  employees,  Bon  Silva  and  Martin  Navaroli,  were  served 

with  notices  of  layoff  dated  and  mailed  March  15,  2005.  Because  they  had  not 
been  included  in  the  March  14  mailing,  LACOE  chose  to  follow  the  two-step 
process  outlined  in  section  44944,  and  Silva  and  Navaroli  were  given  seven 
days  to  request  a  hearing.  After  Silva  timely  requested  a  hearing,  an 
Accusation  was  served  upon  him,  and  he  timely  filed  a  notice  of  defense. 
Thus,  31  teachers  timely  requested  hearings  according  to  the  two methods  of 
service  of  notices  utilized  by  LACOE  and  are  respondents in  this  matter.’ 

10. 

The  74  recipients  of  layoff  notices  consisted  of  55  teachers 

list*).  No  permanent  teachers  were  served  with 

classified  as  probationary  (the  Exhibit  A  list  appended  to  the  Accusation’)  and 
19  teachers  who  are  by  individual  contracts  filling  positions  of  regular  teachers 
on  leaves  of  absence  (the B 
layoff  notices.  The  teachers  on  the  A  list  consist  of  probationary  1°  and 
probationary  2  teachers,  as  well  as  teachers  filling  previously  vacant  positions 
who  are  teaching  pursuant  to  emergency,  variable  term  waiver  (VTW),  pre- 
intern,  or  intern  permits  (sometimes  collectively  referred  to  as  probationary  0 
teachers).  LACOE  asserts  that  the  B  list  teachers  are  temporary  teachers  (as 
opposed  to  permanent,  probationary  or  substitute)  and  none  of  them  has  a  right 
under  Education  Code  sections  44944  or  44949  to  be  included  in  the  hearing 
list  teachers were  sent  notices  of  non-reelection  on  March  14, 
process.  The B 
2005.  But  LACOE  simultaneously  served  these  teachers  with  “precautionary” 
notices  “that  your  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year” 
(virtually  identical  to  the  notices  served  on  the  A  list  teachers)  so  as  to  allow 
them  the  opportunity  to  appear  and  state  their  cases  for  retention  should  any 
one  of  them  wish  to  challenge  his  or  her  status  as  temporary.  While  five  of  the 
B  list  teachers  requested  a  hearing,  none  appeared  or  offered  evidence  of  his  or 

  

?  The  list  of  31  respondents  is  attached  to  this  Proposed  Decision  as  Exhibit  1. 
>  The  A  list  of  employees  who  received  notices  is  attached  to  this  Proposed  Decision  as  Exhibit  2. 
*  The  B  list  of  employees  who  received  precautionary  notices  is  attached  to  this  Proposed  Decision 
as  Exhibit  3. 
>  The  designation  probationary  1  refers  to  a  probationary  teacher  in  his  or  her  first  year  of  teaching 
in  a  probationary  status.  A  probationary  2  designation  refers  to  a  teacher  in  his  or  her  second  year 
of  teaching  in  a  probationary  status. 

   

her  individual  situation.  The  evidence  therefore  established  that  the  19  B  list 
teachers  are  temporary  teachers  and  not  entitled  to  the  procedural  protections 
of  Education  Code  sections  44955  and  44949. 

11. 

On  the  first  day  of  hearing,  LACOE  withdrew  the  Accusation  as 

against  18  of  the  teachers  who  had  been  notified  of  their  impending  layoffs. 
Nine  of  the  teachers  were  respondents®  and  nine  were  teachers  who  had  not 
requested  a  hearing.’  All  of  the  teachers  who  were  the  beneficiaries  of  the 
Accusation  withdrawals  were  probationary  teachers  from  the  original A 
list. 
The  teachers  were  retained  because  LACOE  determined  prior  to  the  hearing 
that  it  was  able  to  restore  certain  positions  and  due  to  additional  attrition  it  had 
identified  since  March  15,  2005. 

12. 

In  the  process  of  sending  out  the  March  15  notices  to 

respondents  and  others  subject  to  layoff,  LACOE  inadvertently  failed  to  serve 
one  teacher  who,  by  its  own  analysis  of  the  seniority  and  bumping  rights  of  its 
employees,  should  have  been  served.  That  teacher,  Troy  Doyle,  has  a 
seniority  date  of  September  13,  2004.  He  is  a  probationary  1  employee  who 
teaches  in  the  juvenile  court  and  community  schools  (JCCS),  and  holds  a 
multiple  subject  teaching  credential  and  second  language  certificate  (SDAIE). 
As  a  result  of  the  mistake  in  not  serving  Mr.  Doyle  with  a  March  15  notice,  by 
law  he  may  not  be  laid  off.*  The  mistake  was  not  discovered  until  April  7, 
2005,  but  LACOE  claims  that  the  omission  did  not  result  in  any  employee 
receiving  a  layoff  notice  who  should  not  have.  In  other  words,  no  employee 
received  a  layoff  notice  that  was  intended  for  Doyle.  Because  the  mistake  was 
not  discovered  until  after  March  15,  2005,  LACOE  proceeded  with  the  layoff 
of  one  employee  less  than  it  had  intended. 

13. 

Two  teachers  who  once  left  LACOE  and  returned  within  39 
months  were  given  new  seniority  dates  upon  their  return  pursuant  to  law.” 
Roy  Hensley,  who  teaches  at  a  juvenile  court  school,  has  a  seniority  date  of 
September  14,  2004,  and  holds  elementary,  secondary,  administrative  services, 
driver  education  and  SDAIE  certificates.  Claretta  Diaz,  whose  teaching 
assignment  is  in  community  day  care,  has  a  seniority  date  of November  8, 
2004,  and  holds  a  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential.  Both  Hensley  and 
Diaz  were  issued  layoff  notices.  Diaz  requested  a  hearing,  Hensley  did  not. 
The  Accusations  as  to  both  were  withdrawn  on  the  first  day  of  the  hearing. 

14. 

The  parties  agree  that  the  following  respondents  have  seniority 
dates  earlier  than  Doyle,  Hensley  and  Diaz,  and  that  each  of  these  respondents 

  

A  list  of  the  nine  respondents  is  attached  as  Exhibit  4. 
A  list  of  the  nine  non-respondents  is  attached  as  Exhibit  5. 

8  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c). 
*  See  Education  Code  sections  44848  and  44931,  and  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627,  641. 

   

is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide  the  services  now  being  rendered  by 
Doyle,  Hensley  or  Diaz:  Brendlinger,  Cali,  Cruces,  Hastings,  James,  Lai, 
Oliphant,  Resor,  Reyes,  Silva,  Tatevossian,  and  Warner.  Additionally,  the 
following  teachers  who  received  layoff  notices  but  did  not  request  a  hearing 
likewise  have  seniority  dates  more  senior  than  Doyle,  Hensley  and  Diaz,  and 
are  likewise  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  services  now  being 
rendered  by  Doyle,  Hensley  or  Diaz:  Bailey,  Chavira,  Garcia,  Miller,  Navaroli, 
Ruiz,  Scepan,  Stang  and  Winitsky. 

15.  | LACOE  has  or  intends  to  send  notices  of  non-reelection  to  all 
teachers  now  serving  under  emergency,  VTW,  pre-intern  and  intern  permits. 
This  fact  was  known  to  LACOE  prior  to  March  15,  2005,  and  was  taken  into 
account  in  identifying  the  positions  for  elimination  that  were  included  in 
Resolution  No.  26. 

16. 

|  Respondent  Jackie  L.  Brendlinger  testified  in  her  own  behalf. 
Her  date  of  initial  hire  was  June  11,  1990,  and  she  worked  for  LACOE  as  an 
instructional  assistant.  Brendlinger  was  assigned  to  teach  in  a  juvenile  court 
school  beginning  in  September  of  2003  in  a  vacant  position  as  a  substitute 
teacher.  She  taught  under  a  long-term  permit,  as  she  had  not  yet  earned  her 
credential.  Thereafter,  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing 
(CTC)  issued  a  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  to  Brendlinger, 
effective  September  19,  2003,  the  date  Brendlinger  believes  should  also  be  her 
seniority  date.  She  testified  that  she  filed  the  credential  with  LACOE 
“immediately.”  Instead,  LACOE  established  December  19,  2003,  as  her 
seniority  date  on  the  basis  that  her  status  was  not  changed  from  substitute 
teacher  to  probationary  1  until  the  date  she  was  first  paid  as  a  probationary  1 
teacher,  which  was  the  later  date.  On  February  10,  2004,  Brendlinger  signed  a 
Probationary  Employee  Contract,  which  indicated  the  effective  date  of  her 
status  as  a  probationary  1  teacher  to  be  December  19,  2003.  Finally,  on 
February  20,  2004,  LACOE  sent a  letter  to  Brendlinger  advising  her  that  her 
seniority  date  had  been  established  as  December  19,  2003.  LACOE  has  no 
record  that  respondent  replied  or  objected  to  the  date  at  that  time,  although 
Brendlinger  testified  that  she  does  not  recall  receipt  of  the  letter. 

17. 

Respondent  Bon  Silva  testified  in  his  own  behalf.  He  agreed 

that  his  seniority  date  of  September  20,  2003,  as  reported  by  LACOE,  is 
correct.  Silva,  a  probationary  2  teacher,  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject 
credential  that  should  be  cleared  by  the  end  of  May,  2005.  He  teaches  in  a 
juvenile  court  school  and  has  received  good  evaluations.  Silva  testified  that  he 
would  gladly  accept  the  position  currently  held  by  Doyle,  Hensley  or  Diaz. 

18.  |  Respondent  Kristen  Lai  testified  in  her  own  behalf.  She  agreed 

that  her  seniority  date  of  September  2,  2003,  as  reported  by  LACOE,  is 
correct.  Lai,  a  probationary  1  teacher,  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in 

 

music,  is  working  on  a  masters  degree  in  education  at  California  State 
University,  Los  Angeles,  and  intends  to  obtain  a  Ph.D.  as  well.  She  testified 
that  she  will  earn  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential  sometime  in  2005.  Lai 
would  gladly  accept  an  assignment  to  teach  in  any  one  of  the  positions 
currently  held  by  Doyle,  Hensley  or  Diaz. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  1 
through  5. 

2. 

Respondents  raised  the  following issues  in  support  of  a  claim 

that  some  or  all  of  them  should  be  retained  by  LACOE. 

(a)  Did  the  one-step  process  utilized  by  LACOE,  combining  the 

request  for  a  hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense  deadlines  into  one  deadline, 
violate  Education  Code  section  44949  so  as  to  invalidate  all  of  the  notices  sent 
in  that  fashion? 

(b)  Must  certain  respondents  be  retained  because  they  are 

senior  to  and  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  same  services  being 
rendered  by  teacher  Doyle? 

(c)  Must  certain  respondents  be  retained  because  they  have 
seniority  dates  earlier  than  permanent  teachers  Hensley  and  Diaz,  and  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  same  services? 

(d)  Did  teachers  who  did  not  request  a  hearing  and/or  did  not 
file  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing  waive  their  rights 
under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  challenge  their  layoffs  in 
light  of  the  retention  of  teachers  Doyle,  Hensley  and  Diaz?  If  so,  what  is  the 
effect  of  LACOE’s  decision  to  withdraw  the  Accusation  as  to  nine teachers 
who  had  not  requested  a  hearing? 

   

(e)  Does  the  decision  to  not  re-elect  all  temporary  teachers  for 
the  next  school  year  constitute  additional  assured  attrition  that  must  be  taken 
into  account  in  identifying  teachers  to  be  laid  off? 

of  certain  respondents  so  that  they  became  more  susceptible  to  layoff  under 
Education  Code  section  44949? 

of  the  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369 

(f)  Did  Elk  Grove  require  LACOE  to  adjust  the  seniority  dates 

(g)  Does  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Governing  Board 

(Golden  Valley),  apply  to  this  matter  such  that  LACOE  failed  to  assign 
seniority  dates  to  emergency  permit-holders  or  interns  to  the  prejudice  of  any 
respondent? 

3. 

Did  the  one-step  process  utilized  by  LACOE,  combining  the 

request  for  a  hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense  deadlines  into  one  deadline, 
violate  Education  Code  section  44949  so  as  to  invalidate  all  of  the  notices  sent 
in  that  fashion?  No. 

It  is  true  that  LACOE  did  not  strictly  follow  the  procedures 

outlined  in  Education  Code  section  44949,  which  uses  typically  mandatory 
language  (“shall”)  to  require  that  school  districts  first  serve  all  teachers  subject 
to  layoff  with  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  by  March  15.  The  teacher  served  with  notice  is  allowed 
no  less  than  seven  days  to  request  a  hearing.  The  school  district  must  then 
serve  all  teachers  who  requested  a  hearing  with  an  Accusation  that  advises  the 
teachers  of  a  further  deadline  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation 
within  five  days  of  service  of  the  Accusation.  Thus,  a  teacher  must  comply 
with  two  deadlines,  totaling  12  days,  in  order  to  be  granted  hearing  rights  as 
administered  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11500,  et  seq. 

Instead,  LACOE  served  all  but  two  respondents  with  notices  of 

the  impending  layoff  and  Accusations  simultaneously,  provided  forms 
combining  a  request  for  hearing  and  a  Notice  of  Defense,  and  allowed  the 
teacher  14  days  to  return  the  combined  form.  On  its  face,  the  procedure 
utilized  by  LACOE  does  not  offend  due  process  considerations,  and  no 
advantage  to  the  teacher  in  being  offered  two  separate  deadlines  to  meet  is 
obvious.  Respondents  offered  no  authority  to  support  its  claim  that  the 
process  chosen  by  LACOE  should  invalidate  all  notices  served  pursuant  to  the 
process  other  than  its  obvious  variance  from  the  procedures  dictated  by  section 
44949, 

In  their  closing  brief,  respondents  nevertheless  claim  prejudice 

by  virtue  of  the  procedure  utilized,  as  follows:  “1.  Confusion  as  to  dates  when 
responses  had  to  be  filed  by  the  respondents.  2.  What  documents  were 
required  to  be  filed  by  the  Respondents.  3.  A  majority  of  the  Respondents 
were  denied  their  rights  to  request  the  County  Superintendent  to  rescind  the 
Notices  of  Lay-Off;  and  4.  There  was  confusion  as  to  who  was  actually  a  part 
of  these  hearings  and  who  were  merely  ‘precautionary’  and  what  that  was 
intended  to  mean.”  But  no  one  testified  to  being  confused.  Indeed,  the 
procedure  adopted  appears  less  confusing  than  the  one  provided  by  the  code  in 
that  only  one  deadline  of  longer  duration  is  presented.  And  the  notices  are 
sufficiently  clear  to  overcome  the  claim  of  confusion. 

10

The  more  pertinent  question,  however,  is  whether  LACOE  is 

authorized  to  alter  the  procedure  set  forth  in  section  44949.  LACOE  could  not 
convincingly  argue  that  it  could  establish  a  deadline  later  than  March  15  to 
© 
serve  its  notices  of  layoff,  or  that  it  could  shorten  the  deadlines  for  teachers  to 
request  a  hearing  or  file  a  Notice  of  Defense,  or  that  it  could  establish  its  own 
adjudicatory  system  that  did  not  adhere  to  the  hearing  process  of  the 
Administrative  Procedure  Act.  Such  innovations  would  clearly  violate  the 
statute,  defeat  legislative  intent  and  introduce  due  process  concerns.  But  is 
LACOE  otherwise  free  to  alter  the  statutory  scheme,  and  if  not,  what  is  the 
consequence  to  doing  so  vis-a-vis  these  respondents?  The  answer  follows 
from  a  determination  of  whether  the  two-step  requirements  of  section  44949  is 
mandatory  or  directory,  and  an  analysis  of  “whether  the  failure  to  comply  with 
a  particular  procedural  step  will  or  will  not  have  the  effect  of  invalidating  the 
governmental  action  to  which  the  procedural  requirement  relates.”  (Morris  v. 
County  of Marin  (1977)  18  Cal.3d  901,  908.) 

In  order  to  determine  whether  a  particular  statutory 
provision  ...  is  mandatory  or  directory,  the  court,  as  in  all  cases 
of  statutory  construction  and  interpretation,  must  ascertain  the 
legislative  intent.  In  the  absence  of  express  language,  the  intent 
must  be  gathered  from  the  terms  of  the  statute  construed  as  a 
whole,  from  the  nature  and  character  of  the  act  to  be  done,  and 
from  the  consequences  which  would  follow  the  doing  or  failure 
to  do  the  particular  act  at  the  required  time.  [Citation.]  When 
the  object  is  to  subserve  some  public  purpose,  the  provision  may 
be  held  directory  or  mandatory  as  will  best  accomplish  that 
purpose  [citation],  and  the  courts  will  look  to  see  whether  the 
provision  is  of  the  essence  of  the  thing  to  be  accomplished. 

(Pulsifer  v.  County  of Alameda  (1946)  29  Cal.2d  258,  262.)  Here,  the 
legislature  intended  that  a  school  district  follow  the  two-step  process  laid  out 
in  section  44949  to  ensure  that  teachers  subject  to  layoff  will  receive  timely 
and  adequate  notice  of  that  fact,  and  to  ensure  that  they  have  fair  opportunity 
to  appear  at  a  hearing  and  state  their  individual  and  collective  cases  for 
retention.  Nothing  about  LACOE’s  one-step  process  appears  to  thwart  that 
purpose,  and  while  a  public  agency  ignores  or  alters  a  legislatively-imposed 
procedural  requirement  at  its  own  peril,  here  “the  essence  of  the  thing  to  be 
accomplished,”  timely  and  adequate  notice  and  a  fair  opportunity  to  exercise  a 
right  to  a  hearing,  was  satisfied.  The  statute’s  requirement  that  LACOE  do  in 
two  steps  what  it  chose  to  do  in  one  is  directory  only. 

4. 

Must  certain  respondents  be  retained  because  they  are  senior  to 
and  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  same  services  being  rendered  by 
teacher  Doyle?  No. 

11 

 

For  two  reasons  clearly  enunciated  in  the  Education  Code,  the 

mistake  in  not  serving  teacher  Doyle  with  a  layoff  notice  does  not  require  that 
all  teachers  senior  to  him  be  retained.  First,  the  controlling  language  of 
Education  Code  section  44955  is: 

[T]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less 
seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

(Emphasis  added.)  As  no  permanent  employee  is  being  laid  off  (see  Finding 
10),  LACOE  correctly  argues  that  it  has  complied  with  the  section.  Section 
44955  also  requires,  however,  that  “employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the 
inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed”  (Ed.  Code  §  44955,  subd. 
(c)).  Respondents  argue  that  Doyle’s  retention  violates  the  requirement  and 
compels  the  retention  of  all  senior  teachers  who  are  certificated  and  competent 
to  render  the  services  being  rendered  by  Doyle. 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(3),  provides, 

“{nJonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing 
the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.”  Since  no  teacher  received 
a  layoff  notice  because  LACOE  failed  to  serve  Doyle,  and  all  respondents 
would  have  been  laid  off  in  any  event,  no  prejudice  is  shown.  (See  Factual 
Finding  12.) 

5. 

Must  certain  respondents  be  retained  because  they  have 

seniority  dates  earlier  than  teachers  Hensley  and  Diaz,  and  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  the  same  services?  Yes. 

Teachers  Hensley  and  Diaz,  who  had  established  tenure  with 

LACOE  prior  to  their  resignations,  resigned  at  points  in  time  less  than  39 
months  prior  to  being  reemployed  on  September  14,  2004,  and  November  8, 
2004,  respectively.  Education  Code  section  44848  required  that  LACOE  fix 
their  seniority  dates  upon  their  return  to  employment  as  the  dates  of  paid 
service  upon  reemployment.  LACOE  takes  the  position  that  these  teachers  are 
nonetheless  “permanent”  employees  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b),  and  may  not  be  laid  off  so  long  as  any  probationary  employee 
is  being  retained  in  a  position  for  which  the  “permanent”  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render.  LACOE  relies  on  Education  Code 
section  44931  to  justify  classifying  Hensley  and  Diaz  as  “permanent”  despite 
their  break  in  service  and  the  requirement  that  new  seniority  dates  be  assigned 
them  pursuant  to  section  44848.  Section  44931  provides: 

12 

 

Whenever  any  certificated  employee  of  any  school 
district  who,  at  the  time  of  his  or  her  resignation,  was 
classified  as  permanent,  is  reemployed  within  39  months 
after  his  or  her  last  day  of  paid  service,  the  governing 
board  of  the  district  shall,  disregarding  the  break  in 
service,  classify  him  or  her  as,  and  restore  to  him  or  her 
all  of  the  rights,  benefits  and  burdens  of,  a  permanent 
employee,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  code. 

(Emphasis  added.)  Each  party  cites  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627,  in  the  context  of  this  issue.  While  San  Jose  does 
confirm  the  need  to  restore  the  returning  teachers  to  permanent  status,  the 
precedent  supports  respondents’  argument  that  for  purposes  of  seniority 
calculations  vis-a-vis  other  teachers,  Hensley  and  Diaz  have  lost  the  protection 
section  44955  otherwise  gives  permanent  teachers: 

We  hold  that  section  44931  provides  that  the  break  in 
service  shall  be  “disregarded”  as  to  individual  rights, 
burdens  and  benefits,  but  not  as  to  seniority  rights  which 
affect  other  employees.  The  “except  as  otherwise 
provided  in  this  code”  provision  in  section  44931  must 
be  read  as  deferring  to  section  44848. 

(San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  641. 
Emphasis  added.)  Respondents  are,  necessarily,  “other  employees”  affected 
by  the  breaks  in  service  of  Hensley  and  Diaz. 

LACOE  contends  that  the  altered  seniority  dates  for  teachers 

who  resign  but  return  within  39  months  mean  only  that  should  a  layoff  under 
sections  44949  and  44955  reach  into  the  ranks  of  permanent  teachers,  the 
returning  teachers  would  be  vulnerable  to  layoff  to  the  extent  their  newly 
assigned  seniority  dates  compared  unfavorably  to  the  seniority  dates  of  other 
permanent  teachers.  This  narrow  construction  of  section  44931  is  not 
supported  by  any  evidence  of  legislative  intent  or  other  appellate  language. 

LACOE  must  retain  the  services  of  the  two  most  senior 

respondents  who  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  services  that 
Hensley  and  Diaz  were  retained  to  render.  In  rejecting  the  domino  theory  as  a 
means  of  addressing  respondents’  grievance  associated  with  the  retention  of 
Hensely  and  Diaz,  the  reasoning  applied  in  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567,  576, 
is  adopted  to  effect  the  retention  of  only  those  two  teachers  actually  prejudiced 
thereby. 

   

13 

6. 

Did  teachers  who  did  not  request  a  hearing  and/or  did  not  file  a 

Notice  of  Defense  and  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing  waive  their  rights  under 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  challenge  their  layoffs  in  light  of 
the  retention  of  teachers  Doyle,  Hensley  and  Diaz?  Yes.  What  is  the  effect,  if 
any,  of  LACOE’s  decision  to  withdraw  the  Accusation  as  to  nine  teachers  who 
had  not  requested  a  hearing? 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides,  “The  employee  [served 
with  a  notice  of  layoff]  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year  ...  If  an  employee  fails  to 
request  a  hearing  ...  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver 
of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.”  LACOE  sent  each  teacher  identified  for 
layoff  a  copy  of  section  44949,  included  a  form  to  request  a  hearing,  and 
advised  that  a  failure  to  request  a  hearing  constituted  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a 
hearing. 

Respondents  cite  Education  Code  section  44924  for  the 

proposition  that  a  teacher  cannot  waive  his  or  her  rights  under  the  Education 
Code.  However,  section  44924,  which  directs  that  a  teacher’s  purported 
waiver  of  his  or  her  rights  under  the  Education  Code  in  the  context  of a 
contract  or  agreement,  is  inapplicable  here.  The  waiver  that  operates  against 
the  teachers’  interests  in  this  matter  is  a  product  of  the  Education  Code  itself, 
and  section  44924  cannot  logically  be  construed  to  make  a  nullity  of  a  waiver 
provided  for  in  section  44949, 

LACOE’s  action  in  withdrawing  the  Accusation  as  to  nine 

teachers  who  did  not  request  a  hearing  does  not  operate  to  vitiate  the 
mandatory  obligation  of  teachers  to  request  a  hearing  and  file  an  Notice  of 
Defense  should  they  wish  to  present  evidence  concerning  their  individual 
seniority  dates,  special  education  or  qualifications  or  any  other  matter  that  may 
impact  the  order  of  layoff.  Put  more  simply,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge 
cannot  operate  in  a  vacuum.  He  or  she  can  only  affect  the  rights  of  those  who 
appear  before  him  or  her. 

7. 

Does  the  decision  to  not  re-elect  all  temporary  teachers  for  the 
next  school  year  constitute  additional  assured  attrition  that  must  be  taken  into 
account  in  identifying  teachers  to  be  laid  off?  No. 

By  virtue  of  Factual  Finding  15,  LACOE  took  into  account  the 
fact  that  all  temporary  teachers  would  receive  notices  of  non-reelection  for  the 
next  school  year.  Therefore,  even  if  such  non-reelections  were  to  be 
considered  “attrition,”  they  were  accounted  for  as  “positively  assured 
attrition.”  (See  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.3d  648,  654.) 

14 

   

8. 

Did  the  Elk  Grove  decision  require  LACOE  to  adjust  the 

seniority  dates  of  certain  respondents  so  that  they  became  more  susceptible  to 
layoff  under  Education  Code  section  44949?  It  is  unnecessary  under  the  facts 
of  this  matter  to  decide  this  issue. 

In  Smith  v.  Governing  Board  of Elk  Grove  Unified  School 

District  (2004)  120  Cal.App.4th  5,  the  court  concluded  that  an  emergency 
credential  is  a  “provisional  credential”  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44911  and  that  service  under  such  a  credential  may  not  be  counted 
toward  permanent  status  even  if  the  teacher  also  held  a  valid,  regular 
credential  in  another  subject.  Prior  to  this  year,  LACOE  had  given  teachers 
credit  toward  tenure  under  such  a  circumstance  and  assigned  their  first  date  of 
paid  service  under  the  provisional  credential  as  their  seniority  date  in  layoff 
proceedings.  Even  though  E/k  Grove  was  not  concerned  with  economic 
layoffs,  LACOE  interpreted  the  decision  as  requiring  the  seniority  date 
adjustment  for  purposes  of  both  tenure  and  layoff  proceedings. 

By  reason  of  Factual  Finding  6,  respondents  Eduarte,  Orona  and 
Reyes  were  impacted  by  LACOE’s  change  in  procedure,  in  that  their  seniority 
dates  were  revised  pursuant  to  its  interpretation  of  E/k  Grove.  However,  none 
of  the  effected  teachers  appeared  and  no  evidence  was  adduced  to  establish 
that  any  pre-adjusted  seniority  date  would  have  given  any  one  of  them 
seniority  over  any  teacher  who  is  being  retained. 

9. 

Does  Golden  Valley  apply  to  this  matter  such  that  LACOE 

failed  to  assign  seniority  dates  to  emergency  permit-holders  or  interns  to  the 
prejudice  of  any  respondent?  No. 

Respondents  argue  that  California  Teachers  Association  v. 
Governing  Board  of the  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  369,  required  LACOE  to  treat  all  provisionally  credentialed 
teachers’  as  probationary  teachers,  assign  them  seniority  dates  based  upon 
their  first  date  of  paid  service  and  provide  them  with  notice  and  rights  under 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Had  LACOE  proceeded  in  this 
fashion,  it  is  asserted  by  respondents,  more  of  the  provisionally  credentialed 
teachers  would  have  been  served  with  layoff  notices  and  because  many  were 
not  served,  the  entire  process  is  flawed  and  cannot  be  sustained. 

LACOE  counters  that  Golden  Valley  merely  stands  for  the 

proposition  that  a  provisional  credential  holder  who  had  not  been  classified  as 
a  temporary  employee  must  be  classified  as  probationary  and  could  be 
dismissed  mid-year  only  for  cause,  pursuant  to  notice.  LACOE  argues  also 
that  the  “top  down”  approach  utilized  to  identify  teachers  subject  to  layoff  was 

  

'  Le.,  holders  of  emergency,  VTW  and  intern  permits. 

15 

   

not  flawed  in  that  the  most  junior  teachers  in  the  positions  to  be  eliminated 
were  identified  and  noticed. 

The  teacher  in  Golden  Valley  was  employed  pursuant  to  a 

written  contract.  She  taught  under  an  emergency  permit,  and  her  status  was 
contingent  upon  fulfilling  the  requirements  to  obtain  a  valid  credential.  When 
she  did  not  fulfill  those  requirements,  she  was  terminated  without  the  benefit 
of  notice  by  March  15.  The  court  invalidated  the  termination,  holding  that 
Education  Code  section  44915"  allows  a  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency 
permit  to  be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee  and  entitled  to  the 
protection  of  statutory  notice  governing  the  mid-year  dismissal  of  a 
probationary  employee.  A  persuasive  argument  that  underscores  the 
difference  between  the  concepts  of  tenure  and  seniority  may  be  made  that 
teachers  holding  emergency  permits  or  another  provisional  credential  should 
also  receive  the  protections  afforded  probationary  teachers  in  layoff  hearings. 
Seniority  is  the  principal  tenet  behind  the  layoff  procedures.  (Education  Code 
section  44955.)  Seniority  is  used  to  distinguish  teachers  within  a 
classification,  including  probationary  teachers.  (Cousins  v.  Weaverville 
Elementary  School  District  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846,  1855.)  Section 
44955  does  not  distinguish  the  type  of  credential  held  by  a  probationary 
employee,  except,  perhaps,  as  part  of  a  tie-breaking  formula.  The  other 
argument  states  that  there  is  no  compelling  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
legislature  intended  to  require  the  holder  of  a  provisional  credential  to  obtain  a 
regular  credential  before  he  or  she  could  begin  to  accrue  seniority  toward 
tenure  (Education  Code  section  44911),  but  also  intended  that  a  provisional 
credential  holder  could  effectively  “bump”  a  fully  credentialed  teacher 
pursuant  to  an  economic  layoff  under  Education  Code  section  44949. 

But  the  issue  as  applied  here  is  a  red  herring:  LACOE  did  in  fact 

categorize  provisionally  credentialed  teachers  as  probationary  teachers 
(probationary  0)  in  its  seniority  analysis.  Indeed,  the  respondents  include  four 
employees  who  are  teaching  under  provisional  credentials,  and  several  more 
were  served  with  layoff  notices  who  did  not  request  a  hearing.  No  showing 
has  been  made  by  respondents  that  any  of  them  are  qualified  by  certificate  and 
competence  to  render  the  services  currently  being  rendered  by  a  junior 
provisionally  credentialed  employee  who  is  being  retained.  Moreover,  the 
evidence  is  that  no  provisionally  credentialed  teacher  is  to  be  retained.  If  the 
provisionally  retained  individual  was  not  identified  for  “bumping”  and  layoff 
through  the  seniority  matrix  process,  then  the  individual  will  be  non-reelected 
in  any  event. 

  

''  Education  Code  section  44915  reads:  “Governing  boards  of  school  districts  shall  classify  as 
probationary  employees,  those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications 
for  the  school  year,  who  have  not  been  classified  as  permanent  employees  or  as  substitute 
employees.” 

16 

 

10. 

|  Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955,  because  of 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  give  notice 
to  all  but  the  two  most  senior  respondents  who  are  certificated  and  competent 
to  render  the  services  being  rendered  by  teachers  Hensley  and  Diaz  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  The  cause  relates 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning 
of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

1, 

Except  as  otherwise  required  by  this  Order,  notice  shall  be  given 
to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school 
year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 
Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

2. 

LACOE  shall  identify  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  law  and 

this  Decision  the  two  most  senior  respondents  who  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  the  services  being  rendered  by  teachers  Hensley  and  Diaz. 
As  to  the  respondents  thus  identified,  the  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  4,  2005 

  

TIMOTHY  S.  THOMAS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

17   

