BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  HAYWARD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT  ~ 
ALAMEDA  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Certificated  Reduction  in 
Force,  Hayward  Unified  School District: 

Certain  Certificated  Employees, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2005010610 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  20,  2005,  in  Hayward,  California,  within  the  Level  A  Conference  Room  of 
the  Administrative  Offices  of  the  Hayward  Unified  School  District  at  24411  Amador Street, 
Hayward,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Cynthia  A.  Schwerin,  Attomey  at  Law,  of  Lozano  Smith,  899  Northgate  Drive,  Suite 
200,  San  Rafael,  California  94903  -3666,  as  assisted  by  Karen  M.  Rezendes,  Attorney  at  Law, 
of  Lozano  Smith,  2000  Crow  Canyon  Place,  Suite  200,  San  Ramon,  California  94583-1344, 
represented  the  Superintendent  for  the  Hayward  Unified  School  District  (“the  District”). 

Dale  Brodsky,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Beeson,  Tayer  and  Bodine,  1404  Franklin  Street, 
Suite  500,  Oakland,  California  94612,  represented  all  respondents  in  this  matter,  except  for 
Respondents  Zarlasht  Barakzoy,  Stanley  Booker,  Thirkell  Debellotte,  Yvonne  Holland, 
Dayna  Hudson,  Sandra  Kim,  and  Hilary  Pineda.  At  the  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  that 
although  Ms.  Mina  Gordon  did  not  file  a  request  for  hearing,  the  District  accepted  a  claim 
that  the  teacher  had  certain  health  problems  that  acted  as  extenuating  circumstances  for  her 
inability  to  file  a  request  for  hearing.  Accordingly,  the  District  recognized  Mina  Gordon  as  a 
respondent  to  this  matter,  and  that  Attorney  Brodsky  represented  the  interests  of Respondent 
Mina  Gordon. 

Respondents  Zarlasht  Barakzoy,  Stanley  Booker,  Thirkell  Debellotte,  Yvonne 
Holland,  Dayna  Hudson,  Sandra  Kim,  and  Hilary  Pineda  were  not  represented  by  legal 
counsel  at  the  hearing,  but  each  of  those  individuals  had  requested  a  hearing  in  this  matter. 
The  District’s  Superintendent’ s  personnel  served  each  of  those  respondents  with  notice  of  the 
hearing  but  they  failed  to  appear  for  the  hearing  of  this  matter.  The  absent  respondents,  who 
were  hot  represented  by  legal  counsel,  were  in  default  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section 
11520,  and  the  hearing  proceeded  in  their  absence.

  

hearing  but  they  failed  to  appear  for  the  hearing  of  this  matter.  The  absent  respondents,  who 
were  not  represented  by  legal  counsel,  were  in  default  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section 
11520,  and  the  hearing  proceeded  in  their  absence. 

The  parties  to  the  hearing  stipulated  and  agreed  that  Andrea  Hayes  and  Elena 
Stockmeyer,  whose  names  did  not  appear  on  the  printed  seniority  list  of  Respondents,  were 
served  with  lay-off  notices  and  they  had  filed  requests  for  hearing.  Accordingly  those  two 
individuals  were  included  in  the  corps  of  respondents  represented  by  Attorney  Brodsky. 
On  April  20,  2005,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

STIPULATIONS 

A. 

The  Hayward  Unified  School  District,  through  its  administrators,  and 

Respondents  agreed  and  stipulated,  in  writing,  before  the  hearing  that: 

i. 

ii. 

lil. 

iv. 

Vv. 

Vi. 

All  certificated  employees  listed  on  Attachment  A,  as  affixed  hereto, 
are  Respondents  in  this  matter; 

The  certificated  employees  whose  names  appear  on  Attachment  A  were 
properly  and  timely  served  with  preliminary  notices  of prospective 
layoff  action  and  each  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing: 

The  certificated  employees  listed  on  Attachment  A  were  properly  and 
timely  served  an  Accusation,  Statement  to  Respondent,  Notice  of 
Defense,  Notice  of  Hearing  and  relevant  statutes; 

The  certificated  employees  listed  on  Attachment  A  made  and  filed 
timely  Notice  of  Defense; 

The  District  appropriately  took  account  of  positively  assured  attrition  in 
the  form  of  resignations  and  retirements  of  other  certificated  employees 
as  of  the  date  of  March  15,  2005; 

The  District  rescinded  layoff  notices  for  the  following  individuals  as  a 
result  of  determination  of  bumping  rights  following  the  application  of 
tie-breaking  criteria  to  the  below  named  certificated  teachers  who  have 
the  same  seniority  dates.  After  conducting  a  lottery  for  certificated 
teacher-employees  holding  the  same  number  of points  as  calculated  on 
application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  the  following  teachers  are  to  be 
retained: 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Schneider,  Tina 
Beckham,  Miriam 
Doss,  Robert

  

d. 
€. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
J. 
k. 
1. 
m. 
n. 
0. 

Wilson,  Joscelyn 
Leary,  Monique 
 Gauzin,  Elvia 
Holstein,  Rachel 
 Hetu,  Yesenia 
Rome,  Robin 
Martin,  Teresa 
Pabley,  Harry 
Olson,  Peter 
Villanueva,  Javier 
_Freyre,  Tracey 
 Elkhouri,  Constance 

a.  Rhoades,  Sarah 
b.  Reyes, Gerald 

vii. 

The  following  certificated  employees  will  only  be  subject  to  0.5  F.T.E, 
reduction  as a  result  of  bumping  rights; 

B. 

During  the  course  of  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  parties  through  counsel 

stipulated  and  agreed  that: 

may  bump  Respondent  Matthew  Clark. 

1. 

Ms.  Anne  Leache,  who  is  not  a  respondent,  has  such  seniority  that  she 

il. 

March  15,  2005  was  a  point  in  the  current  school  year  that  marked  66  percent  of  the  passage 
of  the  school  year  for  the  District. 

As  to  the  contentions  of  Respondent  Yesenia  Dimick,  the  date  of 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

On  or  before  F ebruary  9,  2005,  the  District’s  Superintendent,  or  her  designee, 
presented  the  District’s  Governing  Board  with  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice 
that  particular  kinds  of  services,  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated 
for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2005-2006). 

2, 

Most  of  the  respondents  to  the  proceeding  are  identified  by  name  on  the  list 
affixed  hereto  as  Attachments  “A.”!  But  by a  stipulation  at  the  hearing,  the  attachment  was 
supplemented  by  the  addition  of  the  names  of  Mia  Gordon,  Andrea  Hayes  and  Elana 
Stokamer  to  the  list  of  names  of  affected  respondents. 

3. 

On  February  9,  2005,  the  District’s Governing  ‘Board  unanimously  adopted 

District  Resolution  number  0405-22. 

The  attachment  is  Complainant’ s  hearing  exhibit  “12,”  which  is  titled  “Revised  List  of  Respondents.” 

  

' 

G 

  

 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  it  has  become 
necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
2005-2006  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of  F.T.E.  (full  time 
equivalent)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

A. 

Administrative 

1.0  F.T.E. 
Executive  Director 
1.0  F.T.E. 
Assistant  Superintendent,  Educational  Support 
1.0  F.T.E. 
Assistant  Superintendent.  Curriculum/Instruction 
  3.0F.T.E. 

Subtotal 

B. 

Instructional 

Elementary  Schools 
110.0  F.T.E. 
110.0  F.T.E. 

Subtotal 

Kindergarten  to  6"  Grade  Classroom  Teachers 

Secondary  Schools 
1.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 
11.0  F.T.E. 
3.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 
24.0  F.T.E. 

Subtotal 

Industrial  Arts 
Language  Arts/History 
Physical  Education 
English 
Social  Science 
Art 
Business  Education 
Fine  Arts 

137.0  F.T.E. 

Grand  Total 

4. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  |  1,  2005,  the  District’s  Superintendent, 

Janis  Duran,  dispatched  preliminary  notices”  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including 
each  respondent,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to 
discontinue  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence, 
due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered 
to  the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named 
individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  1  1,  2005,  which  had  attached  to  it  the District’s 
resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  a  right  to  file  a 
request  for  hearing  “to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  employing  [the  named  respondent] 
for  the  2005-2006  school  year.” 

  

“Notice  of  Recommendation  That  Services  Will  Be  Terminated.”

  

5. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  District’s 
Superintendent  and  the  District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s 
Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  course  as  taught  by  respondents. 

6. 

As  stipulated,  respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to 

determine  whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

7. 

As  stipulated,  District’s  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent 

the  Accusation  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

8. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

9. 

Ms.  Chery]  Petermann,  in  her  capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human 

Resources,  appeared  at  the  hearing.  She  provided  competent,  credible  and  persuasive 
evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

For  the  current  school  year,  the  District  employs a  total  of  about  1,232  teachers. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2005-2006  school 
year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s  budget.  Also,  the 
prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the  declining  pupil  census  for 
the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a 
reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  Superintendent,  or  her  designee, 
recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to 
lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of  work  for  teachers  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

On  February  9,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  a  resolution  that  identified  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  next  year  as  a  means  to  handle  the  pressing  financial 
difficulties  faced  by  the  District. 

10.  _  Assistant  Superintendent  Petermann  further  established  that  upon  learning  that 
the  District  was  required  to  initiate  lay-off proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District; 
the  assistant  superintendent  with  her  staff  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the 
District’s  seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Peterman  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s 
teachers  who  were  properly  designated  as  provisional  employees  and  temporary  teachers. 
She  studied  and  set  forth  on  the  District’s  2004-2005  seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire 
dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  all  teachers  to  the  District. 

The  Superintendent,  with  the  aid  of  Assistant  Superintendent  Peterman, 
recommended  that  the  District  eliminated  137  full  time  equivalent  positions  for  the  ensuing 
school  year.  The  decision  was  reached  through a  variety  of professional  personnel  in 

consultation  with  the  Superintendent.  

Before  February  23,  2005,  after  consulting  the  teachers’  labor  union  representatives 
and  gaining  Board  approval,  the  Superintendent’s  office  established  criteria  as  a  tie-breaking 
mechanism  for  teachers  who  have  the  same  date  of paid  service  to  the  District  so  as  to 
develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the  year  2004-2005.  On  F ebruary  23,  2005,  the  Board 
adopted  Resolution  No.  0405-28  that  set  forth  in  an  appendix  criteria  for  tie-breaking  for 
contests  regarding  seniority  where  teachers  had  identical  first  days  of paid  service  to  the 
District.  The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  was  grounded  upon  purely  objective  criteria  to 
address  pressing  needs  of  the  District,  which  was  led  by  a  goal  to  retain  teachers  with 
certified  skills  and  training  in  Spanish  language  instruction  as  evidenced  through  a  teacher’s 
possession  of  a  BCLAD  certificate. 

On  March  11,  2005,  based  on  the  seniority  list,  Superintendent  Janis  Duran  caused  to 

be  placed  in  the  mail,  notices  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary  teachers  that  their 
services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 
Respondents’  Contentions 

11. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  proposed  action  is  procedurally  defective 
and  improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does  not 
fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of  credentialed 
employees  who  are  junior  in  time,  or  equal  in  time;  in  service  to  respondents.  Respondents 
aver  that  the  District  incorrectly  applied  seniority  dates  for  certain  respondents  by  failing  to 
account  for  training,  experience  or  certification  under  Bilingual,  Crosscultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development  (BCLAD)  program  certificates. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  lay-off proceeding  is  confusing  because,  in  part,  the 
District’s  financial  solvency  has  improved  over  past  years;  yet,  the  District  proposes  to 
reduce  the  number  of  teacher  positions  greater  than  the  number  of  teachers  affected  during  | 
the  immediate  past  year.  Respondents  contend  that  the  lay-off  process  exceeds  that 
touchstone  precept  for  layoffs,  namely  “necessity,”  and  hence,  such  proposed  over-all  lay-off 
action  is  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

. 

Also,  Respondents  contend  that  because  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  did  not 
specify  that  the  proposed  teacher  layoff  was  due,  in  part,  to  declining  in  attendance  by  pupils 
and  because  testimony  at  the  hearing  from  the  assistant  superintendent  indicated  that  the 
“PKS”  lay-off proceeding  was  due,  in  part,  to  declining  enrollment  of pupils, Respondents 
asserted  that  they  were  not  afforded  proper  notice  of  such  basis  for  the  layoff.  Hence, 
respondents  aver  sufficient  notice  was  not  afforded  them  to  develop  a  defense  to  the 
superintendent’s  testimony  regarding  declining  pupil  enrollment  so  that  the  entire  layoff 
proceeding  should  be  dismissed. 

Respondents  further  aver  that  the  proposed  lay-off  action  is  “overkill”  as  the  number 
of  teachers  subject  to  the  PKS  reduction  is  not  necessary.  Respondents  argue  the  District  for  © 
the  current  school  year  was  not  in  as  grave a  financial  short-fall  as  the  District  confronted  in 
past  years  so  that  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District  is  not  obligated  to  eliminate  137

  

F.T.E.  positions.  Hence,  Respondents  contend  that  the  proposed  lay-off  action,  which 
pertains  to  the  elimination  of particular  kinds  of  services  that  involves  137  F .T.E.  positions, 
was  arbitrary  and  capricious. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Respondents’  Motion  to  Dismiss  Accusation  Against  Certain  Certificated  English  Teachers 

12. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  Board  resolution  prescribes  the  elimination  of 

eleven  (11)  F.T.E.  positions  for  Secondary  School  English  teachers.  Respondents  move  that 
the  Accusation  against  four  more  senior  teachers,  who  received  lay-off  notices  when  a  junior 
teacher  will  be  retained  for  the  next  school  year,  should  be  dismissed  from  the  proposed 
agency  action.  Respondents  contend  that  non-reemployment  of  those  four  English  teachers 
at  the  high  school  level,  especially  when  the  retained  Junior  English  teacher  has  no  greater 
competence,  training  or  experience  as  an  English  teacher  at  the  high  school  level,  is 
unlawful. 

Facts  Underpinning  Respondents’  Motion  to  Dismiss 

13. 

The  District  identified  14  certificated  secondary  school  English  teachers  who 

filled  11  F.T.E  positions  that  were  proposed  for  elimination.  But,  the  District  mailed 
preliminary  notices  of  lay-off  to  only  13  of  the  identified  teachers. 

An  employee  named  Amy  Kudenov,  with a  first  day  of paid  service  to  the  District  of 
January  21,  2004,  did  not  received  a  lay-off  notice.  Yet,  the  District  gave  preliminary  notice 
of  lay-off  to  four  teachers  who  possess  earlier  seniority  dates  as  measured  against  Ms. 
Kudenov. 

The  four  teachers  with  seniority  dates,  which  were  earlier  than  the  seniority  date  for 
Ms.  Kudenow,  are:  Laila  Rall,  Jennifer  Munkelt,  Paul  Lai  and  Jennesis  Jensen.  Each  of  the 
four  English  teachers  has  a  seniority  date  with  the  District  of  August  23,  2003. 

The  District  offered  no  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  to  prove  that  any  of  the 
four affected  English  teachers  was  less  competent  or  less  educated  or  possessed  of  less  skill 
than  Ms.  Kudenov  to  teach  English  at  the  secondary  school  level.  No  evidence  came  into  the 
record  to  show  that  Ms.  Kudenov,  although  a  more  junior  teacher  to  the  subject  four  teachers, 
had  greater  ability  to  service  the  needs  of  the  high  school  level  English  teaching  program  so 

as  to  be  retained  by  the  District  when  competent  and  senior  employees  were  to  be  terminated.  

© 

At  the  hearing,  neither  the  assistant  superintendent  nor  other  administrative  personnel 
of  the  District  offered  competent  evidence  on  the  placement  of  the  four  English  teachers  in 
relative  standing  among  each  other  regarding  seniority.  The  District’s  administrators  did  not 
use  the  Board  approved  criteria  for  tie-breaking  so  as  to  assign  points  to  each  of  the  four 
English  teachers  to  designate  relative  positions  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

Respondents  argue  the  four  English  teachers,  who  have  seniority  dates  greater  than 

the  retained  junior  employee,  but  who  received  preliminary  notice  of  lay-off,  should  be 
dismissed  from  the  Accusation. 

The  District  proclaims  that  the  controversy  be  resolved  by  the  District  retention  of 
one  of  the  affected  four  respondents  by  applying  the  “corresponding  number”  standard  as 
contemplated  under  Alexander  v.  Delano-Joint  Union  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d 
567,  576. 

Individual  Respondents 

14. 

Respondent  Kerry  Von  Esch  (“Respondent  Von  Esch”)  holds  an  intern 
certificate.  She  is  a  grade  teacher  at  Cherryland  School.  She  has a  first  date  of paid  service 
to  the  District  on  August  21,  2001,  Respondent  holds  status  under  a  contract  with  the 
District  as  an  intern. 

@ 

Respondent  Von  Esch  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Biology  as  well  as  a 
Bachelor  of  Arts  equivalent  in  Spanish.  She  has  a  Master’s  degree  in  Education  with  a 
emphasis  in  “Teaching  English  to  Speakers  of  Other  Languages.”  Respondent  Von  Esch 
represents  that  she  has  taught  bilingual  students  for  her  entire  teaching  career,  which  includes 
about  three  years  in  another  state  as  a  certificated  teacher. 

She  has  worked  for  the  District  over  four  years.  Over  the  past two  years,  at  least, 

Respondent  Von  Esch  has  taught  a  bilingual  class  in  the  District. 

About  a  year  before  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  Respondent  Von  Esch  took  the  course 
for  certificate  as  a  BCLAD  teacher.  She  passed  the  test  for  that  certificate.  But,  as  of  March 
15,  2005,  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  had  not  approved  the  courses  and 
qualifications  of  Respondent  Von  Esch  as  a  holder  of  either  a  BCLAD  certificate  or  a  clear 
multiple  subject  credential. 

Respondent  was  not  persuasive  that  the  fact  that  she  currently  teaches  a  bilingual 
class  for  the  District  equates  to  a  status  of  holding  an  actual  BCLAD  certificate  for  the 
purpose  of  enhancing  her  position  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Moreover,  Respondent  Von 
Esch  established  that  only  during  the  week  immediately  before  the  hearing  of  this  matter  had 
she  “turned  over  her  paper  work”  to  the  California  State  Commission  of  Teacher 
Credentialing  for  her  prospective  certification  as  a  BCLAD  holder  and  possessor  of  a  clear 

@  multiple  subject  credential. 

 

Also  Respondent  Von  Esch  was  not  persuasive  the  District  should  have  skipped  her 

on  the  seniority  list  due  to  her  skills  in  Spanish  and  bilingual  education. 

Respondent  Von  Esch  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Von  Esch  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  teach. 

15. 

Respondent  Maria  Rosa  De  Altonaga  (“Respondent  De  Altonaga”)  has a  first 
date  of paid  service  as  a  probationary-one  teacher  as  of  October  13,  2004.  She  now  holds  a 
Ryan  teaching-preliminary  multiple  subject  credential.  Respondent  worked  during  the  past 
school  year  at  Palma  Ceia  Elementary  as a  bilingual  fifth-sixth  grade “combo”  teacher, 

As  of  March  15,  2004,  Respondent  De  Altonaga  did  not  possess  a  BCLAD certificate. 
But,  she  does  hold  a Crosscultural, 

She  plans  to  take  the  test  for  the  BCLAD  in  June  2005. 
Language  and  Academic  Development  (“CLAD”)  certificate. 

Respondent  De  Altonaga  asserts  that  she  is  a  “native  speaker”  in  Spanish  and 
that  she 
initially  had  no  plan  to  take  testing  on  her  language  proficiency.  However,  she  has  set  about 
to  take  testing  for  acquisition  of  the  certificate.  Yet,  Respondent  De  Altonaga  is  now 
enrolled  in  a  “Second  Language  Acquisition”  course  through  the  English  learning  center. 
But,  she  does  not  possess  a bilingual  teacher-in-training  certificate. 

Respondent  De  Altonaga  was  not  persuasive  the  District  should  have  skipped  her  on 

the  seniority  list  due  to  her  skills  in  Spanish  and  bilingual  education. 

Respondent  De  Altonaga  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has: - 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  De  Altonaga  possessés  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach. 

, 

16. 

Respondent  Susan  Tabrah  (“Respondent  Tabrah”)  is  a  probationary-two 
employee  with a  first  date  of paid  service  to  the  District  on  August  25,  2003.  During  the  past 
school  year,  Respondent  Tabrah  worked  as a  fifth  grade  English  Language  Development 
(“ELD”)  teacher  at  Burbank  Elementary  School. 

Respondent  Tabrah  asserts  that  she  holds  a  BCLAD  certificate. 
But,  the  ELD  class  that  Respondent  Tabrah  teaches  does  not  require  that  subject 
teacher  to  hold  a  BCLAD  certification.  The  class  taught  by  Respondent  Tabrah  is  not 
designated  as  a  bilingual  class.  She  does  not  teach  the  entire  class  in  the  Spanish  language. 
During  her  teaching  work,  Respondent  Tabrah  selectively  aids  Spanish  speaking  pupils  in 
Spanish.  And,  Respondent  Tabrah  has  eleven  students  for  whom  she  communicates  in 
Spanish  to  their  parents,  including  writing  report  cards  in  Spanish. 

  

 

Respondent  Tabrah  was  not  persuasive  the  District  should  have  skipped  her  on  the 
seniority  list  due  to  her  skills  in  Spanish,  bilingual  education  and  possession  of  a  BCLAD 
certificate. 

Respondent  Tabrah  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 
teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Tabrah  possesses a  credential  and  is  currently  competent 
to  teach. 

17, 

The  parties  stipulate  and  agree  that  Respondents  Piet  Best  and  Gloria  Sifuentes 

are  teachers-in-training  for  the  BCLAD  certificates.  Although  those  individual  teachers  - 
teach  bilingual  classes,  those  two  respondents  did  not  possess,  as  of  March  15,  2005, 
BCLAD  certificates. 

18. 

Respondent  Yesenia  Dimick  (“Respondent  Dimick”)  holds  a  temporary  CLAD 
certificate.  She  possesses  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential.  Respondent  Dimick  has 
a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  of  August  26,  2002.  During  the  past  school  year 
she  taught  at  the  Shepherd  Elementary  School  as  an  ELD  teacher. 

Respondent  Dimick  accepts  that  under  criteria  for  tie-breaking,  the  District  granted 
her  three  points  in  determining  relative  seniority  with  other  teachers  who  had  first  dates  of 
paid  service  to  the  District  as  Respondent  Dimick.  But,  Respondent  Dimick  is  not  persuasive 
that  the  District’s  administrative  personnel failed  to  give  her  points  under  the  criteria  for  tie- 
breaking  as  follows:  (i)  three  points  for  all  years  of  service  to  the  district,  (ii)  two  points  for 
possession  of  a  CLAD  certificate,  and  (iii)  one  point  for  a  Master’s  Degree  in  Education. 

Respondent  Dimick  is  not  persuasive  that  she  had  an  entitlement  to  six  points,  rather 

than  three  points,  under  the  District’s  criteria  for  tie-breaking. 

But,  the  District  established  that  as  of  the  date  for  mailing  of  the  preliminary  lay-off 
notices  as  of  mid-March  2005  Respondent  Dimick  had  not  completed,  at  least,  75  percent  of 
a  third  year  as  a  teacher  in  the  district.  Hence,  she  was  entitled  to  only  two  points,  rather 
than  as  she  contends  three  points,  under  the  tie-breaking  criteria  regarding  years  of  service  to 
the  District. 

Also,  the  District  showed  that  as  of  March  15,  2005,  Respondent  Dimick  had  not  filed 
an  approved  CLAD  certificate  with  the  District.  In  fact,  Respondent  Dimick  acknowledged 
that  District  administrators  recently  notified  her  that  the  District  did  not  have  on  file  a 
BCLAD  certificate  document  before  the  date  for  failing  of  the  preliminary  lay-off  notice. 
Respondent  Dimick  was  not  persuasive  the  District  should  have  skipped  her  on  the 

seniority  list  due  to  her  skills  in  Spanish  and  bilingual  education. 

Respondent  Dimick  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 
teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Dimick  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently  competent 
to  teach. 

10  

19. 

Respondent  Matthew  Clark  (“Respondent  Clark”)  is  a  probationary-one 

employee  of  the  District  because  his  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  J anuary  17, 
2004.  Over  the  past  year,  Respondent  Clark  taught  four  periods  of  history  for  eighth  grade 
classes  at  Chavez  School.  Also,  he  taught  one  period  of  an  enrichment  reading  class  at  that 
school. 

Respondent  Clark  has  credentials  in  single  subject-History  and  he  holds  a  CLAD 
certificate.  Respondent  has  a  supplemental  credential  in  language  arts  for  Kindergarten 
through  9"  grade. 

Respondent  Clark  is  troubled  by  the  supposed  bumping  of  his  position  by  Anne 
Leache,  who  the  District  has  decided  not  to  provide  a  preliminary  lay-off  notice.  But, 
Respondent  Clark  is  mistaken  regarding  the  credentials  held  by  Anne  Leache.  Anne  Leache 
has a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  of  August  25,  2003,  which  gave  her  an  earlier 
seniority  date  than  Respondent  Clark.  Also,  Anne  Leache  possesses  a  supplemental  science 
credential,  which  is  not  held  by  Respondent  Clark. 

Respondent  Clark  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained  any 
teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Clark  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently  competent 
to  teach. 

20. 

Respondent  George  Kwong  (“Respondent  Kwong”)  over  that  past  school  year 

has  taught  third  grade  at  the  Schafer  Park  School. 

In  August  2002,  Respondent  Kwong  first  worked  for  the  District  as  a  fifth  grade 
teacher  at  Harter  Elementary  School.  He  held  status  then  as  a  teacher  with  probationary-one 
contract.  But,  on  the  15™  day  of  the  academic  year,  Respondent  was  reassigned  to  Markham 
Elementary  School;  however,  the  principal  at  that  school  sought  an  experienced  teacher  so 
that  the  District’s  personnel  officer  offered  Respondent  Kwong  options  from  which  he 
decided  to  resign  his  teacher  position  on  about  October  11,  2002.  Thereafter,  effective  on 
January  6,  2003,  the  District’s  administrators  hired  Respondent  Kwong  to  serve  as  a 
substitute  teacher. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  called  Mary  Ellen  Cote  to  show  that  for  the  school  year 
2002-2003,  Respondent  Kwong  worked  as  a  probationary  teacher  for  34  days  and  he  worked 
for  105  days  as  a  substitute  teacher.  Ms.  Cote  established  that  for  the  entire  school  year  of 
2002-2003,  Respondent  Kwong  worked  for a  total  of  139  days.  During  that  school  year,  the 
District  had a  total  of  186  days.  Hence,  for  the  school  year  2002-2003,  Respondent  Kwong 
served  the  District  for  74.73  percent  of  the  school  year,  in  part,  as  a  substitute  teacher. 

At  the  hearing,  Ms.  Cote  offered  that  District  personnel  initially  erred  by  classifying 
Respondent  Kwong  as  a  probationary  two  teacher  for  the  school  year  2003-2004.  Rather, 
Ms.  Cote  persuasively  stated  that  for  that  school  year  Respondent  Kwong  should  have  been 
working  under  probationary-one  teacher  status. 

  

1]

On  March  10,  2005,  Respondent  Kwong  learned  through a letter  from  Assistant 

Superintendent  Petermann  that  for  the  current  school  year  (2004-2005)  he  had  been 
inaccurately  designated  a  permanent  status  teacher.  The  letter  informed  Respondent  Kwong 
that  he  correctly  occupied  probationary-two  employee  status  as  a  teacher  to  the  District  and 
that  he  had a  seniority  date  of  January  6,  2003.  The  letter  was  dispatched  by  the  assistant 
superintendent  because  Respondent  Kwong  served  the  District  for  only  74.73  percent  of  the 
school  year  for  the  first  year  that  he  worked  as  a  teacher  for  the  District. 

Respondent's  Witness  on  Financial  Matters  Pertaining  to  the  Proposed  Lay-Off Action 

21. 

Mr.  Samuel  De  Haven  (“Union  Representative  De  Haven”)  appeared  at  the 

-  hearing  of  this  matter  on  behalf  of  Respondents.  However,  the  evidence  offered  by  him  was 
not  persuasive  or  reliable. 

Union  Representative  De  Haven  claimed  that  a  supposed  analysis  of  the  District’s 
fiscal  records  for  the  current  school  year,  past  years,  as  well  as  projections  into  the  future, 
indicate  that  the  District  had  “saved  ”  money  for  the  District’s  general  fund  account,  in  that 
its  financial  condition  improved  by  $1.2  million  dollars  from  the  date  of  a  previous  interim 
report.  Union  Representative  De  Haven  was  not  credible  when  he  propounded  that  the 
District’s  financial  condition  as  measured  against  the  District’s  financial  state  one  year  ago 
warranted  a  lay-off  that  did  not  entail  137  F.T.E.  positions,  but  rather  a  lesser  number  of 
positions  and  therefore  a  lesser  number  of  individual  teachers  would  be  proper,  equitable  and 
lawful.  Union  Representative  De  Haven  was  neither  persuasive  nor  credible  with 
representations  that  in  order  for  the  District  to  remain  financially  sound  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  that  the  District  needed  to  eliminate  only  thirteen  F.T.E.  or  teacher  positions 
rather  than  137  F.T.E.  positions. 

Union  Representative  De  Haven’s  assertions  regarding  attrition,  in  the  way  of  — 
resignations  and  retirements  of  certificated  employees  since  the  date  for  dispatch  of  the 
preliminary  notices,  have  no  persuasive  bearing  on  the  Board’s  discretion  to  perfect  final  lay- 
off  action  against  respondents  subject  to  this  matter, 

The  overall  fiscal  analysis  by  the  Union  Representative  De  Haven  was  not  reliable  or 
trustworthy.  The  unreliable  analysis  was  founded  upon  information  transmitted  to  the  union 
from  the  sources,  data  or  summaries  of  financial  records  other  than  from  the  District’s  Fiscal 
Services  operations  or  the  Alameda  County  Board  of  Education’s  appointed  fiscal  crisis 
management  advisors  to  the  District. 

Further,  evidence  offered  by  Union  Representative  De  Haven  was  not  reliable  as  no 
evidence  shows  that  he  has  expertise  as  a  school  administrator  or  as  an  expert  in  accounting, 
business  management  or  financial  analysis.  Union  Representative  De  Haven  has  never  been 
involved  in  the  actual  production  of  a  budget  for  a  school  district. 

   

12

‘  @ 
. 

The  lay-off  proceeding,  for  which  the  hearing  in  this  matter  was  conducted,  is  not  the 

proper  forum  for  the  labor  union  representative  to  advance  arguments  on  so-called  District 
savings  due  to  future  contract  negotiations  that  may  entail  an  increase  in  class  sizes  that 
individual  teachers  will  be  assigned  during  the  next  school  year. 

The  evidence  offered  through  Union  Representative  De  Haven  has  no  bearing  on  the 

Governing  Board’s  ability  to  issue  final  lay  off  notices  to  affected  respondents  to  this 
proceeding. 

District's  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

22. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the  District 
faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State  of  California 
may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Board  has  determined  that 
sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of  teachers  and  administrator 
positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year.  Hence,  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the 
positions  held  by  many  of  the  affected  respondents. 

23. 

Other  than  as  set  out  above  as  to  four  English  teachers  at  the  high  school  level, 
no  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed  elimination  of 
the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  the  District  will  retain 
@  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services  for  which  respondents  have 

been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE  positions  for  the  next  school 
"year. 

24. 

The  recommendation  of  the  District’s  superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision 

to  eliminate  or  discontinue  most  of  a  total  of  137.0  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions 
held  by  most  of  the  respondents,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise 
of  the  District’s  discretion. 

25. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 

positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  most  of  the  respondents,  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

26. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

@  44949  and  44955. 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

13 

 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth 
in  the  Stipulations’  as  well  as  Factual  F indings  1  through  8,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 

duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been  regularly 
performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the  District  has 
properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non  reemployment  of 
respondents. 

4. 

Board  Resolution  0405-22,  as  adopted  on  February  9,  2005,  stated  that  it  was 
the  Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  A  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  was  not  cited 
as  a  basis  for  eliminating  five  full  time  equivalent  certificated  positions  in  the  District’s  corps 
of  teachers  and  single  administrative  position. 

The  Superintendent’s  preliminary  layoff  notice,  dated  March  11,  2005 ,  Stated  that  the 
reason  for  the  notice  was  due  to  a  decision  “to  reduce  services  in  our  schools. Unfortunately, 
this  reduction  in  services  makes  it  necessary  to  inform  you  that  I  have  recommended  to  the 
Governing  Board  that  your  services  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  ...” 
The  preliminary  notice,  which  made  reference  to  the  Board’s  resolution,  did  not  mention  a 
decline  in  average  daily  attendance  as  the  reason  for  the  lay-off  action. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  authorizes  a  district’s  governing  board 

to  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  employees 
whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  for  all  schools  in  the  first  six 
months  has  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  school  year  or 
whenever a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year. 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a)  requires  that  no  later  than  March  15 
and  before  an  employee  is  given  preliminary  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by 
the  school  district’s  superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be 
given  to  employees  and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation. 
The  preliminary  notice  is  intended  to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed  of 

the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be 
reemployed.  The  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
(Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education  (1974)  39  Cal.  App.3d  355.) 

A  notice  that  specifies  both  grounds,  that  is  PKS  reduction/elimination  and  declining 

average  daily  attendance,  is  suspect.  (See,  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.3d  648.)  And,  where a  notice  specifies  one  of  the  two  statutory  reasons  for  a 

  

At  page  two,  above. 

  

14

teacher  layoff,  a  governing  board  may  not  later  attempt  to  justify  dismissal  on  the  other 
ground.  (Karbach  v.  Bd of  Education,  supra,  39  Cal.App.3d  3554.) 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  need 

not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number  of 
students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number  of  terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within  the 
Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a  particular 
service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627.) 

The  procedural  defect  or  error  in  Karbach  may  be  distinguished  from  the  facts 
pertaining  to  this  matter.  Unlike  Karbach,  the  Hayward  Unified  School  District’s  Governing 
Board  did  not  propose  layoffs  for  any  reason  not  specified  in  the  preliminary  notice  as  sent  to 
certificated  employees.  The  projection  of  declining  pupil  attendance  or  enrollment,  as 
offered  in  evidence  by  the  assistant  superintendent,  was  one  of  a  few  reasons  for 
consideration  by  that  professional  education  administrator  offered  as  the  ground  for  teacher 
lay-off  to  the  subject  governing  board  for  its  decision  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services.  In  this  matter,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  a  fraudulent, 
arbitrary  or  capricious  action,  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796.) 

The  Hayward  Unified  School  District  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  137 
F.T-.E.  positions  for  the  2005-2006  school  (which  may  have  been  based  in  some  measure  on  a 
projected  decline  in  enrollment  of  pupils  for  the  2005-2006  school  year)  was  a  discretionary 
decision  that  constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  service  under  the 
Education  Code. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955  establishes,  in  part,  that  the  order  of  teacher 
layoff  must  occur  “in  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  [the  employee  teachers]  were  employed, 
as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  [Education  Code  section] 
...  44845  ....”  And,  Education  Code  section  44845,  in  part,  states:  “Every  probationary  or 
permanent  employee  employed  . 
.  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed on  the  date  upon 
which  [sJhe  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  Probationary  position.”  (Emphasis  added.) 
Also,  Education  Code  section  44911  set  out:  “Service  by  a  person  under  a 
provisional  credential  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a 

. 

  

* 

In  Karbach,  the  governing  board  gave  notice  to  probationary  teachers  that  such  employees 
.  would  not  be  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  on  the  ground  of  a  decline  in  average  daily 
attendance.  But,  at  the  administrative  adjudication  hearing,  the  presiding  officer  allowed  the  board  to 
present  evidence  justifying  the  decision  to  eliminate  positions  of  the  affected  probationary  teachers  on  the 
new  theory  of  reduction  in  particular  services.  The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  governing  board  had  no 
authority  to  terminate  the  teachers  for  any  reason  not  specified  in  the  original  preliminary  notice  and  that 
the  proposed  terminations  on  the  ground  of  reduction  in  services  were  not  valid. 

  

15

prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  of  a 
school  district.”  (Emphasis  added.)  Accordingly,  as  to  a  number  of  teachers  who  do  not 
possess  BCLAD  certificates,  yet  currently  teach  bilingual  class  under  a  status  of  “teacher-in- 
training”  did  not  establish  a  basis  to  require  the  District  to  award  tie-breaking  points  under 
the  criteria  that  allows  points  for  possession  of  a  BCLAD  certificate. 

Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026,  reflects 

the  underpinning  of  the  public  education  system  that:  “the  numerous  provisions  of  the 
_  Education  Code  [express]  the  legislative  preference for fully  credentialed  teachers  and  the 
goal  of  reducing  the  number  of  teachers  employed  under  temporary  or  emergency 
credentials.”  Summerfield  shows  that  an  emergency  credential  does  not  accrue  time  in 
service  for  the  attainment  by  such  a  classified  teacher  of  permanent  status.  Summerfield  cites 
Education  Code  section  45023.1,  subdivision  (a)(1)  (which  limits  salary  increases  to 
credentialed  teachers  but  not  such  increases  for  those  holding  emergency  credentials),  and 
Education  Code  section  44225.7,  subdivision  (c)  (which  directs  assignment  of  interns  to 
classrooms  so  as  to  diminish  a  District’s  reliance  on  teachers  on  emergency  permits). 

It  is  important  to  note  that  Education  Code  section  44300  requires  school  districts  to 

certify  that  the  affected  district  is  unable  to  recruit  a  sufficient  number  of  credentialed 
teachers  or  interns  before  employing  teachers  on  emergency  credentials.  And,  Education 
Code  section  44225.7  demands  that  “state  policy  directs  the  assignment  of  fully  prepared 
teachers  to  California  classrooms...  .” 

The  scheme  devised  by  the  California  Legislature  would  be  violated,  and grave 

wrongs  would  be  visited  upon  credentialed  teachers  with a later  hire  date  than  the  subject 
probationary  and  provisional  credentialed  teachers,  under  the  arrangement  sought  by 
Respondent  Von  Esch,  De  Altonaga,  Best  and  Sifuentes,  who  have  not  gained  fully 
credentialed  status,  or  are  lacking  full  BCLAD  certificate  even  though  they  are  “in  training.” 
Moreover,  probationary  status  is  not  retroactively  conferred  to  the  beginning  of  employment 
of  a  teacher  who  secures  a  clear  credential  or  a  full  BCLAD  certificate  during  the  school  year  | 
after  an  initial  contract  is  executed  by  the  teacher  in a  status  other  than  probationary  as  in  the 
instances  of  several  respondents  hereto. 

Respondents  Kerry  Von  Esch,  Maria  Rosa  De  Altonaga,  Piet  Best  and  Gloria 

_  Sifuentes  are  either  “in  training,”  prospectively  certified  BCLAD  teachers  or  who  do  not 
have  BCLAD  certificates,  Or,  in  the  case  of  Respondent  Susan  Tabrah,  that  the  teacher, 
_  although  holding  a  BCLAD  certificate,  did  not  teach  a  bilingual  class  over  the  past  school 
year.  The  Board  resolution  is  specific  that  tie-breaking  criteria  points  were  to  be  awarded  to 
teachers  who  had  BCLAD  certificate  and  actually  taught  bilingual  classes. 

The  District's  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  underpin  the  District’s 

preliminary  notices  to  the  affected  teachers  were  reasonable  and  rationale. 

Respondents  Kerry  Von  Esch,  Maria  Rosa  De  Altonaga,  Piet  Best  and  Gloria 

Sifuentes,  and  Susan  Tabrah  remain  properly  subject  to  receipt  of  a  final  lay-off  notice. 

16  

5. 

As  to  Respondent  Yesenia  Dimick,  that  teacher  was  not  entitled  to  a  greater 

number  of  points  under  the  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  than  the  three  points  that  had  been 
granted  her.  When  the  preliminary  notice  was  dispatched  before  March  15,  2005,  only  66 
percent  of  the  school  year  had  passed.  Hence,  she  was  not  entitled  to  a  point  for  her 
supposed  third  year  as  a  certificated  teacher  with  the  district. 

Also,  Respondent  Dimick  was  not  entitled  to  tie-breaking  points  for  a  BCLAD 
certificate  that  was  not  registered  by  her  with  the  County  Office  of  Education  and  the  District 
by  the  date  for  dispatch  on  March  11,  2005,  of  the  preliminary  lay  off  notices. 
After-acquired  credentials,  which  are  filed  after  the  date  for  mailing  the  preliminary  lay-off 
notice,  need  not  be  considered  by  a  District  in  the  lay-off  action.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

. 

Respondent  Dimick  was  properly  assi gned  the  proper  number  of  tie-breaking  points, 

that  is  three  points,  under  the  criteria  to  set  the  final  seniority  list.  She  remains  properly 
subject  to  receipt  of  a  final  lay-off  notice. 

6. 

The  District  properly  designated  Respondent  George  Kwong  as  a 
probationary-two  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of  January  6,  2003.  During  his  first  year  of 
employment  with  the  District  beginning  in  August  2002,  Respondent  Kwong  worked  for  | 
about  one  month  under a  contract  as  a  probationary  teacher.  Then  in  January  2003,  the 
District  hired  Respondent  Kwong  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  the  balance  of  the  school  year 
over  the  span  of  105  days.  For  the  next  school  year  of  2003-2004,  the  District  hired 
Respondent  Kwong  as  a  probationary  employee. 

Education  Code  449]  8  establishes: 

. 

.  employee,  who 

Any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  . 
serves  during  one  school  year for  at  least  75%  of  the  number 
of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained  in 
such  school  year  and  has  performed  the  duties  normally 
required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall 
be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete  year  as  a  probationary 
employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  for  the 
following  school  year.  [Emphasis  added. ] 

For  the  school  year  2002-2003,  calculating  his  total  time  as  a  probationary  employee 
and  the  time  spent  as  a  substitute  teacher,  Respondent  Kwong  worked  74.73  percent  of  the 
school  year  for  the  District.  There  is  no  legal  authority  to  “round-up”  so  as  to  grant 
Respondent  Kwong  additional  time  in  service  in  order  to  reach  the  requisite  75  percent  of  the 
time  prescribed  in  Education  Code  section  44918. 

Respondent  Kwong,  in  not  serving  the  District  “for  at  least  75%”  of  the  number  of 
days  of  the  school  year  2002-2003,  did  not accrue  sufficient  time  as  a  substitute  teacher  for 
that  school  year  so  as  to  gain  status  as  a  probationary  employee  for  his  first  year  in  the 

  

17

@ 

employ  of  the  District.  For  the  current  school  term  (2004-2005),  Respondent  Kwong  is 
properly  classified  as  a  probationary-two  employee  to  the  District. 

Respondent  Kwong  has  no  right  to  skip  another  certificated  employee  who  is  senior 

to  him  on  the  seniority  list. 

Respondent  George  Kwong  remains  properly  subject  to  receipt  of  a  final  lay-off 

notice. 

8. 

San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627, 
establishes  that  a  school  district  need  not  consider  positively  assured  attrition  that  occurs 
between  the  date  of  issuance  of  the  preliminary  notice  of  a  Board  determination  that 
certificated  employees  not  be  reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  by  reason  of  a 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  date  for  dispatch  of  the  final  notice  that 
determines  the  number  of  certificated  employees  that  are  to  be  terminated.  “In  PKS  cases  the 
determination  of  the  amount  by  which a  service  is  to  be  reduced  is  the  determination  of  the 
number  of  positions  to  be  eliminated.”  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144 
Cal.App.3d  at  636.) 

Contrary  to  respondents’  argument,  the  District  may  issue  final  lay-off  notices  to 
affected  respondents  without  accounting  for  other  teachers’  retirements  and  resignation  that 
occur  between  March  15,  2005,  and  May  15,  2005. 

@ 

9. 

Respondents  and  the  Superintendent  cite  as  supposed  persuasive  authority 
proposed  decisions  from  past  years  by  administrative  law  judges,  as  adopted  by  other  school 
districts  as  a  decision  of  such  other  districts.  But,  such  proposed  decisions  from  past  years 
have  no  precedential?  effect  on  the  Hayward  Unified  School  District  in  reaching 
_  determinations  or  an  order  in  this  matter. 

Ruling  on  Respondents’  Motion  to  Dismiss  Accusation  of Certain  Certificated English 
Teachers 

7 

10. 

Respondents’  motion  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  Respondents  Laila 

Rall,  Jennifer  Munkelt,  Paul  Lai  and  Jennesis  Jensen  is  sustained. 

The  District  gave  lay-off  notices  to  those  four  English  teachers,  while  the  District 
failed  to  give  a  lay-off  notice  to  an  English  teacher  named  Amy  Kudenov,  who  was  junior  to 
the  subject  four  English  teachers,  who  are  respondents  in  this  matter. 

The  District  cites  Alexander  v.  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139 

Cal.App.3d  567  for  the  proposition  that  even  though  the  District  failed  to  give  the  junior 

  

@  precedent  decisions. 

> 

Government  Code  section  11425.60  establishes  the  authority  for  the  adoption  of  a  system  for 

 

18 

teacher—Ms.  Kudenov—preliminary  notice  when  the  District  proceeded  with  lay-off  action 
against  the  four  more  senior  English  high  school  teachers  that  only  one  teacher  of  the  more  | 
senior  teachers  should  be  dismissed  from  the  lay-off  under  a  “corresponding  number” 
standard. 

: 

The  District  persuasively  argues  rejection  of  a  “domino  effect”  that  would  effectively 

dismiss  the  Accusation  against  the  four  English  teachers  who  have  earlier  seniority  dates 
than  the  junior  teacher  who  did  not  receive  preliminary  notice  of  lay-off. 

The  facts  in  this  matter  require  application  of  the  “corresponding  number”  standard  as 

raised  in  Alexander, 

But,  because  all  four  of  the  subject  English  teachers  have  the  same  seniority  date  of 

August  23,  2002,  and  as  no  evidence  was  offered  as  to  the  proper  application  of  tie-breaking 
criteria  under  the  Board’s  subject  resolution,  proper  identification  of  the  most  senior  of  the 
affected  four  English  teachers  can  not  accurately  be  made  through  this  decision. 

The  controversy  must  be  resolved  by  the  Superintendent  through  use  of  the  Board’s 
tie-breaking  criteria  that  may  be  then  followed  by  an  objective  lottery  so  as  to  ascertain  top 
placement  on  seniority  list  ranking  of  one  Secondary  School  English  teacher  among  the  four 
affected  respondents  and  that  such  single  Secondary  School  teacher,  with  a  first  date  of  paid 
service  of  August  23,  2003,  shall  be  retained  as  an  employee  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Sanctity  of Stipulation  to  Dismiss  Teachers  from  the  Accusation 

11. 

Judgments  entered  by  a  tribunal  on  the  stipulation  of  the  parties  have  the  same 

effect  as  acts  tried  on  the  merits.  (John  Siebel  Associates  v.  Keele  (1986)  188  Cal.App.3d 
560,  565.) 

The  District  stipulates  to  withdraw  the  Accusation  against  those  certificated 
employees  named  in  the  Stipulations  (A)(vi)  and  (vii)  at  pages  two  and  three,  above.  The 
stipulations  are  binding  on  the  parties. 

Ultimate  Determinations 

12. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to  give 

respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual 
Findings  9,  10,  14  to  20  inclusive,  22  to  24  inclusive  and  26. 

  

° 

“Because  at  least  some  of  the  persons  skipped  [that  is,  the  junior  employee  such  as  Amy 

Kudenov]  should  have  received  the  notices,  a  corresponding  number  [in  this  matter—one  employee]  of  the 
most  senior  of  the  employees  who  were  not  employed  must  have  been  improperly  given  notices.” 

  

19

13. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  each 
respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in  Factual  Finding  25. 

14. 

Any  contentions  raised  by  respondents  that  are  not  discussed  above  are  found 
to  be  without  merit  and  are  hereby  rejected. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed,  pursuant  to  a  stipulation  between  the  parties,  as 
to  Tina  Schneider,  Miriam  Beckham,  Robert  Doss,  Joscelyn  Wilson,  Monique  Leary,  Elvia 
Gauzin,  Rachel  Holstein,  Yesenia  Hetu,  Robin  Rome,  Teresa  Martin,  Harry  Pabley,  Peter 
Olson,  Javier  Villanueva,  Tracey  Freyre,  and  Constance  Elkhouri. 

2. 

Pursuant  to  a  stipulation  between  the  parties,  the  Accusation  is  partially 

dismissed  as  against  Respondents  Sarah  Rhoades  and  Gerald  Reyes,  who  will  only  be  subject 
to  0.5  F.T.E.  reduction  as  a  result  of  bumping  rights. 

3. 

By  reason  of  Factual  Finding  13  and  Legal  Conclusion  10,  the  matter  is 

remanded  to  the  Superintendent  for  her  to  use  the  Board’s  approved  tie-breaking  criteria,  and 
if  necessary  to  use a  lottery,  to  determine  seniority  of  the  single  Secondary  School  English 
teacher,  as  among  Respondents  Laila  Rall,  Jennifer  Munkelt,  Paul  Lai  and  Jennesis  Jensen, 
who  will  be  retained  to  teach  during  the  ensuing  year.  Accordingly,  by  May  13,  2005,  the 
District  will  withdraw  the  Accusation,  and  give  notice  of  reemployment,  to  the  single 
Secondary  School  English  teacher  who  acquires  the  paramount  position  on  the  seniority  list 
after  application  by  the  Superintendent  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  and  if  necessary  lottery. 

4. 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent,  not  dismissed  from  the 

proceeding, is  sustained. 

5. 

Other  than  the  employees  dismissed  as  set  out  in  this  Order,  final  notice  may 
be  given  to  those  respondents  identified in  Attachment  “A,”  as  well  as  Mia  Gordon,  Andrea 
Hayes  and  Elana  Stokamer,  that  their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  6,  2005 

20  

  PERRY  O.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings | 

  

