_ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SAN  FRANCISCO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
161.8  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees 

OAH  No.  N2005020720 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ruth  S.  Astle,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Francisco,  California  on  April  19,  2005. 

Melanie  Petersen,  Attorney  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith,  represented  the  Governing  Board 

of  the  San  Francisco  Unified  School  District. 

Stewart  Weinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  Weinberg,  Roger  &  Rosenfeld,  represented  all 

the  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  19,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Michele  Modena,  Chief  Administrative  Officer  of  the  San  Francisco  Unified 

School  District  (District),  made  this  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  and  not  otherwise. 

Each  of  the  named  respondents  was  at  all  times  mentioned  herein,  and  now  is, 

a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  the  criteria  for 

establishing  the  order  of  termination  among  respondents  who  have  the  same  date  of  first 
rendering  paid  service  to  the  District  and  the  order  of  termination  among  respondents. 

_ 

4, 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 
No.  53-8802,  directing  the  Chief  Administrative  Officer  or  her  designee  to  give  notices  to 
certificated  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

The  programs  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  are  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A  attached  to  the 
Accusation  in  this  matter.  The  reductions  include  Administrative  Services  for  75  F  .T.E.,

© 

Elementary  School  Programs  for  51  F.T.E.',  Middle  School  Programs  for  16.8  F.T.E.,  High 
School  Programs  for  20  F.T.E.  for  a  total  reduction  of  163.8  F.T.E.  That  was  reduced  to 
161.8  F.T.E.  At  the  hearing,  the  District  stated  that  this  hearing  concerned  only  112.8 
F.T.E.’  since  a  number  of  administrators  would  be  reassigned. 

5. 

On  March  15,  2005,  the  Chief  Administrative  Officer  gave  written  notice  to 

the  Governing  Board  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to 
respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2005-2006, 
and  stating  the  reasons  therefore. 

6. 

On  March  15,  2005,  respondents  were  served  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  law, 

with  written  notice  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  respondents  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  and  setting  forth  the  reasons  therefore. 

7. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  respondents,  in  writing,  duly 

required  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

8. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
for  not  reemploying  respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  except  as  noted  in  Findings  12 
and  13,  below.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Governing  Board,  it  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the 
number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  on  account  of  the  above  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  services.  As  a  consequence,  the  Board  has  determined  that  the  services  of 
a  corresponding  number  or  less  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  District  shall  be 
terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  2004-2005  school  year. 

@ 

9. 

The  Governing  Board  has  further  determined  that,  as  between  employees  who 

first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date,  the  order  of  termination  listed  on  the  seniority 
list  has  been  and  will  be  based  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students 
thereof,  and  that  a  lottery  is  authorized  to  be  used  when  the  tie-breaking  criteria  results  in 
more  than  one  employee  with  the  same  date  of  hire  being  found  to  have  the  same  number  of 
points  under  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  This  occurred  for  a  number  of  employees  who  were 
hired  August  25,  2004.  The  District  did  not  apply  the  lottery  as  of  the  date  of  the  hearing 
pending  a  decision  on  whether  or  not  they  can  skip  a  number  of  teachers  as  set  forth  below  in 
Finding  12. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  allows  the  board  to  determine  the 
order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  District.  After  stating  a  number  of 

  

'  Two  elementary  instruction  F.T.Es.  were  restored. 

>  At  the  hearing  the  representative  of  the  teachers  was  concerned  about  how  that  number  was 

derived.  How  the  number  was  derived  is  irrelevant  provided  that  they  represent  particular  kinds  of 
@  services  that  can  be  reduced  and  are  set  forth  in  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution,  which  they  are. 

2

10. 

No  permanent  or probationary certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  render  a  Service,  which  the  respondents,  or  any  of  them,  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  €xcept  as  noted  below  in  F indings  12  and  13. 
The  cause  for  not  reemploying  Tespondents  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  in  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

Il. 

. 

The  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  to  establish  that  there  is  a  “specific  need  for 
Personnel  to  teach  a  Specific  course  or  Course  of  study,  . 
has  special  training  and  experience  hecessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of study  or  to 
.  and  that  the  certificated  employee 
provide  those  Services,  which  others  with  more  Seniority  do  not  Possess.”  It  is  the  last  Part  of . 
that  statement  in  Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1)  that  the  District  failed  to 
establish.  The  District  must  demonstrate  Pursuant  to  the  Education  Code  that  others  with 
more  seniority  do  not  Possess  the  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  in  those  schools. 
At  a  minimum,  the  District  is  Tequired  to  give  those  senior  teachers  with  the  required 
experience  and  proper  credentials  the  Opportunity  to  bump  into  those  Positions.  Since  the 
District  did  not  meet  the  requirements  for  skipping  the  27  teachers,  these  teachers  cannot  be 
There  were  two  individuals  who  requested  credit  for  previous  service, 
Ms.  Josephine  Ho  Was  a  preschool  teacher  for  the  District  prior  to  becoming  an  elementary 
school  teacher  for  the  District.  The  District  has  agreed  to  look  into  this  matter.  No  evidence 
Was  presented  at  the  h  aring  to  demonstrate  that  she  is  entitled  to  an  earlier  seniority  date, 
This  does  not  foreclose  the  Board  from  granting  Ms.  Ho  additional  service  credit  after 
investigating  the  matter, 
Ms.  Dawnell  Boylan  was  an  employee  of a  district  charter  school  for  the  previous 
School  year.  She  is  designated  as  a  probationary  one  employee.  The  District  contends  that 
employment  at  the  charter  school  does  Not  constitute  paid  service  for  the  District  because  the 
*  No  one  requested  the  criteria  application  process  for  ranking  employees  prior  to  the  hearing. 

oe 

13. 

3

{  @ 

  

District  gives  the  funds  to  the  charter  school  and  the  charter  school  pays  their  employees 
directly.  Also,  the  District  contends  that  they  do  not  control  the  hiring  and  firing  of  the 
teachers  at  the  charter  school.  The  District  presented  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that 
Ms.  Boylan’s  first  date  of  paid  service  should  not  extend  to  her  first  date  of  paid  service  with 
the  District’s  charter  school.  She  was  paid  with  District  funds.  Ms.  Boylan  must  be 
classified  as  a  probationary  2  employee  and  ranked  accordingly. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Except  as  set  forth  in  Finding  12°  and  13°,  cause  for  the  termination  of  the 

particular  kinds  of  service  listed  in  Finding  3  and  the  corresponding  positions  exists  in 
accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955.  It  is  determined  that  the  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

2 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Finding  9,  Pursuant  to  Education  Code 

section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  only  the  Governing  Board  can  determine  the  order  of 
termination  for  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date.  A 
lottery  can  be  instituted  post  hearing  to  determine  the  final  order  of  seniority. 

ORDER 

Except  as  set  forth  above,  and  in  accordance  with  the  final  seniority  list,  notice  may 

be  given  to  respondents,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school 
year. 

DATED:  (prt  29,2908 

RUTH  S.  ASTLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

*  The  27  “Dream  School”  teachers  cannot  be  skipped. 

>  D.  Boylan  had a  first  date  of  paid  service  in  August  2003 

4

