BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
SANTA  RITA  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
10.80  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees 

    

OAH  No.  N2005030427 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Michael  C.  Cohn,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Salinas,  California,  on  April  14,  2005. 

Daniel  A.  Ojeda,  Attorney  at  Law,  Miller  Brown  &  Dannis,  71  Stevenson  Street, 

Nineteenth  Floor,  San  Francisco,  California  94105,  represented  the  Santa  Rita  Union  School 
District. 

Michelle  A.  Welsh,  Attorney  at  Law,  Stoner,  Welsh  &  Schmidt,  413  Forest  Avenue, 

Pacific  Grove,  California  93950,  represented  respondents  Ronald  Bobb,  Diane  Gehling, 
Nicole  Jensen,  Sherry  Kefalas,  Courtney  Toller,  Yolanda  Virgen,  and  Heather  Zimmerman. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondent  Victoria  Senter. 

The  record  was  held  open  in  order  to  allow  the  district  to  submit  a  brief  in  response  to 

respondents’  brief  regarding  the  district’s  competency  standard.  The  district’s  brief  was 
received  on  April  21,  2005  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  8  for  identification.  On  April  25, 
2005,  respondents  objected  that  the  district’s  brief  had  gone  beyond  its  stated  purpose  and 
had  included  argument  on  evidence  that  had  been  submitted  at  the  hearing.  Respondents 
requested  that  this  portion  of  the  brief  —  page  4,  line  15,  through  page  6,  line  16  —  be  stricken. 
This  request  is  granted. 

The  matter  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  on  April  25,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l. 

On  February  17,  2005,  the  governing  board  of  the  Santa  Rita  Union  School 

District  adopted  Resolution  No.  05.02.74,  in  which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006 
school  year  and  directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designated  representative  to  send 
appropriate  notice  to  employees  whose  positions  might  be  lost  by  virtue  of  this  action:

  

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF 
SERVICES 

NUMBER  OF  FULL  TIME 
EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS 

Five  (5)  K-5  self  contained  classes 
Elementary  Music 
District  School  Counselor 
Coordinator  of  Intervention  Programs 
Sections  in  Grades  6-8 

Two  (2)  6"  grade  CORE  LA/SS  sections 
Four  (4)  7"  grade  CORE  LA/SS  sections 
One  (1)  8"  grade  U.S.  History  section 
Five  (5)  Science  sections 
Four  (4)  Exploratory  sections 
One  (1)  Physical  Education  section 
One  (1)  Math  section 

Total 

total 

5.0 
0.8 
1.0 
1.0 
3.0 
333 
.667 
167 
830 
.667 
.167 
167 

10.80 - 

2. 

On  March  9,  2005,  the  superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  a  number  of 

employees,  including  respondents,  that  recommendation  for  their  non-reemployment  for  the 
2005-2006  school  year  was  being  made  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 
Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing. 

3. 

In  Resolution  No.  05.02.74,  the  board  determined  to  retain  the  services  in  the 
2005-2006  school  year  of  certificated  employees  who  possessed  the  qualifications  necessary 
for,  and  were  currently  teaching  in,  the  following  programs:  Special  Education  Program, 
English  Language  Learners  Program,  and  Middle  School  Foreign  Language  Program.  The 
evidence  showed  that  the  district’s  population  of  special  education  and  non-English  speaking 
students  is  increasing.  The  evidence  further  showed  that  recruitment  and  retention  of 
teachers  qualified  to  teach  in  these  programs  is  difficult.  The  district  has  demonstrated  a 
specific  need  to  retain  personnel  to  teach  these  courses  of  study.  The  district’s  skipping  of 
junior  employees  who  meet  the  standards  set  in  Resolution  No.  05.02.74  is  in  accordance 
with  applicable  statutory  and  case  law.  Included  among  those  the  district  intends  to  skip  are 
respondents  Yolanda  Virgen,  Heather  Zimmerman,  and  Victoria  Senter.  While  all  received 
layoff  notices,  the  district  advised  them  that  these  were  precautionary  notices  and  that  their 
services  would  be  retained  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

4. 

In  Resolution  No.  05.02.74,  the  board  set  forth  a  standard  of  competence  for 
bumping  purposes:  at  least  one  year  of  teaching  experience  in  the  assigned  subject  matter 
during  the  last  10  years.  Respondents  contend  that  this  standard  fails  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  and  that  it  was  created  to 
target  one  employee,  respondent  Ronald  Bobb. 

|  

Assistant  Superintendent  James  Fontana  testified  that  he  recommended  this 

competency  standard  to  the  governing  board.  His  rationale  was  that  an  individual  who  might 
have  a  credential  to  teach  a  specific  subject,  but  had  not  actually  taught  the  subject  within  the 
past  10  years,  would  not  have  the  requisite  experience  in  current  methodology  and  would  not 
be  familiar  with  either  the  district’s  curriculum  or  current  standards  and  expectations.  At  the 
time  Fontana  recommended  this  competency  standard,  he  knew  it  would  affect  Bobb.  But 
there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  competency  standard  was  drafted  to  target  Bobb,  or 
that  Bobb  is  the  only  teacher  in  the  district  who  would  be  affected  by  such  a  standard.’  And 
the  district’s  standard,  very  similar  to  one  held  valid  in  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College 
District,’  is  found  to  have  a  rational  and  reasonable  relationship  to  the  skills  and 
qualifications  to  teach  a  particular  subject. 

5. 

Bobb  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  that  entitles  him  to  teach  in 

self-contained  classes  up  to  grade  nine,  and  a  standard  secondary  credential  in  music.  He  has 
been  employed  in  the  district  since  1991.  From  1991  until  the  1993-1994  school  year,  Bobb 
taught  middle  school  music.  Since  then  he  has  taught  only  elementary  school  instrumental 
music.  He  currently  serves  in  a  0.8  FTE  position. 

Because  he  has  not  served  as  an  elementary  school  classroom  teacher  within  the  past 
10  years  (and  in  fact  there  was  no  evidence  he  has  ever  served  in  such  a  position)  respondent 
Bobb  is  not  entitled  to  bump  into  a  classroom  teaching  position  since  he  does  not  meet  the 
district’s  competency  standards. 

6. 

Respondent  Diane  Gehling  is  junior  to  respondent  Bobb.  Like  Bobb,  Gehling 

holds  a  standard  secondary  credential  in  music.  She  is  the  district’s  only  middle  school 
music  teacher.  She  teaches  instrumental  music  and  chorus  and  serves  as  the  music  director 
for  the  band,  orchestra,  and  chorus.  She  holds  a  1.0  FTE  position.  Bobb  contends  that  he  is 
entitled  to  bump  Gehling  for  a  portion  of  her  full-time  position.  Citing  Murray  v.  Sonoma 
County  Office  of Education  and  King  v.  Berkeley  Unified  School  District,’  the  district  asserts 
that  part-time  employees  are  not  entitled  to  bump  into  full-time  positions. 

The  cases  cited  by  the  district  are  both  rehire  cases  interpreting  Education  Code 
section  44956.  Thus  they  are  not  directly  on  point.  Layoffs  are  governed  by  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955.  In  subdivision  (b),  the  latter  section  provides  that,  “the  services 
of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while . . 
. 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 

  

'In  Finding  9,  below,  respondent  Nicole  Jensen  is  found  not  eligible  to  bump  into  a  science 

position  because  she  lacks  the  appropriate  credential.  But  even  if  she  had  possessed  a  science  credential, 
she  would  not  have  been  qualified  for  the  position  because  of  the  board-adopted  competency  standard. 

*Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555. 

>Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  Office  of Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456;  King  v.  Berkeley 

Unified  School  District  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016.

  

employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  Nothing  in  section  44955  or  in  any  of  the 
cases  interpreting  it  specifically  precludes  “partial  bumping.”  As  a  general  proposition, 
therefore,  a  senior  part-time  teacher  may  bump a  junior  full-time  teacher  from  a  portion  of 
his  or  her  position.  But  this  general  proposition  does  not  apply  in  all  circumstances.  If 
splitting  a  position  between  two  employees  would  be  impractical  or  inefficient,  then  the 
senior  employee  should  not  be  entitled  to  partially  bump  the  junior  employee.  That  is 
precisely  the  situation  here. 

Bobb  is  a  0.8  FTE  employee  and  Gehling  occupies  a  1.0  FTE  position.  If  Bobb  were 
permitted  to  bump  Gehling,  he  would  be  retained  for  0.8  FTE  of  the  middle  school  position 
and  Gehling  would  be  retained  for  the  remaining  0.2  FTE  position.  As  can  be  seen  from  the 
board’s  resolution,  one  section  at  the  middle  school  equals  0.167  FTE.  If  the  middle  school 
teaching  position  were  to  be  split  as  Bobb  suggests,  he  would  be  retained  to  teach 
approximately  4.8  sections  while  Gehling  would  be  retained  to  teach  approximately  1.2 
sections.  This  would  clearly  be  an  inefficient  and  impractical  way  to  run  a  program. 
Considering  that,  it  is  determined  that  the  district  should  not  be  forced  to  split  its  middle 
school  music  position  to  accommodate  the  senior  part-time  employee.  Bobb  is  not  entitled  to 
bump  Gehling  from  a  portion  of  her  position. 

7. 

A  number  of  teachers  have  resigned  or  retired  from  the  district  since  February 
2005.  Some  of  those  resignations/retirements  occurred  before  the  board  passed  Resolution 
No.  05.02.74,  one  occurred  between  the  passage  of  the  resolution  and  the  time  the  district 
sent  the  March  9,  2005  non-reemployment  letters,  and  several  occurred  after  those  notices 
were  sent.  By  leaving  those  positions  vacant  while  laying  off  employees,  respondents  argue, 
the  district  is  attempting  an  “end  run”  around  the  layoff  statutes  and  is  effectively  eliminating 
more  positions  than  called  for  by  the  board’s  resolution.  For  instance,  two  elementary 
classroom  teachers  —  Mike  Gladwell  and  Karen  Chubbuck  —  submitted  their  resignations/ 
retirements  to  the  board  about  a  week  before  the  February  17,  2005  resolution.  Two  more 
elementary  classroom  teachers  —  Asia  Blau  and  Mary  Rose  Scott  —  submitted  their 
resignations/retirements  to  the  board  in  April  2005.  The  district  intends  to  leave  these  four 
positions  vacant  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  Respondents  assert  that  the  district  is 
therefore  effectively  eliminating  9.0  FTE  of  classroom  teaching  services,  not  the  5.0  FTE  the 
board  specified  in  its  resolution.  Respondents  contend  that  a  district  may  not  eliminate  any 
certificated  positions,  even  if  no  employees  will  be  terminated  as  a  result,  unless  the  board 
acts  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44955. 

Respondents’  assertion  is  rejected.  The  layoff  procedures  of  Education  Code  section 

44955  come  into  play  only  when a  district  seeks  to  “terminate  the  services”  of  certificated 
employees  because  of  a  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  No 
employees  are  having  their  services  terminated  because  the  district  chooses  not  to  fill 
vacancies  created  by  resignations  or  retirements.  Therefore,  the  requirements  of  section 
44955  are  inapplicable  to  those  vacated  positions. 

8. 

Respondents  next  assert  that  the  four  resignations/retirements  created 

vacancies  into  which  some  respondents  are  entitled  to  be  placed,  thus  avoiding  termination. 

 

However,  the  district  argues  that  the  two  resignations/retirements  that  occurred  before  the 
board  adopted  its  resolution  on  February  17  were  taken  into  account  in  determining  how 
many  positions  to  cut.  This  argument  is  supported  by  Fontana’s  testimony  that  although  the 
board  was  aware  of  these  departures,  it  still  elected  to  reduce  5.0  FTE  of  elementary 
classroom  teaching. 

The  district  further  argues  that  while  attrition  need  not  be  taken  into  account  in  a  PKS 
layoff,  it  has  nonetheless  effectively  done  so.  Although  the  board  authorized  the  elimination 
of  5.0  FTE  of  elementary  classroom  teaching,  the  district  sent  layoff  notices  to  only  three 
elementary  classroom  teachers.  Two  of  those  teachers  —  Lisa  Dauwalder  and  Cheri  Johnson 
—  did  not  request  hearings.  The  third  elementary  classroom  teacher  who  received  a  layoff 
notice  is  respondent  Courtney  Toller.  The  district  correctly  asserts  that  the  post-layoff-notice 
resignations/retirements  of  Blau  and  Scott  do  not  require  the  district  to  retain  Toller.  In 
effect,  two  of  the  five  positions  being  eliminated  are  accounted  for  by  these  two  departures. 
The  remaining  three  positions  are  accounted  for  by  the  termination  of  three  employees,  one 
of  whom  is  respondent  Toller.  The  district  is  not  required  to  retain  her  services. 

9. 

Most  of  the  teachers  at  the  district’s  middle  school  teach  a  CORE  class  plus 

sections  of  a  particular  subject.  Respondent  Nicole  Jensen  teaches  a  7th  grade  Language 
Arts/History  CORE  and  6th  grade  Health.  (The  four  “Exploratory”  sections  specified  in  the 
board’s  resolution  are  health  classes.)  Jensen  holds  a  preliminary  single  subject  credential  in 
health  sciences.  On  March  30,  2005,  Jensen,  who  holds  a  Utah  credential  that  entitles  her  to 
teach  physical  education,  submitted  through  the  Monterey  County  Office  of  Education  an 
application  for.a  physical  education  supplementary  authorization  to  her  single  subject 
credential.  That  authorization  has  not  yet  been  issued.  As  part  of  her  undergraduate 
education,  Jensen  completed  18  units  in  science.  She  expects  to  complete  seven  more  units 
before  the  start  of  the  next  school  year. 

After  the  board’s  February  17,  2005  resolution,  two  CORE/Science  teachers  resigned  — 

or  retired.  Jensen  asserts  that  she  is  qualified  to  be  placed  into  one  of  those  positions 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44256,  subdivision  (a).  That  section  provides  that  a 
holder  of  a  single  subject  credential  “who  has  completed  20  semester  hours  of  coursework  or 
10  semester  hours  of  upper  division  or  graduate  coursework  approved  by  the  [Commission 
on  Teacher  Credentialing]  . 
.  shall  be  eligible  to  have  this  subject  appear  on  the  credential” 
as  a  supplementary  authorization.  Jensen  does  not  yet  have  the  necessary  coursework  for  a 
supplementary  authorization  in  science.  All  her  science  units  appear  to  be  undergraduate 
units.  She  will  not  cross  the  20-unit  threshold  until  sometime  later  this  year.  Even  so, 
section  44256  is  not  self-implementing.  Before  a  teacher  may  be  considered  qualified  to 
teach  the  supplementary  subject  she  still  must  first  obtain  approval  from  the  Commission  on 
Teacher  Credentialing.  Further,  a  district  need not consider  a  credential  or  supplementary 
authorization  not  registered  prior  to  the  board’s  PKS  resolution.’  For  the  same  reason, 

. 

  

“Degener  v.  Governing  Board  of  Wiseburn  School  District  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.

  

Jensen  is  not  entitled  to  a  physical  education  position  since  she  has  not  yet  received  the 
authorization  for  which  she  has  applied. 

Finally,  Jensen  asserts  that  she  is  entitled  to  a  CORE/Science  position  because  her 

units  entitle  her  to  teach  science  under  a  board  waiver.  Even  if  Jensen  meets  the 
requirements  for  such  a  waiver,  the  board is  not  obligated  to  provide  one.  It is  purely 
discretionary.’  The  district  need  not  retain  Jensen  in  either  a  CORE/Science  or  a  PE 
position. 

11. 

Respondent  Sherry  Kefalas  is  the  district’s  only  counselor.  Her  position  is 

being  eliminated.  For  the  past  two  years,  the  district  has  contracted  with  Sun  Street  Center  to 
provide  intervention  services.  These  services  were  in  addition  to  the  counseling  functions 
Kefalas  performed.  The  district  plans  to  continue  with  the  intervention  services  contract  for 
the  2005-2006  school  year,  but  it  will  eliminate  the  counseling  : services  Kefalas is  now 
performing. 

Kefalas  argues  that  she  is  qualified  to  perform  the  intervention  services  being 

provided  by  Sun  Street  Center,  and  that  she  should  therefore  be  retained  to  perform  those 
-  services  rather  than  to  have  them  contracted  out.  Kefalas  currently  coordinates  the  Tobacco 
Education  Use  Prevention  and  Safe  and  Drug  Free  Schools  programs.  She  argues  that 
without  her  coordination  services  the  district  will  be  unable  to  attain  funding  for  these 
programs  and  will  therefore  be  unable  to  meet  state  and  federal  mandates.  Both  of  Kefalas’s 
arguments  are  rejected.  The  evidence  showed  that  counseling  services  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year  will  be  performed  in  a  different  manner  than  they  are  now  performed.  Nothing 
in  the  law  prohibits  a  school  district  from  contracting  out  certain  counseling  services  and  the 
district  is  not  required  to  retain  Kefalas  to  perform  these  services.  In  addition,  it  was  not 
shown  that  not  having  a  counselor  will  leave  the  district  unable  to  receive  funding  for  the 
Tobacco  Education  Use  Prevention  and  Safe  and  Drug  Free  Schools  programs  or  that  this 
would  result  in  failure  to  meet  mandated  levels  of  service. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  10.8  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  set  forth  below,  cause  further  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 
This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949, 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  3,  the  district  intends  to  retain  the  services  of 

respondents  Yolanda  Virgen,  Heather  Zimmerman,  and  Victoria  Senter.  Accordingly,  notice 
may  not  be  given  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

  

*See  Education  Code  section  44256,  subdivision  (b).  (A  governing  board  “may”  authorize  an 

employee  to  teach  a  subject  outside  his  or  her  credential.)

  

@ 

3. 

The  middle  school  music  services  currently  being  performed  by  respondent 
Diane  Gehling  are  not  being  reduced.  No  senior  teacher  is  entitled  to  bump  Gehling  from 
her  position.  Accordingly,  notice  may  not  be  given  Gehling  that  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

. 

Notice  may  be  given  respondents  Ronald  Bobb,  Nicole  Jensen,  Sherry  Kefalas,  and 

Courtney  Toller  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

ORDER 

DATED:  A onl  a7),  wos 

Wu LoW  CEL 

MICHAEL  C,  COHN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

