BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MILPITAS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-reemployment  of 
Four  (4)  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees: 

Tyler  Beatie,  Ryan  Carter,  Julie  Cler, 
Jennifer  Young, 

Respondents. 

  

  

OAH  No.  N2005030438 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Steven  C.  Owyang,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Milpitas,  California,  on  April  15,  2005. 

John  R.  Yeh,  of  Miller,  Brown,  Dannis,  represented  the  Milpitas  Unified  School 

District. 

Cler,  and  Jennifer  Young. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Esq.,  represented  respondents  Tyler  Beatie,  Ryan  Carter,  Julie 

At  hearing,  the  district  withdrew  the  accusation  against  Jennifer  Young.  The  matter 

was  submitted  on  April  15,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l. 

Karl  Black,  Superintendent,  Milpitas  Unified  School  District,  made  and  filed 

the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

On  March  10,  2005,  upon  the  recommendation  of  Superintendent  Black,  the 

governing  board  of  the  Milpitas  Unified  School  District  adopted  Resolution  No.  2005.57,  in 
which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services 
for  the 2005-2006  school  year: 

Elementary,  Class  Size  Reduction,  Grade  3 

15  FTE 

High  School,  Class  Size  Reduction,  Grade  9 

 SFTE

Middle  School,  Counselor 

High  School,  Counselor 

Elementary,  Assistant  Principal 

Coordinator,  IT 

2  FTE 

1  FTE 

4  FTE 

1  FTE 

The  board’s  resolution  involves  three  FTE  (full-time  equivalent)  middle  school  and  high 
school  counselor  positions.  The  board  directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send 
notice  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the 
2004-2005  school  year.  The  board  further  resolved  to  retain  the  services  of  certificated 
employees  in  the  2005-2006  school  year  regardless  of  seniority,  who  possess  qualifications 
needed  for  special  education,  mathematics,  physics/physical  science,  chemistry,  economics, 
and  life  science/biology,  and  who  have  taught  at  least  one  semester  in  the  subject  within  the 
last  three  years. 

3. 

On  March  10,  2005,  upon  the  recommendation  of  Superintendent  Black,  the 

governing  board  of  the  Milpitas  Unified  School  District  adopted  Resolution  No.  2005.58,  in 
which  the  board  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  used  to  determine  the  order  of 
termination  of  employees  having  the  same  seniority  date.  The  board  directed  that  the 
superintendent  or  his  designee  use  the  following  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  seniority 
for  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  first  paid  service: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

7, 

Possession  of  BCLAD,  CLAD,  SDAIE,  SB  1969,  BCC 
authorization; 

Possession  of  special  education  credential; 

Number  of  credentials  held; 

Numbers  of  advanced  degrees  held  (in  increasing  order  of 
priority:  Masters,  Ed.D.,  Ph.D.); 

Teaching  experience  at  different  subject  areas,  by  number  of 
subjects  taught; 

Teaching  experience  at  different  grade  levels,  by  numbers  of 
grades  taught; 

Number  of  classes  taken  towards  continuing  education in 
assignment-related  subject  areas.

The  board  directed  that  employees  holding  the  same  first  date  of  paid  probationary  service 
shall  undergo  the  tie-breaking  process  by  application  of  the  above  criteria  in  the  order  listed 
above.  Ifa 
and  the  process  continued,  until  all  ties  are  broken. 

tie  still  exists  after  application  of  a  criterion,  the  next  criterion  is  to  be  applied, 

4, 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  district.  All  respondents  were 
properly  and  timely  served  with  notice  of  layoff.  All  respondents  were  properly  and  timely 
served  an  accusation,  statement  to  respondent,  notice  of  defense,  notice  of  hearing,  and 
relevant  statutes.  All  respondents  have  made  a  timely  request  for  hearing  and  timely  notice 
of  defense.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
have  been  met. 

5. 
paid  service  are: 

Respondents  are  employed  as  counselors  for  the  district.  Their  first  dates  of 

1.  Julie  Cler 

2.  Tyler  Beatie 

3.  Ryan  Carter 

08/22/01 

08/22/01 

08/25/04 

7. 

. 

Tyler  Beatie  and  Julie  Cler  have  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  August  22, 

2001.  The  district  therefore  applied  its  tie-breaking  criteria  to  Beatie  and  Cler.  Neither  had 
an  advantage  under  the  first  (BCLAD,  CLAD,  etc.)  or  second  (special  education  credential) 
criteria.  Application  of  the  third  criterion  (number  of  credentials  held)  resulted in  Cler 
prevailing, in  that  she  holds  two  credentials  (Professional  Clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  and 
Internship  Administrative  Services)  while  Beatie  holds  one  credential  (Clear  Pupil  Personnel. 
Services).  Because  the  tie  was  broken  after  application  of  the  third  criterion,  the  district  did 
not  utilize  the  remaining  criteria. 

8. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  district’s  tie-breaking  criteria,  as  applied  to 

counselors,  are  unreasonable,  arbitrary  and  capricious.  Respondents’  argument  is  rejected. 
As  to  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  vests  discretion  in  the  governing  board  to  determine  the  order  of 
termination  “solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.”  The 
board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  were  based  on  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students. 

9. 

Tyler  Beatie  and  Julie  Cler  assert  that  their  first  date  of  paid  service  was 

August  16,  2001,  because  the  district  asked  them  to  come  to  school  several  days  before  the 
students  arrived.  Neither  Beatie  nor  Cler  established  that  their  attendance  was  mandatory,  or 
that  they  provided  paid  service  on  August  16,  2001.  The  evidence  does  not  establish  that 
their  August  22,  2001,  seniority  date  is  incorrect. 

10. 

The  planned  reduction  of  a  1.0  FTE  high  school  counselor  will  leave  3.0  FTE  | 

counselors  at  the  high  school  level.  The  planned  reduction  of  2.0  middle  school  counselors

will  leave  no  counselors  at  the  middle  school  level.  Even  at  current  staffing  levels, 
counselors  have  difficulty  meeting  their  responsibilities  for  individual  education plans, 
special  needs  students,  career  counseling,  college  counseling,  student  study  teams,  instances 
of  child  abuse,  etc.  The  district  has  not  made  definite  plans  for  meeting  its  counseling  needs 
in  the  coming  school  year,  but  it  may  turn  to  administrators  and  outside  contractors. 

11. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  for  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

The  accusation  against  Jennifer  Young  is  dismissed. 

1, 

2. 

3. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  2.0  FTE  middle  school  and  1.0  FTE  high  school 

counselor  positions  exists  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
This  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  district  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

All  contentions  made  by  respondents  not  specifically  addressed  above  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Tyler  Beatie,  Ryan  Carter,  and  Julie  Cler  that 

their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

ORDER 

DATED:  May  2,  2205S 

 

STEVEN  C.  OWYANG 
Administrative  Law  Judgé 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

