/  @ 
. 

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  ALPINE  COUNTY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

DEIDRE  WALLACE! 

  

OAH  No.  N2005030131 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

@  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  11,  2005,  in  Woodfords,  California. 

Allen  R.  Vinson,  Attorney  at Law,  represented  the  Superintendent  of  the  Alpine 

County  Unified  School  District. 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis, Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent. 

Evidence  was  received  by  way  of  stipulation  only  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on 

April  11,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

James  W.  Parsons,  Ed.D,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Alpine  County  Unified 

School  District.  He made  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  the  parties,  through  counsel,  agreed  that  this 

matter  shall  be  resolved  by  the  terms  of  the  following  stipulation: 

Respondent is employed  by  the  District  as  a  probationary  certificated 

A. 
employee  and  first  rendered  paid  service  on  August  26,  2004. 

  

’  There  were  two  other  named  respondents  in  the  initial  Accusation.  One  notice  was  rescinded  by  the  District  and 
the  other  respondent  did  not  request  a  hearing. 

 

Respondent  shall  be  placed  on  the  24-month  reemployment  list 

B, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44957. 

Ifrespondent  is  reemployed  during  the  24-month  rehire  period,  she 

C. 
shall  be  placed  on  the  Certificated  Salary  Schedule  at  year  three. 

D. 
If  funding  is  restored  for  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood 
Education  Coordinator  position,  the  District  shall  only  be  obligated  to  provide 
a  part-time  position  based  on  the  salary  paid  to  the  teacher  in  the  position  and 
the  grant  funds  provided.  The  District  need  not  provide  additional  District 
funds  to  fund  this  position. 

If  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator 
E, 
position  is  funded  through  a  grant,  the  District  shall  first  offer  the  position  to 
certificated  employees  on  the  rehire  list  who  are  credentialed  and  competent  to 
serve  in  the  position. 

. 

Respondent  will  not  assert  any  claim  for  back  wages  for  any 

F. 
employment  she  has  had  with  the  District  prior  to  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

ORDER 

1. 

This  matter  shall  be  resolved  strictly in  accordance  with  the  above-recited 

stipulation  between  the  parties. 

2. 

While  not  expressly  stated  in  the  stipulation,  if  the  Governing  Board  does  not 
adopt  the  Proposed  Decision  as  written,  the  stipulation  shall  be  null  and  void  and  respondent 
shall  retain  all  her  rights  to  a  hearing in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955  and  incorporated  provisions  of  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act. 

. 
Dated:  Sport  WL,  ro.J 

_— 

  

KARL  S.  ENGEMAN 
Administrative  Law 
Office  of  Administratwe’Hearings

Judge 

  

