BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CUCAMONGA  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SAN  BERNARDINO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  L  2005020721 

7 

a 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

) 
) 
DARREN  ALCALA,  BOBBY  BALTIERRA,  _  ) 
SHANNON  BARRERA,  BHARPUR  BUTTAR,  ) 
) 
REGINA  CONRAD,  JOELLE  CROWL, 
) 
KRISTEN  FAJARDO,  SCOTT  GRAVIANO, _ 
) 
MICHAEL  GROTHEM,  STACY  HICKS, 
) 
CHRISTINE  McALLASTER,  ARTURO  © 
): 
PRECIADO,  PATRICIA  RACINE,  LEANA 
) 
RODRIGUEZ,  KATHRINE  STEFFLER, 
) 
SARAH  STRANGE,  JAMIE  STRONG, 
) 
SHEAU  SUN,  KIMBERLY  THAN, 
) 
KIMBERLY  WEAVER,  BONNIE  WOOD, 
) 
) 
) 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Carolyn  D.  Magnuson,  Administrative  Law  Judge  of 

the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  at  the  offices  of  the  Cucamonga  School  District in 
Rancho  Cucamonga,  California  on  April  20,  2005. 

Glenn  Rothner,  an  attorney  with  the  firm  of  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone, 

represented  the  Cucamonga  School  District. 

Warren  S.  Kinsler,  an  attorney  with  the  firm  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud 

&  Romo,  represented  all of  the  Respondents. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

|  1.  The  Cucamonga  School  District  (District)  operates  three  elementary  schools 

and  one  middle  school  and  has  in  excess  of  140  certificated  employees. 

     

 

2.  On  February  24,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Cucamonga  School 
District  (Board)  was  informed  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  31  full  time — 
equivalent  (FTE)  employees  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

3.  Board  Resolution  No.  0440.08,  was  adopted  on  February  24,  2005,  and 
authorized  a  reduction  or  elimination by  the District  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of 
services,  as  follows: 

Reduce  Kindergarten  through  Fifth  Grade  Classroom  Teaching  Services  -  24  FTE 
-  03  FTE 
Discontinue  Assistant  Principal  Services 
-  03  FTE 
Discontinue  Elementary  Physical  Education  Services 
-  01  FTE 
Discontinue  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assistance  Services 

. 

This  action  required  the  District  to  layoff  of  31  FTE  certificated  employees  employed  in  the 
services  being  reduced  or  eliminated. 

4,  Although  the  District  had  recently  experienced  a  decline in  average daily 

attendance  (ADA),  the  Board’s  resolution  specifically  stated  that  the  Board  was  not  reducing © 
services  by  permanent  certificated  teachers  based  on  the  decline  of  ADA. 

5.  The  District  prepared  a  seniority  list  of  all  certificated  employees  of  the 

District  based  on  each  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  certificated  position  and  used 
that  list  to  identify  those  employees  who  would  receive  notices  of  non-retention.  For  those 
certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  hire,  the  Board  adopted  tie  breaking  criteria. 
None  of  the  Respondents  challenged  the  criteria  or  the  application  of  the  criteria  to  establish 
seniority  rankings. 

6. 

In  creating  the  lay-off  list,  the  District  considered  whether  any  of  the 

certificated  employees  employed  in  a  position  designated  for  reduction  or  discontinuation  was 
“credentialed  and  competent”  to  bump  a  junior  certificated  employee  assigned  to  a  position  that. 

~  had  not  been  selected  for  reduction  or  discontinuation.  The  District  determined  that  the  nine 

most  senior  lay-off  designees  could  bump  a  more  junior  employee.  The  District  then  created  the 
layoff  list,  which  the  Board  adopted. 

7.  On  or  before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  served  on  each  Respondent  a 

written  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to  the  Board  that  notice  be  given  to 
Respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.’  Each  written  notice  stated  that  the  Board  had  passed  a 
resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  services  at  the  close  of  the  2004-05  school  year, 

. 

  

'  The  district  integrated  the  documentary  service  and  reply  requirements  found in  Education  Code  section  44949  into a 
single  procedure  whereby  both  the  notice  of  intent  not  to  re-employ  and  the  accusation  were  served  on  the  teachers  at 
the  same  time,  and  the  teachers  were  allowed  12  days  within  which  to  return  a  signed  request  for  hearing  form  to  the 
District.  The  Respondents  did  not  challenge  the  legality  of  this  modified  procedure.

  

which  would  result  in  the  elimination  of  31  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  for  certificated. 
employees  of  the  District.  Notice  was  served  on  each  of  the  Respondents  as  required  by  law. 

8.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

— 

employees  designated  to  be  laid  off.  The  Accusations  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 
Requests  for  Hearing/Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  the  Respondents  herein.” 

9.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

10.  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  mandated  by  those  sections  have  been 
satisfied. 

- 

11.  Respondents  argue  that  the  Board’s  resolution  reducing  and/or  eliminating 

particular  kinds  of  service  is fatally  defective in  that  it  fails  to  identify  with  sufficient 
particularity  the  services  that  are  being  reduced  or-eliminated.  The  Respondents  assert  that  the 
general  term  “classroom  teaching”  is  too  broad  a  designation  to  provide  the  Respondents  with 
sufficient  information  to  assess  their  employment  situation  vis-a-vis  the  District.  The 
Respondents  argue  that  the  Board  knew  the  nature  and  effect  of  the  layoffs  in  much  more  detail 
than  was  provided  to  the  teachers.  Had  that  information  been  shared,  the  Respondents’ 
understanding  of  how  each  of  them  would  be  affected  would  have  been  more  complete.  The 
Respondents  rely,  inter  alia,  on  the  holdings  in  Burgess  v.  Board  of Education  (1974)  41 
Cal. App.3d  571  [116  Cal.Rptr.  183]  and  Karbach  v.  Board  of Editcation  of Lawndale  School - 
District  (1974)  39  Cal. App.  3d  355  [114  Cal.Rptr.  84]  to  support  these  contentions. 

12.  The  District  maintains  that  elementary  classroom  teaching  is  a  particular 
kind  of  service  and  that  the  resolution  reducing  elementary  classroom  teaching  by  24  FTEs 
comports  with  the  statutory  notice  requirements  and  is  valid.  In  support  of  its  position  the 
District  relies,  inter  alia,  on  the  holding  in  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees. 
of the  Goleta  Union  School  District  (1981)  64  Cal.App.3d  167  [134  Cal.Rptr.  290]. 

13.  Typically,  at  the  elementary  school level,  students  are  assigned  to  a  specific 

classroom;  and  single  teacher  instructs  the  same  students in  multiple  subjects,  unlike  high 
school  where  the  teacher is  certificated  to  teach  a  particular  academic  subject  and  teaches  that 
subject  to  students  who  are  assigned  to  the  teacher’s  room  for  a  single  period.  Thus,  in 
elementary  school,  the  designation  “classroom  teaching”  is  a  PKS  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.  App.3d  627  [192  Cal.Rptr.  710].),  and  the  Board’s  designation  of 
“Kindergarten  through  Fifth  Grade  Classroom  Teaching  Services”  for  reduction  was  sufficient 
to  provide  the  Respondents  with  notice  of  their  potential  of  being  laid  off.  Any  elementary 
school  teacher  in  the  District  with  limited  time  in  service  knew  from  the  resolution’s  language 

  

?  Ten  of  the  employees  noticed  for  layoff  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing/Notice  of  Defense.

  

  

that  s/he  was  at  some  risk  of  being  laid  off.  And  within a  short  period  of  time  thereafter,  every 
teacher  knew  specifically  how  the  resolution  applied  to  him  or  her. 

14.  Therefore,  the  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  0440.08  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

15.  Respondent  Crowel  challenged  her  placement  on  the  seniority  list. 

It  is  her 
belief  that  she  should  be  placed  chronologically  according  to her  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a 
certificated  position  without  regard  for  her  probationary  status.’ 
The  District  had  designated 
Ms.  Crowel  as  a  “prob.  2”  teacher  and  had  placed  her  second in  seniority  of  the  probationary 
teachers  designated  for  layoff. . 

16.  Under  the  holding  of  California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Golden 

Valley  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369,  a  teacher  holding  an  emergency 
credential  is  a  probationary  teacher  under  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  section  44915.5. 

. 

17.  Section  44845  provides  that  a  probationary  teacher  begins  accruing  seniority 

on  his  or  her  first  day  of  paid  service  in  a  credentialed  position. 

18.  However,  under  an  exception  created  by  section  44911,  unlike  most  other 

probationary  teachers,  a  teacher  working  under  an  emergency  credential  or r  permit  does  not 
accrue  tenure  credit. 

_ 

19.  While  section  44955  provides  the  procedures  by which  both  permanent  and 

probationary  certificated  employees  may  be  laid  off  by  a  school  district,  it  does  not  treat  the 
two  types  of  certificated  employees  equally.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides: 

The  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this 
section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

20.  In  other  words,  a  permanent  employee  will  take  precedence  over  two  other 

classes  of  employees:  anyone  who  is  a  probationary  employee  and  any  permanent  employee 
with  a  later  seniority  date.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  817.) 

21.  Therefore,  because  Ms.  Crowel  is  still  a  probationary  employee,  she  may  | 

only  be  retained  if  all  permanent  employees  (without  regard  for  their  seniority  date)  and  all 

  

>  Ms.  Crowel  taught  in  the  District  on  an  emergency  credential  beginning  in  1999  and  at  that  time  began  to  accrue 
seniority.  However,  she  did  not  begin  teaching  on  a  non-provisional  certificate,  and  thereby  acquiring  service  credit 
toward  tenure,  until  the  2003-2004  school  year  and  was,  therefore  a  probationary  teacher  2  at  the  time  of  the  Board's 
decision  to  reduce  services. 

“  This  designation  meant  that  Ms.  Crowel  was  in  the  second  year  of the  tenure  track.  

  

probationary  employees  with  an  earlier  seniority  date,  who  are  affected  by  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services,  have  first  been  retained. 

_ 

22.  Ms.  Crowel’s  placement  on  the  seniority  list  is  correct. 

23.  The  Respondents  argued  that,  because  a  decline  in  ADA  was  one  factor. 

considered  by  the  District  in  deciding  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services,  the  District  was  thereby 
required  to  use  the  ADA  reduction  as  the  basis  for  the  instant  layoffs  and  to  apply  to  these 
layoffs  the  formula  associated  with  ADA  reductions.  In  support  of  this  position,  the 
Respondents  cite  Cousins  v.  Weaverville  Elementary  School  Dist.  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846 
[30  Cal.Rptr.2d  310]  (Cousins). 

24.  The  District  responded  that,  because  ADA  was  just  one  factor  considered  in 
assessing  the  need  for  a  reduction  in  services,  and  not  a  major  factor  at  that,  this  case  is  not  an 
ADA  case;  and  the  Board  acted  properly  in  reducing  certain  PKS,  which  resulted  in  teacher 
layoffs.  In  support  if  its  position,  the  District  cites  Krausen  v.  Solano  County  Junior  College 
Dist.  (1974)  42  Cal.App.3d  394  (Krausen). 

25.  In  fact,  neither  Cousins  nor  Krausen  fully  support  either  party’s  contentions. 

Cousins  was  a  case  in  which  ADA  was  the  only  reason  for  the  reduction  in  services,  which  is 
not  the  case  here,  and  Krausen  was  a  case  in  which  the  court  found  there  had  been  no  decline  in 
ADA, which  is  not  the  case  here. 

26.  The  Respondents  are  attempting  to  make a  distinction  where  there  is  no 
difference.  If  the  reduction  in  force  were  entirely  due  to  a  drop  in  ADA,  then  the  District 
would  be  required  to  base  its  layoffs  solely  on  that  decline.  However,  the  evidence  in  this  case 
established  that  the  District’s  reduction  in  services  was  in  most  part  a  response  to  fiscal 
constraints  unrelated  to  ADA. 

27.  The  fact  that  a  decline  in  ADA  is  an  element  of  a  district’s  economic  picture 

Therefore,  a  district  with  a  declining  ADA  may  also  reduce  or  eliminate 

does  not  constrain  that  district  to  limit  its  response  to  its  overall  budgetary  concerns to  that 
issue.  A  school  district  may  consider  all  its  financial  circumstances  in  deciding  whether  to 
_  reduce  or  discontinue a  particular  kind  of  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627.) 
services  and  may  layoff  certificated  employees  whose  services  will  not  be  required  as a result 
of  those  reductions.  Nor  is  there  any  policy  reason  to  require  a  school  district  to  bifurcate  its 
layoff  procedures  when  ADA  is  only  one  factor  in  the  decision  to  reduce  services  since  the 
procedural  rights  of  the  affected  employees  are  the  same  regardless  of  the  type  of  reduction  in 
force  undertaken  and  any  layoffs  made  in  excess  of  the  “corresponding  ratio”  of  a  decline  in 
ADA  would  be  authorized  by  the  district’s  reduction  in  services. 

' 

levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

28.  It  was  not  established  that  any  particular  kind  of  service  was  lowered  to 

29.  It  was  not  established  that  any  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  more 

  

5  

_ 

© 

senior  employee  was  retained  to  perform  any  service  which  a  more  senior  employee  was 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

30.  Cause  exists  to  affirm  the  Board’s  reduction  of  31FTE  certificated  positions 

as  a  result  of  reducing  or  eliminating  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  by  Board  in 
Resolution  No.  0440.08,  adopted  on  February  24,  2005.  The  Board’s  decision  was  not arbitrary 
or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  valid  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  reduction  and 
elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its 
students. 

31.  As a  result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  service, 

cause  exists  to  give  final  notice  to: 

Darren  Alcala 
Bobby  Baltierra 
Shannon  Barrera 
Bharpur  Buttar 
Regina  Conrad.  _ 
Joelle  Crowl 
Kristen  Fajardo 
Scott  Graviano 
Michael  Grothem 
Stacy  Hicks  - 
Christine  McAllaster 
Arturo  Preciado 
Patricia  Racine  © 
Leana  Rodriguez 
Katharine  Steffler 
Sarah  Strange 
Jamie  Strong 
Sheau  Sun 
Kimberly  Than 
Kimberly  Weaver 
Bonnie  Wood 

~ 

». 

_ 

@ 

/// 

/// 

/// 

[ff 

[1] e.,

  

ORDER 

On  or  before  May  15,  2005  notice will  be  given  to  Darren Alcala,  Bobby 

Baltierra,  Shannon  Barrera,  Bharpur  Buttar,  Regina  Conrad,  Joelle  Crowl,  Kristen  Fajardo, 
Scott  Graviano,  Michael  Grothem,  Stacy  Hicks,  Christine  McAllaster,  Arturo  Preciado,  Patricia 

-  Racine,  Leana  Rodriguez,  Katharine  Steffler,  Sarah  Strange,  Jamie  Strong,  Sheau  Sun, 

Kimberly  Than,  Kimberly  Weaver,  and  Bonnie  Wood  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or discontinuation  of  the  identified 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

“pie ‘Moy  ,A005  | 

CAROLYN  D.  MAGNUSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

. 

  

