BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
KERN  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  KERN 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

\ 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  NO.  L2005030854 

Doe 

ROSEANN  C,  ADKINS 

| 

  

Respondents. 
, 

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2005,  at  Bakersfield,  California. 

Peter  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Administration  of  the  South  Fork 

Unified  School  District  (District). 

Emest  H.  Tuttle  III,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

lL. 

Dr.  Donald  E.  Carter,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District,  filed  the  Accusation 

in  her official  capacity. 

~ 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee of  the  District.  — 

3. 

On  or  before  March  7,  2005,  Superintendent  Carter  recommended  that  the 

Governing  Board  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for 
the  2005-2006  school  year.  Superintendent  Carter  recommended  the  reduction  and/or 
elimination  of  full  time  equivalency  certificated  employees  (“FTE’s”)  as  follows: 

Service  Being  Reduced 
or  Eliminated 

WIA  Funding  Reduction 
| 
Pharmacy  Tech  (BAS/CRD) 

FTE  Reduction 

ae 
.83  FTE

WIA  Funding  Reduction 
Business  Skills  (BAS/CRD) 

| 

1.00  FTE 

Funding  Reduction/Declining  Enrollment 
Business/Computers 

. 

~  86  FTE 

Total  FTE  Reduction 

2.69  FTE 

4. 

The  Board agreed  with  the  recommendations  and  adopted  a  Resolution  dated 

March  7,  2005,  reducing  or  discontinuing  services  as  set  forth  in  finding  3. 

5. 

On  March  9,  2005,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

Superintendent  Carter  notified  Respondent  by  mail  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  next  school  year.  The mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification. 

6 

Respondent  made  a  timely  request  for  hearing. 

8. 

9. 

7. 

On  April  6,  2005,  the  Superintendent  made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against 

| 

Respondent. 

: 

A  Notice  of  Defense  was  timely  filed  by  Respondent.  All  prehearing 

_  Jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

_  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

10. 

Respondent  teaches  a  Pharmacy  Technician  class  that  is  funded  by  WIA.'  As 

of  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  District  had  not  been  informed  whether  it  will  receive  WIA 
funds  for  Respondent’s  class  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  There  are  no  other  funds 
available  from  other  programs  to  fund  Respondent’s  class.  The  District  considers 
Respondent  an  excellent  teacher  and  it  plans  to  retain  Respondent  if  the  District  receives 
WIA  funding  for  her  class  for  the  2005-2006  school  year.  Respondent is  not  credentialed  to 
teach  any  other  class. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  were  met.  Therefore,  Jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding. 

  

'  WIA  refers  to  the  Workforce  Investment  Act.  Under  this  act,  the  federal  government  provides  funds  for  adult 
education,  vocational  courses  and  English  literacy. 

: 

 

2. 

Cause  was  established  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce 

the  number  of  certificated  employees.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the 
identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decision  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949.  This 
conclusion is  based  on  factual  findings  3  through  10. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondent  Roseann  C.  Adkins  that  her  services  will  not  be 

_ 

required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

Dated  (ply  ses 

Hayrbocte  LA hey 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

