BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE 
LAKE  ELSINORE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2005040078 

SHAWN  GOFFMAN, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 
Vallera  J.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Lake  Elsinore,  California  on  April  20,  2005. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the 

Lake  Elsinore  Unified  School  District. 

Ronald  G.  Skipper,  Esq.,  represented  Respondent. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  20,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l. 

Dr.  Sharron  E.  Lindsay,  Superintendent,  of  the  Lake  Elsinore  Unified  School 

District  (District),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

Shawn  Goffman  (Respondent)  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the 

2. 
District. 

3. 

In  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the 
Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  Lake  Elsinore  Unified  School  District 
(Board)  and  Respondent  that  she  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondent  that  his 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

On  March  11,  2005,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2004-05-092,  Reduction  of 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955,  reducing  or 
eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

1

  

On  March  11,  2005,  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  on  Respondent,  either  by 
tice  of  termination  in  the  United  States  re  gular  mail 
personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  the  no 
and  certified  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  Respondent  at  his  last  known  address. 
The  written  notice  of  termination  stated  that  Respondent’s  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  2005-06  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The 
recommendation  that  Respondent  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to  his 
competency  as  a  teacher. 

In  addition,  the  notice  advised  Respondent  of  his  right  to  a  hearing,  that  the  request 
for  hearing  must  be  delivered  to  the  Board  on  or  before  April  4,  2005,  not  less  than  seven 
days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  upon  him,  and  that  the  failure  to 
request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

Respondent’s  attorney  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was 

cause  for  not  reemploying  Respondent  for  the  ensuing  year. 

- 

An  Accusation  was  timely  served  on  Respondent.  His  attorney  filed  a  timely  Notice 

of  Defense. 

4, 

5. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 
The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of 

certificated  services  commencing  in  the  2005-2006  school  year: 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

Teachers  on  Specia!  Assignment 

Adaptive  PE  Teacher 

8.0 

1.0 

0.5 

Industrial  Tech/Construction 
The  proposed  reductions  total  9.5  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

According  to  the  evidence,  there  is  a  mathematical  error  in  the  Board’s  Resolution;  the  Board 
On  the  date  of  the  resolution,  there 
intended  to  reduce  all  teachers  on  special  assignment. 
were  7.0  FTE  teachers  on  special  assignment;  as  such,  the  Board  intended  to  reduce  7.0  FTE 
teachers  on  special  assignment,  not  8.0  FTE  teachers  on  special  assignment;  therefore  the 
proposed  reductions  should  have  been  8.5  FTE  positions,  rather  than  9.5  FTE  positions. 
The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capt! 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

cious  but 

6. 

 

7. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particul 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils  and  was  necessary  to 
employees  of  the  District,  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

ar  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
decrease  the  number  of certificated 

8. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 
"bumping"  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in 
another  area  and  were  entitled  to  "bump"  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be 
laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not 
covered  by  the  known  vacancies  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse 
order  of  seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and 
whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees. 
The  District  has  considered  attrition  in  determining  the  actual  number  of 
necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees.  Based  on  seniority  and  credentials, 
the  District  determined  that  the  teachers  on  special  assignment  and  the  adaptive  physical 
education  teacher  were  qualified  to  be  assigned  to  vacant  positions  during  2005/2006  school 
year.  Based  on  Respondent's  credentials,  he  could  not  be  retained  in  a  1.0  FTE  position.  In 
consideration  of  attrition  the  District  concluded  that  the  number  of  permanent  certificated 
employees  required  to  be  terminated  pursuant  to  this  proceeding  is  0.5  FTE  position. 

9. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Respondent  has  been  retained  to  perform 

10. 

any  services  which  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 
A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  vs.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 

2. 

178-179. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Lake 
Elsinore  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The 
cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of services  is  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4, 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 
In  doing  so,  the 
unior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 

hich  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 

_continuing  position  w 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  aj 

3

  

ol  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
Lacy  vs.  Richmond  Unified  Scho 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  vs.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.  App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393 
ys.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 
No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  Respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

5. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Shawn  Goffman  is  sustained, 
Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondent  Shawn  Goffman  before  May  15,  2005 
that  0.5  of  his  full-time  equivalent  position  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-06  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of particular  kinds  of  services  as  indicated. 

2. 

DATED:  Let  Lb,  0F 

Pl 
J  bia 
VALLERA  J. JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative Hearings 

 

