BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
HUGHES-ELIZABETH  LAKES  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  LOS  ANGELES,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2005030613 

_  JENNIFER  BERBERICH 
JEANETTE  CANGRO 
RHONDA  GONZALES, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  on  April  15,  2005  in  Los Angeles, 

California,  before  H.  Stuart  Waxman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California. 

Peter  C.  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Hughes-Elizabeth  Lakes 

Union  School  District. 

. 

. 

Richard  J.  Schwab,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondents,  Jennifer 

Berberich,  Jeanette  Cangro,  and  Rhonda  Gonzales. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  22,  2005  ' 

_FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Penny  Mertens  (Superintendent  Mertens)  made  and  filed  the  Accusation in  — 
her  official  capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  Hughes-Elizabeth  Lakes  Union  School.  — 
District  (District). 

2.  Respondents,  Jennifer  Berberich,  Jeanette  Cangro  and  Rhonda  Gonzales, 

are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  District  employees. 

M/ 

[if 

  

I  See  Footnote  2. 

|

3.  On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  the  District  personally  served  on  each 
respondent  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  each 
respondent,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  her  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  (Notice  of  Recommendation  Not  to 
Reemploy).  Each  written  notice  set  forth  a  reason  for  the  recommendation  and  noted 
that  the  Board  had  passed.a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff. 

4.  On  or  about  March  15,  2005,  Pamela  McHale,  a  Special  Education  teacher 

on  whom  the  District  had  also  served  a  timely  Notice  of  Recommendation  Not  to 
Reemploy,  filed  a Waiver  to  Right  to  Request  a  Hearing. 

5.  Certificated  employees  timely  submitted written  requests  fora  hearing  to 

"  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

certificated  employees  who  réquested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations,  with  required 
accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were  timely  served  on  those 
certificated  employees. 

7.  On  March  30,  2005,  a  Notice  of  Defense,  pursuant  to  Government  Code 

section  11506,  was  timely  filed  on  behalf  of  all  three  respondents”.  Respondents 
Jennifer  Berberich  and Jeanette  Cangro  also  timely  filed  individual  Notices  of 
Defense. 

8.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

9.  On  March  14,  2005,  the  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 

following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  | 

One  self-contained  classroom 
Special  Education  services 

1 
1 

10.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any.  respondent  was  retained-to  perform 

any  services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Hf 

MI 

  

?  Although  it  was  timely  filed,  that  Notice  of  Defense  did  not  reach  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  until 
several  days  after  the  hearing  was  concluded,  and  it  was  not  part  of  the  evidence  offered  at  the  hearing. 
The  Notice  of  Defense  was  admitted  in  evidence  on  April  22,  2005,  pursuant  to  counsels’  oral  stipulation. 

2

11.  During  the  hearing,  Superintendent  Penelope  Mertens  testified  that  the 

elimination  of  two  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  was  necessitated  by  the  heavy. 
rains  which  fell  in  southern  California  in  January  2005.  Those  rains  flooded  and 
washed  out  portions  of  a  main  road  used  by  many  students  to  get  to  and  from  school. 
As a  result,  students  were  unable  to  get  to  school,  and  they  either  transferred  to  other 
school  districts  or  they  and  their  families  moved  from  the  area.  The  District  lost  24- 
25  students  in  a  six-week  period,  including  18  students  in  four  weeks.  Superintendent 
Mertens  further  testified  that,  in  light  of  the  circumstances,  the  District’s  reduction  in. 
force  was  based  on  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA). 

| 

12.  Respondents  do  not  argue  that  they  received  improper  notice  of  the  reason 

for  their  dismissals.  (The  notices  indicated  that  the  dismissals  were  based  on  a 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  rather  than  ADA.)  Nor  do 
Respondents  argue  that  the  District  failed  to  establish  that  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  the  District  seeks  to  terminate  equals  a  “corresponding  percentage  of  the  - 
certificated  employees  of  the  district”  as  mandated  by  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b).  Respondent  do,  however,  argue  that  their  terminations  are 
unnecessary  because  of  the  positively  assured  attrition  of  one  full-time  intern,  who 
teaches  seventh  and  eighth  grade  social  science,  and  who  was  not  invited  back  for  the. 
next  school  year. 

_ 

13.  Although a  district  is  not  required  to  consider  positively  assured  attrition 

in  a  PKS  hearing  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627),  : 
courts  have  traditionally  held  that  a  district  must  consider  all  positively  assured 
attrition  when  terminating  certificated  employees  because  of  a  decline  in  average 
daily  attendance.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa 
Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App3d  831  [172  Cal.Rptr.  312]; 
Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648  [167  Cal.Rptr.  363]; 
Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689  [136  Cal.Rptr.  801];  Lewin  v. 
Board  of Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977  [133  Cal.Rptr.  385];  Burgess  v.  Board  of 
Education  (1974)  41  Cal.App.3d  571  [116  Cal.Rptr.  183].)  However, Respondents 
bore  the  burden  of  establishing  that  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to 
teach  social  science  at  the  seventh  and  eighth  grade  levels  so  that  they  might  replace 
the  full-time  intern  who  is  not  returning  for  the  upcoming  school  year’.  (Evid.  Code 
§500.)  They  failed  to  sustain  that  burden. 

Hf 

  

*  Even  if  one  or  more  of  the  respondents  had  sustained  that  burden,  she/they  would  have  been  subject  to 
testing  before  being  permitted  to  teach  seventh  and  eighth  grad  social  science.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  if  a  retained  employee’s  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  him/her  to  teach 
a  subject  “he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential 
or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 
governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate 
subject.”  - 

:

14.  Pamela  McHale is  an  intern  teaching special  education  for  the  District.  As. 

stated  above,  she  is  not  contesting her  layoff.  Her  dismissal  shall  constitute  the 
elimination  of  one  FTE in  special  education. 

15.  The  remaining  three  respondents,  Jennifer  Berberich,  Jeanette  Canero,  and 

Rhonda  Gonzales,  all  share  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District, 
August  30,  2004.  They  do  not  dispute  their  seniority  dates.  Therefore,  the  order  of 
dismissals  for  the  remaining  FTE  position  must  be  determined  via  the  use  of  tie- 
breaker  criteria  established  by  the  Board. 

16.  Board  Resolution  No.  9-04-05,  adopted  on  March  14,  2005,  established 
tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees 
who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided  that  the  order  of 
termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students in  accordance 
with  the  following,  which  it  deemed  “not  necessarily  listed  in  order  of  importance:” 

Credentialing 
Experience 
Extracurricular  Activities 
Training 
Special  Education  Needs 
Competence 
Evaluations 

. 

17.  Respondent,  Jennifer  Berberich,  hold  a  preliminary  multiple  subject 
~  credential  with  a  supplementary  authorization  in  mathematics.  She is  also  cross- 

cultural  language  and  academic  development  (CLAD)  certified.  She is  presently  a 
full-time  fifth  grade  teacher in  her  first  year  of  teaching.  Between  September  1999 
‘and  April  2004,  Ms.  Berberich  performed  her  student  teaching  duties in  five  different 
California  elementary  schools. 
She  is  a  member  of  the  Hughes-Elizabeth  Lakes 
PTA,  and  she  recently  served  as  a  featured  speaker  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
National  Council  of  Teachers  of  Mathematics  held in  Anaheim,  California.  She is  in 
the  California  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment  (BTSA)  program  and  is 
currently  enrolled  in  the  Teaching  English  Learners  class  through  BTSA.  She  has 
taken  40  units  of  education  since  earning  her  bachelor’s  degree  and is  presently 
earning  4.5  additional  units.  She is  a  member  of  the  Community  Emergency 
Response  Team  (CERT)  through  which  she  was  previously in  charge  of  coordinating 
emergency  and  disaster  procedures  between  an  after-school  program  and  a  school 
site.  Ms.  Berberich  previously  worked  in  the  child  care  profession  in  which  she 
trained  in  a  number  of  areas  she  considers  relevant  to  her  current  career.  She  has 
worked  with  two  developmentally  disabled  children  in  an  after-school  program.  In 
October  2004,  Ms.  Martens  gave  Ms.  Berberich  a  very  good  observation  evaluation. 
Ms.  Martens  observed  Ms.  Berberich in  the  classroom  again  in  March  2005  but, as  of 
the  time  of  the  hearing,  had  not  yet  published  her  evaluation. 

  

 

18.  Respondent  Jeanette  Cangro  holds  a  professional  clear  single  subject 

She  was  previously  credentialed  in  the  State  of  Montana. 

credential  in  mathematics. 
That  credential  has  expired.  Ms.  Cangro  presently  teaches  mathematics  to  the 
District’s  seventh  and  eighth  graders  in  the  District’s  departmentalized  program. 
Between  1998  and  2004,  she  taught  in  the  Antelope  Valley  Union  High  School 
District  where  she  earned  good  evaluations.  In  that  position,  she  chose  to  teach 
academically  lower  end  students,  50  percent  of  whom  were  special  education 
students.  Two  of  her  present  students  are  also  special  education  students.  While  with 
the  Antelope  Valley  District,  she  served  as  that  District’s  math  instructional  coach 
: 
and  as  the  “hip-hop”  advisor  at  Quartz  Hill  High  School.  Ms.  Cangro  participated  in 
a  number  of  practica  while  living in  Montana.  She  was  awarded  a  Space  Grant 
scholarship  for  the  1997-1998  academic  year,  one  of  approximately  1,500  such  grants 
nationwide.  As  a  new  teacher,  she  participated in  BTSA.  She  later  served  as  a  BTSA. 
support  advisor  and  performed  BTSA  peer  coaching  training  services  in  all  subjects. 
Ms.  Cangro’s  biography  has  been  published in  two  editions  of  Who’s  Who  Among. 
America’s  Teachers,  an  honor  based  on  student  recommendations. 

19.  Respondent  Rhonda  Gonzales  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject 

teaching  credential  with  CLAD  emphasis.  She  presently  teaches  first  grade  for  the 
District.  Before  coming  to  the  District,  Ms.  Gonzales  taught  at  Mariposa  Elementary . 
School  in  the  Lancaster  School  District  where  she  was  assigned  to  a  second/third 
grade  classroom  for  her  first  year,  and  a  third  grade  classroom  the  following  year.  As 
a  classroom  volunteer  in  both  of  her  children’s  classrooms,  Ms.  Gonzales  has 
observed  and  learned  about  teaching  styles  and  curriculum  from  kindergarten  through 
fourth  grade.  In  the  course  of  earning  her  bachelor’s  degree  in  liberal  studies  from 
California  State  University  at  Bakersfield,  she  was  on  the  Dean’s  List  on  two 
occasions.  Ms.  Gonzales  has  been  a  dance  instructor  for  24  years,  winning  both 
studio  team  competitions  at  the  local,  state  and  national  levels,  and  winning  personal 
choreography  awards.  She  has  used  her  talents  and  experience  in  her  community 
where  she  volunteers  for  various  performance  arts  projects,  and  in  her  school  where 
she  serves  as  a  coordinator  for  the  talent  show.  She  also  serves  as  a  coordinator  for  _ 
the  school  spelling  bee.  Ms.  Gonzales  participated  in  BTSA  and  completed  several 
training  programs  offered  by  the  Lancaster  School  District  including  “6+1  Traits  of 
.  Writing,”  “Thinking  Maps,”  and  “Results  Assessment:  Grades  2-3.”  In  her  previous 
district,  Ms.  Gonzales  put  together  IEPs  for  several  special  education  students.  All  of 
Ms,  Gonzales’s  evaluations in  the  two  districts in  which  she  has  taught  have  been 
very  good. 

_ 

20:  Superintendent  Mertens  is  delighted  with  the  performance  of  all  three 

respondents.  She  is  deeply  disappointed  over  having  to  lose  one  of  them. 

MI 

Mf 

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained in  those  sections  were 
satisfied. 

‘ 

2.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 

due  to  a  decline in  average  daily  attendance.  The  District  identified  the  certificated 
employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be 
reduced  or  discontinued.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified 
services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  and  was.a  proper  exercise of  i its 
discretion. 

3.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 

services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

4.  The  Special  Education  FTE  position  is  eliminated  by  virtue  of  the  election 
of  the  noticed  Special  Education  teacher  (Pamela  McHale)  not  to  request  a  hearing  on 
the issue.  The  elimination  of  the  remaining  self-contained  classroom  FTE  position 
must  be  determined  by  way  of  the  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria. 

5.  All  tie- -breaking  criteria  have  been  considered  for  all  three  respondents. 
Based  on  the  number  of  tie-breaking  criteria  and  the  Board’s  position  that  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria  were  “not  necessarily  listed in  order  of  importance,”  the  Board 
granted  broad  discretion  in  determining  which  teachers  should  be  retained  and  which 
must  be  dismissed.  Despite  the  broad  discretion  granted  by  the  Board,  this  case 
presents  a  particularly  difficult  choice  between  three  excellent  and  dedicated 
educators. 

H/ 

MI 

th 

If. 

If 

Mt 

Ii! 

If

6.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  are  viewed  with  consideration  for  what  will  best 

serve  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

L.ATY 

: 

a.  Ms.  Cangro  is  an  experienced  teacher  with  a  single  subject 

credential  in  mathematics  and  outstanding  qualifications,  who  is  presently  teaching 
mathematics,  a  core  area,  in  a  middle  school.  Although  teachers  with  multiple  subject 
credentials  may  teach  at  the  middle  school  level,  the  single  subject  credential  is  best 
suited for that  level.  Ms.  Berberich  could  use  her  supplementary  authorization  in 
mathematics  to  teach  middle  school  mathematics,  but  she  lacks  Ms.  Cangro’s 
experience  at  that  level,  having  taught  in  a  self-contained  classroom  at  the  elementary 
level  during  her  single  year  of  teaching. 

. 

b.  Ms.  Gonzales  and  Ms.  Berberich  are  closely  matched  in  almost  all 
areas.  However,  Ms.  Gonzales  is  the  more  experienced  teacher,  who  brings  with  her 
additional  skills  to  enrich  students’  educational  activities. 

i 

_ 

c.  On  close  balance,  Ms.  Cangro  and'Ms.  Gonzales  should  be  retained. 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusation  is  sustained  as  to  Respondent  Jennifer Berberich. 

2.  The  Board  may  notify  Respondent  Jennifer  Berberich  that  her  services  will 

not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

3.  The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondents  Jeanette  Cangro  and 

Rhonda  Gonzales. 

4.  Notice  may  not  be  given  to  Respondents  Jeanette  Cangro  and  Rhonda 

Gonzales  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  forthe  2005-2006  school  year. 

DATED:  April  26,  2005 

H.  STUART  WAXMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

