BEFORE  THE 
SONOMA  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
SONOMA  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

. 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

GAIL  ALIOTO,  et.  al., 

OAH  No.  2005030692 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  26,  2005,  in  Windsor,  California. 

Elizabeth  Mori,  Esq.,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal 
Services,  5350  Skylane  Boulevard,  Santa  Rosa,  California  95403,  represented  the 
Sonoma  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  Sonoma  County  Office  of  Education. 

Scott  A.  Lewis,  Esq.,  Perry,  Johnson,  Anderson,  Miller  &  Moskowitz,  LLP, 
703  Second  Street,  Fourth  Floor,  Santa  Rosa,  California  95404  represented  all  of  the 
respondents. 

_ 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Carl  Wong  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents,  those 

individuals  listed  on  Attachment  A,  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Sonoma  County 
Superintendent  of  Schools,  Sonoma  County  Office  of  Education  (SCOE). 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  SCOE. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  10,  2005,  the  County  Superintendent  adopted  a  resolution 

finding  it  was  necessary  to  terminate  certain  employees  due  to  a  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year: 

Nursing  position 
Adaptive  Physical  Education  (APE) 
Special  Ed.  Pre-School  Program  teaching  positions 
Special  Ed.  6-22  teaching  positions 

14  F.T.E. 
1.1  F.T.E. 
11.0  F.T.E. 
8.0  F.T.E.

  

Youth  Development,  Support  and  Leadership 
(Alternative  Education)  teaching  positions 

8.6  F.T.E. 

Total 

30.1  F.T-.E. 

The  resolution  also  authorized  the  County  Superintendent  to  send  appropriate 

notices  to  all  employees  affected  by  the  reduction. 

4. 

On  March  10,  2005,  the  County  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to 

respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  his 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
| 
recommendation. 

5. 

Respondents  each  made  a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a  hearing  to 

determine  if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

6. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

7. 

At  hearing  SCOE  dismissed  the  Accusation  against  Cheryl  Mattioli, 
Vickie  Whitehead  and  Dottie  Downing,  all  of  whom  will  be  retained  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year. 

8. 

As  part  of  its  action  in  reducing  services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year, 

SCOE  determined  to  retain,  regardless  of  seniority,  certificated  employees  who 
possess  a  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD) certificate. 
SCOE  established  this  “skipping  criteria”  to  meet  the  needs  of  its  diverse  and 
scattered  student  population.  SCOE  provides  educational  services  at  50  different  sites 
in  Sonoma  County.  It  serves  court  schools  and  other  alternative  schools  (e.g., 
It  also  serves  students  on  behalf  of  various  school  districts.  The  school 
juvenile  hall). 
districts  determine  which  of  their  students’  SCOE  will  serve.  Typically,  SCOE  serves 
the  “more  difficult”  students  from  school  districts,  including  English  language 
learners  (ELLs).  A  significant  percentage  of  the  students  served  by  SCOE  are  ELLs. 
Approximately  11  to  12  percent  of  special  education  students  and  16.7  percent  of 
alternative  school  students  are  ELLs.  Many  of  the  ELL  students  have  Individualized 
Education  Plans,  which  require  the  students  to  be  served  as  near  to  home  as  possible. 
These  ELL  students  are  scattered  across  the  50  sites  served  by  SCOE  and  can  be  in 
any  of  the  courses  provided  by  SCOE.  In  addition,  the  number  and  identity  of  the 
ELL  students  enrolled  in  SCOE  schools,  and  the  courses  required  by  these  students, 

  

!  SCOE  also  determined  to  retain,  regardless  of  seniority,  certificated  employees  who 
were  speech  and  language  therapists,  teachers  of  deaf  and  hard  of  hearing  students,  teachers  of 
visually  impaired  students,  nurses  (once  the  1.4  F.T.E.  reduction  was  satisfied)  and  Dottie 
Downing.  Since  no  challenges  to  these  skipping  criteria  were  raised  at  hearing,  they  will  not  be 
discussed  further  in  this  decision. 

 

change  each  year.  In  SCOE’s  Alternative  Education  programs,  probation  restraints 
and  safety  issues  also  limit  which  students  can  be  placed  in  certain  classes. 
Therefore,  it  is  impracticable  to  group  ELL  students  at  the  same  site  or  in  the  same 
classroom.  If  even  one  ELL  student  is  in  a  class,  state  law  requires  that  the  teacher  be 
certified  to  teach  ELLs. 

During  the  2001-2002  school  year,  a  State  Certification  Compliance  review 

was  conducted  at  SCOE  schools.  SCOE  was  found  out  of  compliance  because  it  did 
not  have  a  sufficient  number  of  appropriately  certified  teachers  to  provide  required 
instruction  to  ELLs.  SCOE  was  required  to  submit  a  compliance  plan  to  correct  this 
deficiency.  As  part  of  the  compliance  plan  SCOE  agreed  to  create  incentives  for  its 
teachers  to  obtain  CLAD  certification.  It  also  agreed  to  only  hire  teachers  who  hold  a 
CLAD  certificate. 

In  December  2002  SCOE  imposed  the  requirement  that  all  of  its  teachers, 
except  preschool  teachers,  obtain  CLAD  certification.  The  requirement  is  still  in 
effect.  By  letter  dated  December  9,  2002,  the  County  Superintendent  advised 
teachers  of  the  new  requirement  and  of  SCOE’s  need  for  teachers  certified  to  teach 
ELLs,  especially  in  its  alternative  education  and  special  education  classes.  The  letter 
also  advised  that  participating  in  training  and  earning  a  certificate  would  help  protect 
existing  teachers  from  the  possibility  of  reassignment  or  exposure  to  layoff  for  not 
having  the  required  certification.  The  letter  noted  the  state  compliance  target  date  of 
September  2005  for  all  teachers  to  obtain  ELL  instruction  certification.  Ina 
December  10,  2003,  letter  to  teachers  the  Director  of  Certified  Personnel  advised  that 
in  the  event  of  a  layoff,  teachers  with  less  seniority  who  had  CLAD  certification 
would  be  skipped  while  teachers  with  more  seniority  but  who  did  not  have  CLAD 
certification  would  be  laid-off.  The  letter  also  specifically  noted  that  the  requirement 
to  obtain  ELL  instruction  certification  was  currently  in  effect,  and  that  staff  needed  to 
meet  the  certification  requirements  now.  A  similar  message  was  repeated  in  a  series 
of  several  letters  and  memoranda  to  teachers  from  SCOE  between  January  and 
November  2004. 

9, 

Respondent  Patsy  Truxaw  holds  Standard  Secondary  Credentials  in 

Sociology,  English,  Drama  and  Administration.  SCOE  currently  employs  Truxaw  as 
a  1.0  F.T.E.  Principal.  SCOE  has  assigned  Truxaw a seniority  date  of  September  1, 
1993.  Truxaw  is  being  laid  off  as  part  of  the  F.T.E.  reduction  in  Youth  Development, 
Support  and  Leadership  (Alternative  Education)  positions. 

10. 

|  Respondent  David  Hardin  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Clear  Teaching 

Credential  and  a  Single  Subject  Adaptive  Physical  Education  (APE)  credential. 
SCOE  currently  employs  Hardin  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  APE  teacher.  SCOE  has  assigned 
Hardin  a  seniority  date  of  December  18,  1992.  Hardin  is  being  laid  off  as  part  of  the 
F,T.E.  reduction  in  Youth  Development,  Support  and  Leadership  positions.

  

11. 

Respondent  Jens  Oetiker  holds  a  Preliminary  Level  1,  Moderate/Severe 

Credential  and  a  Multiple  Subject,  Education  Specialist/Learning  Handicapped 
Credential.  SCOE  currently  employs  Oetiker  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  Special  Education 
teacher.  SCOE  has  assigned  Oetiker  a  seniority  date  of  February  23,  2001.  Oetiker is 
being  laid  off  as  part  of  the  F.T.E.  reduction  i  in  special  education  positions. 

12. 

Scott  Morris  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Level  II,  Special  Education 

Credential.  SCOE  currently  employs  Morris  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  Special  Education 
teacher.  SCOE  has  assigned  Morris  a  seniority  date  of  August  27,  1998.  Morris  is 
being  laid  off  as  part  of  the  F.T.E.  reduction  in  special  education  positions. 

13. 

Tina  De  Mattei  is  a  preschool  teacher  who  is  currently  on  a  39  month 
disability  leave  that  ends  January  6,  2008.  De  Mattei  is  being  laid  off  as  part  of  the 
F.T.E.  reduction  in  preschool  positions. 

14. 

Kathy  Allen  is  a  court/community  teacher  who  is  currently  on  STRS 

disability  leave.  Allen  has  been  on  leave  approximately  three  years.  Her  leave  is 
scheduled  to  end  on  August  5,  2006.  SCOE  has  assigned  Allen  a  seniority  date  of 
January  7,  1986.  Allen  is  being  laid  off  as  part  of  the  F.T.E.  reduction  in  Youth 
Development,  Support  and  Leadership  positions. 

15. 

Respondents  Truxaw,  Oetiker,  Morris  and  Hardin  were  all  in  the 

process  of  obtaining  CLAD  certification  when  SCOE’s  March  15,  2005,  deadline  for 
submitting  proof  of  credentials  and  certifications  expired.?  (See  Campbell  v.  Abbot 
(1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  814-815  [school  district  not  required  to  consider 
credentials  acquired  after  the  March  15  deadline  for  sending  layoff  notices];  Degener 
v.  Governing  Bd.  of  Wiseburn  School  District  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689  [credential 
must  be  on  file  with  district  in  order  to  be  effective].)  Allen  and  De  Mattei  were  on 
disability  leaves  of  absence  when  the  deadline  expired.  Neither  submitted  proof  of 
CLAD  certification  prior  to  the  deadline.  As  a  result  of  SCOE’s  skipping  criteria, 
respondents  Truxaw,  Oetiker,  Morris,  Hardin,  Allen  and  De  Mattei  will  be  laid  off  in 
lieu  of  less  senior  employees  who  hold  CLAD  certificates. 

16.  |  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)  permits  a  school  district 

to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  if  it 
demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of 

  

*  Truxaw,  Oetiker  and  Morris  are  seeking  CLAD  certification  through  the  University  of 

San  Diego.  Truxaw  has  finished  her  coursework  and  has  submitted  her  paperwork  to  the 
University  for  approval.  She  obtained  a  temporary  certification  from  SCOE  on  April  26,  2005. 
Morris  finished  his  coursework  on  March  15,  2005,  and  has  submitted  his  paperwork  to  the 
University  for  approval.  He  obtained  a  temporary  certification  from  SCOE  on  March  22,  2005. 
Oetiker  finished  his  coursework  on  March  25,  2005,  and  plans  to  submit  his  paperwork  to  the 
University  for  approval  very  soon.  Hardin  is  also  in  the  process  of  obtaining  his  CLAD 
certification.  He  passed  a  portion  of  the  CLAD  examination  in  December  2004.  On  June  25, 
2005,  he  plans  to  re-take  the  portion  of  the  examination  that  he  did  not  pass. 

 

study,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  the  course  or  course  of  study,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do 
not  possess. 

. 

Respondents  contend  SCOE  has  failed  to  establish  a  need  to  only  retain 
teachers  with  CLAD  certification.  They  note  that  approximately  90  percent  of  SCOE 
teachers  have  the  required  certification,  while  only  about  16.7  percent  of  SCOE’s 
to  12  percent  of  its  special  education  students 
alternative  education  students  and  11 
are  ELLs.  Respondents  also  note  that  the  state  has  extended  its  compliance  date  for 
obtaining  ELL  instruction  certification  to  January  1,  2008.  Respondents  reason  that 
since  there  is  no  state  mandate  for  current  ELL  certification,  and  since  there  is  a  much 
higher  percentage  of  CLAD  certified  teachers  than  ELL  students,  SCOE  has  failed  to 
establish  a  need  for  teachers  with  CLAD  certification. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  not  persuasive.  The  evidence  established  that 

ELL  students  are  scattered  throughout  the  classes  and  across  the  many  locations 
SCOE  serves.  It  is  impracticable  for  SCOE  to  group  these  students  at  a  single  site  or 
in  a  restricted  set  of  classes.  An  ELL  student  may  be  in  any  SCOE  class.  SCOE 
therefore  has  a  need  for  teachers  with  CLAD  certificates.  SCOE  is  only  retaining 
teachers  with  rankings  lower  than  respondents  who  have  such a  certificate.  Section 
44955,  subdivision  (d)  authorizes  such  retention. 

17. 

Respondents  next  contend  teachers  with  CLAD  certification  are  not 

being  retained  to  teach  a  particular  course  of  study  because  they  are  not  teaching  what 
they  learn  in  their  CLAD  coursework  to  the  students  in  their  classroom. 

Respondent’s  strained  interpretation  of  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (d)  is  not  persuasive.  Subjects  taught  in  elementary  and  secondary 
schools  are  curricular  offerings.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  637-638.)  Under  state  law,  ELL  certification  is  required  in  order 
teach  these  curricular  offerings  whenever  an  ELL  student  is  present  in  the  classroom. 
It is  therefore  found  that  CLAD  certified  teachers  are  being  retained  to  teach  a 
particular  course  or  course  of  study. 

18. 

Respondent  Truxaw  additionally  seems  to  suggest  that  SCOE  should  be 

estopped  to  lay  her  off  because  on  a  date  which  is  not  clear  from  the  record,  she  was 
advised  by  Ethan  Hack,  Director  of  Certificated  Personnel  and  Gerald  Lapinski, 
Director  of  Youth  Development,  Support  and  Leadership,  not  to  worry  about 
obtaining  a  CLAD  certificate.  She  was  told  she  could  retreat  to  the  classroom  if  she 
were  laid  off  from  her  administrative  position  as  a  principal.  (CLAD  certification  is 
not  a  requirement  for  administrative  positions.)  However,  in  February  2005  Truxaw 
(who  was  laid  off  from  her  administrative  position  and  sought  to  exercise  her  right  to 
bump  into  a  teaching  position)  was  advised  that  she  would  be  laid  off  because  she  did 
not  have  CLAD  certification. 

  

 

The  elements  of  estoppel  are  (1)  a  misrepresentation  or  concealment  of 

material  facts;  (2)  made  with  knowledge  of  the  facts;  (3)  to  a  party  ignorant  of  the 
truth;  (4)  with  intention  that  the  latter  act  upon  it;  and  (5)  the  party  must  have  been 
induced  to  act  upon  it.  (See  7  Witkin,  Summary  of  Cal.  Law  (1974  ed.)  Equity  §  132, 
p.  5352,  and  cases  cited  therein.)  “Where  one  of  these  elements  is  missing  there  can  be 
no  estoppel.”  (California  School  Employees  Assn.  v.  Jefferson  Elementary  School 
District  (1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  668,  692.)  No  showing  was  made  that  SCOE 

-  intentionally  concealed  a  known  material  fact  with  the  intent  that  Truxaw  act  on  it  to  her 
detriment.  Rather  the  evidence  indicates  that  Truxaw  was  aware  that  her  right  to  retreat 
to  the  classroom  was  subject  to  her  possessing  the  necessary  credentials  and 
qualifications.  The  evidence  also  reveals  that  Truxaw  was  aware  that  in  the  event  ofa 
layoff,  teachers  with  less  seniority  who  had  CLAD  certification  would  be  skipped 
while  teachers  with  more  seniority  but  who  did  not  have  CLAD  certification  would  be 
laid-off.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  at  what  point  Hack  and  Lapinski  expressed 
their  belief  that  Truxaw  did  not  have  to  worry  about  CLAD  certification;  however, 
Truxaw  was  clearly  aware  no  later  than  2004  that  teachers,  and  therefore  anyone 
hoping  to  retreat  to  a  teaching  position,  needed  CLAD  certification  in  order  to  protect 
their  seniority  rights.  She  chose  to  delay  in  obtaining  that  certification.  Truxaw  has 
failed  to  prove  that  estoppel  is  warranted. 

19. 

Respondents  Allen  and  De  Mattei  are  disabled  teachers  on  unpaid  leave 

status.  Allen  and  De  Mattei  contend  that  laying  them  off  would  usurp  their  rights 
under  Education  Code  section  44978.1.  Allen  and  De  Mattei  also  suggest  that  laying 
them  off  deprives  them  of  the  right  of  accommodation  due  to  their  disability,  which  is 
mandated  by  the  Fair  Employment  and  Housing  Act  (FEHA). 

Respondent’s  contentions  are  not  persuasive.  Education  Code  section  44978. 1 

provides  that  a  permanent  employee  who  is  medically  unable  to  perform  her  duties 
shall  be  placed  on  a  reemployment  list  for  a  period  of  39  months,  and  shall  be 
returned  to  work  in  a  position  in  which  she  is  credentialed  and  qualified  during  this 
39  month  period  whenever  she  is  medically  able.  Nothing  in  that  section  entitles  an 
employee  to  employment  in  a  position  for  which  she  is  not  qualified.  Neither  Allen 
nor  Mattei  has  the  CLAD  certification  necessary  to  avoid  layoff.  Thus,  both  are 
subject  to  layoff  under  the  same  skipping  criteria  applied  to  other  SCOE  employees. 

Allen  and  De  Mattei  have  also  failed  to  establish  that  laying  them  off  will 

deprive  them  of  their  right  of  accommodation  under  the  FEHA.  SCOE  has  expressed 
its  intent  to  comply  with  its  employment  obligations  toward  Allen  and  Mattei. 
Moreover,  it  must  be  presumed  that  SCOE  will  perform  its  official  duties  and  comply 
with  legislative  mandates.  (Campbell  v.  Abbot,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Gallup  v. 
Loma  School  Dist.  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571.)  Also,  it  must  be  noted  that  even  if 
SCOE’s  action  in  laying  off  Allen  and  De  Mattei  were  a  violation  of  FEHA,  such  a 
violation  would  not  prevent  the  SCOE  from  exercising  its  authority  und  the  Education 
Code  to  reduce  services.  Respondents’  remedy  for  a  violation  of  FEHA  lies in 
another  forum.

20. 

Respondents  also  argue  that  since  the  resolution  authorizing  layoffs 
identified  a  specific  the  number  of  positions  to  be  reduced  in  each  of  five  service 
categories,  “SCOE  can  only  reduce  the  number  of  teaching  positions  within  the 
particular  kind  of  service  that  they  announced  in  their  resolution.”  As  an  example, 
respondents  note  that  although  the  resolution  authorized  the  elimination  of  8.6  F.T.E. 
Youth  Development  teaching  positions  (or  30.7  percent  of  SCOE’s  28  Youth 
Development  teachers),  13  F.T.E.  Youth  Development  teachers  (or  46  percent  of 
Youth  Development  teachers)  were  noticed  for  layoff.  Citing  San  Jose  Teachers 
Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  respondents  contend  SCOE  cannot 
notice  a  higher  percentage  of  positions  for  layoff  under  a  particular  category  of 
services  than  is  authorized  by  its  resolution. 

Respondents  are  mistaken.  The  purpose  of  the  initial  notice  of  non- 

reemployment  is  to  notify  employees  of  the  probability  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  they  may  consider  looking  elsewhere  for 
employment.  (Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  y.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  653.) 
In  order  to  ensure  that  all  employees  who  potentially  may  be  affected  by  a  layoff 
receive  proper  notice,  it  is  often  necessary  for  a  school  district  to  notice  more 
employees  than  will  actually  be  laid  off.  Such  broad  noticing  may  be  necessary  when 
issues  of  seniority,  bumping,  etc.  have  not  been  finally  determined  by  the  statutory 
deadline  for  issuing  layoff  notices.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra, 
does  not  preclude  this  process.  It  simply  indicates  that  if  a  school  district  (or  county 
office  of  education)  specifies  a  specific  number  of  positions  to  be  eliminated  in  its 
authorizing  resolution,  it  is  bound  by  the  resolution.  In  this  case,  there  is  no  evidence 
SCOE  will  eliminate  more  positions  than  those  authorized  in  its  resolution. 

21. 

Respondents  have  failed  to  establish  that  District  should  be  required  to 

retain  their  services. 

the  ensuing  school  year. 

22. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  SCOE  will  be  reducing  services  for 

23. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to 

perform  services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

24. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of 

SCOE  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3  is  a  kind  which  may  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed. 
Code  §  44955;  Campbell  v.  Abbot,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing 
Bd.,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the

  

services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  County 
Superintendent’s  discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  for  termination  of  30.1  full-time  equivalent  positions  as  a 

result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 

the  2005-2006  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

_§/6/05 

q 

   
      HERYY  KFOMPKIN 

dnministrative 

Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

Respondents 

Alioto,  Gail 
Allen,  Karen 
Allen,  Kathy 
Bissada,  Karina 
Colt,  Joanna 
Corvino,  Cheryl 
De  Mattei,  Tina 
Dimock,  Tim 
Downing,  Dottie 
Doyle,  Lisa 
Gau-Cunningham,  Collette 
Hardin,  David 
Hartnett-Laube,  Maria 
Hoy,  Carolyn 
Keig,  Carol 
Kreinkamp,  Marsha 
Mattioli,  Cheryl 
McAllister,  Debra 
McDonald,  Steve 
McDougall,  Vicki 
Morris,  Scott 
Oetiker,  Jens 
Overstreet,  Michael 
Parolini,  Elena 
Stone,  Elaine 
Swisher,  Linda 
Temple,  Laura 
Truxaw,  Patsy 
Whitehead,  Vicki 
Wright,  Eric 

ATTACHMENT  A

  

