BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SANTA  BARBARA  SCHOOL  DISTRICTS | 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Tn  The  Matter  of the Accusations  against: 

OAH  No.  L2005030494  _ 

Dee  Carter  Brown,  Aran  Burke,  Lynn 
Davis,  Lauren  Thal,  Nancy  Tobin  and 
Marilyn  Lauer, 

| Respondents. 

  

  

"PROPOSED  DECISION 

David B.  Reéseninan,  Administrative  I Law  Judge,  Office of  Administrative Hearings, 

oe  sate  of  California,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  25;  2005,  in  Santa Barbara,  Califotnia:: 

The  Santa  Barbara  School  Districts  were »  represented by Liebert Cassidy  Whitmore, 

.  by  Mary  Dowell,  attorney  at ‘law.  Respondents  Dee  Carter  Brown,  Aran  Burke,  Lynn  Davis, 

Lauren  Thal,  Nancy  Tobin  and  Marilyn  Lauer  were  present  and  were  represented  by 
Hathaway,  Perrett;  Webster,  Powers,  Chrisman  & Gutierrez,  byP  Paul D.  Powers  and  Alexis  _ 
Ridenour, attorneys  at  law. 

S 

“The  request for. hearing  of  Marilyn  Lauer  was  withdrawn, and  the] Districts dismissed 

‘the, Accusation  against  her.  Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  and  the parties 
made  oral  argument.  The  matter  was S  submitted  on  April  25,  2005. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION  | 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  Santa Barbara  School Districts  determined,  for  budgetary 

;  reasons,  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  téachers  and  other 
certificated  employees. 
the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

The  decision  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of 

_  Districts’  staff  carried  out  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection 
"process  involving  review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  “skipping,”  and  breaking 
The  selection  process  was 
ties  between  employees  with  the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service. 
in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the Education  Code.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Santa  Barbara  School  Districts  (Districts)  operate  elementary  and 

secondary  schools  for  students in  the  Santa Barbara  area.  Unique  to  the  state, there a are  two’ 
separate  school  districts  with  a  common  school  board  and  administration.  | 

2. 

J.  Brian  Sarvis  has  recently  been  appointed  as  the  Superintendent  of  the 

Districts.  Previously,  he  functioned  as  the  secretary-clerk  to  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 
Districts.  Robin  Sawaski  became  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  the  elementary  school 
_  district  as  of  March  7,  2005.  Ann  Peak  became  the  Interim  Coordinator  for  Certificated 

Personnel  for  the  Districts  as  of  January  1,  2005,  and  has  worked in ‘the  Districts’  personnel 

_  office  for  about  13 years.  Their  actions  as  set  forth  below  were  taken in  their  official 

capacities. 

3. 

Before  March  15,  2003,  the  Districts  personally  served.  on  each Respondent 
and  on, ‘other  certificated  employees  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that . 
notice  be  given  to  Respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that - 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set fore 
the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the Board  had  passed  Resolutions . 
. 
reducing  thé  certificated  staff  by  8 full-  time  equivalent  (F TE)  positions for  elementary 
Sa 
hibrarians  and  16  FTE Positions for  elementary  school  teachers. 

Respondents  submitted timely  written  requests  fora hearing  to  determine  if  there is  = 

cause  for not >t  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4.- 

-The  Superintendent  made  and filed  Accusations against  each  of  the  employees) 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations,  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. - 

5. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  some  of  the  employees, who are  the 

Respondents  herein. 

employees  of  the Districts. 

6. 

Respondents  i  in  this  proceeding  are >  probationary  or  permanent  certificated 

7. 

On  March  8,  2005,  ata meeting  of  the  Districts’  Board  of  Education  of  the 
Santa  Barbara  Elementary  School  District  (Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  was: 
-  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  employees  holding  8 
FTE  positions  for  elementary  librarians  and  16  FTE  positions  for  elementary  school  teachers!  - 
be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating 
the  reasons  for  those  recommendations. 

  

!  There  was  evidence  that  the  number  of  school  teacher positions was  established  to.“include”  the  librarian 
positions,  in  case  librarians  receiving  notice  could  ‘ ‘bump”  teachers  who  were  below  them in  seniority.”

B.S  Specifically,  G Goveming  Board  Resolutions  Nos.  04/05-21  and  04/05-22, 

adopted  on  March  8,  2005,  provided  for  the  reduction  or elimination  of  the  following 

_  particular  kinds  of  services: 

16  FTE’s  Elementary  Librarian  and  8  FTE’s s  Elementary  School 

Teaching. 

9. 

The  Governing  Board Resolutions were  required  by  the  Districts’  fiscal  crisis 

and  need  to  reduce  services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students.  The  decision 
was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are 
proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated: 

10. 

The  Districts  maintain  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees, 
credentials,  and  authorizations.  Credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the 
Districts’  records. 

1  1.  ~ 

Ann  Peak  and  other  employees  of  the Districts  were  responsible  for 

~ 

=.  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the layoff. 

- 

12.  : 

The  Districts  used  the  seniority list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list of 
least  senior  employees  currently  assigned in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  In - 
_  determining who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  affected  service,  the  Districts counted  the  oe 

the 

number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the.  affect  on 
incumbent  staff in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  Districts  then  determined  whether  the  least 
senior  employees  held  credentials in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other,  more’ 
senior,  employees  such  that  the  less  senior  employees  would  be  retained  and  the  “bumped” 
employees  would  receive  lay  off notices. 

13. 

Governing Board  Resolution  02/03- 31  was  adopted  during  the  2002- 2003 
school  year  to  establish  competency  and  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 
seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The - 
Districts  used  information  from  the  seniority  list  to  apply  the  tie-breaker  criteria  of  Board - 
Resolution  02-16. 

14. 

Respondents  contend,  among  other  things,  that  the  Districts:  improperly  based  | 
their  decision  to  eliminate  positions  on  speculation  that  there  would  be  less  money  available  - 
from  the  state  for  the  Districts’  annual  budget;  should  conduct  the  reductions  later  under . 
Education  Code  section  44955.5  after  the  Districts  are  aware  of  the  funding  to  be  received - 
_  from  the  state;  improperly  based  its  decision  to  eliminate positions  on  a  decrease  in  average 
daily  attendance  rather  than  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services;  improperly  eliminated. 
positions  in  schools  that  receive  “Title  1”  funds  which  are  subject  to  budgetary 
recommendations  by  school  site  councils;  and  may  be  reducing  librarian  services  to  the point 
that  there  may  not  be a  certificated  librarian  for  the  elementary  schools,  as  is  required  by  law. 

  

?  All  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

15. 

-  Respondents’  contentions  are  not  persuasive,  as  set  forth  in  these  Fac 

Findings  and/or  Conclusions  of  Law  and Discussion. 

: 

16. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

~ 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  teduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction in  certificated  staff,  . 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
_  reduction.”  ‘The  Districts  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings  — 
"  are  necessary  to  resolve  its financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board's  decisions  were  a  proper 

exercise  of  its  discretion. 

17. 

The  Governing Board may  consider  the  budgetary affect  of  a  reduction in 

enrollment  i  in  determining  whether  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services,  as  was done  here. 
It is  not  necessary  for  the  Governing  Board  to  proceed  with a  lay. off  process  under  the - 
procedures  for  a  decrease in  average  daily  attendance.  Nor is  it  necessary  for  the  Governing 
Board  to  implement  reductions  under  section  44955.5  at  a  later  time.. Although  these  options 

. 

may  be available,  the  Governing  Board  i is not  required  to take  them. 

,  18. 

Respondents  did not establish  that  the  existence  of federal Title  1  funding  foe 

two  school  sites  invalidates  or  affects  the  lay  off  process.  If  the  local  school  site  councils. 
wish  to  recommend funding  for librarian  s  services  ‘to  the  Governing  Board,  they  may  do  so. 

19. 

"Respondents  did  not establish  that  the  Governing  Board  has  a Tegal 

.  requirement  to  have  at  least  one  certificated  librarian  for  the  elementary  school  district. 

Further,  the  Districts  established  that  the  elementary  school  libraries  would  be  staffed  by  |  = 
classified  employees  in  positions  as  library  technicians,  and  that  the  Governing  Board was  in 
the  process  of  developing  a  position  of  library  trainer  to  train  the  technicians.  It  was 

_  unknown,  as  of  the  time  of  hearing,  what  the  qualifications  and  other  duties  of  the  library 

trainer  would be  and  whether  it  would  be  a  certificated  position. 

20.  The  Districts’  decisions  to  reduce  librarian  and  teaching  services were not 

arbitrary  and  were  based  upon  reasonable  considerations. 

| 

21. 

The  Districts’  employees  receiving  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be  © 

required  next  year  have  all  rendered  valuable  services  to  the  Districts. 

Ht 

@  Il 

t
 
e
t
e
h
t
t
a

 
l
a
t
i
n
i

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION  ~ 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set forth 

m  Bducation  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  services  identified in  Governing  Board Resolutions  Nos.  04/05-21  and 

04/05-22  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section 
44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services 
.  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  Districts’  schools 
and  pupils  w  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949, 

3. 

The  Districts  may  reduce  services  within  the. meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b), “either  by  determining  that’a  certain  type  of  servicé  to  students  shall  not, . 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to. 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees (1976)  64  Cal. App. 3d  167, 
| 
178  179. 

. 

is 

Bo  ALS  :  Cause  exists  to:  rediiee the  number  of certificated  employees  of the  Districts.  - 

-  due  to ‘the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction 

- 

or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of the Districts’ ‘Schools  and  pupils 
- within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

3S...  Noj junior certificated  employee  i  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  - 

which  a  more  senior employee i iS  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  . 

6. 

~~ 

A  senior  teacher  Whose position  is  discontinued has  the 1e  right  to  transfer  toa  — 

.  continuing  position which  he  or  she is certificated  and  competent  to  fill.  In  doing  so, the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee who is  filling  that  position.: 
. Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be - 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 

. Governing Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

H 

H 

 

1. 

The  Accusation  against  Marilyn  Lauer  is  dismissed. 

ORDER 

2. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  employees  of  the  Districts  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the  following  Respondents:  Dee Carter  Brown,  Aran 

-  Burke,  Lynn  Davis,  Lauren  Thal and Nancy’ Tobin. 

| 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  _ 

DATED:  April  29,2005. 

Sy 

. 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
_  Administrative  Law  Judge 

fe 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings. 

  

  

 

