BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
JEFFERSON  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

ROZANNA  BENSON  and  various  other 
certificated  employees  of  the  District, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N  2005010581 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ruth  S.  Astle,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Daly  City,  California  on  April  14,  2005. 

Laurie  S.  Juengert,  Attorney  at  Law,  Lozano  Smith,  represented  the  Governing  Board 

of  the  Jefferson  School  District. 

Stewart  Weinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  Weinberg,  Roger  &  Rosenfeld,  represented  all 

the  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  14,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l. 

2. 

Dr.  Barbara  B.  Wilson  made  this  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 

Superintendent  of  the  Jefferson  School  District  (District)  and  not  otherwise. 

a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

Each  of  the  named  respondents!  was  at  all  times  mentioned  herein,  and  now  is, 

3. 

On  March  9,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 

No.  05-03-09  as  set  forth  below,  directing  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  give  notices 
to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  school 
year. 

  

'  The  names  appear  on  the  2005  Layoff  List  attached  to  Exhibit  2

The  programs  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  are  as  follows: 

1, 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12, 

Reduction  in  Kindergarten 
Reduction  in  First  Grade 
Reduction  in  Second  Grade 
Reduction  in  Third  Grade 
Reduction  in  Fourth  Grade 
Reduction  in  Fifth  Grade 
Reduction  in  Sixth  Grade 
Reduction  in  Social  Science 
BTSA  Provider 
‘Vice  Principal 
Director  of  Special  Education 
Preschool/ELL  Director 

For  a  total  of  33.6  FTE 

3.0  FTE 
5.0  FTE 
1.0FTE 
14.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
0.6  FTE 
L.OFTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

4. 

On  March  10,  2005,  respondents  and  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  were 

given  written  notice  by  certified  mail  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  Notice  be  given 
respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  setting  the  reasons  therefore. 

5, 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  respondents,  in  writing,  duly 

required  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

6. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 

for  not  reemploying  respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year  except  as  noted  in  Finding  7, 
below.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Governing  Board,  it  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  in  the  District  on  account  of  the  above  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
services.  As  a  consequence,  the  Board  has  determined  that  the  services  of  a  corresponding 
number  or  less’  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  District  shall  be  terminated  at  the  close 
of  the  current  2004-2005  school  year. 

7. 

The  Governing  Board  by  Resolution  number  05-01-26A,  dated  J anuary  26, 

2005,  has  further  determined  that,  as  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on 
the  same  date,  the  order  of  termination  listed  on  the  seniority  list  has  been  based  solely  on  the 
basis  of  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof,  except  that  a  lottery  was  used  when 
the  tie-breaking  criteria  resulted  in  more  than  one  employee  with  the  same  date  of  hire  being 
found  to  have  the  same  number  of  points  under  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  This  occurred  for 

  

?  The  District  has  taken  into  account  positive  attrition  so  that  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  24  employees  were  subject  to 
layoff.

  

three  employees  who  were  hired  August  19,  2002.  Each  of  the  three  employees  received  4 
points  so  the  District  conducted a  lottery  ranking  the  employees,  Vizcarra,  Rivera  and  Link, 
in  descending  order.  The  notices  for  Vizcarra  and  Rivera  were  rescinded  leaving  Link  on 
the  layoff  list.  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  requires,  in  part,  that  “As 
between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the 
governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  ....”  The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  did  not  call  for a  lottery  as  the  final 
tiebreaker.  The  District  acted  without  proper  authority  from  the  Governing  Board  when  a 
lottery  was  used  to  determine  the  ranking  of  employees  with  the  same  date  of  service  after 
other  criteria  failed  to  rank  order  the  employees.  Therefore,  district  employee  Link  cannot  be 
laid  off  under  these  circumstances. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  render  a  service,  which  the  respondents,  or  any  of  them,  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  except  as  noted  above. 
. 

The  cause  for  not  reemploying  respondents  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 

schools  in  the  District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

The  District  rescinded  the  notices  sent  to  Eikrem,  Rivera,  Vizcarra,  and 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

Walden. 

The  greatest  number  of  reductions  or  eliminations  in  particular  kinds  of 

service  is  a  result  of  increasing  class  size  and  collapsing  classes  in  grades  K  though  6.  The 
respondents  claim  that  this  violates  the  collective  bargaining  agreement.  That  is  irrelevant  to 
these  proceedings. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

lL. 

Except  as  set  forth  in  Finding  7,  cause  for  the  termination  of  the  particular 

— 

kinds  of  service  listed  in  Finding  3  and  the  corresponding  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 
Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955.  It  is  determined  that  the  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

2 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Finding  7,  employee  Link  cannot  be  given 

a  layoff  notice.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  only  the 
Governing  Board  can  determine  the  order  of  termination  for  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date.  Since  three  employees  are  equally  senior  and 
two  of  them  are  being  retained,  cause  does  not  exist  to  layoff  the  third  employee.

  

ORDER 

Except  as  set  forth  above,  and  in  accordance  with  the  seniority  list,  notice  may  be 

given  to  respondents  except  Link,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year. 

DATED:  lepud  27,  L405 

Kudo d Cotle 

RUTH S. ASTLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

