BEFORE  THE 
SIERRA  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
SIERRA  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

BARBARA  DOUVILLE, 

OAH  No.  N2005040079 

  

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  - 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  20,  2005,  in  Sierraville,  California. 

Cynthia  M.  Smith,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Sierra  County  Superintendent  of 

Schools. 

- 

Carolyn  Langenkamp,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  20,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Mary  Genasci,  is  the  Sierra  County  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of 

Schools.  He  made  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondent  is  employed  by  the  Superintendent  as  a  probationary  certificated 

employee  and  first  rendered  paid  service  for  the  Superintendent  on  August  25,  1997. 

3. 

On  or  about  February  8,  2005,  the  Superintendent  recommended  that  notice  be 

given  respondent,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  her  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore.  The 
Superintendent  determined  to  discontinue  two  (2.0)  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  by 
reducing  Special  Day  Class/Resource  Specialist  services  and  .5  FTE  High  Risk  Counselor

services.  Although  not  required,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Sierra  County  Board  approved 
the  Superintendent’s  recommendation. 

4. 

The  Resolution  approved  by  the  Governing  Board  recites  that  the  order  of 
termination  as  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date  is  the 
order  “listed  on  the  seniority  list  dated  2/2/2005.”  The  seniority  list  lists  respondent  one  line 
above  Marlene  Mongolo,  who  has  the  same  date  of  first  paid  probationary  service  as 
respondent.  However,  the  order  of  placement  of  the  two  names  was  not  based  upon  the 
application  of  tie-breaking  criteria  by  the  Superintendent  which  occurred  later.  The  language 
implying  otherwise  in  the  resolution  was  inadvertent. 

5. 

On  March  10,  2005,  respondent  was  given  notice  by  the  Superintendent  that 
her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Nowhere  in  the  notice  was 
respondent  apprised  of  her  right  to  a  hearing.  Superintendent  believed,  based  in  part  upon 
advice  of  legal  counsel,  that  respondent  was  not  entitled  to  a  hearing. 

6. 

On  March  18,  2005,  respondent  signed  a  Request  for  a  Hearing,  which  was 

received  by  the  Superintendent  on  March  21,  2005.  Superintendent  acknowledged  the 
request  in  an  e-mail  sent  to  respondent  on  March  24,  2005,  and  told  respondent  in  the  e-mail 
that  she  would  apprise  respondent  of  the  date  as  soon  as  the  hearing  had  been  set.  On  April 
7,  2005,  the  Superintendent  filed  the  Accusation  in  this  matter  and  served  it  and  related 
documents  on  respondent.  Included  was  a  Notice  of  Hearing. 

7. 

In  2001,  Superintendent’s  predecessor  negotiated  with  the  bargaining  unit  for 

certificated  employees  of  the  Office  of  Education,  criteria  for  tie-breaking  between  and 

-  among  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  first  paid  probationary  service.  The  cri- 
teria  are  found  in  Article  17  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU).  The  most  recent 
version  of  the  MOU,  applicable  to  this  proceeding,  contains  the  same  language. 

8. 

Section  17.2  of  the  MOU  reads: 

As  Between  Unit  Members  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date, 
as  set  forth  in  Section  17.1,  the  specific  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  their 
relative  order  of  seniority  are  the  following: 

A. 

Professional  Preparation 

1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Each  valid  credential  held  for  service 
Each  subject  area  of  teaching  competency 
by  the  Unit  Member’s  major 
Each  subject  area  of  teaching  competency 
established  by  the  Unit  Members  minor 
Each  credential  authorization  beyond  the 
Unit  Member’s  major/minor 
Each  master’s  degree  held 

3  points 

3  points 

1  point 

1  point 
1  point 

 

B. 

Experience 

1. 

2. 

Each  year  of  previous  in-District  experience  as  a  certificated 
employee  which  reflects  in  years  of  service  other  than  that  de- 
termined  by  the  established  hire  date.  (A  certificated  employee 
who  may  have  resigned  and  been  rehired  at  a  later 
date) 
Each  year  out-of-District  experience  up  to  seven  (7)  years  as  a 
certificated  employee 

  

1  point! 

1  point 

  

C. 

Lottery 

If  any  two  or  more  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered 

1. 
paid  service  on  the  same  date  still  have  the  same  number  of  points  after 
application  of  points  provided  above,  the  ranking  of  such  employees 
shall  be  determined  by  a  lottery  conducted  by  the  appropriate  Superin- 
tendent  or  his/her  designee. 

9. 

The  Superintendent  applied  the  criteria  to  resolve  the  tie  between  respondent 

and  Marlene  Mongolo.  She  awarded  respondent  19  points  and  Mongolo  25  points.  More 
specifically,  each  teacher  was  awarded three  points  for  holding  a  Professional  Clear  Multi- 
ple-Subject  Teaching  Credential.  Respondent  was  awarded  an  additional  point  for  Supple- 
mental  Authorization:  Teach  General  Science.  Each  teacher  was  awarded  three  points  for 
holding  a  Clear  Specialist  Credential  in  Special  Education,  Authorized  Field:  Learning 
Handicapped.  Mongolo  was  awarded  an  additional  three  points  for  holding  a  Clear  Crosscul- 
tural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  Certificate  (CLAD).  Each  teacher  was  awarded 
three  points  for  holding  Clear  Resource  Specialist  Certificate  of  Competence.  These  teach- 
ing  authorizations  were  all  issued  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 
Respondent  received  seven  points  for  in-District  experience,  plus  two  points  for  out-of- 
District  experience.  Mongolo  received  seven  points  for  in-District  experience.  Thus,  had  the 
Superintendent  awarded  additional  points  to  either  teacher,  the  teachers  would  each  have  had 
19  points  and  the  Superintendent  would  have  had  to  break  the  tie  by  lottery  pursuant  to  sec- 
tion  17.2,  subdivision  C,  of  the  MOU. 

10. 

The  Superintendent  awarded  six  additional  points  to  Mongolo  for  having  taken 

and  passed  three  state  approved  competency  examinations.  The  Superintendent’s  rationale 
for  awarding  the  additional  points  was  her  interpretation  of  section  17.2,  subdivision  A,  re- 
cited  above.  Superintendent  was  familiar  with  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  (NCLB) 
and  its  provisions  which  generally  impose  additional  competency  requirements  on  teachers 
beyond  a  college  degree  in  the  appropriate  field  and  a  teaching  credential.  She  was  aware 
that  one  of  two  ways  to  establish  competency  was  to  pass  a  state  approved  standard  compe- 

  

'  Section  17.3  expressly  states  that  the  criteria  in  17.2  shall  be  utilized  for  any  “reductions  in  force  that  may  occur 
pursuant  to  provisions  of  the  California  Education  Code.” 

 

tency  exam.  She  concluded,  therefore,  that  “competency”  as  it  is  used  in  17.2,  subsection  A 
2,  should  be  redefined  to  coincide  with  NCLB  requirements.  Superintendent  did  not  explain 
why  she  awarded  two  points  for  each  of  the  standard  examinations  passed  by  Mongolo.  Su- 
perintendent  awarded  no  points  to  either  teacher  for  their  respective  majors,  reasoning  that 
every  teacher  has  a  major,  so  no  points  are  appropriate. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

ISSUES  PRESENTED  BY  RESPONDENT 

Respondent  raised  the  following  contentions  at  hearing: 

1. 

The  Superintendent’s  failure  to  apprise  respondent  of  her  right  to  a 
hearing  in  the  preliminary  notice  was a  fatal  jurisdictional  defect  which 
was  not  cured  by  the  filing  of  an  accusation  and  provision  of  a  hearing. 

Superintendent  is  estopped  from  denying  respondent’s  relative  seniority 
over  Mongolo  based  on  the  statement  in  the  Superintendent’s  resolution 
coupled  with  the  attached  seniority  list  which  placed  respondent  senior 
to  Mongolo. 

Superintendent  misapplied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  in  at  least  two  re- 
spects:  (1)  Superintendent  awarded  points  for  teaching  authorizations 
which  were  not  “credentials”;  and,  (2)  Superintendent  awarded  points 
to  Mongolo  for  having-passed  state  competency  exams,  a  factor  which 
was  not  included  among  the  agreed-upon  tie-breaking  criteria. 

APPLICABLE  LAW 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44949?  reads: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by 
the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing 
board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superinten- 
dent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district 
which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing 
board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  em- 
ployee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 
Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision 

_ 

  

?  As  respondent  points  out,  this  section  and  44955  cited  below  apply  to  certificated  employees  employed  by  the  Su- 
perintendent  of  a  county  office  of  education,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  1294.

(b)  or  has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  rea- 
sons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  per- 
son,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.  How- 
ever,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  it- 
self,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of 
any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 
for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a 
hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent 
the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in 
that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date 
on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails 
to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to 
do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing. 
The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of 
the  provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding 
shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5 
(commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of 
the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power 
granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  ap- 
ply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if-any,;-within 
five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days 
after  service  of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section 
11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. 

_ 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who 
shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  de- 
termination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  re- 
lated  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed 
decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation 
as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final 
determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition.  None 
of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in  the  ” 
proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be 

binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  

committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  dis- 
trict  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  er- 
rors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be 
submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before 
May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses 
of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the  administrative  law  judge,  shall 
be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not 
inconsistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  ef- 
fectuate  this  section. 

. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  deliv- 
ered  in  person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  de- 
posited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  ad- 
dressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

— 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continu- 
ance  is  granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the 
dates  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of 
granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  of 
Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance 
shall  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance.  (Em- 
phasis  added.) 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  reads: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of 
the  schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in 
session  shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of 
the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board  deter- 
mines  that  attendance  in a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a 
result  of  the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined 
in  Section  46304,  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced 
or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification 
of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  condi- 
tions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corre- 
sponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  per- 
manent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except 
as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  em- 
ployee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re-

tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent employee  i 1s 5  certifi- 

cated  aid  compe  tent to  render.” 

  

In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this 
section  for  a  newly  formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school 
of  the district  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  a  school  of  the  newly 
formed  or  reorganized  district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school 
years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termi- 
nation  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination 
is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later 
than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accor- 
dance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria 
in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group. 
This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  writ- 
ten  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall 
not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest 
that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement.  (Emphasis  added.) 

Education  code  section  44002  reads: 

\ 

- 

A  ‘credential’  includes  a  credential,  certificate,  life  document,  life  di- 
ploma,  permit,  certificate  of  clearance,  or  waiver  issued  by  the  commis- 
sion. 

4. 

5. 

Education  code  section  44004  defines  “credential,”  when  used  as  a  noun,  as: 

“the  document  issued  by  a  county  board  of  education  to  license  the  holder  to  perform  the 
service  specified  in  the  certificate. 

993 

Education  Code  section  44330,  dealing  with  the  filing  of  credentials  and  cer- 

tificates  with  the  county’s  Office  of  Education,  reads: 

Except  where  such  service  is  provided  by  a  school  district  pursuant  to 
Section  44332.5,  each  county  or  city  and  county  board  of  education 
may  provide  for  the  registration  of  any  valid  certification  or  other 
document  authorizing  the  holder  thereof  to  serve  in  a  position  requir- 
ing  certification  qualifications  as  an  employee  of  the  county  superin- 
tendent  of  schools  of  such  county  or  city  and  county  or  of  a  school  dis- 
trict  under  the  jurisdiction  of  such  county  superintendent  of  schools. 

  

>  This  definition  clearly  deals  with  a  different  situation  than  the  issuance  of  teaching  authorizations  by  the 

 

Such  registration  shall  authorize  the  service  of  the  holder  as  an  em- 
ployee  of  the  county  superintendent  of  schools  or  of  any  school  district 
under  his  jurisdiction  in  the  capacity  in  which  and  for  the  period  of 
time  for  which  the  certification  or  other  document  is  valid. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44006  reads: 

The  term  "certificated  person"  refers  to  a  person  who  holds  one  or  more 
documents  such  as  a  certificate,  a  credential,  or  a  life  diploma,  which 
singly  or  in  combination  license  the  holder  to  engage  in  the  school  ser- 
vice  designated  in  the  document  or  documents. 

_  APPLICATION  OF  LAW  TO  FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

7. 

Superintendent  failed  to  apprise  respondent  of  her  right  to  a  hearing  in  the 

March  10,  2005,  communication.  However,  such  failure  was  a  nonsubstantive  procedural 
omission  which  did  not  prejudice  respondent.  Respondent  did  request  a  hearing  on  March 
21,  2005,  and  the  Accusation  was  filed  on  April  7,  2005,  and  served  on  respondent  along 
with  a  Notice  of  Hearing.  Respondent  appeared  with  counsel  at  the  hearing  and  demon- 
strated  no  prejudice  resulting  from  the  omission  in  the  March  10,  2005,  letter.  Respondent 
contends  that  the  preliminary  notice  required  by  section  44949  is  a  jurisdictional  requirement 
and  failure  to  comply  is  a  fatal  error  which  cannot  be  cured  by  demonstrating  lack  of  preju- 
dice. 
In  this  matter,  however,  respondent  was  provided  notice  that  her  services  would  not  be 
required  in  the  ensuing  school  year  and  that  notice  was  provided  before  the  March  15,  2005, 
deadline.  Thus,  the  “substance”  of  the  notice  requirement  was  met.  The  failure  to  include 
respondent’s  right  to  a  hearing  was  a  procedural  error  which  led  to  no  demonstrable  preju- 
dice  in  this  matter. 

- 

8. 

The  Superintendent  is  not  estopped  from  denying  that  respondent’s  seniority  is 

higher  than  Mongolo’s,  as  reflected  in  the  seniority  list.  The  elements  of  estoppel  against  a 
public  agency  are  included  in  Evidence  Code  section  623  which  provides:  “Whenever  a  party 
has,  by  his  own  statement  or  conduct,  intentionally  and  deliberately  led  another  to  believe  a 
particular  thing  true  and  to  act  upon  such  belief,  he  is  not,  in  any  litigation  arising  out  of  such 
statement  or  conduct,  permitted  to  contradict  it.  To  establish  a  claim  or  defense  based  on  eq- 
uitable  estoppel,  the  party  asserting  the  defense  must  prove:  (1)  a  representation  or  conceal- 
ment  of  material  facts  (2)  made  with  knowledge,  actual  or  virtual,  of  the  facts  (3)  to  a  party 
ignorant  of  the  truth  (4)  with  the  intention  that  the  latter  act  upon  it  and  (5)  the  party  must 
have  been  induced  to  act  upon  it.  Where  one  of  these  elements  is  missing  there  can  be  no 
estoppel.  (California  School  Employees  Assn.  v.  Jefferson  Elementary  School  District  (1975) 
45  Cal.  App.  3d  683,  692.) 

9. 

In  this  matter,  the  representation  of  respondent’s  seniority  to  Mongolo  on  the 
seniority  list  was  arguably  material,  and  it  was  made  with  true  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the 

required  tie-breaking  criteria  had  not  yet  been  applied.  This  was  not  known  to  respondent.  

However,  there  was  no  intention  that  respondent  act  upon  the  misrepresentation.  To  the  con- 
trary,  respondent  was  given  the  preliminary  notice  that  she  would  not  be  employed  in  the 
next  school  year.  She  took  no  action  in  reliance  upon  her  seniority  date  to  her  detriment.  In 
summary,  the  elements  of  estoppel  were  not  established. 

10. 

Superintendent  did  not  misapply  the  tie-breaking  criteria  by  awarding  points  to 
each  teacher  for  certificates  issued  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  The  use  of 
the  phrase  “credential  held  for  service”  in  the  tie-breaking  criteria  is  somewhat  ambiguous. 
The  Commission  does  designate  teaching  authorizations  such  as  the  CLAD  and  Clear  Re- 
source  Specialist  as  a  “certificate”  rather  than  a  “credential.”  The  tie-breaking  criteria,  a 
consensus  product  included  in  the  MOU,  does  not  include  a  separate  category  for  teaching 
authorizations  other  than  credentials,  at  least  suggesting  that  certificates  are  to  be  included  in 
the  meaning  of  the  disputed  phrases.  The  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  dealing  with  the 
issuance  of  credentials  and  certificates  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  and  the 
filing  of  such  documents  with  the  county  appear  to  treat  both  credentials  and  certificates  as 
different  forms  of  state  authorization  to  teach  in  the  areas  specified.  Under  these  circum- 
stances,  it  was  not  unreasonable  for  the  Superintendent  to  treat  them  the  same  in  awarding 
points  under  section  17.2,  subsection  A  1. 

11.  |  Superintendent’s  decision  to  award  two  points  to  Mongolo  for  each  of  the 

three  standardized  tests  that  she  passed  did  constitute  a  misapplication  of  the  tie-breaking  cri- 
teria.  Neither  the  professional  preparation  nor  the  experience  category  included  credit  for 
passing  such  examinations.  Superintendent  interpreted  section  17.2,  subsection  A  2,  to  in- 
clude  passing  standard  exams,  but  the  plain  language  of  that  subsection  provides  credit  for 
“teaching  competency  established  by  the  Unit  Member’s  major.”  Both  teachers  had  a  single 
major  and  were  entitled  to  three  points  each  for  this-criterion.  However,  the  word  “compe- 
tency”  cannot  reasonably  be  taken  out  of  the  context  of  the  quoted  phrase  and  interpreted  to 
mean  compliance  with  the  federal  NCLB.  Certainly,  Superintendent  could  have  negotiated  a 
separate  criterion  for  compliance  with  the  NCLB  and  the  number  of  points  to  be  awarded. 
Even  if  such a  criterion  were  adopted,  it  would  make  little  sense  to  award  two  points  for  each 
of  the  qualifying  examinations  passed  and  the  criterion  would,  in  fairness,  have  to  award  the 
same  number  of  points  for  compliance  by  the  alternative  experience  route  available  to  “not 
. 

-  new”  teachers  like  respondent. 

12.‘ 

The  tie-breaking  criteria,  properly  applied,  would  have  resulted  in a  tie  be- 

tween  respondent  and  Mongolo.  The  MOU  provides  that  under  such  circumstances,  a  lottery 
is  to  be  conducted  by  the  Superintendent  to  determine  the  teacher’s  respective  seniority.  The 
Superintendent  may  conduct  the  lottery  to  determine  which  teacher  is  the  more  senior  if  the 
process  is  completed  before  May  15,  2005. 

   

LEGAL  CAUSE  FOR  NOTICE 

13. 

Cause  does  not  presently  exist  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  to  provide  notice  to  respondent  Barbara  Douville  that  her  services  as  a  Special  Day 
Class/Resource  Specialist  will  not  be  required  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

14. 

Superintendent  may  conduct  the  lottery  contemplated  by  the  tie-breaking  crite- 
ria  within  the  MOU.  If  respondent  “loses”  the  lottery,  cause  will  exist  under  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide  notice  to  Barbara  Douville  that  her  services  as  a  Special 
Day  Class/Resource  Specialist  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

ORDER 

If  Superintendent  conducts  the  tie-breaking  lottery  pursuant  to  section  17.2, 
subsection  C,  of  the  MOU,  and  respondent  is  deemed  junior  to  Marlene  Mongolo,  notice 
shall  be  given  to  respondent  that  her  services  as  a  Special  Day  Class/Resource  Specialist  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2005-2006  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
services.  If  the  lottery  is  not  conducted  before  May  15,  2005,  respondent  shall  not  be  given 
notice  that  her  services  as  a  Special  Day  Class/Resource  Specialist  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2005-2006  School  Year. 

      

KARL  S.  ENGEMAN 
Administrative  Law 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Judge 

 

10 

