BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
MT.  DIABLO  UNFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-reemployment  of 
12.63  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees. 

OAH  No.  N2005030493 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stewart  A.  Judson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Richmond,  California,  on  April  25,  2005. 

Daniel  A.  Ojeda,  Esq.  represented  complainant  Gary  McHenry,  the  Superintendent  of 

the  Mt.  Diablo  Unified  School  District  of  Contra  Costa  County,  State  of  California. 

Emest  Tuttle,  Esq.  represented  the  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  25,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

L. 

Gary  McHenry  (complainant)  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Mt.  Diablo  Unified 

School  District  (the  District)  and  made  and  filed  the  accusations  in  his  official  capacity  as 
said  officer. 

2. 

Each  of  the  respondents,  all  of  whom  are  listed  in  Complainant’s  Exhibit  7  and 

incorporated  herein  by  this  reference,  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  January  25,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  (the  Board)  of  the  District  adopted 

the  criteria  for  establishing  the  order  of  termination  among  respondents  who  have  the  same 
date  of  first  paid  probationary  service. 

4, 

On  March  7,  2005,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  04/05-37,  set  forth  in 
Exhibit  1  and  incorporated  herein,  directing  complainant  or  his  designated  representative 
to  give  notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
2005-06  school  year.

  

5. 

On  March  10,  2005,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  the  Board  of  his 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

6. 

On  March  10,  2005,  respondents  were  given  written  notice  of  the 

Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  respondents  that  their  services  will 
be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

7. 

Respondents  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is" 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

8. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  announced  its  withdrawal  of  notices  to  the 

librarians,  a  total  of  4.53  FTE  positions,  thereby  reducing  the  number  of  FTE  positions 
affected  from  12.63  to  8.10. 

INSTRUMENTAL  MUSIC’ 

9. 

The  District  intends  to  reduce  this  particular  kind  of  service  by  4.60  FTE 

positions  at  the  fourth  grade  level.  The  evidence  established  that  those  certificated 
employees  affected  by  this  reduction  are,  in  order  of  least  seniority: 

NAME 

SR  DATE 

STATUS 

  

CREDENTIALS 

Christian  Emigh 

8/26/02 

Provisional 
.80  FTE 

Emergency 
Music/German 

Brenda  Thompson 

8/31/98 

Amanda  Smythe 

9/27/04 

Provisional 
1.0  FTE 

Emergency 
Music 

Prob  1 
1.0  FTE 

Preliminary 
Music 

10. 

Elaine  Bush  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  27,  2004.  Her  status  is  a 
probationary  1’  certificated  employee  with  a  clear  credential.  She  did  not  teach  music 
during  the  current  school  year  and  is  retiring  effective  the  end  of  this  school  year. 

  

'  Respondent  Coartney,  who  holds  a  1.0  FTE  position  and  teaches  instrumental  music,  sought  to  challenge 

his  seniority  date.  The  District,  however,  indicated  it  was  withdrawing  his  layoff  notification.  The  District 
represented  that  this  issue  is  part  of  a  suit  now  pending  in  court.  Since  the  District  is  no  longer  seeking  to  terminate 
Coartney  and  the  issue  of  his  seniority  date  is  being  contested  in  another  forum,  that  matter  is  deemed  moot  for  the 
purposes  of  this  proceeding. 

*  Indicating  first  year  probationary  status.

  

11. 

|  Smythe  challenges  her  seniority  date.  She  was  employed  as  a  substitute 

certificated  employee  on  October  13,  2003.  She  obtained  her  credential  at  the  beginning 
of  the  2004-05  school  year.  She  started  teaching  the  current  school  year  on  September  8, 
-  2004.  She  attended  the  new  teacher  orientation  on  August  30  and  31,  2004,  went  to  her  two 
school  sites  on  September  land  on  September  2  attended  a  “vocal”  meeting.  Smythe  was 
informed  that  her  status  at  the  start  of  the  school  year  was  as  a  substitute  and  that  she.had 
been  registered  as  one  since  the  prior  school  year.  Although  she  testified  she  was  never 
given  a  contract  as  a  temporary  employee,  the  evidence  established  that  she  executed  a 
contract  with  the  District  on  September  24,  2004,  showing  her  status  as  a  100%  temporary 
teacher  in  the  District  effective  September  27,  2004. 

12. 

Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  Smythe’s  seniority  date  is  as  indicated  in 

Exhibit  3,  to  wit:  September  27,  2004. 

13. 

The  three  most  junior  certificated  employees  in  the  District  are  respondents 

Emigh,  Thompson  and  Smythe,  totaling  2.8  FTE  positions.  The  balance  of  the  4.6  FTE 
positions  being  eliminated  consists  of  two  certificated  employees,  to  wit:  Bush  and  one 
teacher  on  leave.  The  District  has  agreed  to  consider  these  two  positions  as  attrition  in  its 
calculations. 

14. 

The  District  will  continue  to  provide  a  music  program  at  the  fifth  grade  level 

and  other  higher  grade  levels. 

NURSES 

15. 

The  District  currently  has  9.6  FTE  positions  in  its  nursing  staff.  Eight 

employees  each  possess  one  FTE  position.  Two  employees,  Taylor-Thompson  and  Gabe, 
each  hold  a  .80  FTE  position.  Celestino,  who  holds  a  1.0  FTE  position,  is  assigned  to  a 
separate  program  than  the  other  nurses.  She  works  a  205-day  schedule.  The  other  nurses 
work  a  183-day  schedule.  The  District  is  seeking  to  layoff  1.0  FTE  position  in  this  latter 
schedule.  As  a  result,  the  District  will  provide  the  services  of  8.6  FTE  nurse  positions  in  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

16. 

Taylor-Thomas  is  on  a  39-month  rehire  list  and  currently  is  on  leave  from 

the  District.  Celestino’s  seniority  date  is  September  9,  2003.  She  is  the  most  junior  of  the 
nurses.  She  holds  a  preliminary  school  nurse  services  credential.  During  Taylor-Thomas’ 
leave,  Celestino  will  fill  Taylor-Thomas’  183-day  schedule  as  a  temporary  employee  until 
Taylor-Thomas  either  retires,  resigns  or  returns  and  her  remaining  22  summer  days. 
Respondent  Agronow,  whose  seniority  date  is  January  16,  2001,  and  whose  status  is 
permanent  in  the  183-day  schedule,  will  bump  into  the  183  days  that  Celestino will  no 
longer  serve.  Agronow is  the  second  most  junior  nurse  in  the  District. 

  

 

17. 

There  are  36,000  students  enrolled  in  the  District  this  year.  Nurses  are 

expected  to  serve  all  students  attending  schools  and  program  sites.  State  mandated  services 
include  hearing  and  vision  screening  for  all  kindergarten,  second,  fifth  and  tenth  grade 
students.  Assistants  help  in  kindergarten  and  second  grade.  Scoliosis  screening  is  mandated 
for  female  students in  the  seventh  grade  and  male  students  i  in  the  eighth  grade.  Other 
mandated  nurse  services  include: 

~ 

* 

¢ 
* 
* 

¢ 
* 

¢ 

Reviewing  student  immunization  and  first  grade  CHDP  health  exam  records 
for  compliance. 
Managing  the  provision  of  specialized  health  care  procedures. 
Completing  student  health  assessments. 
Providing  staff  development  in  areas  of  blood  borne  pathogens  and 
universal  precautions,  specialized  health  care  issues  and  other  health issues  as 
needed. 
Attending  Student  Study  Team,  IEP  and  Section  504  team  meetings  as  needed. 
Assisting  school  staff  in  establishing  effective  practices  in  administering 
medication  to  students. 
Assisting  school  staff  with  managing  the  disposal  of  medical  waste  materials. 

18. 

|  The  District,  when  considering  layoffs  in  its  nursing  staff,  examined  all 
of  the  services  performed  by  the  nurses.  To  assure  that  all  mandated  services  will  be 
accomplished,  the  District  will  seek  to  minimize  the  nursing  duties  and  provide  duties 
above  those  that  are  mandated  in  a  different  manner.  Some  duties  may  be  combined. 
Efforts  will  be  made  to  perform  and  combine  services  more  efficiently  with  the  goal 
being  to  assure  they  are  rendered  more  effectively.  Health  assistants  will  be  used  where 
necessary.  While  assignments  for  the  ensuing  school  year  have  not  been  finalized,  the 
evidence  has established  that  nursing  mandated  services  will  now  be  rendered  with  one  less 
FTE  position. 

19. 

The  services  sought  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  by  the  District  are  particular 

services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  and  will  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  2005-2006. 

20. 

‘The  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  retained  by  the  District  and  described  in 

Resolution  04/05-37  (page  2)  will  be  retained  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

21. 

|  No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  terminating  4.53  FTE  librarian  positions  does  not  exist  as  the 

District  has  withdrawn  the  letters  of  layoff  to  those  respondents.

  

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  reducing  or 

discontinuing  4.6  FTE  instrumental  fourth  grade  music  positions  and  1.0  FTE  nursing 
position. 

3. 

Cause  for  not  reemploying  respondents  Emigh  (.80  FTE),  Thompson 

(1.0  FTE)  Smythe  (1.0  FTE)  and  Celestino  (1.0  FTE)  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

ORDER 

The  accusations  against  all  librarians  are  dismissed. 

The  accusation  against  respondent  Gary  Coartney  is  dismissed. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The  District  may  notify  respondents  Emigh,  Thompson,  Smythe  and  Celestino 

that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4. 

All  other  accusations  are  dismissed. 

DATED:  ligsala  |  Kw _ 

    

  

  

STEWART  A.  JUDSON 
Administrative  Law  Jud 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

