wow  BAS 

eS  ARLEO  RG  bee  be  ete 

ef 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
GROSSMONT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
Forty  Two  Certificated  Employees: 

OAH  No.  L2005030585 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  E.  Hjelt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  El  Cajon,  California  on  April  26,  2005. 

Pamela  A.  Dempsey,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Parham  &  Rajcic,  represented  the 

Grossmont  Union  High  School  District. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  any  respondent  except  Gary  Juhl  who 

appeared  and  represented  himself. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Terry  Ryan,  Superintendent  with  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District, 

made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity  as  such  public  officer  of  the 
Grossmont  Union  High  School  District. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  District  employees. 

3. 

On  March  3,  2005,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (the  Board)  issued  a  resolution  regarding  the 
reduction  in  the  number  of  certificated  employees  because  of  the  following  reasons: 

“Because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being  insufficient 
to  maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program  changes

  

 
}

 
N
o

 
m
r

resulting  therefrom,  the  Governing  Board  determined  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
certain  positions  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year.” 

The  recommendation  that  Respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
their  competency  as  teachers. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  a  notice  of  termination  was  delivered  to  each 
Respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  the  notice  of  termination  in  the 
United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  Respondent’s  last  known 
address. 

The  written  notices  of  termination  specifically  stated  that  Respondents’  services 

would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

Each  notice  advised  Respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each  Respondent  had 
to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination  by 
April  4,  2005,  which  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  uf  termination  was  served, 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

Each  appearing  Respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to 
determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  Respondent  for  the  ensuing  year. 

5. 

Accusations  were  timely  served  on  Respondents  thereafter.  Each  Respondent 

appearing  in  this  matter  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  were  met. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds 

of  services  for  the  2005-2006  school  year: 

6. 

7. 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Administrators 
Alternative  Education 
Art 
Business  Education 
Consumer  Science/Home  Economics 
Curriculum  Specialist 
Counseling 
English 
Foreign  Language 

French 
German 
Spanish 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0

1.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
4.8  FTE 
3.0  FTE 

Math 
Performing  Arts 
Physical  Education 
Science 
Social  Science 
Special  Education 
Work  Experience 

C 

3.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
4.0  FTE 
3.8  FTE 
3.6  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
4.8  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  total  42.0  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. — 

8. 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certifica:ed  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

10. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

11. 

|  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12. 

The  District  established  a  reasonable  and  appropriate  method  for  determining 
the  order  of  seniority  of  its  certificated  employees  and  established  criteria  to  determine  the 
order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date.  The  criteria  to  break  ties  was  appropriate  and  it  was 
applied  appropriately 

13. 

|  Much  of  the  language  in  this  Decision  is  couched  in  what  could  be  described 
as  “legalese.”  The  Decision  uses  legal  terms  such  as  “particular  kinds  of  service”  and  “full- 
time  equivalent.”  The  “legalese”  defines  a  comprehensive  body  of  law  that  can  be  as 
confusing  and  complex  as  the  terms  of  art  used  in  this  Decision.  However,  when  one  gets 
past  the  legalese,  this  case  revolves  around a set  of  questions  that  must  be  answered.  The 
_  questions  focus  on  trying  to  balance  two  conflicting  sets  of  needs  and  goals.  The  first  need  is 
that  of  the  School  District.  The  District  must  act  in  a  fiscally  prudent  fashion  and  risks  being 
placed  in  involuntary  receivership  should  it  fail  to  make  prudent  decisions  to  balance  its 
financial  books.  The  second  need  is  that  of  teachers,  generally  and  specifically, 
Respondents,  in  this  case.  Teachers  are  our  unsung  heroes  who  nurture,  challenge,  and 
stimulate  our  young  students.  They  deserve  the  full  protection  of  the  law  in  trying  to  retain 
their  hard-earned  employment.

  

7 

- 

ae 
wee  a a 

waa  Sw  ed 

ta  ae  SNS 

so 

, 

eT 
ee, 

14. 

The  layoff  system  is  predicated  on  seniority.  That  means  quite  simply  that  the 

It  is  often,  lamentably,  the  most  energetic  and  best 
last  hired  generally  is  the  first  laid  off. 
trained  young  teacher  who  gets  the  pink  layoff  slip.  When  that  unfortunate  bit  of  bad  news 
must  be  delivered,  the  law  requires  that  such  an  affected  teacher  be  accorded  an  opportunity 
to  contest  the  decision.  The  law  also  requires  that  such  bad  news  be  delivered  by  a  date  that 
will  allow  such  a  teacher  the  maximum  opportunity  to  find  other  employment. 

15. 

The  laws,  both  statutory  and  decisional,  in  the  teacher  layoff  cases  demand 
that  a  school  district  strictly  comply  with  a  variety  of  notice  requirements  or  be  deemed  to 
have  involuntarily  rehired  the  teacher  in  question.  The  law  also  demands  that  the  school 
district  make  these  difficult  decisions  based  on  a  well  thought  out  and  clearly  articulated  set 
of  factors  that  all  relate  solely  to  the  well-being  of  the  students  of  the  district.  Teacher  layoff 
hearings  are  required  so  that  a  District  can  be  put  to  the  test  and  an  independent  judgment 
made  about  the  layoff  choices  it  proposes.  Sometimes  a  District  might  seek  to  use  the  layoff 
process  to  punish  a  disfavored  teacher  or  reward  the  less  worthy.  These  hearings  exist  to 
allow  an  affected  teacher  to  have  such  a  claim  heard  and  determined. 

16. 

In  this  case,  the  evidence  and  the  reasonable  inferences  that  flow  from  it, 

strongly  support  a  finding  that  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  has  acted 
appropriately  and  with  due  caution  in  taking  the  steps  it  took.  Serious  financial  problems 
face  the  district  because  of  lessened  funding  from  the  Legislature.  In  order  to  balance  the 
budget,  the  District  thought  long  and  hard  about  where  and  how  much  to  cut.  None  of  the 
scenarios  were  terribly  appealing.  However,  the  layoffs  that  have  been  proposed  were  well 
thought  out  and  are  consistent  with  the  District’s  mandate  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  students. 

17. 

The  only  respondent  to  appear  and  testify  at  the  hearing  was  Gary  Juhl.  He  is 

a  35  year  old  Physical  Education  teacher  at  El  Cajon  Valley  High  School.  One  can  only 
assume  that  he  is  representative  of  the  quality  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  other  respondents 
who  were,  regrettably,  slated  for  layoff.  He  seems  devoted  to  his  job  and  his  students  and  in 
a  completely  fair  world  would  not  be  the  subject  of  this  layoff  proceeding.  Unfortunately, 
despite  some  part-time  employment  with  the  District,  his  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the 
District  is  August  16,  2004  and  therefore  the  action  taken  by  the  District  to  lay  him  off is 
appropriate.  It  can  only  be  hoped  that  further  attrition  takes  place  and  he  can  stay  employed 
with  the  District  as  he  is  a  valuable  asset  to  the  students  he  comes  in  contact  with. 

18. 

At  the  hearing  the  District  moved  to  Dismiss  the  Accusation  against  22 

respondents.  These  were:  Wayne  T.  Tribble,  Julia  Marie  Bohe,  Shelly  K.  Poliska,  Ronald  L. 
Toretto,  Staci  Nicol  Ortiz,  Nicole  M.  Sabell,  Jessica  Menard,  Ellen  A.  Gadon,  Brittany  S. 
Luecht,  Melissa  D.  Amerian,  Ryan  W.  Hass,  Shoshana  M.  Adams,  Andrew  A.  Banuelos, 
Randy  M.  Cambou,  Christopher  Emerick,  Summer  D.  Lambert,  William  R.  Lourey,  Drew  E. 
Stewart,  Olivia  R.  Wilson,  Mary  L.  Nishikawa,  R.  Vargas-Wilson  and  Lori  E.  Trim.  The 
Motion  To  Dismiss  is  granted. 

 

19. 

The  District  established  that  grounds  exist  to  serve  final  layoff  notices  on  the 
following  individuals  totaling  17.4  FTE: 

James  Scott  Killen 
Robby  Tuttle 
Susan  Streeper 
Mark  Alamillo 
Michael  Dundovich 
Brenden  Sexton 
Summer  Smith 
Ross  Bartell 
Sarah  Oconnor 
Brandon  Accardi 
Stephen  George 
Gary  Juhl 
Megan  Lilien 
Von  Petrasko 
Boyd  Stewart 
Joel  Tropp 
Patric  Greenhalgh 
Jill  Enright 
Marguerite  Rohmer 

_ 

1LOFTE 
.8  FTE 
.6  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
AFTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
.6  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

1. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained 
the  charges  set  forth  in  the  Accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  Respondents 
notice  before  May  15,  2005,  that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.

do  Walls  faa.  os  USAR RCW  nal  PEL  SRT 

Nt  Se 

ORDER 

The  Accusations  are  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  James  Scott 

Killen,  Robby  Tuttle,  Susan  Streeper,  Mark  Alamillo,  Michael  Dundovich,  Brenden  Sexton, 
Summer  Smith,  Ross  Bartell,  Sarah  Oconnor,  Brandon  Accardi,  Stephen  George,  Gary  Juhl, 
Megan  Lilien,  Von  Petrasko,  Boyd  Stewart,  Joel  Tropp,  Patric  Greenhalgh,  Jill  Enright, 
Marguerite  Rohmer,  before  May  15,  2005,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  because  of 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

DATED:  Men  ey  2005 

Pion 

thas 

STEPHEN  E.  H}ELT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

