BEFORE  THE 
STATE  ADMINISTRATOR  OF  THE 
VALLEJO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

. 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
Certificated  Employees  Corresponding  to 
78.06  Full  Time  Equivalent  Positions 

| 

. 

OAH  No.  N2005030437 

— 

- 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Administrative  Law  Judge  Jonathan  Lew, State  of 
California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  on  April  18,  2005,  in  Vallejo,  California. 

‘The  Vallejo  City  Unified  School  District  was  represented  by  Lawrence  M.  Schoenke, 

Esq.,  Miller  Brown  &  Dannis,  71  Stevenson  Street,  19th  Floor,  San  Francisco,  California 
94105.: 

_ 

Except  as  otherwise  noted,  respondents  were  represented  by  David  Weintraub,  Esq., 

Beeson,  Tayer  and  Bodine,  1404  Franklin  Street,  Oakland,  California  94612. 

Respondents  Lois  Banks,  Linda  Combs,  James  Gordon,  Pamela  McCluskey, Kristine 

Mietzner,  David  Parker,  Allison  Simpson,  Carol  Stalcup  and  Rosalind  Vance  were  ' 
_  unrepresented  and  they  did  not  appear  at  hearing. 

The  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  18,  2005. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS. 

i. 

Richard  J.  Damelio,  Ed.D.,  is  the  State  Administrator  of  the  Vallejo  City Unified 

School  District  of  Solano  County  (District).  He  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his 

_  capacity  as  such  public  officer. 

2. 

Each  of  the  respondents  listed  on  Attachment  A,  attached  hereto  and 
mcorporated  herein  by  reference,  was  at  all  times  mentioned  herein  and  now  is  a  certificated  . 
employee  of  the  District. 

| 

3. 

On  March  2,  2005,  the  State  Administrator  of  the  District  adopted  criteria  for 
establishing  the  order  of  termination  among  respondents  who  have  the  same  date  of  first 
rendering  paid  service  and  the  order  of  termination  among  respondents.

  

4, 

On  March  2,  2005,  the  State  Administrator  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 

No.  2291  directing  that  the  State  Administrator  or  his  designated  representative  give  notices 
to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  for  the  2005-06  school 
year. 

5. 

On  March  15,  2005,  respondents  were  served in  the  manner  prescribed  by  law 

with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  them  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2005-06  school  year.  Such  notice  stated  the - 
reasons  for  such  recommendation. 

6. 

Respondents,  within  the  time  limit  specified  in  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision  (b),  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  satisfied. 

7. 

The  State  Administrator  of  the  District  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue 

78.06  Full  Time  Bquivalent  (FTE)  positions  in  Resolution  No.  2291.  Specifically,  the State 
Administrator  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

9  —  12  Library  Program 
9  —  12  Counselor  Program 
Nurses 
Elementary  Prep  Time  Program  Teachers 
9  —  12  Independent  Study  Program  Teachers  _ 
Home  Outreach  Program  of  Education  (HOPE)  K-  12  Teachers 
Categorically  Funded  Instructional  Associates 
Categorically  Funded  Elementary  Support  Teachers 
Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment  Program  (BTSA) 
Professional  Development  Center  Program  (PDC) 
Categorically  Funded  Instructional  Associate/ITUSP 
Community  Day  School  Program  Teachers  (CDS) 

3.0 
14.0 
8.0 
4.0 
4.0 
8.0 
11.8 
15.66 
3.0 
1.6 
1.0 
AO” 

The  particular  kinds  of  services  described  in  Resolution  No.  2291  are  to  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  2005-06.  They  are  particular 
kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 

_  TOTAL 

78.06  FTE 

  

'  The  District  received  timely  requests  for  hearing  from all  but  three  respondents.  Elizabeth  Gaines,  Pamela 
McCluskey  and  Patricia  Smith  filed  requésts  for  hearing  with  the  District  on  March  25,  2005,  two  days  beyond  the 
five-day deadline.  A  motion  was  made  at  the  time  of  hearing  to allow  respondents  Elizabeth  Gaines  and  Patricia 
Smith  to  participate  in  these  proceedings  based  upon  principles  of  due  process,  basic  fairness  and  equity,  as  well  as 
lack  of  prejudice  to  the  District.  The  motion  to  allow  respondents  Elizabeth  Gaines  and  Patricia  Smith  to  participate 
is  granted.

Code  section  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

8. 

-  Nona  Cohen-Bowman  is  the  Director  of  Certificated  Personnel  for  the  District. 
She  notes  that  the  decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  was  prompted  by  financial 
difficulties  experienced  by  the  District.  She  believes  that  none  of  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  described  above  are  mandated  and  that  while  there  is  a  possibility  that  some  of  the 
services  will  be  restored,  this  has  not  happened  as  of  this  date.  After  accounting  for 
employee  attrition  and  transfers,  notices  were  sent  to  59  certificated  employees. 

Under  a  different  process,  temporary  and  provisional  employees,  holding  one  year 

contracts  with  the  District,  were  given  separate  notices  on  February  28,  2005,  that  their 
services  for  the  upcoming  school  year  were  not  needed.”  These  employees  included  District 
pre-interns,  interns,  and  teachers  holding  emergency  certificates  or  waivers.  The  District 
released  69  employees  based  upon  their  credential  status,  a  number that  respondents  contend 
is  far  in  excess  of  those  temporary  employees  legitimately  substituting  for  the  approximately 
24  District  teachers  on  long  term  leave.  Respondents  believe  such  temporary  employees 
should  be  classified  as  probationary  employees,  placed  on  the  layoff  list  and  entitled  to  rehire 
rights.  Respondents  concede,  however,  that  such  argument  is  made  solely  on  behalf  of 
teachers  not  named  in  this  case  and  that  the  status  of  such  teachers  has  no  direct  impact  on 
the  seniority  or  other  layoff  rights  of  named  respondents.  The  appropriate  classification  of 
temporary  teachers  not  named  as  respondents,  having  been  determined  to  have  no  impact  on 
the  rights  of  named  respondents  or  on  the  resolution  of  relevant  issues,  will  not  be  considered 
here.  The  issue  of  their  appropriate  classification  should  be  contested  in  a  different  foram. 

9. 

Nurse  Services.  Lisa  Tosch  is  a  credentialed  school  nurse  and  she  testified  to  the 

important  servicés  provided  by  the  District’s  school  nurses.  Theré  are  a  number  studerit 
services  that  are  provided  by  nurses  such  as  vision,  heating  and  scoliosis  screening.  Students 
with  individualized  health  care  plans  may  require  assistance  from  nurses  for  catheterization, 
tube feeding  and  suctioning.  Other  students  with  diabetes  may  requiré  daily  monitoring  atid 
insulin  injections.  Certain  of  these  services  cannot  be  delegated  to  unlicensed  personnel. 
However,  other  services,  though  mandated,  may  still  be  performed  by  individuals  who  are 
not  certificated  nursing  staff.  (See  Ed.  Code,  §§  49426,  49452,  49452.5  and  49455.)  The 
District’s  school  nurses  note  that  Vallejo’s  population  has  a  high  percentage  of  at-risk 
children,  frequently  challenged  by  health  issues,  who  do  not  achieve  without  the right 
support  services.  With  the  cutbacks  proposed  in  nursing  services,  there  would  be  a  reduction 
of  the  nurse  to  student  ratio  from  1:2,650  to  1:19,000.  Ms.  Tosch  believes  students  in  the 
District  will  be  left  without  a  critical  safety  net  if  school  nurses  are  not  present  and  she  is 

  

*  Under  Education  Code  section  44954,  the  governing  boards  of  school  districts  may  release  temporary  employees 
requiting  certification  qualifications  at  the  pleasure  of  the  board  prior  to  serving  at  least  75  percent  of  the  school 
year,  Or  upon  notice  of  non-reelection  for  the  succeeding  school  year  where  the  employee  has  served  at  least  75 

percent  of  the  school  year.  

concemed  for  students  with  any  unforeseen  illness,  injury  or  health  problems  for  which 
school  nurses  will  not  be  able  to  detect  or  provide  the  necessary  care,” 

While  the  District  will  be  required  to  have  a  plan  in  place  for  the  provision  of  nursing 
services  for  the  2005-06  school  year,  it  does  not  have  to  have  a  finalized  plan  in  place  at  the 
time  the  decision  is  first  made  to  reduce/eliminate  particular  nursing  services.  And  in  the 
absence  of  any  evidence  as  to  how  the  District  intends  to  deliver  the  required  services,  itis  | 
premature  to  consider  whether  the  District  will  or  will  not  meet  the  statutory  requirements. 
Evidence  Code  section  664  creates  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official  duties  of  a  public 
entity,  such  as  the  District,  have  been  regularly performed.  (Degener  v.  Governing  Board 
(1977)  67  Cal.  App.3d  689,  696.)  The  State  Administrator  for  the  District  has  discretion  to 
determine  how  and  in  what  manner  mandated  services  are  to  be  provided.  (Campbell  - 
Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (  1978)  76  Cal.  App.3d  796,  811;  Gallup  v.  Board 
of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.  App.4  th1571,  1582-90.)  Changing  the  way  in  which  a  service  is 
to  be  performed  constitutes  a  reduction  in  a  particular  kind  of  service,  as  does  having  fewer 
etmployees  available  to  perform  the  service.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustees  (1976)  64 
Cal.  App.3d  167,  179;  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  supra,  76 
Cal.App.3d  at  p.  811.)  For  these  reasons,  the  District  may  reduce  nursing  services  by  8.0 
FTE  as  proposed  in  the resolution. 

© 

Be 

10. 

Categorically  Funded  Instructional  Associate  Positions.  Eight  respondents  are 

currently  slated  for  layoff  from  instructional  associate  positions.  They  contend  that  their 
services  are  not  being  reduced  at  all,  but  instead  they  are  being  re-categorized  into  “teacher 
leaders”  positions.  Carleén  Gundersgaard  is  the  assistant  superintendent  for  academic 
achievement  and  accountability.  She  confirms  that  the  District  intends  to  create  new  teacher 
leader  positions  and  that  instructional  associates  will  get  “first  crack”  at  these  positions  if 
they  are  interested.  But  the  teacher  leader  is  a  new  position  and  the  expectation  is  that  they 
will  be  doing  a  different  job  than  instructional  associates.  Currently,  the  duties  of 
instructional  ass6ciations  are  site  based  driven.  Specific  responsibilitiés  vary  and  aré 
flexible,  defined  largely  by  the  needs  of  the  assigned  school.  In  contrast,  the  proposed 
teacher  leader  position  will  provide  grade  level  téams  with  skills  to  tmplement  a  curriculum. 
The  teacher  leaders,  acting  as  professional  developers/coaches,  will  be  responsible  for 
working  much  more  with  teacher  teams,  harnessing  the  energy  and  teaching  skills  that  these 
teachers  hold. 

= 

. 

Il. 

Laurie  Reemsnyder.  Ms.  Reemsyndeer  is  a  photo gtaphy  teacher  assigned  to 

Bethel  High  School,  where  she  has  been  art  department  chair  over  the  past  four  years.  She’ 
received  Teacher  of  the  Year  honors  in  2004.  She  was  asked  to  teach  photography  in  2000, 
at  a  time  that  the  high  school  had  no  dark  room  or  photography  equipment/materials 
whatsoever.  She  wrote  a  course  description  that  was  eventually  approved  by  both  the  | 
University  of  California  and  California  State  University  systems  to  fulfill  an  “f°”  requirement. 

  

*  Much  of  this  information  was  communicated  to  Dr.  Damulio  and  the  District  is  apparently  looking ahead  to 
upcoming  contract  negotiations  where  issues  relating  to  mursing  services  will  be  discussed.  Dr.  Damilio  has  yet  to 
commit  to  a  plan  for  how  nursing  services  will  be  provided  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

  

4

6  She  believes  her  layoff  would  deprive  students  of  the  ability  to  meet  this  college 

requirement.  She  also  designed a  curriculum  to  align  with  the  California  visual  /performing 
arts  standards.  Ms.  Reemsnyder  is  the  only  photography  teacher  in  the  District  who  holds  an 
art  credential.  Projected  signups  for  her  photography  course next  year  approximate  eight 
sections, 

sO 

It  is  not  clear.  whether  photography  courses  are  being  reduced,  or  whether  another 
teacher  is  bumping  into  the  position  held  by  Ms.  Reemsnyder.  In  either  event,  she  has  not 
established  that  the  District  acted  improperly  or  unreasonably  in  reducing  a  particular  kind  of 
service  or  retaining  a  more  senior  teacher  to  teach  art/photography  classés  at  Bethel  High 
School  or  elsewhere. 
, 

12. 

Credit  for  Time  Served  as  Interns.  Two  respondents  contend  they  should  be 

credited  with  more  seniority  based  upon  additional  time  they  served  as  interns  with  the 
'  District.  Respondent  David  Samson  was  first  hired  by  the  District  on  February  1,2000.  He 
was  hired  under  a  contract  for  temporary  certificated  employment-as  a  middle  school  teacher. 
He  held  a  multiple  subject  credential  (intern).  He  did  not  work  for  the  District  for  the  2000- 
01  school  year.  The  District  treated  this  period  as  a  break  in  employment  and  a  notation  in 
his  file  indicates  that  it  was  prompted  by  his  resignation.  However,  when  he  returned  to 
work  for  the  District  he  apparently  completed  a  form  (Intent  to  Return  to  Duty)  intended  for 
teachers  returning  from  leave.  There  was  no  evidence  in  the  file  suggesting  that  Mr.  Samson 

4 
(  ©  had  evet  sought  or  was  ever  approved  for  leave.  Mr.  Samson  returned  to  the  District  and 
. 

entered  into  contracts  for  certificated  employment  for  school  years  2001-02;  2002-03;  2003- 
04  and  2004-05.  He  received  his.preliminary  credential  on  March  1,  2004.  The  District 
“  originally  listed  Mr.  Samson’s  seniority  date  as  March  1,  2004.  The  District  has  since 
changed  his  seniority  to  an  earlier  date,  August  29,  2003,  essentially  crediting  him  with  a 
portion  of  the  time  (up  to:one  school  year)  he  had  worked  as  an  intern  for  the  District.  Mr. 
Samson  believés  his  seniority  should  be  even  earlier,  and  based  upon  the  date  he  first 
rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.  Under  Education  Code  section  44885.5, 
district  mterns  are  to  be  classified  as  probationary  employees  and  Mr.  Samson  contends  that 
his  seniority  date  should  therefore  be  his  first  date  of  paid  service  as  an  intern.  This  would 
either  be  from  the  beginning  of  school  year  2001-02,  or  even  earlier  if  he  was  on  leave 
during  school  year  2000-01. . 

~ 

Similarly,  the  District  gave  respondent  Marnee  McKenzie  a  seniority  date  of  July  30, 
2004.  She  has  been  employed  with  the  District  continuously  since  August  30,  2002.  Over 
the  first  two  years  of  her employment  (school  years  2002-03  and  2003-04)  she  held  intern 
credentials.  Her  preliminary  credential  was  issued  July  30,  2004.  The  District  concedes  that 
she  should  now  be  credited  for  up  to  one  school  year  for  certificated  service  as  an  intern  and 
intends  to  adjust  her  seniority  date  to  August  29,  2003.  Ms.  McKenzie  believes  her  seniority 
date  should  be  August  30,  2002,  her  first  date  of  paid  service  as  an  intern. 

(  © 

13. 

Education  Code  section  44845  provides  that:  “Every  probationary  or  permanent 
employee  employed  after  June  30,  1947,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed  on  the  date 
upon  which  he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.”  As  noted  earlier, 

 

@  school  districts  shal!  classify  as  probationary  employees  “any  person  who  is  employed  as 

district  intern  pursuant  to  Section  44830.3  and  any  person  who  has  completed  service in  the 
district  as  a  district  intern  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44325  and  Section  44830.3 
and  is  reelected  for  the next  succeeding  school  year  to  a  position  requiring  certification 
qualifications.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44885.5.) 

Education  Code  section  44466  provides: 

. 

An  intern  shall  not  acquire  tenure  while  serving  on  an  internship  credential.  A 
petson  who,  after  completing  a  teaching  internship  program  authorized 
pursuant  to  this  article,  is  employed  for  at  least  one  complete  school  year  in  a 
position  requiring  certification  qualifications  by  the  school  district  that 
employed  the  person  as  an-intern  during  the  immediately  preceding  school 
year  and  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeedin g  school  year  to  a  position 
. 
requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
succeeding  school  year,  acquire  tenute. 
This  section  details  the  requirements  for  the  attainment  of permanent  status  by  interns 
who  are  participating  in  intern  programs.  While  interns  cannot  acquire  tenure  while  serving” 
on  an  internship  credential,  they  are  afforded,  after  completing  a  teacher  internship  program, 
credit  for  up  to  one  year  certificated  service  as  an  intern  towards  attainment  of permanent 
©  status  or  tenure.  The  District  correctly  added  an  additional  year  for  time  that  David  Samson 
and  Marnee  McKenzie  served  under  internship  credentials.  Thus,  the  correct  seniority  dates 
for  both  Mr.  Samson  and  Ms.  McKenzie  is  August  29,  2003.  For  both  tenure  and  seniority 
calculations,  the  District  is  not  required  to  credit  them  with  any  time  they  served  as  interns 
beyond  this  one  year.  To  find  otherwise  would:  allow. teachers  remaining  on  an  internship 
credéntials,  four  years  in  the  case  of  David  Samson,  to  infringe  upon  the  rights  of  fully 
credentialed  probationary  teachers,* 

14. 

Except  as  provided  by  statute,  no  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondents,  or  any 
of  them,  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  As  between  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same date,  the  order  of  termination  has  beén  based  solely 
on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof, 

S 

15. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in 
Resolution  No.  2291  are  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  students  thereof  within 
_  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  decision-to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of 
discretion  of  the  District, 

    

A  district  intern  credential-is  valid  for  a  period  of  two  years,  but  may  be  extended  one  year  upon  the 
recommendation  of  the  school  district.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44325,  subd.  (b).)  The  Legislature  could  not  have  intended 
extended  service  as  a  district  intern  to  be  a  factor  in  caleulating  district  seniority,  but  not  in  acquiring  tenure. 

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

_ 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required: 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  Vallejo  City 

Unified  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

- 

3. 

The  District  may  reduce nursing  services  and  categorically  funded  instructional 
associate  positions  as  proposed  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Findings  9  and  10.  They 
are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955. 

“. 

The  district  seniority  dates  of  respondents  David  Samson  and  Marnee McKenzie 

shall  be  changed  to  August  29,  2003,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth in  Findings  12  and 
13.  The  District  correctly  added  an  additional  school  yeat  for  time  that  David  Samson  and 
Marnee  McKenzie  served  under  internship  credentials.  The  District  was  not  required  to 
calculate  their  seniority  from  their  first  date  of  paid  service  as  an  intern. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 

2005-06  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services, 

DATED: 

A,,,’ 

665 

Lb Lona 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

ATTACHMENT  A 
LIST  OF  RESPONDENTS 

pt 

l. 
Jennifer  Acker 
2. 
Lois  Banks 
3.  Retina  Bowen 
4.  Veronica  Bowen 
5. 
Cheryl  Casabun 
6.  David  Casdan 
7.  Linda  Combs 
8.  Margaret  Elliott 
9.  Elizabeth  Gaines 
10.  James  Gordon 
ll.  Barbara  Haeuser 
12.  Kathleen  Hahn 
13.  Anca  Hariton 
14.  David  Henderson 
15.  Tamsie  Irvan  - 
16.  Dwayne  Jones 
17.  Michelle  Jordan-F aucett 
18,  Leigh  Lash-Nash 
19.  Pamela  McCluskey 
20.  Marnee  McKenzie 
21,  Roxanne  Meier 
22.  Kristine  Mietznér 
23,  Kimberly  Mitchell 
24.  David Parker 
25.  Laurie  Potts 
26.  Laurie  Reemsnyder 
27,  Richard  Responte 
28.  Michael  Rettinghouse 
29.  David  Samson 
30,  Pamela  Schecter 
31.  Jenny  Schwartz- -Groody 
32.  Allison  Simpson 
33.  Brenda  Smith 
34.  Patricia  Smith 
35.  Ainsléy  Soderberg 
36.  Carol  Staulcup 
37.  Lisa  Tosch 
38.  Rosalind  Vance 
39.  Kathryn  Vevoda 
40.  Esther  Yialelis

__ 

  

