BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BLACK  OAK  MINE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  N2006040071 

Fran  Duckon, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  18,  2006,  in  Georgetown  California. 

David  Girard,  and  Heather  Edward,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Black  Oak 

Mine  Unified  School  District. 

Andrea  Price,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Fran  Duckon. 

The  parties  represented  at  hearing  that  they  had  reached  a  settlement  of  the  matter. 
They  orally  set  forth  the  terms  of  the  settlement,  which  were  captured  by  the  court  reporter 
on  the  official  hearing  record.  Additionally,  the  parties  requested  that  the  Administrative 
Law  Judge  prepare  a  Proposed  Decision  incorporating  the  terms  of  their  stipulation  within 
the  Factual  Findings  and  Order. 

STIPULATED  JURISDICTIONAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Rob  Schamberg  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions  and  the 

actions  of  the  Governing  Board  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2. 

On  March  13,  2006,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(the  Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  respondent  be  given  notice  that  .1912  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)of  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating 
the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

3. 

On  March  13,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  a  Resolution,  providing  for  the 

reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

   

4, 

On  March  14,  2006,  the  District  personally  served  on  respondent  a  written 

notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondent,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  .1912  FTE  of  her  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing 
particular  kinds  of  services  which  reduced  the  certificated  staff  by  .4428  FTE  certificated 
positions. 

5. 

Respondent  was  advised  that  a  portion  of  her  services,  .1912  FTE,  would  be 
eliminated  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to 
determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  re-employing  her  for  .1912  FTE  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against  respondent  pursuant 

to  her  request  for  a  hearing.  The  Accusation  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  a 
blank  Notice  of  Defense  was  timely  served  on  respondent. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

STIPULATED  FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  ORDER 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District  for  .75  FTE. 

In  the  2006-2007  school  year,  the  District  shall  retain  respondent  to  teach  .75 

FTE  within  her  credentials  (multiple  subject,  special  education  and  resource  teacher). 

3. 

By  June  30,  2006,  respondent  shall  obtain  appropriate  authorization  from  the 
California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  to  provide  instruction  for  students  whose 
second  language  is  English.  Appropriate  authorization  may  include  an  emergency  credential 
in  instruction  of  English  language  learners. 

6. 

7. 

1, 

2. 

DATED:  April  19,  2006 

    

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

