  

BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  THE  SANTA  CLARA  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
COUNTY  OF  SANTA  CLARA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

JOHN  OLIVER,  LISA  POLITEO,  PAUL 
YURI  SAMER  and  CRAIG  TOOMAY, 

OAH  No.  2006030534 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  21,  2006,  in  San  Jose,  California. 

Adam  J.  Fiss,  Esq.,  of  Littler  Mendelson,  represented  the  Santa  Clara  County 

Superintendent  of  Schools. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Esq.,  represented  respondents  Paul  Yuri  Samer  and  Craig 

Toomay.  Respondents  John  Oliver  and  Lisa  Politeo  were  not  present  or  represented. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  21,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Background 

l, 

Laura  Kidwiler  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 
Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  (Assistant  Superintendent)  at  the  Office  of 
the  Santa  Clara  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  (County  Office). 

2. 

Respondents  John  Oliver,  Lisa  Politeo,  Paul  Yuri  Samer  and  Craig  Toomay, 

are  certificated  employees  of  the  County  Office. 

Reduction  or  Discontinuation  of Services 

3. 

On  March  2,  2006,  Santa  Clara  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  Colleen  B. 

Wilcox,  Ph.D.,  (County  Superintendent)  adopted  a  resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing 
particular  kinds  of  services  no  later  than  June  30,  2006,  and  directing  the  Assistant 

-|-

Superintendent  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  certificated  employees  whose  employment 
would  be  reduced  as a result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services. 

© 

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2006,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  gave  written  notice 

to  respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  that  their  services  would  be  terminated  no 
later  than  June  30,  2006. 

5. 

Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  terminating  his  or  her  services.  An  accusation  was  served  on  respondents,  each  of 
whom  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been 
met. 

6. 

7. 

respondents  John  Oliver  and  Lisa  Politeo. 

Before  the  hearing,  the  County  Superintendent  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  to 

The  County  Superintendent  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following 

services  no  later  than  June  30,  2006: 

Alternative  Schools  Resource  Teacher 
Alternative  Schools  Teacher 

1.0  FTE  (Full-Time  Equivalent) 
6.0  FTE 
7.0  FTE 

Total 

Respondent  Paul  Yuri  Samer 

8. 

Respondent  Paul  Yuri  Samer  holds  an  Oregon  teaching  credential.  Last  year, 
when  he  lived  in  Eugene,  Oregon,  Samer  was  looking  for  a  teaching  job.  During  an  on-line 
search,  he  came  across  the  County  Office’s  job  listing  for  an  alternative  school  teacher. 
After  he  “clicked  on”  the  listing  to  indicate  his  interest,  the  County  Office  contacted  him  to 
arrange  for  an  interview.  During  a  telephone  interview,  representatives  of  the  County  Office 
expressed  confidence  that,  based  on  his  Oregon  credential,  Samer  would  be  able  to  obtain  a 
California  teaching  credential. 

9. 

In  early  October  2005,  the  County  Office  offered  Samer  a  job  as  a  teacher  in 
one  of  its  alternative  schools,  with  a  starting  date  of  November  2,  2005.  Samer  was  told  that 
he  was  being  hired  for  a  permanent  position,  but  that  he  would  be  working  under  a  temporary 
county  certificate  (TCC)  until  he  received  his  California  credential.  The  County  Office 
completed  an  Authorization  for  Employment  form,  which  bears  signatures  dated  October  3 
through  13,  and  a  Certificated  New  Employee  Orientation  Check  List,  which  Samer  signed 
on  October  14. 
contingent  upon  applying  for  cred.”  The  form  contains  two  boxes  following  “Status  in  this 
assignment  will  be”  —  the  first  box  indicating  “Permanent”  and  the  second  one  indicating 
“Non-permanent  reassignment  of  regular  employee.”  There  is  a  check  mark  in  the  first  box. 
In  the  same  section  of  the  form,  there  are  three  boxes  following  “Employee  being  hired  & 
assigned  solely  on  this  basis.”  These  boxes  indicate  “Temporary,”  “Limited-Term”  and 
“Provisional.”  None  of  these  boxes  is  checked  on  Samer’s  form.  The  Certificated  New 

The  Authorization  for  Employment  form  contains  the  notation,  “offer 

 

-2- 

  

  
  

@ 

Employee  Orientation  Check  List  form  has  three  boxes  under  “Employee  Status”  —  for 
“Regular,”  “Provisional”  and  “Temporary.”  The  box  for  “Regular”  is  checked  on  Samer’s 
form.  On  October  21,  2005,  Samer  applied  for  a  credential  from  the  California  Commission 
on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC).  At  the  end  of  October,  Samer  moved  from  Oregon  to 
California  to  start  his  job  with  the  County  Office.  On  November  2,  he  started  teaching  at 
Calero  School.  Samer  has  not  received  his  California  teaching  credential.  When  he  recently 
contacted  CTC,  he  was  told  that  his  credential  application  was  still  being  processed. 

10. 

The  County  Office  considers  Samer  to  be  a  provisional  employee,  since  he 

does  not  yet  have  a  California  credential.  As  a  provisional  employee,  Samer  is  not  accruing 
seniority.  Director  of  Human  Resources  Mary  Mulholland  testified  that  the  “Permanent”  box 
on  the  Authorization  for  Employment  form  was  checked  in  error  —  the  “Provisional”  box  in 
the  same  section  should  have  been  checked.  Similarly,  on  the  Certificated  New  Employee 
Orientation  Check  List  form,  the  “Regular”  box  was  erroneously  checked  instead  of  the 
correct  box  indicating  “Provisional.”  The  erroneous  classification  apparently  persisted  until 
very  recently,  since  the  certificated  seniority  list  prepared  on  March  16,  2006,  shows  Samer 
having  an  employee  status  code  of  11,  the  code  for  “Prob  1.”  This  was  corrected  in  the 
updated  list  prepared  on  April  19,  2006,  which  reflects  an  employee  status  code  of  23,  for 
provisional.  Mulholland  stated  that  Samer  is  a  provisional  employee  in  a  permanent 
position. 

| 

11. 

Samer  claims  that  during  the  hiring  process,  no  one  from  the  County  Office 

told  him  he  would  be  a  provisional  employee.  He  apparently  thought  he  would  be  accruing 
seniority  as  of  November  2,  2005,  the  date  he  started  teaching.  It  is  unknown  whether 
knowing  that  he  would  be  a  provisional  employee  without  seniority  rights  would  have  made 
any  difference  to  Samer  when  he  was  deciding  whether  to  take  the  job. 

12, 

Counsel  for  Samer  contends  that  the  County  Office  should  be  equitably 
estopped  from  denying  Samer a  seniority  date  of  November  2,  2005.  His  theory  is  that 
County  Office  personnel  represented  that  Samer  would  be  a  regular  employee  and  led  him  to 
believe  that  he  would  accrue  seniority,  and  in  reliance  on  this  information  Samer  moved 
from  Oregon  to  California  to  take  the  job.  Further,  since  Samer’s  California  credential  will 
be  issued  retroactive  to  at  least  November  2,  2005,  the  County  Office  can  and  should  give 
him  seniority  retroactive  to  that  date. 

13. 

|  The  contentions  on  Samer’s  behalf  are  without  merit.  Aside  from  the  doubtful 

nature  of  Samer’s  estoppel  claim,  principles  of  estoppel  cannot  be  invoked  to  contravene 
statutes  and  constitutional  provisions  that  define  an  agency’s  powers.  (Fleice  v.  Chualar 
Union  Elementary  School  Dist.  (1988)  206  Cal.App.3d  886,  893.)  Under  Education  Code 
section  44911,  service  under  a  provisional  credential  (such  as  a  TCC)  may  not  be  included  in 
computing  service  toward  tenure.  And  even  if  CTC  had  issued a  retroactively-effective 
credential  to  Samer  and  he  had  registered  it  with  the  County  Office,  the  County  Office  would 
not  be  required  to  retroactively  reclassify  Samer  or  accord  him  seniority  or  credit  toward 
tenure.  (Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  Dist.  (2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  1078.)

  

  

14, 

Furthermore,  even  if  Samer  were  granted  a  seniority  date  of  November  2, 

2005,  he  would  still  be  subject  to  layoff.  The  County  Office  is  not  retaining  any  certificated 
employee  with  a  later  seniority  date  to  perform  services  that  Samer  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

© 

Respondent  Craig  Toomay 

15.  |  Respondent  Craig  Toomay  first  worked  for  the  County  Office  in  1997  or  1998 
as  a  substitute  teacher.  He  was  hired  as  a  provisional  employee  in  September  1998,  teaching 
first  under  a  TCC  and  later  under  an  emergency  long  term  multiple  subject  teaching  permit 
issued  by  CTC.  Each  year  after  that  through  the  2002-03  school  year,  Toomay  worked  in a 
teaching  assignment  under  an  emergency  permit.  During  the  2003-04  school  year,  until 
April  2004,  Toomay  worked  as  a  day-to-day  substitute  under  his  last  emergency  permit. 
Because  he  was  not  eligible  for  further  emergency  permits,  Toomay  applied  for  an  individual 
intern  credential  and  he  was  issued  a  TCC.  Toomay  worked  as  a  substitute  during  the  first 
half  of  the  2004-05  school  year. 

16. 

It  took  Toomay  six  years  to  finish  the  course  work  for  his  teaching  credential. 
On  or  about  December  15,  2004,  San  José  State  University  (SJSU)  issued a  letter  confirming 
that  Toomay  had  completed  the  credentialing  requirements  and  that  an  application  for  a 
credential  had  been  submitted  to  CTC.  On  or  about  January  3,  2005,  Toomay  brought  this 
letter  to  the  County  Office,  where  he  was  issued  a  TCC.  The  TCC  document  states: 

This  certificate  is  valid  for  service  in  the  schools  of  Santa  Clara 
County  for  one  calendar  year  from  12/15/04  or  until  the 
credential/permit/certificate  applied  for  is  granted,  denied  or 
delayed  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing;  or  the 
application  is  withdrawn  by  the  applicant.  This  Temporary 
County  Certificate  is  not  renewable. 

17. 

In  February  2005,  Toomay  was  hired  as  a  temporary  teacher  until  the  end  of 

the  school  year.  For  the  2005-06  school  year,  he  was  offered  a  position  as  a  provisional 
teacher.  Toomay  is  currently  teaching  in  this  position. 

18. 

Having  heard  that  it  can  take  six  months  to  one  year  for  CTC  to  process  a 

credential  application,  Toomay  was  not  concerned  about  the  long  wait  to  receive  his 
credential.  At  some  point  fairly  recently,  Toomay  called  CTC  to  find  out  the  status  of  his 
application.  He  was  informed  that  his  credential  had  been  issued  and  sent  to  SJSU.  When 
Toomay  contacted  SJSU,  he  was  told  that  SJSU  had  mailed  the  credential  to  him.  Toomay 
never  received  the  credential.  (It  is  unknown  whether  SJSU  mailed  the  document  to 
Toomay’s  current  address.)  Toomay  has  requested  a  duplicate  of  his  credential  from  CTC, 
but  he  has  not  received  it.  Information  available  at  the  CTC  website  indicates  that  Toomay 
holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  with  an  issuance  date  of  December 
15,  2004.  Toomay  is  aware  of  the  requirement  that  he  register  his  credential  document  with 
the  County  Office  once  he  receives  it. 

 

@ 

  
  

Net 

  

19. 

The  County  Office  has  a  credentials  office  that  counsels  employees  on  how  to 

get  permits  and  credentials.  Over  the  years,  someone  from  that  office  generally  called 
Toomay  and  told  him  when  he  needed  to  come  in  and  apply  for  a  permit  or  certificate.  Since 
December  2005,  no  one  from  the  credentials  office  has  called  Toomay  to  tell  him  he  needed 
to  apply  for  another  TCC.  This  is  because  the  County  Office  considers  the  December  15, 
2004,  TCC  to  be  valid  until  Toomay  receives  the  credential  applied  for  on  that  date  and 
registers  it.  The  County  Office  does  not  recognize  a  credential  for  purposes  of  employee 
classification,  seniority  or  tenure  until  the  employee  registers  the  credential  with  the  County 
Office.  On  an  unknown  date,  Mary  Mulholland  called  Toomay  and  asked  him  if  he  had  a 
credential.  When  he  replied  that  he  did,  she  asked  him  to  bring  it  in  and  register  it  for  a 
seniority  date.  That  was  when  Toomay  told  Mulholland  that  he  had  not  received  the 
credential  document.  (He  did  not  tell  her  the  story  of  how  the  credential  had  been  mailed  to 
various  places.) 

20. 

|  Counsel  for  Toomay  contends  that  the  County  Office  should  grant  Toomay  a 

seniority  date  of  December  15,  2004,  the  effective  date  of  his  preliminary  credential.  He 
asserts  that,  by  its  terms,  Toomay’s  TCC  became  invalid  upon  CTC  granting  him  a 
credential,  so  Toomay  is  now  teaching  under  that  credential.  The  County  Office  knows  that 
a  preliminary  credential  has  been  issued,  and  it  is  through  no  fault  of  his  own  that  Toomay 
has  not  received  and  registered  the  credential  document.  Under  these  circumstances,  counsel 
argues  that  it  is  unfair  for  the  County  Office  not  to  recognize  Toomay’s  credential  and  give 
him  a  seniority  date.  The  County  Office  could  have  helped  Toomay  to  obtain  his  credential 
document,  and  it  should  be  equitably  estopped  from  denying  him  a  seniority  date.  Upon 
recognition  of  Toomay’s  credential,  the  County  Office  should  exercise  its  discretion  to  give 
him  seniority  retroactive  to  December  15,  2004. 

21. 

Although  Toomay’s  situation  is  unfortunate,  the  legal  arguments  on  his  behalf 

are  not  persuasive.  The  County  Office  is  not  required  to  recognize  a  teacher’s  credential 
until  the  credential  document  has  been  registered.  (Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  Dist., 
supra,  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  1078;  Ed.  Code,  §  44330.)  And  even  if  Toomay  had  received 
and  registered  his  credential,  the  County  Office  would  not  be  required  to  retroactively 
reclassify  him  or  accord  him  seniority  or  credit  toward  tenure.  (/bid.)  Toomay’s  claim  of 
estoppel  is  tenuous,  at  best;  and,  as  noted  above,  principles  of  estoppel  cannot  be  invoked  to 
contravene  statutes  and  constitutional  provisions  that  define  an  agency’s  powers.  (Fleice  v. 
Chualar  Union  Elementary  School  Dist.,  supra,  206  Cal.App.3d  886,  893.)  Under  Education 
Code  section  44911,  service  under  a  provisional  credential  (such  as  a  TCC)  may  not  be 
included  in  computing  service  toward  tenure.  Toomay  cannot  be  serving  “under”  his 
preliminary  credential  until  he  has  received  and  registered  that  credential.  (Fine  v.  Los 
Angeles  Unified  School  Dist.,  supra,  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  1078.) 

22. 

As  with  respondent  Samer,  even  if  Toomay  were  granted a  seniority  date  of 
December  15,  2004,  he  would  still  be  subject  to  layoff.  The  County  Office  is  not  retaining 
any  certificated  employee  with  a  later  seniority  date  to  perform  services  that  Toomay  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render.

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  accusations  against  respondents  John  Oliver  and 

Lisa  Politeo. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  section  Education  Code  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  Paul  Yuri 
Samer  and  Craig  Toomay  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  no  later  than  June  30,  2006. 
The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Paul  Yuri  Samer  and  Craig  Toomay  that 

their  services  will  be  terminated  no  later  than  June  30,  2006,  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

The  accusations  against  respondents  John  Oliver  and  Lisa  Politeo  are 

dismissed. 

DATED: 

L 

RE,  2o00b 

2. 

3. 

1. 

2. 

  

NANCY 
SMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   
  

