BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ALPINE  COUNTY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

DEIRDRE  WALLACE, 

Respondent. 

  

OAH  No.  N2006030748 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Karen  J.  Brandt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  24,  2006,  in  Woodfords,  California. 
Allen  R.  Vinson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Alpine  County  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

Attomey  at  Law. 

24,  2006. 

Deirdre  Wallace  (respondent)  was  present  and  was  represented  by  Lesley  Beth  Curtis, 

Evidence  was  received,  the  record  was  closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  the  District  served  all  notices  required  to  be  served 
under  the  Education  Code  in  a  timely  manner  and  that  respondent’s  request  for  hearing  and 
notice  of  defense  were  timely  filed. 

2. 

James  W.  Parsons,  Ed.D.,  is  both  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  the 

principal  of  all  the  schools  in  the  District. 

3. 

On  February  28,  2006,  Superintendent  Parsons  recommended  to  the 

Governing  Board  (Board)  that  it  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  the  following  District  programs 
and  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year: 

   

Certificated  Positions 

American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator 
Necessary  Small  High  School  Teacher 
Library  Media  Coordinator  (Temporary) 
Spanish  Teacher 

.49  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
.795  FTE 
13  FTE 

4, 

On  March  2,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  a  “Resolution  of  Intention  to  Dismiss 
Certificated  Employees,”  Resolution  No.  05-06-11  (Resolution),  which  provided  that  it  was 
necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  described  in  Superintendent 
Parsons’  recommendation  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

The  Resolution,  among  other  things,  provided  that  each  of  the  listed  positions 
constituted  “a  particular  kind  of  service  (PKS)  with  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  § 
44955,”  that  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  it  was  “in  the  best  interest  of  this  District 
that  the  2.415  FTE  certificated  employees  ...be  reduced  pursuant  to  the  adopted  order  of 
employment,”  and  that  the  Board  had  determined  that  “as  between  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  the  order  of  termination  listed  on  the 
seniority  list  dated  2/28/06  has  been  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students 
thereof.” 

The  Resolution  provided  further  that  the  Board  had  “considered  all  positively  assured 

attrition  which  has  occurred  to  date,  that  is,  all  deaths,  retirements,  and  other  permanent 
vacancies  and  additional  attrition  which  may  occur  before  the  start  of  the  2006-2007  school 
year  in  reduction  [of]  these  services  and  but  for  the  attrition  already  assured  and  attrition 
anticipated  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  reduce  additional  particular  kinds  of  services.” 

5. 

The  Resolution  also  provided  that  the  Board  had  “determined  that  the  average 

daily  attendance  in  all  schools  of  the  District  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  was  in 
session  for  the  current  school  [year]  of  2005-2006  had  declined  below  that  of  the 
corresponding  period  of  the  first  six  months  of  prior  year  of  comparison  school  year.”  The 
Accusation  in  this  matter  asserts  that  respondent’s  layoff  was  the  result  of  the  District’s 
determination  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services;  the  Accusation  does  not 
assert  that  the  reduction  was  the  result  of  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA).  At 
hearing,  the  District  did  not  submit  any  evidence  to  show  that  it  had  experienced  a  decline  in 
ADA.  To  the  contrary,  the  District  submitted  a  document  entitled  “Anticipated  Class  and/or 
Service  Assignments  for  All  Certificated  Employees  of  the  District  for  the  Next  Fiscal  Year” 
that  indicates  that  the  current  total  student  enrollment  in  the  2005-2006  school  year  as  of 
March  31,  2006  was  136  and  that  the  total  enrollment  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  is 
anticipated  to  be  137  students.  That  document  provides  further  that  there  was  “no  anticipated 
change  to  weekly  student  contact  hours  for  the  upcoming  fiscal  year.”  It  is,  therefore,  found 
that  the  District  did  not  establish  that  the  reduction  in  this  matter  was  necessitated  by  a  decline 

     
in  ADA.   

     

Respondent's  Seniority 

6. 

Respondent  is  a  .49  FTE  probationary  certificated  employee.  She  first 

rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  as  a  probationary  employee  on  August  26,  2004.  She  has 
a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  Science  and  Biological  Sciences  and  a 
Preliminary  Multiple  Subjects  Teaching  Credential.  She  also  has  a  master’s  degree.  Except 
for  Rita  Lovell,  respondent  is  the  most  junior  certificated  employee  in  the  District.  On March 
6,  2006,  Superintendent  Parsons  served  upon  respondent  a  “Notice  of  Layoff  for  Probationary 
Certificated  Employee”  together  with  a  copy  of  the Resolution.' 

American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator 

7. 

In  1997,  respondent  was  hired  by  the  District  to  be  the  American  Indian  Early 

Childhood  Education  Coordinator.  This  position  was  funded  through  a  grant  from  the 
American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Program  of  the  California  Department  of 
Education.  Under  this  program,  respondent  taught  reading  to  students  in  kindergarten  through 
fourth  grade  who  read  below  grade  level.  Students  who  participated  in  the  program  were 
taken  from  their  regular  classrooms  for  20  —  30  minutes  a  day  and  provided  one-on-one 
reading  instruction.  Initially,  respondent  trained  aides  who  assisted  her  in  implementing  the 
program.  After  about  three  years,  there  was  not  sufficient  funding  to  employ  aides,  so 
Even  though  the  program  applied  research-based 
respondent  ran  the  program  herself. 
methods  for  teaching  reading  to  students  of  Native  American  descent,  the  program  was  open 
to  all  students  who  were  reading  below  their  grade  level,  and  not  just  Native  American 
students. 

The  terms  of  the  original  1997  grant  provided  for  the  teaching  of  both  reading  and 
math.  There  was  not,  however,  sufficient  funding  for  respondent  to  teach  math  under  the 
program. 

The  program  also  included  a  cultural  component.  On  Fridays,  respondent  taught  a 
class  about  the  Washoe  culture.  Respondent  also  acted  as  the  liaison  between  the  District 
In  the  past,  respondent  also  taught  reading  to  a  class  of  fifth  grade  students. 
and  the  tribe. 
Last  year,  respondent  was  notified  that  she  would  be  laid  off  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year.  To  settle  that  matter,  respondent  and  the  District  entered  into  a  stipulation, which 
provided: 

8. 

  

‘In  addition  to  respondent,  Superintendent  Parsons  served  layoff  notices  on  Rita  Lovell  (Lovell)  and  Stephanie 
Bowen  (Bowen).  Lovell  is  currently  a  .795  FTE  Library  Media  Coordinator  (Temporary)  and  a  .13  FTE  Spanish 
Teacher.  Lovell  did  not  file  a  request  for  hearing  in  response  to  her  layoff  notice.  The  District  rescinded  Bowen’s 
layoff  notice  after  Hanley  Rosevold,  a  teacher  at  the  Alpine  County  Secondary  Community  Day  School,  announced 
his  retirement  for  the  2006-2007  school  year,  and  the  District  determined  that  it  no  longer  needed  to  reduce  a 

Necessary  Smal]  High  School  Teacher  by  1.0  FTE.   

1, 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5. 

6. 

7. 

[Respondent’s]  Seniority  date  is  8/26/04  as  set  forth  on 
the  District’s  seniority  list. 

[Respondent’s]  Employment  status  is  probationary. 

[Respondent]  shall  be  placed  on  the  24  month 
reemployment  list  per  Education  Code  Section  44957. 

If  [respondent]  is  reemployed  during  the  24  month  rehire 
period,  she  shall  be  placed  on  the  Certificated  Salary 
Schedule  at  year  3. 

If  funding  is  restored  for  the  American  Indian  Early 
Childhood  Education  Coordinator  position,  the  District 
shall  only  be  obligated  to  provide  a  part-time  position 
based  on  the  salary  paid  to  the  teacher  in  the  position  and 
the  grant  funds  provided.  No  additional  district  funds 
will  have  to  be  used  to  fund  this  position. 

If  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education 
Coordinator  position  is  funded  through  a  grant,  the 
District  shall  first  offer  the  position  to  certificated 
employees  on  the  rehire  list  who  are  credentialed  and 
competent  to  serve  in  the  position. 

[Respondent]  will  not  assert  any  claim  for  back  wages 
[for]  any  employment  she  has  had  with  the  District  prior 
to  the  2005-06  school  year. 

9. 

On  June  1,  2005,  the  Diamond  Valley  School  Site  Council  voted  that,  in  the 

event  the  District  did  not  receive  a  grant  to  fund  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood 
Education  position,  the  Site  Council  would  provide  $29,000  from  its  own  funding  to  retain 
that  position. 

10. 

On  June  30,  2005,  respondent  entered  into  an  employment  contract  with  the 

District  that  provided  that  she  would  serve  as  a  part-time,  probationary  employee  in  the 
position  of  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year. 

 

.

11. 

By  letter  dated  August  8,  2005,  the  California  Department  of  Education 

notified  the  District  that  it  would  not  be  providing  any  funds  to  the  District  under  the 
American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Program  for  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

12. 

On  August  17,  2005,  Superintendent  Parsons  wrote  to  respondent  as  follows: 

   

In  light  of  the  funding  not  coming  through  for  the  Early 
Childhood  Indian  Education  Grant,  we  will,  of  course, utilize 
you  as  a  Title  I  teacher  with  the  funding  provided  by  the 
Diamond  Valley  School  Site  Council.  We  have  scheduled  you 
for  four  (4)  hours  per  day  from  8:30  a.m.  to  12:30  p.m.  at  the 
Diamond  Valley  School  and  assigned  you  specifically  with 
Sharon  Osgood.  The  bulk  of  those  students  in  need  of 
significant  reading  remediation  are  in  this  year’s  fourth  grade 
class  with  Sharon.  We  are  hoping  that  adding  a certificated 
teacher  to  their  instruction  will  enable  us  to  provide  smaller 
groups  and  more  rigorous  remediation. 

13. 

As  we  continue  to  test  students  with  the  new  M.A.P.  program, 
we  may  want  to  reconsider  how  we  spread  your  time  so  that  you 
can  have  the  maximum  impact  on  the  maximum  number  of 
students,  This  assignment  should,  however,  get  us  started  for 
the  year... 
On  September  27,  2005,  respondent  entered  into  another  employment  contract 
with  the  District  that  provided  that  she  would  serve  as  a part-time, probationary  employee  in 
the  position  of  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year.  The  September  27,  2005  contract  increased  respondent’s  hourly  rate  of  pay 
above  the  amount  set  forth  in  the  June  30,  2005  contract  described  in  Finding  10.  Although  in 
one  of  its  exhibits,  the  District  described  respondent’s  position  as  being  categorically  funded 
from  “Carry-Over  funds  designated  from  School-Wide  Project  Categorically  [sic]  Funds,” 
there  was  no  indication  in  either  the  June  30  or  the  September  27,  2005  contract  that 
respondent  was  hired  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44909  for  the  2005-2006  school 
year.”  (See  Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  of  the  Ferndale  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838.) 

14, 

The  work  that  respondent  has  been  performing  during  the  2005-2006  school 
year  is  different  from  the  work  she  previously  performed  for  the  District.  For  one  and  one-_ 
half  hours  in  the  morning,  she  works  with  Sharon  Osgood’s  (Osgood’s)  third  and  fourth  grade 
students  teaching  reading.  According  to  respondent,  when  reading  is  taught,  the  students  are 
divided  into  three  groups:  Osgood  teaches  reading  to  one  group,  respondent  teaches  reading  to 

  

2  Education  Code  section  44909,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  may  employ  persons  possessing  an  appropriate 
credential  as  certificated  employees  in  programs  and  projects  to  perform  services  conducted  under 
contract  with  public  or  private  agencies,  or  categorically  funded  projects  which  are  not  required  by 
federal  or  state  statutes.  The  terms  and  conditions  under  which  such  persons  are  employed  shall  be 
mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  employee  and  the  governing  board  and  such  agreement  shall  be 
...  Such  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods  which  are  less  than  a  full 
reduced  to  writing. 
school  year  and  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially  funded  project 
without  regard  to  other  requirements  of  this  code  respecting  the  termination  of  probationary  or 
permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918. 

 

a  second  group,  and  the  third  group  works  with  an  aide  on  the  Read  Naturally  Program  (see 
Findings  18-24  below). 

Respondent  also  teaches  a  math  class  to  ten  fifth-grade  students  in  a  separate 

classroom.  In  addition,  respondent  has  recess  duty. 

15. 

There  was  a  dispute  as  to  whether  there  was  a  “cultural  component”  to 

respondent’s  position  for  the  current  school  year.  Respondent  asserted  that  she  did  “not 
really”  provide  a  Native  American  program.  She  testified  that  she  still  acted  “a  little”  as  a 
liaison  to  the  tribe,  and  that  she  had  tried  to  coordinate  a  Native  American  Thanksgiving 
program,  but  she  described  this  work  as  “voluntary.” 

Superintendent  Parsons  asserted  that  there  was  still  a  cultural  component  to  — 
respondent’s  position  for  the  2005-2006  school  year,  albeit  “downsized”  from  prior  years. 
He  asserted  that,  in  her  position  as  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education 
Coordinator,  respondent  attempted  to  make  arrangements  with a  local  tribe  to  provide  story 
telling  and  a  display  for  one  or  two  days;  although  those  arrangements  fell  through, 
respondent  was  going  to  try  to  reschedule  them.  In  addition,  respondent,  on  occasion, 
attended  meetings  with  a  parent  advisory  group  from  the  tribe  during  school  hours. 
Superintendent  Parsons  did  not  know  how  many,  if  any,  of  those  meetings  respondent  had 
attended  this  school  year. 

It  is  found  that,  even  if  there  has  been  a  Native  American  cultural  component  to 

respondent’s  position  this  year,  that  component  is  minimal. 

16, 

Respondent  asserted  that,  given  the  changes  in  her  teaching  duties  for  the 

2005-2006  school  year  and  Superintendent  Parsons’  August  17,  2005  letter,  she  has  not  been 
functioning  as  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator;  instead,  she  has 
been  functioning  as  a  Title  I  reading  teacher  and  a  math  teacher.  She  asserted  that  the 
Resolution  should,  therefore,  have  identified  the  services  being  reduced  as  a  Title  I  reading 
teacher  and  a  math  teacher,  and  not  an  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education 
Coordinator.  She  also  asserted  that  her  duties  as  a  math  teacher  were  not  included  in  the  job 
duties  of  an  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  and  were,  therefore,  not 
subject  to  layoff  pursuant  to  the  Resolution.  Superintendent  Parsons  asserted  that,  because  all 
the  students  assigned  to  respondent  are  “at-risk”  and  math  was  a  permissible  component  of 
the  original  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  grant,  respondent’s  current  teaching 
assignments  are  “consistent”  with  the  description  of  her  position  as  the  American  Indian  Early 
Childhood  Education  Coordinator.  Neither  party  submitted  a  job  description  for  the 
American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  position.  The  parties’  assertions  on 
this  issue  are  addressed  in  Legal  Conclusion  3  below. 

There  was  no  evidence  submitted  to  indicate  whether  there  may  be  any  monies 
available  to  the  District,  either  through  the  Site  Council  or  a  grant  provided  by  the  California 

17. 

  

  
  
 

Department  of  Education,  to  fund  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education 
Coordinator  position  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

Read  Naturally  Program  and  Study  Halls  Monitored  by  Classified  Aides 

18. 

Karen  Mortimer  (Mortimer)  is  currently  employed  by  the  District  as  an 

Instructional  Aide  —  Title  I,  a  Restricted  Position.  Jacqueline  Tan  (Tan)  is  employed  as  an 
After  School  Program  Coordinator.  Although  Tan  has  a  teaching  credential,  both  Mortimer 
and  Tan  are  classified  employees. 

| 

19, 

Mortimer  and  Tan  report  to  Nancy  Lampson  (Lampson),  Director  of 

Instructional  Services  for  the  Alpine  County  Office  of  Education.  Lampson  is  an 
administrator  who  does  not  have  any  teaching  assignments.  She  does,  however,  possess  a 
teaching  credential. 
for  the  District.  According  to  the  Read  Naturally  website,  the  program  offers  “struggling 
readers  a  safe,  structured,  and  highly  motivated  opportunity  to  engage  in  reading  on  a  regular 
basis.”  The  website  describes  the  program  as  “an  individualized  program”  that  “allows 
students  to  work  independently  most  of  the  time.” 

As  part  of  her  duties,  Lampson  administers  the  Read  Naturally  Program 

20. 

Lampson  trained  both  Mortimer  and  Tan  to  monitor  District  students  who  are 
involved  in  the  Read  Naturally  Program.  Under  the  program,  the  students  first  read  a  story 
out  loud  to  one  of  the  aides.  The  students  then  practice  on  their  own,  reading  along  with  a 
tape  recording.  The  students  read  the  story  many  times  with  the  tape  recording  until  they  can 
read  it  fluently.  When  they  are  ready,  the  students  again  read  the  story  out  loud  to  an  aide. 
The  students  graph  their  own  progress.  The  aides  may  assist  students  as  they  fill  in  their 
graphs,  but  the  aides  do  not  complete  graphs  for  the  students.  Mortimer  also  corrects  the 
students’  answer  books  using  a  key  that  she  has  been  given.  The  aides  do  not  grade  or 
monitor  the  progress  of  the  students.  Instead,  each  grading  period,  using  the  students’  graphs, 
Lampson  completes  a  progress  report  for  each  student  and  provides  those  progress  reports  to 
the  students’  teachers.  It  is  up  to  the  teachers  whether  they  take  the  progress  reports  into 
consideration  when  they  grade  the  students. 

21. 

From  8:30-10:00  a.m.  each  school  day,  Mortimer  monitors  the  students  who 

participate  in  the  Read  Naturally  Program  from  Osgood’s  third  and  fourth  grade  classes. 
Although  Tan  is  designated  as  the  After  School  Program  Coordinator,  she  begins  work  at 
12:00  noon  and  monitors  students  in  the  first,  second,  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  grades  who 
participate  in  the  Read  Naturally  Program  during  the  school  day.  Neither  aide  reports  to  any 
teachers  about  the  progress  of  the  students,  although  they  may  respond  to  particular  inquiries 
a  teacher  may  have.  If  they  have  any  questions  or  problems  with  any  students,  the  aides 
speak  to  Lampson  about  them. 

22. 

Mortimer  and  Tan  also  monitor  study  halls  during  the  school  day.  According 
to  Tan,  during  study  hall,  the  students  generally  do  their  homework  assignments.  Sometimes, 
a  teacher  may  ask  her  to  watch  the  students  do  particular  assignments  during  study  hall.  The 
classroom  teachers  provide  the  course  work  and  determine  which  students  should  attend  study 

 

hall.  Any  student  discipline  or  supervision  issues  that  may  arise  during  study  hall  are  referred 
to  the  classroom  teacher  or  the  principal’s  office.  Tan  and  Mortimer  do  not  instruct  or  grade 
any  students  in  the  study  halls  they  monitor. 

23. 

On  October  4,  2004,  respondent  entered  into  a  contract  with  the  District  to 

serve  as  a  certificated,  part-time  employee  in  the  position  of  After  School  Program  Instructor 
from  July  1,  2004  to  June  30,  2005.  Effective  January  31,  2005,  respondent  resigned  from 
this  position,  after  the  time  commitment  increased  to  25  hours  a  week  and  she  was  informed 
that  she  could  no  longer  work  both  as  the  After  School  Program  Instructor  and  the  American 
Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator,  since  together  those  two  positions  totaled 
over  40  hours  a  week. 

24. 

Respondent  asserted  that  the  District  is  violating  Education  Code  sections 

45343,  45344,  and  46300  by  allowing  two  classified  aides  to  function  as  independent 
classroom  reading  and  study  hall  teachers  during  time  for  which  the  District  is  claiming  ADA. 
According  to  respondent,  the  District  is  legally  prohibited  from  reducing  her  teaching  services 
while  maintaining  the  services  of  two  classified  aides  to  perform  teaching  services  that  are 
similar  to  the  teaching  services  that  she  is  currently  performing  and  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  perform.  The  District  asserted  that  the  functions  that  the  aides  are  performing 
are  appropriate  to  their  aide  classifications  and  that  respondent,  as  a  certificated  employee, 
cannot  “bump” a  classified  employee.  In  addition,  the  District  asserted  that  neither 
respondent  nor  the  Alpine  County  Teachers  Association  previously  asserted  that  the  classified 
aides  were  improperly  performing  services  that  certificated  teachers  should  perform,  filed  a 
grievance  with  respect  to  this  issue,  or  asserted  to  the  Public  Employees  Relations  Board 
(PERB)  that  the  District’s  utilization  of  the  aides  constituted  an  unfair  labor  practice.  The 
parties'  assertions  regarding  these  issues  are  addressed  in  Legal  Conclusion  4  below. 

Moser’s  Resignation 

25. 

Henri  Moser  (Moser)  is  a  permanent,  full-time,  certificated  employee  whose 

first  date  of  paid  probation  service  was  August  23,  2001.  He  has  both  a  teaching  and  an 
administrative  credential.  Moser  started  his  District  employment  as  a  full-time  teacher  in 
Bear  Valley  Elementary  School.  When  he  obtained  his  administrative  credential  last  year,  he 
became  the  Vice  Principal  for  the  Bear  Valley  elementary  and  high  schools.  During  the 
current  school  year,  Moser  has  spent  75  percent  of  his  time  teaching  kindergarten  through 
eighth  grade,  and  25  percent  of  his  time  as  Vice  Principal.  There  are  currently  13  students  in 
the  Bear  Valley  Elementary  School.  Moser  is  the  only  teacher  in  that  school.  The  District 
anticipates  that  there  will  be  11  students  in  the  school  in  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

26. 

After  the  Board  issued  the  Resolution  and  Superintendent  Parsons  sent  out  the 

layoff  notices,  and  approximately  three  weeks  before  the  hearing  in  this  matter,  Moser 
submitted  his  resignation  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Respondent  asserts  that  the  Board 
resignation  into  consideration  when  determining  whether  she  should  be 
should  take  Moser’s 
laid  off  and  offer  her  the  teaching  component  of  Moser’s 

position. 

  

  
  
 

@ 

27. 

The  Bear  Valley  schools  are  on  the  other  side  of  the  mountain  from  the 

District  office.  In  good  weather,  it  takes  approximately  one  hour  to  drive  between  the  Bear 
Valley  schools  and  the  District  office;  in  winter  and  when  there  is  snow  on  the  ground,  it  may 
take  three  to  four  hours  to  make  this  journey.  Because  Superintendent  Parsons  is  the  only 
principal  in  the  District,  he  and  the  Board  determined  that,  given  the  si gnificant  distance, 
there  was  a  need  for  a  part-time  vice  principal  to  be  located  at  the  Bear  Valley  schools.  When 
Moser  submitted  his  resignation,  Superintendent  Parsons  and  the  Board  determined  that  they 
needed  to  retain  a  single  full-time  employee  to  act  as  both  a  part-time  teacher  and  a  part-time 
administrator.  The  District  is  currently  advertising  for  a  replacement  for  Moser  for  the  2006- 
2007  school  year.  Superintendent  Parsons  asserted  that  it  would  not  make  sense  to  try  to  hire 
a  .75  FTE  teacher  and  a  separate  .25  FTE  Vice  Principal.  Given  both  the  location  and  size  of 
Bear  Valley  Elementary  School,  Superintendent  Parsons’  and  the  Board’s  determination  to 
hire  a  single  individual  to  perform  both  administrative  and  teaching  duties  is  reasonable. 

ISSUES 

The  parties  agreed  that  the  following  issues  are  before  the  Board  for  determination: 

1. 

Should  the  Resolution  have  referred  to  respondent’s  services  as  a  Title  1 

reading  teacher  and  a  math  teacher,  and  not  as  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood 
Education  Coordinator? 

May  the  District  lay  off  respondent  when  it  continues  to  employ  classified 

aides  to  provide  reading  and  study  hall  services? 

Has  the  District  properly  taken  into  account  all  positively  assured  attrition 

between  the  time  the  Board  issued  its  Resolution  and  the  time  of  the  actual  layoff, 
particularly  with  respect  to  the  teaching  duties  of  Moser? 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  this  reduction  or 
discontinuation  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 
forth  in  Finding  5,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  the  reduction  in  this  matter  was 
necessitated  by  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.

As  set 

2. 

3. 

1, 

2. 

    

American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator 

- 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  16,  respondent  asserted  that  the  Resolution  should  have 
identified  the  services  being  reduced  as  a  Title  I  reading  teacher  and  a  math  teacher,  and  not 
an  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator.  Respondent's  assertion  is  not 
persuasive. 

While  respondent  may  have  been  assigned  to  teach  reading  and  math  during  the 
current  school  year,  both  her  June  30  and  her  September  27,  2005  contracts  specifically 
provided  that  she  would  be  serving  in  the  position  of  American  Indian  Early  Childhood 
Education  Coordinator.  Even  if  Superintendent  Parsons  may  have  raised  some  question 
about  the  nature  of  respondent's  position  when  he  stated  in  his  August  17,  2005  letter  that  the 
District  would  "utilize"  her  as  "a  Title  I  teacher,"  respondent's  September  27,  2005  contract, 
signed  after  Superintendent  Parsons'  August  17,  2005  letter,  made  clear  that  respondent 
would  be  serving  in  the  position  of  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator 
during  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

The  fact  that  respondent's  teaching  assignments  in  the  position  of  American  Indian 

Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  may  have  changed  in  the  2005-2006  school  year  to 
include  a  new  math  class  and  a  different  reading  assignment,  and  to  eliminate  much  of  the 
cultural  component  did  not  mandate  a  different  description  of  that  position  in  the  Resolution. 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  in  relevant  part,  provides  that,  "...whenever 
a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  ...  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing 
board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year."  In  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Goleta  Union 
School  District  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32,  36,  the  court  found  that  a  recommendation  that  11 
kindergarten  through  sixth  grade  classes  be  reduced  properly  stated  a  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  court  reasoned  that,  although 
teachers  in  elementary  school  classes  may  teach  many  different  subjects,  the  school  district 
was  not  be  precluded  from  reducing  the  services  of  those  teachers  merely  because  they 
organized  “their  curriculum  in  a  multidisciplinary  manner."  Similarly,  in  this  case,  the 
District  is  not  precluded  from  identifying  respondent’s  particular  kind  of  service  as  the 
American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  just  because  she  may  now  teach 
both  reading  and  math  in  that  position. 

_ 

The  District  is  facing  financial  uncertainty  as  to  whether  there  will  be  funding  for 
respondent's  position  next  year.  (See  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  639  ["Section  44955  does  not  prohibit  consideration  of  financial  difficulties 
as  the  motivation  for  terminations  and,  in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate 
reduction  in  certificated  staff,  section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school 
districts  to  effectuate  a  reduction."].)  The  Resolution  and  the  March  6,  2006  layoff  letter 

10

@ 

  
  
  

gave  respondent  adequate  notice  under  section  44955  that  her  entire  .49  FTE  would  be 
reduced  when  it  informed  her  that  her  position  as  the  American  Indian  Early  Childhood 
Education  Coordinator  would  be  eliminated  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

Read  Naturally  Program  and  Study  Halls  Monitored  by  Classified  Aides 

4. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  24,  respondent  asserted  that  the  District  is  legally 

prohibited  from  reducing  her  teaching  services  while  retaining  two  classified  aides  to 
perform  allegedly  similar  teaching  functions.?  Again,  respondent's  assertion  is  not 
persuasive. 

A  school  district  may  not  dismiss  an  employee  pursuant  to  section  44955  and  yet 

continue  the  identical  kind  of  service  and  position  held  by  the  terminated  employee.  (Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District 
(1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  844.)  In  order  for  this  prohibition  to  apply,  there  must  be  a 
showing  that  there  is  no  difference  in  the  method  or  manner  of  providing  a  particular  service 
between  the  terminated  teacher  and  the  substitute  personnel.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association, 
supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  at  p.  640.)  Respondent  has  not  made  this  showing.  The  services  that 
the  classified  aides  are  providing  with  respect  to  the  Read  Naturally  Program  are  not 
identical  to  the  services  that  certificated  teachers  provide  when  teaching  reading.  The  aides 
are  merely  monitoring  students  as  they  proceed  independently  through  the  Read  Naturally 
Program;  they  are  not  providing  any  instruction,  doing  any  evaluations,  or  giving  any  grades. 
Similarly,  the  classified  aides  are  only  monitoring  students  in  study  halls;  they  are  not 
providing  teaching  services.  Their  services,  therefore,  are  not  identical  to  those  of 
respondent. 

Moreover,  respondent,  as  a  certificated  employee,  cannot  "bump" a  classified 
employee  because  the  procedures  and  reasons  for  laying  off  certificated  employees  under 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  are  different  from  those  applicable  to  classified 
employees  under  Education  Code  section  45308.’  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167,  180  [a  certificated  employee  could  not  "bump"  children's  center  or  Head 
Start  employees  out  of  their  positions  because  the  statutory  grounds  permitting  termination  of 
the  two  types  of  employees  were  different].) 

In  sum,  respondent  did  not  show  that  the  District  is  legally  prohibited  from  reducing 

her  teaching  services  while  maintaining  the  services  of  two  classified  aides. 

  

>  The  question  of  whether  District  is  violating  Education  Code  sections  45343,  45344,  and  46300  by  utilizing 
Mortimer  and  Tan  as  they  are  now  being  utilized  is  beyond  the  scope  of  a  layoff  hearing  and  will  not  be  addressed  in 
this  decision. 

4  Education  Code  section  45308,  in  relevant  part,  provides: 

Classified  employees  shall  be  subject  to  layoff  for  lack  of  work  or  lack  of  funds.  Whenever  a 
classified  employee  is  laid  off,  the  order  of  layoff  within  the  class  shall  be  determined  by  length  of 
service.  The  employee  who  has  been  employed  the  shortest  time  in  the  class,  plus  higher  classes, 
shall  be  laid  off  first. 

11

Positively  Assured  Attrition 

5. 

Finally,  respondent  asserted  that  the  Board  should  take  Moser’s  resignation 

into  consideration  when  determining  whether  she  should  be  laid  off  and  offer  her  the 
teaching  component  of  Moser’s  position.  Respondent's  argument  on  this  issue  is  also  not 
persuasive. 

While  the  Board  included  in  the  Resolution  that  the  layoff  was  due  to  a  decline  in 
ADA,  the  District  did  not  establish  this  assertion;  instead  this  matter  proceeded  as  a  PKS 
reduction.  (See  Finding  5  and  Legal  Conclusion  2.)  A  school  district  does  not  have  to  take 
into  consideration  attrition  when  making  PKS  reductions.  As  the  court  in  San  Jose  Teachers 
Association,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  at  pp.  634-636  explained,  "In  making  a  final  decision  on 
PKS  reductions,  the  extent  to  which  the  services  are  reduced  inherently  determines  the 
number  of  positions  to  remain.  Ifa  service  is  to  be  eliminated,  for  example,  it  is  obvious  that 
it  is  unnecessary  to  consider  attrition  in  any  way." 

Even  if  Moser's  attrition  had  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  respondent  has  not  shown 
that  she  should  be  retained  to  fill  a  portion  of  Moser's  current  teaching  duties  when  she  is  not 
certificated  or  competent  to  assume  his  administrative  duties.  In  Murray  v.  Sonoma  County 
Office  of Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456,  a  part-time  school  nurse,  who  had  been  laid 
off,  contended  that  she  was  entitled  to  be  rehired  as  a  part-time  nurse  before  an  employee 
with  less  seniority  could  be  hired  to  fill  a  full-time  school  nurse  position.  The  court  found 
that  when  part-time  employees  are  laid  off,  they  are  not  entitled  to  full-time  positions  that 
subsequently  open  up;  instead,  they  are  entitled  only  to  be  returned  to  the  status  they 
occupied  prior  to  layoff.  Moreover,  the  part-time  nurse  did  not  have  the  right  to  force  the 
Office  of  Education  to  divide  a  full-time  position  to  accommodate  her  desire  for  a  part-time 
job. 

(Id.  at  p.  460.) 

The  reasoning  set  forth  in  Murray  is  applicable  in  this  matter.  Respondent  has  a  .49 
FTE  teaching  position.  Moser  has  a  .75  FTE  teaching  position  and  a  .25  FTE  administrative 
position.  Given  the  location  and  small  size  of  Bear  Valley  Elementary  School,  the 
Superintendent  and  the  Board  have  determined  that  Moser's  current  position  should  be  filled 
by  a  single  full-time  employee  who  is  credentialed  and  competent  to  be  both  a  teacher  and  an 
administrator.  Respondent  does  not  have  an  administrative  credential.  The  District  cannot 
be  forced  to  divide  up  Moser's  job  to  give  respondent  a  .49  FTE  teaching  position,  and  then 
have  to  seek  a  second  employee  to  fill  the  remaining  FTE  time  as  both  a  teacher  and  an 
administrator. 

6. 

In  sum,  American  Indian  Early  Childhood  Education  Coordinator  is  a 

particular  kind  of  service  that  could  be  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  Board's  decision  to  discontinue  that  service  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was 
a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  decision  was  based  on  the  welfare  of  the  District  and 
its  pupils.  The  District  identified  respondent  as  providing  the  particular  kind  of  service  that 

  

  
  

© 

12

the  Board  directed  be  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be 
retained  to  perform  services  that  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  A 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the  Accusation. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  respondent  Deirdre  Wallace  is  sustained.  Notice  shall  be 

given  to  respondent  before  May  15,  2006  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  because  of  the 
discontinuation  of  the  particular  kind  of  services. 

DATED:  May  3,  2006 

13     

