BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
| 
OF  THE 
SOUTH  PASADENA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

IN  THE  MATTER  OF  THE  ACCUSATIONS 
AGAINST: 

OAH  NO.  L2006030482 

MARYANN  NIELSON,  PATTI  SCHINDLER 
RONALD  BURANASAKORN,  KRISTIN 
BARKHUST,  JOANNE  KHELLA,  DARA 
LOFTIS,  DIANE  SHIRES,  CHRISTINE  MA, 
and  REIKO  IKKANDA 

Respondents. 

  

 
e
e
 
e
e

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  12,  2006,  at  the  offices  of  the  South  Pasadena 
Unified  School  District,  South  Pasadena,  California. 

Warren  Kinsler,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  South  Pasadena  Unified  School 

District. 

Michael  Feinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

SUMMARY 

The  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  of  the  South  Pasadena  Unified  School  District 

(District)  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by 
certificated  personnel  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision 
was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  teachers whose  services  were 
proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking  ties  between  employees  with 
the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code 
requirements.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dr.  Kenneth  Moffett,  the  Interim  Superintendent  of  the  District,  filed  the 

Accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  or  about  March  13,  2006,  Dr.  Moffett  recommended  that  the  Governing 
Board  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2006- 
2007  school  year.  Dr.  Moffett  recommended  the  reduction  and/or  elimination  of  8.8  full- 
time-equivalency  (FTE)  certificated  employees  as  follows: 

Reduce  Middle  School  Social  Studies  Teaching  Services 

Reduce  High  School  Social  Studies  Teaching  Services 

Reduce  Middle  School  English  Teaching  Services 

1.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

Reduce  High  School  English  Teaching  Services 

4.0  FTE 

| 

Discontinue  Middle  School  Home  Arts  Teaching  Services 

<8  FTE 

4, 

“On  March  13,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2005-2006-14,  to 

discontinue  or  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3.  The 
Board  further  determined  that  based  on  the  discontinuance  or  reduction  of  services,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certified  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school 
year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions.  The  Board  also  directed 
the  Interim  Superintendent  to  notify  the  employees  affected  by  the  Board’s  resolution. 

5. 

On  March  14,  2006,  Dr.  Moffett  notified  Respondents  in  writing  that  it  had 

been  recommended  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  The 
mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification.  Respondents  made  timely  requests  for 
hearing. 

6. 

7, 

8. 

9. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  all  of  the  employees  who  appeared  for 

the  hearing.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in 

Factual  Finding  3,  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

The  Board  considered  attrition,  including  resignations,  retirements  and 

requests  for  leave,  in  determining  the  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  employees.

  

10. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  current  assignments  and 
locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations. 

11. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12.  The  evidence  established  that  respondent’s  are  all  outstanding  teachers. 

However,  the  District  has  projected  a  budget  deficit  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  District 
anticipates  of  revenue  shortage  of  $860,000.00. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  were  met.  Therefore,  jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all 
Respondents. 

. 

2. 

Cause  was  established  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce 

the  number  of  certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  identified  services  were 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decisions  relate  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s 
schools  and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Maryann  Nielson,  Patti  Schindler,  Ronald 
Buranasakorn,  Kristin  Barkust,  Joanne  Khella,  Dara  Loftis,  Diane  Shires,  Christine  Ma  and 
Reiko  Ikkanda,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

mt 

eh  flue 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
NORTH  ORANGE  COUNTY  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  against 

WILLIAM  BALDWIN, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  L2006031023 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Daniel  Juarez,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

heard  this  matter  on  May  4,  2006,  in  Anaheim,  California. 

Jacqueline  D.  Dewarr,  Attorney  at  Law,  Law  Offices  of  Margaret  A.  Chidester  & 

Associates,  represented  the  North  Orange  County  Community  College  District  (the  District), 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  Reich,  Adell,  Crost  &  Cvitan,  represented  William 

Baldwin  (Respondent).  Respondent  also  appeared. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received.  The  record  was  closed,  and  the  matter 

was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  4,  2006. 

The  hearing  was  originally  to  be  held  on  April  19,  2006.  A  continuance  was  granted 
and  the  hearing  was,  thereafter,  held  on  May  4,  2006,  15  days  later.  Consequently,  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  87740,  subdivision  (i),  the  date  on  which  the  proposed  decision 
must  be  submitted  to  the  District  is  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to  the  continuance. 
Therefore,  the  deadline  to  submit  the  proposed  decision  to  the  District  was  extended  from 
May  7,  2006,  to  May  22,  2006.  Similarly,  the  District’s  deadline  to  provide  notice  to 
Respondent,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  87740,  subdivisions  (e)  and  (h),  was 
extended  from  May  15,  2006  to  May  30,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  1,  2006,  the  District  sent  Respondent  a  letter  informing  him  that, 

pursuant  to  a  resolution  by  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees,  Respondent’s  services  as  an 
instructor  would  no  longer  be  required  as  of  the  2006-2007  academic  year.  On  April  8, 
2006,  Respondent  requested  a  hearing,  in  response  to  the  District’s  March  1,  2006  letter. 
On  March  29,  2006,  Jeffrey  O.  Horsley,  Vice  Chancellor,  Human  Resources,  signed  the 
Accusation,  in  his  official  capacity,  on  behalf  of  the  District.  On  March  30,  2006, 
Respondent  signed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  in  response  to  the  Accusation,  and  this  action 
ensued. 

 

  

2. 

On  February  28,  2006,  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  adopted,  signed,  and 
approved  “Resolution  No.  05/06-11  Regarding  a  Reduction  or  Discontinuance  of  Particular 
Kinds  of  Service.”  (Exhibit  1.)  That  resolution  ordered  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
one  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  computer  science  instructor  position  (probationary  or 
permanent  faculty  employee),  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743.  It  was 
this  resolution  that  the  District  referred  to  in  its  March  1,  2006  letter  to  Respondent.  As  part 
of  its  resolution,  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  exempted  from  that  reduction,  instructors 
who  possessed  the  qualifications  and  experience  to  teach  Computer  Information  Systems 
(CIS),  currently  assigned  to  instruct  such  courses  in  the  2006-2007  academic  year. 

3. 

CIS  is  a  distinct  discipline  from  computer  science.  In  overly  simplistic  terms, 

computer  science  involves,  among  other  things,  software  programming,  whereas  CIS 
involves  the  usage  of  software  applications  and  network  installation.  Therefore,  an 
instructor’s  background  and  experience  in  computer  science  is  not  necessarily  adequate 
experience  to  teach  CIS,  and  conversely,  an  instructor’s  background  and  experience  in  CIS  is 
not  necessarily  adequate  experience  to  teach  computer  science. 

4, 

In  June  1990,  community  college  districts  changed  the  way  they  qualify 

instructors  to  teach  various  disciplines.  Prior  to  1990,  the  Board  of  Governors  of  California 
Community  Colleges  issued  credentials  that  related  to  specified  disciplines;  instructors  were 
thereby  qualified  to  teach  courses  within  the  credentialed  discipline.  After  June  1990,  the 
law  required  the  Board  of  Governors  of  California  Community  Colleges  to  establish  defined 
minimum  qualifications  to  teach  within  a  discipline.  (Ed.  Code  §  87356,  subd.  (a);  Cal.  Code 
Regs.,  tit.  5,  §  53410.)  Now,  the  District  follows  the  established  minimum  qualifications  and 
honors  previously  issued  credentials  with  which  to  designate  instructors  to  teach  particular 
disciplines.  To  honor a  credential  for  purposes  of  teaching  a  discipline,  however,  the  District 
requires  the  credential  to  be  named  exactly  as  the  discipline  in  which  the  instructor  proposes 
to  teach.  If  the  credential  is  distinctly  named  from  the  discipline  (and  the  instructor  does  not 
otherwise  meet  the  minimum  qualifications),  the  instructor  must  request  an  equivalency 
determination  through  the  equivalency  process.  The  Legislature  provided  for  an  equivalency 
process,  a  process  whereby  community  colleges  can  employ  instructors  who  do  not  meet  the 
minimum  qualifications.  (See,  Ed.  Code  §  87359.)  In  that  process,  if  an  instructor  proves  . 
that  he  or  she  possesses  qualifications  that,  while  distinct,  are  equivalent  to  the  regulatory 
minimum  qualifications,  then  a  community  college’s  equivalency  committee  may  approve 
that  instructor  to  teach  the  sought-after  discipline. 

5. 

The  Board  of  Governors  of  California  Community  Colleges  identified 

computer  science  as  a  discipline  that  requires,  as  minimum  qualifications,  that  the  instructor 
have  a  master’s  degree  in  computer  science  or  computer  engineering,  or  various  other 
combinations  of  master’s  and  bachelor’s  degrees  in  related  disciplines.  CIS,  however,  is  a 
discipline  in  which  a  master’s  degree  is  not  generally  expected  or  available.  The  minimum 
qualifications  to  teach  CIS  are,  that  the  instructor  have  any  bachelor’s  degree  and  two  years 
of  professional  experience  directly  related  to  CIS,  or  an  associate’s  degree  and  six  years  of 
professional  experience  directly  related  to  CIS.  The  professional  experience  should  be  in 
areas  like  “computer  network  installation,  microcomputer  technology,  [and]  computer

  

applications.”  (Exhibit  3.) 
the  District  can  review  an  instructor’s  experience  through  the  equivalency  process. 

If  an  instructor  does  not  possess  these  minimum  qualifications, 

6. 

Respondent  holds  a  bachelor  of  arts  degree  in  business  administration,  and  a 
master  of  science  degree  in  software  engineering.  Furthermore,  since  November  1988,  he 
holds  a  credential  in  Computer  and  Related  Technologies.  The  credential  is  valid  for  life. 

7. 

The  District  hired  Respondent  as a  full-time  instructor  in  August  1999.  Since 
then,  he  has  taught,  mainly,  computer  science  courses  at  Cypress  College.  Respondent  has 
also  taught  computer  science  at  several  other  schools,  including  Fullerton  College,  another 
college  within  the  North  Orange  County  Community  College  District.  In  addition  to 
computer  science  courses,  he  has  taught  CIS  and  mathematics  courses  at  various  schools, 
including  Cypress  College.  In  the  fall  1996  and  spring  1997  semesters,  Respondent  taught  a 
CIS  course  at  Fullerton  College  called  “Introduction  to  Personal  Computer  Applications” 
that  included  instruction  on  how  to  use  Microsoft  Office  4.3.  (Exhibit  11-B.)  Respondent 
also  taught  another  CIS  course  at  Fullerton  College,  in  the  fall  1991,  and  spring  1992 
semesters.  Respondent  taught  CIS  courses  at  three  other  colleges  between  1990  and  1995. 
Since  the  fall  2002  semester,  he  has  taught,  mainly,  computer  science  classes,  when  teaching 
within  the  North  Orange  County  Community  College  District.  The  District  values 
Respondent  as  an  instructor,  and  its  decision  to  lay  him  off  is  not  related  to  his  competency 
or  dedication. 

8. 

For  several  years,  student  enrollment  in  computer  science  has  been  declining 

within  the  North  Orange  County  Community  College  District.  The  decline  in  enrollment  has 
been  such  that  the  District  concluded  it  had  to  reduce  one  FTE  computer  science  instructor 
position.  The  District  reviewed  the  seniority  list  of  computer  science  instructors  when 
deciding  whom  it  needed  to  lay  off. 

9. 

Respondent  is  senior  to  one  faculty  member  on  the  computer  science 

discipline  seniority  list.  The  District  hired  the  junior  faculty  member  on  the  same  day  as 
Respondent.  However,  when  the  District  hires  two  or  more  employees  on  the  same  day,  it 
draws  names  by  lottery  to  establish  seniority.  Using  this  process,  the  District  designated 
Respondent  as  the  senior  faculty  member  between  the  two.  Though  Respondent  is  senior  to 
this  other  faculty  member,  the  District  found  the  junior  faculty  member  to  possess  the 
necessary  qualifications  to  teach  CIS,  in  addition  to  computer  science.  The  junior  faculty 
member  is  on  the  CIS  seniority  list  but  Respondent  is  not.  Respondent,  therefore,  faces  lay- 
off  by  the  District  instead  of  the  junior  faculty  member. 

10. 

In  approximately  June  2004,  noting  that  Respondent  did  not  have  the  requisite 

background  to  teach  in  the  CIS  discipline,  and  in  accordance  with  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement  between  the  District  and  faculty,  the  District  proposed a  retraining  program  to 
Respondent  that  would  provide  him  the  necessary  skills  to  be  qualified  to  teach  in  the  CIS 
discipline.  Respondent  reviewed  the  proposal,  but  after  a  series  of  communications  between 
Respondent  and  District  personnel,  from  June  2004  through  a  date  uncertain  in  2005, 
Respondent  thereafter  refused  the  retraining  program.  The  District  made  Respondent  aware

that,  pursuant  to  the  collective  bargaining  agreement,  Respondent’s  failure  to  undertake 
retraining  could  “culminate  in  loss  of  employment  with  the  District.”  (Exhibits  2  &  10-B.) 
Respondent  found  the  proposal  unfair  and  excessive  when  he  considered  his  CIS  experience. 
He  argued  that  he  had  taught  several  of  the  courses  in  the  proposed  training  program  for  well 
over  a  decade,  and  therefore  he  did  not  require  retraining  in  those  subjects.  He  also  argued 
that  the  retraining  program  would  require  him  to  take  computer  courses  that  were  not  taught 
at  Cypress  College  where  he  was  faculty,  and  therefore,  those  courses  were,  for  him, 
unnecessary.  Nonetheless,  the  District  reasserted  its  retraining  proposal,  and  Respondent  still 
refused  to  enroll. 

11. 

Onor  about  September  26,  2003,  Respondent  had  submitted  an  application  to 
the  District  for  equivalency  in  CIS.  He  submitted,  among  other  things,  his  résumé,  inclusive 
of  his  work  history,  a  list  of  all  the  courses  he  taught,  including  CIS  courses,  and  a  copy  of 
his  teaching  credential  in  Computer  and  Related  Technologies.  Thereafter,  the  District’s 
equivalency  committee  reviewed  Respondent’s  application,  and  denied  it.  When  it  reviews 
an  application,  the  District’s  committee  personnel  note  data,  regarding  Respondent,  on  the 
cover  sheet.  Respondent’s  cover  sheet  has  a  space  to  list  credentials.  Respondent’s  cover 
sheet  shows  no  credential  and,  instead,  is  blank.  Respondent  noted  his  credential  on  his 
equivalency  application  in  response  to  question  five  of  the  application,  and  on  page  two  of 
his  included  résumé.  District  personnel  wrote  the  word  “denied”  on  the  cover  sheet,  with  the 
date  of  November  3,  2003.  (Exhibit  11-B.)  Among  other  things,  Respondent  noted,  in  his 
application,  that  he  had  “taught  CIS  classes  at  five  different  schools  covering  about  thirty 
different  classes  for  a  total  of  about  one  hundred  sections.”  (Jbid.)  Respondent  noted  his 
related  work  experience  with  a  third  party  hardware  service  company  as  a  “Region 
Operations  Administrator”  from  February  1988  to  April  1989,  and  “Field  Administrative 
Specialist”  from  October  1982  to  February  1988.  (/bid.) 

12. 

Respondent  argued  that  the  District’s  equivalency  committee  should  have 

approved  his  equivalency  application;  had  it  done  so,  he  argued,  and  due  to  his  seniority,  he 
would  not  be  subject  to  lay-off.  Specifically,  Respondent  argued  that  the  District’s 
equivalency  committee  failed  to  consider  his  overall  teaching  experience,  including  the  CIS 
courses  he  taught,  it  failed  to  consider  his  Computer  and  Related  Technologies  credential, 
and  it  failed  to  consider  his  work  history.  Respondent  asserted  that  his  teaching  experience, 
particularly  the  CIS  courses  within  the  North  Orange  County  Community  College  District, 
showed  adequate  familiarity  with  the  CIS  discipline.  He  further  asserted  that  his  work 
history  showed  sufficient  vocational  background  with  CIS-related  skills.  Lastly,  Respondent 
asserted  that  his  credential  is  broad  enough  in  scope  to  cover  the  computer  science  and  CIS 
disciplines.  Respondent  further  argued  that  the  omission  of  his  credentials  on  his  application 
cover  sheet  proved  the  District  failed  to  consider  it.  Respondent’s  arguments  fail.  (See, 
Legal  Conclusions  17-19,  post.) 

13. 

The  District’s  equivalency  committee  considered  Respondent’s  complete 

application.  The  committee  looked  more  closely  at  Respondent’s  work  experience  than  his 
teaching  experience  because,  for  the  CIS  discipline,  it  valued  vocational  experience  more 
than  academic  experience.  The  District  admitted  that  it  was  an  administrative  oversight  to 

 

have  allowed  Respondent  to  teach  CIS  within  the  North  Orange  County  Community  College 
District  without  approving  his  equivalency  beforehand.  In  looking  at  Respondent’s  work 
history,  it  did  not  find  his  experience  to  be  sufficiently  relevant  to  the  CIS  discipline,  nor  did 
it  find  his  work  history  to  be  sufficiently  recent.  The  committee  did  not  find  Respondent’s 
credential  relevant  to  the  CIS  discipline. 

14. 

After  learning  of  the  District  equivalency  committee’s  denial,  Respondent 

attempted  to  resubmit  his  equivalency  application.  He  redrafted  his  résumé,  further 
describing  his  work  experience,  in  a  way  he  believed  showed  sufficient  vocational 
background  to  cause  the  committee  to  approve  his  application.  The  committee  did  not 
reconvene  to  reconsider  Respondent’s  redrafted  résumé,  as  part  of  a  subsequent  application. 
The  District  informed  Respondent  that  it  would  only  reconsider  an  equivalency  application  if 
the  applicant  had  new  and  different  information  than  what  he  had  previously  submitted.  The 
committee  did  not  find  Respondent’s  redrafted  résumé  to  provide  new  and  different 
information.  Respondent  sought  a  way  to  appeal  the  committee’s  original  equivalency 
denial;  however,  the  committee  informed  him  that  there  was  no  right  of  appeal.  Respondent 
argued  that  the  denial  of  an  equivalency  determination  appeal  was a  violation  of 
Respondent’s  rights  in  this  matter;  it  was  not.  (See,  Legal  Conclusion  20,  post.) 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  exists  to  sustain  the  District’s  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue,  at  the 

close  of  the  2005-2006  academic  year,  one  full-time  equivalent  computer  science  instructor 
position,  specifically  the  position  held  by  Respondent  William  Baldwin,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1-14,  and  Legal 
Conclusions  2-21. 

. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  87740  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(b) 

The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year. 

(c) 

In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the 
proceeding  shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with 
Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  part  1  of  Division  3  of  the 
Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to 
an  agency  in  that  chapter,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(]---  [9] 

[].-- U9 

(3) 

The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge 

who  shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a 
determination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related 

   

. 

@ 

to  the  welfare  of  the  colleges  and  the  students  thereof.  . 
proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the 
employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is 
commenced. 

.  [C]opies  of  the 

(i) 

If,  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b),  any 

continuance  is  granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the 
dates  prescribed  in  subdivisions  (c),  (d),  (e)  and  (h)  that  occur  on  or  after  the 
date  of  granting  the  continuance  shall  be  extended  for  a  period  of  time  equal  to 
the  continuance. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  87743  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

[H.--  [9] 

[]---  [9] 

Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the 
schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall 
have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two 
school  years,  or  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  and 
when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become 
necessary  by  reason  of  either  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of 
tenured  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the 
services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  employees  of  the 
district,  tenured  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year. 
However,  the  services  of  no  tenured  employee  may  be  terminated  under  this 
section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less 
seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  in  a  faculty  service  area  in  which  the 
records  of  the  district  maintained  pursuant  to  Section  87743.4  reflect  that  the 
tenured  employee  possesses  the  minimum  qualifications  prescribed  by  the 
board  of  governors  and  is  competent  to  serve  under  district  competency 
criteria. 

© 

4. 

The  parties  satisfied  all  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  to  establish 

jurisdiction,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  87740  and  87743. 

5. 

The  decline  in  enrollment  in  the  District’s  computer  science  discipline  is  an 
appropriate  reason  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kind  of  service  at 
issue  in  this  matter.  (Ed.  Code  §  87743.)  The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  relates 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District,  and  its  campuses  and  students. 

6. 

The  District  properly  reviewed  its  computer  science  seniority  list  to  decide 

@ 

whom  it  must  seek  to  lay-off.  The  evidence  supported  the  District’s  conclusion  that 

 

Respondent  was  not  qualified  to  teach  CIS  courses,  as  laid  out  below.  The  California 
Supreme  Court  has  given  due  deference  to  school  districts’  determinations  related  to  teacher 
competency  and  qualifications  in  lay-offs  like  the  instant  case.  The  state’s  high  court  has 
described  those  determinations  by  schools  as,  “‘discretionary  decisions’  which  are  within  the 
‘special  competence’  of  the  school  districts.”  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District 
(1987)  196  Cal.  App.  3d  555,  565  [citing  Martin  v.  Kentfield  School  District  (1983)  35 
Cal.3d  294,  299].)  Thus,  the  determinations  regarding  Respondent’s  qualifications,  here,  are 
given  due  deference.  The  District  is  an  appropriate  entity  to  assess  Respondent’s  skills  and 
experience  vis-a-vis  its  needs  in  CIS  instruction.  Though  it  provided  for  some  deference  to 
districts,  the  Duax  Court  nonetheless  set  parameters  to  that  deference,  noting  that  schools’ 
definitions  of  competency  were  reasonable  when  they  considered  “the  skills  and 
qualifications  of  the  teacher  threatened  with  layoff.”  (Duax,  supra,  196  Cal.App.3d  at  page 
565.)  Here,  the  evidence  established  that  the  District  adequately  considered  Respondent’s 
skills  and  qualifications. 

7. 

To  prevail  in  this  matter,  Respondent  needed  to  prove  that  he  was  qualified  to 
teach  in  the  CIS  discipline  in  one  of  three  ways:  1)  by  virtue  of  his  credential,  2)  because  he 
met  the  minimum  qualifications,  as  set  forth  in  regulation,  or  3)  by  establishing  equivalent 
qualifications  through  the  equivalency  process.  Respondent  failed  to  do  so.  The  evidence, 
as  a  whole,  supported  the  District’s  conclusion  that  Respondent  is  not  qualified  to  teach  in 
the  CIS  discipline.  Therefore,  the  District  acted  properly  in  seeking  to  lay-off  Respondent, 
even  though  it  will  retain  the  services  of  an  instructor  who  is  junior,  in  seniority,  to 
Respondent. 

Respondent’s  Credential 

8. 

Education  Code  section  87355  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

Notwithstanding  Section  87356,  every  person  authorized  to  serve  as  a 

community  college  instructor...  under  a  credential  shall  retain  the  right  to 
serve  under  the  terms  of  that  credential,  and,  for  that  purpose,  shall  be  deemed 
to  possess  the  minimum  qualifications  specified  for  every  discipline  or  service 
covered  by  the  credential  until  the  expiration  of  that  credential.  The  board  of 
governors  shall  adopt  regulations  as  necessary  to  implement  this  requirement. 

9. 

Education  Code  section  87356,  subdivision  (a)  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a) 

The  board  of  governors  shall  adopt  regulations  to  establish  and 
maintain  the  minimum  qualifications  for  service  as  a  faculty  member  teaching 
credit  instruction  .... 

\\\ 
\\\ 
\\ 

   

10. 

Respondent’s  credential  is  not  in  CIS,  but  is  entitled,  “Computer  and  Related 

Technologies.”  Respondent  retains  the  right  to  serve  as  an  instructor  “under  the  terms  of  that 
credential,  and  for  that  purpose,”  and  he  is  deemed  to  possess  the  minimum  qualifications  for 
disciplines  “covered  by  the  credential.”  (Ed.  Code  §  87355.)  While  Respondent  argued  that 
his  broadly  titled  credential  established  his  qualifications  to  teach  CIS  courses,  the  District 
proved  a  sufficient  distinction  between  the  subject  matters  covered  by  a  “Computer  and 
Related  Technologies”  credential,  and  CIS,  as  a  discipline.  More  specifically,  the  evidence 
proved  a  reasonable  distinction  between  computer  science,  as  an  academic  discipline  focused 
on  developing  software,  and,  in  contrast,  CIS,  as  a  vocationally  focused  discipline, 
emphasizing  the  use  of  software  applications,  microcomputers,  and  the  installation  of 
networks.  At  hearing,  Respondent  highlighted  a  community  college  credential  guide  that,  he 
asserted,  proved  his  credential  was  meant  to  cover  virtually  all  computer-related  instruction, 
including  CIS.  (Exhibit  11-D).  The  evidence,  however,  proved  the  guide  unreliable. 
Respondent  did  not  prove  the  guide’s  age,  and  the  guide’s  wording  supported  the  District’s 
contention  that  the  guide  was  outdated  and  was  more  relevant,  perhaps,  closer  in  time  to 
when  Respondent  was  initially  credentialed  (1988).  While  it  may  have  been  the  case  that  the 
State’s  credentialing  entity  intended  to  give  Respondent’s  credential  significant  breadth,  the 
established  distinction  between  computer  science  and  CIS  was  sufficient  to  minimize  the 
relevance  of  Respondent’s  credential,  for  this  purpose.  Thus,  Respondent’s  credential  is  not 
sufficient  to  qualify  him  to  teach  CIS  courses. 

The  Minimum  Qualifications  Analysis 

11. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  53410,  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  minimum  qualifications  for  service  as  a  community  college  faculty 
.  shall  be  satisfied  by  meeting  any  one  of 

. 

member  teaching  any  credit  course  . 
the  following  requirements: 

(a) 

Possession  of  a  master’s  degree,  or  equivalent  foreign 

degree,  in  the  discipline  of  the  faculty  member’s  assignment. 

(b) 

Possession  of  a  master’s  degree,  or  equivalent  foreign 

degree,  in  a  discipline  reasonably  related  to  the  faculty  member’s  assignment 
and  possession  of  a  bachelor’s  degree,  or  equivalent  foreign  degree,  in  the 
discipline  of  the  faculty  member’s  assignment. 

(c) 

For  faculty  assigned  to  teach  courses  in  disciplines  where 

the  master’s  degree  is  not  generally  expected  or  available,  which  are, 
generally,  disciplines  in  specialized  technical,  trade,  or  industrial  fields,  either 
of  the  following: 

Possession  of  a  bachelor’s  degree,  or  equivalent 
foreign  degree,  plus  two  years  of  professional  experience,  directly  related  to 
the  faculty  member’s  assignment.

(1) 

12. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  53404,  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

As  used  in  this  Subchapter,  “professional  experience”  includes  teaching 

experience.  “Occupational  experience”  does  not  include  teaching  experience. 

13. 

Respondent  did  not  prove  he  met  the  minimum  qualifications,  pursuant  to 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  53410.  To  teach  in  the  CIS  discipline,  where 
a  master’s  degree  is  not  generally  expected  or  available,  Respondent  needed  to  show  that  he 
possessed  any  bachelor’s  degree,  and  two  years  of  professional  experience,  directly  related  to 
CIS.  Respondent  has  a  bachelor’s  degree,  but  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  he 
possessed  two  years  of  professional  experience  directly  related  to  CIS. 

14 

Respondent’s  work  experience  showed  he  was  a  “Regional  Operations 
Administrator”  for  14  months.  Respondent,  however,  did  not  prove  his  work  history 
demonstrated  CIS-related  experience.  The  District’s  CIS  faculty  did  not  find  his  résumé  (or 
even  his  redrafted  résumé)  convincing  of  CIS-related  skills.  Of  his  work  history  that  was  on 
point,  the  District  found  Respondent’s  experience  neither  sufficiently  relevant  nor  recent  to 
qualify  him  for  CIS  instruction.  Moreover,  even  if  his  experience  was  sufficiently  related, 
his  14  months  of  experience  do  not  meet  the  two-year  regulatory  requirement.  Respondent 
did  not  prove  that  his  other  work  experience  demonstrated  CIS-related  experience,  either. 
Lastly,  even  considerjng  that  professional  experience  includes  teaching  experience  (Cal. 
Code  Regs.,  tit.  5,  §  53404),  the  District  considered  Respondent’s  teaching  experience  as  part 
of  its  equivalency  review,  and  did  not  find  it  adequate  to  qualify  him  to  teach  CIS  courses. 
Thus,  Respondent  did  not  meet  the  minimum  qualifications,  as  set  forth  in  regulation. 

The  Equivalency  Process 

15. 

|  Education  Code  section  87359  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  board  of  governors  shall  adopt  regulations  setting  forth  a  process 

authorizing  local  governing  boards  to  employ  faculty  members  .  ..  who  do  not 
meet  the  applicable  minimum  qualifications  specified  in  the  regulations 
adopted  by  the  board  of  governors  pursuant  to  section  87356.  Unless  and  until 
amended  pursuant  to  the  process  described  in  Section  87357,  the  regulations 
shall  require  all  of  the  following: 

|  Noone  may  be  hired  to  serve  as  a  community  college 
(a) 
faculty  member .  . 
.  under  the  authority  granted  by  the  regulations  unless  the 
governing  board  determines  that  he  or  she  possesses  qualifications  that  are  at 
least  equivalent  to  the  minimum  qualifications  specified  in  regulations  of  the 
board  of  governors  adopted  pursuant  to  Section  87356.  The  criteria  used  by 
the  governing  board  in  making  the  determination  shall  be  reflected  in  the 
governing  board’s  action  employing  the  individual.

(b) 

The  process,  as  well  as  criteria  and  standards  by  which 

the  governing  board  reaches  its  determinations  regarding  faculty  members, 
shall  be  developed  and  agreed  upon  jointly  by  representatives  of  the  governing 
board  and  the  academic  senate,  and  approved  by  the  governing  board.  The 
agreed  upon  process  shall  include  reasonable  procedures  to  ensure  that  the 
governing  board  relies  primarily  upon  the  advice  and  judgment  of  the 
academic  senate  to  determine  that  each  individual  faculty  member  employed 
under  the  authority  granted  by  the  regulations  possesses  qualifications  that  are 
at  least  equivalent  to  the  applicable  minimum  qualifications  specified  in 
regulations  adopted  by  the  board  of  governors. 

16. 

The  evidence  proved  that  the  District  considered  Respondent’s  complete 

equivalency  application,  including  his  credential,  teaching  experience,  and  work  experience, 
and  found  his  background  inadequate  for  CIS  equivalency. 

17. 

Respondent’s  argument  that  the  District  failed  to  consider  his  credential,  by 

virtue  of  its  omission  on  his  application’s  cover  sheet  (see,  Factual  Finding  12,  ante),  or 
otherwise,  is  negated  by  the  fact  that  Respondent,  himself,  noted  his  credential  in  two  other 
places  on  his  application.  (See,  Factual  Finding  11,  ante.)  There  was  no  evidence  that  the 
District’s  equivalency  committee  ignored  or  overlooked  Respondent’s  complete  application. 
Furthermore,  the  totality  of  the  evidence  established  that  Respondent’s  credential  is  not 
sufficient  to  establish  Respondent’s  qualification  to  teach  CIS  courses. 

18. 

Respondent  did  not  prove  that  his  teaching  experience  qualified  him  for  CIS 

equivalency.  His  CIS  teaching  experience  with  the  North  Orange  County  Community 
College  District  was  between  nine  and  15  years  ago.  The  District’s  evidence  established  that 
Respondent’s  teaching  experience  was  not  sufficiently  recent  to  find  it  adequate. 
Additionally,  Respondent  did  not  prove  that  the  CIS  field  remained  sufficiently  static,  to 
deem  his  earlier  teaching  experience  equivalent,  for  the  District’s  instructional  needs. 
Education  Code  section  87359,  subdivision  (a)  provides  a  basis  for  Respondent  to  reasonably 
believe  the  District  had  tacitly  qualified  him  to  teach  CIS,  by  allowing  him  to  teach  CIS 
courses  in  the  past.  The  District,  however,  admitted  that  its  previous  allowance  was  an 
administrative  oversight.  Such  an  administrative  error,  of  a  significant  number  of  years  ago, 
should  not  be  the  basis  on  which  to  qualify  Respondent  for  CIS  instruction,  when  the  District 
has,  after  methodical  consideration,  appropriately  determined  he  does  not  so  qualify.  To  do 
so,  would  compound  one  error  with  a  second  error.  The  District  reasonably  concluded  that 
his  teaching  experience  was  inadequate,  and  the  evidence  did  not  sufficiently  controvert  that 
conclusion. 

. 

19. 

|  Respondent’s  argument  that  the  District  failed  to  consider  his  work 
experience,  when  assessing  his  equivalency  application  fails,  as  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion 
14,  ante. 

\\\ 
\\\ 

  

10

20. 

Respondent’s  argument  that  the  District  denied  him  a right  to  appeal  its 
equivalency  decision  is  without  merit.  Nothing  in  the  law  provides  for  an  appeal  right 
regarding  the  equivalency  process  provided  in  Education  Code  section  87359.  Moreover,  the 
evidence  supported  the  District’s  determination  that  his  application  did  not  provide  new  or 
different  information,  sufficient  to  merit  reconsideration. 

21. 

The  evidence  regarding  the  District’s  retraining  proposal  is  not  relevant  to  this 

matter,  other  than  to  note  that,  had  Respondent  agreed  to  retrain,  as  the  District  proposed, 
(including  those  courses  he  asserted  to  have  already  mastered),  indications  are  that  the 
District  may  not  have  taken  this  action  against  him;  a  consequence  of  which  he  was  aware. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondent,  William  Baldwin,  is  sustained.  Notice  shall 

be  given  to  Respondent,  William  Baldwin,  before  May  30,  2006,  that  his  services  will  be 
terminated  at  the  close  of  the  2005-2006  academic  year. 

DATED: 

May  19,  2006 

  DANIEL  JUAREZ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

    

