BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PASADENA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

MICHELLE  RODRIGUEZ,  MONICA  E. 
CASTILLA,  DAVID  K.  NEWHALL, 
TUCKER:CANNON,  CHRISTINE  KIM 
and  ERICA  CIVITATE, 

Respondents. 

  

  

OAH  No.  L2006030664 

eee 
|  Pa 
MAY  1 

Y  2006 

  
   

Olen of  Anil  inier 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Mark  E.  Harman,  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  24,  2006,  in  Pasadena,  California. 

Jeff  C.  Marderosian,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Pasadena  Unified  School 

District. 

. 

Glenn  Rothner,  of  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  represented  respondents  Michelle 

Rodriguez,  Monica  E.  Castilla,  David  K.  Newhall,  Tucker  Cannon  and  Christine  Kim 
(Respondents).  Respondent  Erica  Civitate  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing.  Ms.  Civitate, 
having  requested  a  hearing  and  having  received  notice  of  the  date,  place  and  time  of  the 
hearing,  is  deemed  to  have  abandoned  her  appeal. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  made.  The  record  was 

closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  Pasadena  Unified  School  District  determined  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  employees  totaling  9.00 
full-time  equivalent  positions.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and 
dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  to  be  reduced or  eliminated.  The  process  of 
selecting  the  less  senior  certificated  employees  for  layoff  was  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code.  The  issue  in  this  proceeding  is  whether  the  Board  has 
acted  properly  to  discontinue  five  school  social  worker  positions  presently  held  by 
Respondents. 

   

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

2. 

3. 

Complainant  Percy  Clark,  Jr.,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Pasadena 
Unified  School  District  (District),  and  he  signed  the  Accusations  in  that  official  capacity. 

1. 

Respondents  were  at  all  times  mentioned  certificated  District  employees. 

On  February  28,  2006,  pursuant  to  Complainant’s  recommendation,  the 

Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted  Resolution  No.  1812,  which  determined  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  encompassing  9.00  full-time  equivalent 
(FTE)  positions  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year.  The  resolution  directed  Complainant 
to  send  appropriate  notices  to  employees  affected  by  the  Board’s  action. 

4. 

~ 

On  March  10,  2006,  Complainant  gave  written  notices  to  10  affected 

employees,  including  Respondents,  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The 
notices  informed  Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year,  based  on  Complainant’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s  action.  Notices  were  hand- 
delivered  or  served  by  certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested.  Each  notice  advised 
Respondents  of  their  right  to  an  administrative  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for 
not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Of  the  10  noticed  employees,  six  filed 
written  requests  for  a  hearing. ' 

- 

5. 

Complainant  thereafter  served  each  of  the  Respondents  with  an  Accusation. 

Five  Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  these  Accusations,  and  this  hearing 
ensued.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

6. 

Board  Resolution  No.  1812  specifically  provides  for  the  reduction  or 

elimination  of  the  following  particular kinds  of  services: 

Particular  Kinds 

of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  Positions 

Secondary  Counselors 
School  social  workers 

TOTAL  FTE  REDUCTION 

3.0  FTE 
6.0  FTE 

9.0  FTE 

7. 

The  District  maintains  “seniority”  lists  containing  the  employees’  first  date  of 
paid  service,  whether  employees  are  permanent,  probationary  or  temporary,  as  well  as  their 

  

'  This  Proposed  Decision  addresses  the  contentions  of  five  District  school  social 

workers  who  are  named  as  Respondents  herein.  The  sixth  employee  who  requested  a 
hearing,  Erica  Civitate,  is  a  secondary  counselor;  however,  as  noted  above,  Ms.  Civitate  has 
waived  her  right  to  a  hearing  and  therefore,  this  Proposed  Decision  does  not  decide  issues 
regarding  the  Board’s  proposed  layoff  of  three  FTE  secondary  counselor  positions. 

. 

   

» 

current  assignments  and  locations.  The  information  on  these  lists  is  accurate.  The  District 
used  the  lists  so  as  to  layoff  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
-  services  being  reduced.  In  determining  who  would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  each  kind  of 
particular  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covereg  by  the 
known  vacancies,  attrition,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority. 

8. 

Board  Resolution  No.  1812  also  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to  determine 

the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same 
date.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  did  not  become  necessary  to  use. 

9. 

The  Board  desires  to  eliminate  six  FTE  positions  for  school  social  worker, 

with  the  effect  of  eliminating  all  six  current  staff  members,  who  currently  provide 
professional  services  to  students  who  have  special  needs  which  hamper  their  ability  to  learn. 
The  school  social  workers  perform  psychiatric  social  work,  including  counseling  children 
and  parents  with  mental  health  problems,  providing  social  training,  and  coordinating  services 
for  students  who  are  not  attending  due  to  truancy,  delinquency  or  other  problems. 

10. 

|  The  Board  proposes  to  provide  the  same  services  to  its  students  in  the  next 

school  year  through  a  newly  created  position  of  “clinical  social  worker.”  The  District 
already  has  advertised  the  proposed  new  position  through  a  job  opportunity  bulletin  posted 
on  its  web-site.  Judith  Barhydt,  the  District’s  Director  of  Special  Education  and  SELPA 
director,  and  current  supervisor  of  the  school  social  workers,  testified  on  behalf  of 
Complainant.  She  said  those  hired  for  the  new  positions  should  do  the  same  job  as  now, 
“performing  the  same  services  in  the  same  manner.”  The  job  opportunity  bulletin  contains  a 
description  of job  duties  which  are  substantially  similar,  as  well  --  providing  intensive  mental 
health  services  to  students  meeting  the  need-based  qualifications.  The  new  positions, 
however,  will  not  require  a  credential,  but  will  be  designated  “classified  supervisory” 
positions. 

11.  |  The  Board’s  proposed  action  would  allow  it  to  change  six  certificated 
positions  to  classified  positions.  The  Board  argues  that  this  proposed  new  system  is  a  change 
in  the  manner  of  providing  services,  primarily  because  the  new  positions  will  be  directly 
supervised  by a  newly  hired  classified  employee,  who  is  a  licensed  clinical  social  worker 
(LCSW),  instead  of  Ms.  Barhydt,  who  is  a  credentialed  employee  and  is  not  trained  or 
experienced  in  providing  the  services  of  a  clinical  social  worker.  (Ms.  Barhydt  currently 
does  not  observe  the  work  of  the  school  social  workers  on  a  daily  basis;  rather,  the  District 
has  retained  an  LCSW  as  a  consultant  to  perform  day-to-day  supervision  and  to  evaluate  the 
school  social  workers.)  The  Board  further  argues  that  the  proposed  new  position  will  only  be 
offered  to  persons  who  have  earned  a  Master’s  degree  in  clinical  social  work,  it  will  be  a 
classified  supervisory  position,  and  it  will  allow  the  new  employees  to  amass  supervisory  © 
hours  necessary  to  qualify  for  state  licensure  as  an  LCSW. 

 

12. 

|  Respondents  argue  that  the  Board  has  failed  to  establish  the  propriety  of  its 

decision  with  regard  to  the  school  social  worker  positions,  and  that  there  is  no  real  reduction 
in  a  “particular  kind  of  service.” 

13. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described  particular 

kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion. 

14. 

The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds 

of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

15.  |  No  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  the  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met.  Factual  Findings  1-6. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  1812  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Respondents  have  relied  on  Gallup  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571,  to  argue  that  the  Board’s  action  is  not  truly  a 
discontinuance  of  a  particular  kind  of  service,  since  the  District  will  continue  to  provide 
professional  counseling  services  which  it  currently  provides  to  its  students,  but  through 
classified  employees  instead  of  certificated  ones.  Respondents  argue  that  since  it  is  likely 
some  of  the  same  persons  would  be  providing  the  same  services  next  school  year,  there  is  no 
discontinuance  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  The  Gallup  court,  however,  stated  that  “the 
issue  is  not  who  will  perform  the  services,  but  how  the  services  will  be  performed.”  (Jd.  at  p. 
1588.)  Here,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  “new”  providers,  who  will  be  classified  supervisory 
personnel,  will  not  perform  the  services  in  the  same  manner  as  the  certificated  employees. 

Under  the  case  law,”  the  Board  has  wide  latitude  to  determine  the  manner  in  which 
services  are  provided.  Here,  although  the  job  duties  for  the  new  position  are  similar  to  the 
existing  positions,  the  Board  has  established  that  a  change  from  certificated  to  classified 
employees  will  afford  more  flexibility  in  how  the  District  will  manage  and  supervise  its 
employees  who  provide  professional  services  to  its  students.  The  Board  also  hopes  to  hire 
highly  qualified  individuals  who  will  be  gaining  experience  to  advance  toward  full  licensure 
in  their  field. 

  

2  See,  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  639-640  (a 
school  district  may  decide  to  provide  mandated  services  on  a  contract  basis,  and  thereby 
discontinue  the  existing  particular  kind  of  service  used  to  provide  them). 

 

3, 

Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  those  particular  services  relates 

solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949.  No  showing  has  been  made  that  the  action  of  the  Board  was  not  taken  in  good 
faith.  Factual  Findings  1-14. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Factual  Findings  1-14. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Factual  Finding  15. 

4. 

5. 

ORDERS 

1. 

The  Accusations  are  sustained. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given.to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2006-2007  school  year,  and  such  notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  May  5,  2006 

YW 

/ Co Lom 

MARK  E.  HARMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

    

