BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
WARNER  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
SAN  DIEGO  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2006040331 

FIVE  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES, 
including  SHAHRAM  YOUSEFIAN,  Ph.D., 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Warner  Springs,  California,  on  May  2,  2006. 

Pamela  A.  Dempsey,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Warner  Unified  School 

District. 

Respondent  Shahram  Yousefian,  Ph.D.,  ably  represented  himself  and  was  present 

throughout  the  administrative  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  2,  2006. 

The  Warner  Unified  School  District 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l, 

The  Warner  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  a  relatively  small  school 

district  located  in  the  foothills  of  Palomar  Mountain  approximately  50  miles  northeast  of  San 
Diego.  The  school  is  adjacent  to  the  historic  Warner  Springs  Ranch,  established  in  1844, 
which  has  served  travelers  since  the  days  of  the  Butterfield  Overland  Stage  Coach.  There  are 
two  Native  American  Indian  reservations  within  the  District,  the  Los  Coyotes  Reservation 
and  the  Santa  Ysabel  Reservation. 

The  District  provides  educational  services  to  approximately  450  students  who  live 

within  in  a  rural  area  covering  approximately  435  square  miles.  The  District  includes  a 
continuation  school,  a  high  school,  a  middle  school  (6"  to  8"  grades),  and  an  elementary 

   

  

school  (kindergarten  through  5"  grade).  The  District  employs  approximately  22  certificated 
employees  (administrators  and  teachers)  and  about  22  non-certificated  employees. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  a  five  member  Board  of  Education  (the  Board), 

each  member  being  a  duly  elected  official.  The  District’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Richard 
L.  Swanson,  Ph.D.  (Dr.  Swanson),  the  Superintendent  of  Schools. 

Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major  source  of 

assured  revenue  for  the  funding  of  public  education.  Following  the  passage  of  Proposition 
13,  a  public  school  district  has  primarily  relied  upon  the  State  of  California  and  other 
governmental  entities  for  funding.  To  a  large  extent,  funding  is  based  on  average  daily 
attendance  within  the  district. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  funding  it  will  receive  until  the  state 

budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  must  take  precautionary  steps  to  make  certain  that  financial  ends 
meet  in  the  event  that  a  worst-case  funding  scenario  develops  and  in  circumstances  in  which 
there  has  been a  declining  enrollment.  To  meet  its  duty  to  be  fiscally  responsible,  a  school 
board  frequently  reviews  the  particular  kinds  of  services  it  provides  through  its  certificated 
employees  and  then  determines  if  some  of  those  services  can  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  a  budget  in  light  of  a  potential  but  unknown 

shortfall  often  requires  that  teachers,  administrators  and  other  valued  certificated  employees 
be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices,  i.e.,  notices  warning  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  in  the  next  school  year.  Under  Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary 
layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  more  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of 
permanent  employees  over  probationary  employees. 

The  Situation  at  Warner  Unified  School  District 

4, 

For  the  past  several  years,  there  has  been  declining  enrollment  within  the 

District,  a  situation  well  known  to  the  Board  and  the  District.  In  early  2006,  the  Board  was 
concerned  with  the  impact  of  these  issues  on  the  District’s  operations  and  on  a  projected 
$220,000  shortfall  for  the  coming  school  year.  The  District  looked  into  ways  to  trim  the 
budget,  including  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  being  provided 
by  certificated  employees. 

Superintendent  Swanson  determined  that  3.2  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  teaching 

positions  could  be  cut  by  reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  or  programs 
including  1.0  self-contained  elementary  school  classroom,  0.6  self-contained  middle  school 
classroom,  0.6  single  subject  Science  class  in  middle  school,  0.2  of  an  Agriculture  class  in 

  

2 

   

middle  school,  0.2  of  a  Mathematics  class  in  middle  school,  and  0.6  of  a  single  subject 
Science  class  in  high  school.  In  reaching  this  determination,  Superintendent  Swanson 
confirmed  with  the  University  of  California  that  an  AP  Environmental  Science  class  and  an 
Agricultural  Biology  class  being  offered  at  the  high  school  satisfied  the  University  of 
California/California  State  University  admission  requirements  for  lab  classes.  He  also 
determined  that  several  courses,  including  Physics  A/B,  could  be  taken  online  at  the  National 
University  Virtual  High  Schools. 

Superintendent  Swanson’s  recommendation  concerning  reductions  in  force  was  made 

in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

The  Board’s  Resolution 

stated: 

5. 

On  March  9,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  2005-06-01.  That  resolution 

“WHEREAS,  Sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code  require  action 
by  the  Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  eliminate  services  and  permit  the 
layoff  of  certificated  employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Superintendent  of  the  Warner  Unified  School  District  has 
recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-2007  school 
year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning 
of  the  2006-2007  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  positively  assured 
attrition  which  has  occurred  to  date,  that  is,  all  deaths,  resignations, 
retirements  and  other  permanent  vacancies  in  reducing  these  services  and,  but 
for  the  attrition  already  assured,  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  reduce 
additional  particular  kinds  of  services. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Warner  Unified  School  District: 

I. 

That  all  of  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

2. 
That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being 
insufficient  to  maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program 
changes  resulting  therefrom,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to  render 
or  eliminate  from  those  positions  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A,  attached  hereto  and 

incorporated  by  reference  herein,  listing  by  level,  subject  field  or  

classification,  and  full-time  equivalent,  those  positions  which  shall  be  reduced 
or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-20007  school  year. 

That  because  of  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 

3. 
services  listed  in  Exhibit  A  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to  the  positions 
affected  in  the  reduction  or  eliminate  of  the  above-described  service. 

That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some  of  the  employees  in  the 

4, 
services  being  reduced  or  eliminated  are  such  that  they  have  displacement 
rights  by  virtue  of  seniority,  and  that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a 
less  senior  employee  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  the  more  senior  is 
both  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

5. 
That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated 
employees  who  shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution, 
Education  Code  section  44955  requires  the  Governing  Board  to  state  specific 
criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  termination  of  certificated  employees 
who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary 
position  on  the  same  date. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of 

6. 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board 
in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date  are  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit 
B,  which  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference  herein. 

7. 
The  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  board 
in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date.  Listed  and  described  in  Exhibit 
B,  are  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  Warner  Unified  School  District  and  the 
students  thereof. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated 
8. 
employees  who  shall  received  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  resolution, 
Education  Code  section  44955  allows  the  Governing  Board  to  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificate  employee  in  order  of  seniority  by  virtue  of  their 
competence,  credential(s),  assignment,  and  the  specific  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students. 

That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from  terminating 
9. 
certificated  employees  who  may  otherwise  be  terminated  by  order  of  seniority 
will  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  students  of  the  District,  and  will  ensure  that 
no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is  retained  to 
render  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

©

  

  
  

@ 

That  the  Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative  will  send 

10. 
appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  possibly  affected  by  virtue  of  the 
reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

That  the  action  of  this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be 

11. 
considered  to  prejudice  the  rights  of  certificated  employees  to  whom  notice 
will  be  given  as  to  the  Superintendent’s  consideration  of  any  proposed 
decision  by  ad  administrative  law  judge  in  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by 
any  employee. 

ADOPTED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Warner  Unified  School  District 
this  9th  day  of  March  2006.” 

6. 

Exhibit  A  set  forth  the  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  number  of  full-time 

equivalent  teaching  positions  as  follows: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services  or  Programs  Number  of  Full-Time  Equivalent 

Positions  Inc.  Prep  and  Travel 

} 

Elementary 
Self  contained  classroom  (K-5) 
Self  contained  classroom  (6-8) 
Single  subject  Science  (6-8) 
Agriculture  (6-8) 
Mathematics  (6-8) 
Secondary 
Single  subject  science 
Support 
None 

TOTAL 

1.00 
0.60 
0.60 
0.20 
0.20 

0.60 

3.20 

7. 

Exhibit  B  set  forth  tie-breaking  criteria  which  set  forth  numerous  criteria  to  be 
applied  in  the  priority  order  indicated  to  determine  which  employee(s)  with  the  same  date  of 
hire  should  be  retained  over  other  employees  with  the  same  date  of  hire. 

1, 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials. 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials  or  certificates  authorizing 

2. 
services  in  classes  for  limited  or  non-English  proficient  students  as  follows: 

CLAD. 
BCLAD. 
Language  Development  Specialist  Certificate. 
Supplemental  Authorization  for  English  as  a  Second  Language. 

A. 
B. 
C, 
D. 
E. 

SDAIE.  

Persons  with  one  or  more  of  the  following  credentials,  certificated 

3. 
and/or  graduate  degrees  priority  listed  as  follows: 

A. 

B. 

C. 
Dz. 
E 

Majors  in  academic  teaching  subject  possessing  more  than  two 
teaching  credentials 
Majors  in  academic  teaching  subject  possessing  two  teaching 
credentials. 
Two  or  more  teaching  credentials. 
Masters  degree. 
Persons  with  one  or  more  additional  authorizations. 

Persons  with  specialized  training/experience  in  elementary  science  or 

4. 
mathematics. 

5. 

Persons  with  specialized  reading  training. 

Persons  who  are  currently  assigned  to  one  of  the  following  assignments 

6. 
priority  listed  as  follows: 

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 

Activities  Director. 
Athletics  Director. 
Department  Chair. 
High  School  Head  Coach. 

The  Seniority  List 

8. 

Under  Superintendent  Swanson’s  supervision,  a  certificated  seniority  list  was 

developed  for  all  certificated  employees  within  the  District  providing  services  in  the  2005- 
2006  school  year.  The  list  contained  a  seniority  number  (from  the  most  senior  to  the  least 
senior  teacher,  in  ascending  order)  the  teacher’s  name,  a  seniority  date  based  upon  the 
teacher’s  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  teacher’s  assignment,  and  the  teacher’s  credentials. 

The  names  of  18  certificated  employees  appeared  on  that  list,  Respondent  Shahram 

Yousefian,  Ph.D.  (Dr.  Yousefian)  was  assigned  seniority  number  13,  based  on  his  first  day  of 
paid  service  on  August  26,  2002. 

Dr.  Yousefian  offered  no  evidence  challenging  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

The  Layoff Notices 

9. 

On  March  14,  2006,  five  certificated  employees,  including  Dr.  Shahram,  were 
served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice,  which  advised  of  the  reason  for  the  layoff  (“financial 
constrains  resulting  from  insufficient  revenue  to  sustain  current  levels  of  programs,  and 
program  changes  resulting  therefrom”),  a  representation  that  “there  is  no  probationary  or 
permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  retained  who  is  rendering  service  which 
you  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render,”  notification  that  a  request  for  a  hearing  had  to 

  

6 

   

be  made  in  writing  and  had  to  be  delivered  to  Superintendent  Swanson  no  later  than  3:00 
p.m.  on  March  31,  2006,  together  with  a  copy  of  Education  Code  sections  44944  and  44955 
and  the  recommendation. 

Others  served  with  the  notice  included  Melissa  Adrid  (seniority  number  15,  a  high 

school  and  self-contained  middle  school  classroom  teacher  with a  first  day  of  paid  service  on 
August  23,  2004),  Tiffany  Lenfers  (seniority  number  16,  a  5"  grade  self-contained  classroom 
teacher  with  a first  day  of  paid  service  on  August  23,  2004),  Thomas  McDonough  (seniority 
number  17,  a  high  school  and  self-contained  middle  school  classroom  teacher  with  a  first  day 
of  paid  service  on  August  23,  2004),  and  Laura  Worthen  (seniority  number  19,  a  high  school 
and  self-contained  middle  school  classroom  teacher  with a  first  day  of  paid  service  on 
August  22,  2005). 

10. 

Christopher  Sanchez  (seniority  number  18,  a  Spanish  high  school  and  middle 
school  language  classroom  teacher  with a  first  day  of  paid  service  on  August  22,  2005)  was 
not  given  a  preliminary  notice  because  he  was  the  only  person  at  the  school  credentialed  to 
teach  a  foreign  language  and  there  was  a  need  for  that  subject  to  meet  University  of 
California  admission  requirements. 

11. 

Dr.  Yousefian  did  not  challenge  the  providing  of  preliminary  layoff  notices 

based  on  the  Board’s  resolution  and  its  application  to  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Instead,  he 
challenged  the  wisdom  of  his  employment  being  terminated  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in 
factual  finding  16. 

The  Administrative  Proceeding 

12. 

Dr.  Yousefian  and  the  other  certificated  employees  who  requested  a  hearing 

were  personally  served  with  a  notice  of  accusation  and  acknowledgment  of  request  for 
hearing,  the  accusation,  a  blank  notice  of  defense,  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955,  and  copies  of  Government  Code  sections  11500,  11505,  11506,  11507.5, 
11507.6,  11507.7,  11590  and  11520. 

Dr.  Yousefian  timely  filed  a  notice  of  defense.  The  matter  was  set  for  an 

administrative  hearing. 

13. 

.On  May  2,  2006,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was 
received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  Board’s  Reduction  or  Elimination  of Particular  Kinds  of Services  and  Programs 

14. 

The  reduction  and  elimination  of  the  classes  and  programs  set  forth  in  Exhibit 
A  involved  the  Board’s  exercise  of  discretion.  The  decision  was  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c). 
It  was  a  difficult  decision  that  was  reasonably  made,  even  though  others  similarly  situated 
may  have  reached  a  different  decision.  The  reduction  of  a  0.60  FTE  in  secondary  single 

7  

subject  Science  was  a  “particular  kind  of  service”  the  Board  was  authorized  to  reduce  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kind  of  services  identified  in  Exhibit  A 

was  not  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  an  appropriate  exercise  of  the 
Board’s  discretion,  The  extent  to  which  the  particular  kinds  of  service  were  reduced  was  a 
matter  well  within  the  Board’s  discretion. 

Sherri  Freeman  (seniority  number  6,  a  single  subject  ROP/Agriculture,  Agricultural 

Science  and  AP  Science  high  school  teacher  with  a  first  day  of  paid  service  on  September  1, 
1995)  was  qualified  and  competent  to  teach  the  science  lab  classes.  The  termination  of  Dr. 
Yousefian’s  employment  by  the  District  would  not  preclude  students  from  being  accepted  at 
either  the  University  of  California  or  at  California  State  University  campuses. 

No  certificated  employee  who  was  junior  to  Dr.  Yousefian  was  retained  to  provide 

services  within  the  District  which  respondent  was  competent  and  qualified  to  render  by 
reason  of  his  teaching  certificate.  Dr.  Yousefian  was  not  credentialed  to  teach  Spanish. 

No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated 

by  state  or  federal  law. 

Dr.  Shahram  Yousefian 

15.  |  Dr.  Yousefian  was  born  on  November  4,  1962,  in  Iran.  He  graduated  from 

Parkway  North  High  School  in  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  in  1980.  He  graduated  from  Southwest 
Baptist  University  in  Bolivar,  Missouri,  with  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  May  1984.  He 
married  and  spent  a  year  working  at  Southwest  Baptist  University.  He  then  attended  the 
University  of  Missouri,  where  he  obtained  a  Ph.D.  in  Chemistry,  with  a  specialization  in 
Organic  Chemistry,  in  December  1990.  Thereafter,  Dr.  Yousefian  spent  a  year  in  a  post- 
doctoral  program  as  a  research  assistant  at  the  Washington  University  School  of  Medicine  in 
St.  Louis,  Missouri. 

After  a  brief  vacation  in  Iran  in  1992,  Dr.  Yousefian  and  his  family  returned  to  the  St. 

Louis  area  where  he  taught  Chemistry  at  the  Missouri  Baptist  University.  Thereafter,  he 
engaged  in  further  post-doctoral  training  and  teaching  assignments  at  Trinity  University  in 
San  Antonio,  Texas.  Dr.  Yousefian  and  his  family  moved  to  California  in  1994. 

In  1994-1995,  Dr.  Yousefian  was  a  Lecturer  at  the  University  of  California,  San 
Diego,  in  Chemistry,  after  which  he  served  as  a  Professor  at  Cuyamacas  Community  College 
and  at  California  State  University,  San  Marcos,  in  the  field  of  Chemistry. 

  

     

Dr.  Yousefian  attended  National  University  from  1998-2000,  and  obtained  a 

Professional  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential’  in  Chemistry  with  an  additional 
authorization  in  Introduction  to  Mathematics.  He  also  received  a  CLAD  certification.” 

Dr.  Yousefian  began  teaching  at  University  City  High  School  in  summer  2000,  and 

then  taught  at  Mira  Mesa  High  School.  He  taught  at  West  Hills  High  School  in  Santee  in  the 
2000-2001  school  year,  but  his  employment  was  terminated  by  the  San  Diego  City  School 
District  when  a  tenured  teacher  returned  to  West  Hills  High  School. 

Dr.  Yousefian  found  employment  teaching  high  school  in  Novato,  the  northernmost 

city  in  Marin  County,  approximately  29  miles  north  of  San  Francisco  and  37  miles  northwest 
of  Oakland.  He  commuted  from  his  home  in  Poway  to  Novato  on  weekdays,  but  he 
ultimately  found  this  to  be  impossible  after  9/11  and  he  was  forced  to  leave  this  employment. 

Dr.  Yousefian  began  his  employment  with  the  District  on  August  26,  2002.  During 
his  employment  with  the  District,  Dr.  Yousefian  has  taught  laboratory  sciences  (including 
Chemistry,  Physics,  and  Earth  Science),  college  success  classes,  and  computer  science. 

16. 

Dr.  Yousefian  studied  school  accountability  documents  and  concluded  the 

Board  made  several  erroneous  or  irresponsible  decisions  that  “precipitated  the  current 
financial  condition.”  He  noted  that  while  teachers’  salaries  remained  stagnant,  the  salaries  of 
administrators  increased  dramatically,  notwithstanding  declining  enrollment.  Even  then,  Dr. 
Yousefian  did  not  understand  how  there  could  be  a  budget  shortfall  given  the  number  of 
students  enrolled  in  the  District.  He  believed  cutting  courses  and  teachers  would  further 
erode  District  enrollment  and  cause  revenue  to  further  decline.  Dr.  Yousefian  was  concerned 
about  the  academic  impact  of  cutting  Science  classes  on  the  ability  of  students  to  enter  the 
University  of  California  or  the  California  State  University  campuses,  and  wondered  if  the  cut 
would  impact  the  implementation  of  an  AVID  program  and  the  2007  Western  Association  of 
Schools  and  Colleges  (WASC)  evaluation. 

Dr.  Yousefian  proposed  the  Board  retain  one  administrator  to  supervise  the  District’s 
operations,  and  use  the  savings  resulting  from  the  elimination  of  one  administrative  position 
to  fund  teachers.  He  speculated  that  any  “projected  shortfall  could  be  covered  by  the 
upcoming  retirements,  additions  of  the  casino  in  Santa  Ysabel,  and  the  planned  housing 
development  by  the  Los  Coyotes.” 

  

This  credential  authorizes  the  holder  to  teach  (in  grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in 

classes  organized  primarily  for  adults)  the  subject  matter  content  for  the  subject  or  subjects  identified  in  the 
credential  and  supplementary  authorizations. 

The  Crosscultural,  Language  &  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  certification  authorizes  the  holder  to 

2 
provide  the  following  services  to  limited-English-proficient  pupils:  (1)  instruction  for  English  language 
development  in  grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes  organized  primarily  for  adults;  and  (2) 
specially  designed  content  instruction  delivered  in  English  in  single-subject-matter  (departmentalized)  courses  as 
authorized  on  this  document.  This  crosscultural,  language  and  academic  development  authorization  also  covers 
classes  authorized  by  other  valid,  non-emergency  credentials  held,  as  specified  in  Education  Code  section  44253.3. 

9 

   

  

Dr.  Yousefian  offered  his  testimony  and  a  variety  of  documents  to  support  his  fiscal, 

political  and  academic  arguments. 

17. 

Scott  Loefke  (Loefke),  who  has  taught  for  the  District  for  six  years,  is 

President  of  the  Association  of  Warner  Educators.  He  acknowledged  there  was  declining 
enrollment  within  the  District,  as  did  all  other  witnesses.  Loefke  was  uncertain  what  impact, 
if  any,  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  would  have,  if  any,  on  the 
possible  implementation  of  the  AVID  program  or  on  the  2007  WASC  evaluation. 

18. 

Dr.  Yousefian  did  not  establish  the  particular  kinds  of  services  being  reduced 

or  eliminated  were  exempt,  or  the  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious,  or  the  decision  would  result  in  the  lowering  educational 
services  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law,  or  that  the  Board 
abused  its  discretion.  Dr.  Yousefian  did  not  establish  that  any  certificated  employee  who 
was  junior  to  Dr.  Yousefian  was  retained  to  provide  services  within  the  District  which  he  was 
competent  and  qualified  to  render  by  reason  of  his  teaching  certificate. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  respondent  Shahram  Yousefian. 

2. 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 

services  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  a  district’s  decision  as  to  how 
many  services  will  be  reduced.  It  is  within  the  board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  amount  by 
which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  645-636. 

3, 

“In  determining  whether  the  decision  of  a  school  board  is  reasonable  as 

distinguished  from  fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious,  its  action  is  measured  by  the  standard 
set  by  reason  and  reasonable  people,  bearing  in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may  permit  a 
difference  of  opinion  on  the  same  subject.”  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott 
(1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  808. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  affirm  the  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of 

services  and  in  the  amount  of  full  time  equivalent  positions  as  identified  in  Board  Resolution 
No.  2005-06-01.  The  Board’s  decision  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  was  a  valid 
exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  elimination  and  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of 
service  was  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

5. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  Shahram 

Yousefian  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  by  the  District  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

10   

     

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Shahram  Yousefian  under  Education  Code  section  44955  that 

his  services  will  not  be  required  by  the  Warner  Unified  School  District  for  the  2006-2007 
school  year. 

DATED:  (Meteteg,  Z  QO 

(ope  AHLER 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

11  

