BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MIDDLETOWN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations 
Against: 

BONNIE  ALBERTSON  and 
TARA  MARTZ, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2006040076 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  M.  Amanda  Behe,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  26,  2006,  at  the  Middletown  Unified  School 
District,  Windsor,  California. 

Suzanne  K.  Reed,  Senior  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of 

California,  represented  the  Middletown  Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Bonnie  Albertson  and  Tara 

Martz.  Ms.  Albertson  was  not  present  at  the  hearing.  Ms.  Martz  was  present  at  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

l. 

The  Middletown  Unified  School  District  (hereinafter  “the  District”)  operates 
elementary,  middle  and  high  schools.  Donald  K.  Martin,  Ed.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the 
District. 

2. 

On  March  8,  2006,  Dr.  Martin  gave  notice  to  the  Governing  Board  in 

accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  of  his  recommendation  that 
particular  kinds  of  services  being  provided  by  the  District  be  reduced  or  discontinued, 
specifically: 

1.0  FTE’  Secondary  Departmentalized  English/Social  Science 

  

'  The  acronym  “FTE”  refers  to  a  full-time  equivalent  position.

  

1.0  FTE  Secondary  Departmentalized  Math/Science 
1.0  FTE  Secondary  Alternative  Education  Program 
1.0  ROP/Work  Experience  Program  Services 
2.0  FTE  Elementary  School  Instructional  Service. 

Dr.  Martin  further  recommended  that  six  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated 
employees  be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

3. 

Board  Resolution  No.  05-05-06,  adopted  on  March  8,  2006,  directed  the 

reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

1.0  FTE  Secondary  Departmentalized  English/Social  Science, 
1.0  FTE  Secondary  Departmentalized  Math/Science 
1.0  FTE  Secondary  Alternative  Education  Program 
1.0  ROP/Work  Experience  Program  Services 
2.0  FTE  Elementary  School  Instructional  Service. 

The  Governing  Board  directed  Dr.  Martin  to  initiate  and  pursue  procedures  to  not 
reemploy  six  full-time  equivalent  certificated  employees  for  the  ensuing  school  year  because 
of  the  discontinuation  or  reduction  in  services. 

4. 

Before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  served  affected  employees  with  written 

notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  and  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

Each  notice  further  advised  the  employee  of  his/her  right  to  a  hearing,  including  that 
such  a  request  must  be  delivered  in  writing,  and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would 
constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Respondents  Bonnie  Albertson  and  Tara  Martz  filed  timely  and  proper 

requests  for  hearing. 

6. 

On  March  14,  2006,  Dr.  Martin  filed  Accusations  which  were  timely  served  on 
respondents  as  required  by  the  Education  Code,  and  the  information  that  a  Notice  of Defense 
must  be  filed  within  five  days  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1). 

7. 

Respondents  Albertson  and  Martz  filed  timely  and  proper  Notices  of  Defense. 

8. 

Dr.  Martin  described  that  his  recommendation  and  the  Board  Resolution  were 

required  by  the  District’s  budget  situation,  and  that  elimination  of  excess  positions  was 
necessary  to  resolve  fiscal  problems.  None  of  the  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  are 
mandated  services. 

     

9. 

In  implementing  the  Governing  Board’s  Resolution  No.  05-05-06  Dr.  Martin 

had  notices  sent  to  a  seven  employees,  including  two  elementary  teachers  with  the  same  first 
date  of  paid  service.  Later  analysis  of  the  budget  indicated  that  sufficient  funds  were 
available  to  reinstate  some  of  the  positions  originally  scheduled  for  lay-offs,  and  the  related 
notices  were  rescinded.  The  reinstated  positions  were  in  Secondary  Departmentalized 
English/Social  Science,  Secondary  Departmentalized  Math/Science,  and  one  of  the 
Elementary  School  Instructional  Service  positions.  The  positions  were  reinstated  on  the 
basis  of  District  instructional  needs,  and  to  limit  the  impact  on  teachers  delivering  services  to 
the  greatest  number  of  students. 

The  District  reinstated  Jenny  Keyport,  a  middle  school  Science  teacher  who  holds  a 

single  subject  Science  credential.  Ms  Keyport’s  first  date  of  paid  service  was  August  28, 
2003,  and  she  is  senior  to  respondent  Martz,  who  was  hired  August  30,  2005.  Respondent 
Martz  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  .  The  District  also  reinstated  Dawn  Ginn  and  David 
Leonard,  both  of  whom  have  the  seniority  date  of  September  2,  2004,  and  hold  multiple 
subject  credentials. 

The  four  least  senior  District  teachers,  all  with  the  seniority  date  of  August  31,  2005, 
are  Katherine  Hawley,  Louise  Owens,  Marc  Morita  and  respondent  Martz.  Ms.  Hawley,  Mr. 
Morita  and  respondent  Martz  have  multiple  subject  credentials.  Ms.  Owens  hold  a  single 
subject  Physical  Education  credential.  Mr.  Morita  has  a  supplementary  authorization  in 
English  and  taught  it  at  the  secondary  level  for  four  years.  As  a  middle  school  English 
teacher  Mr.  Morita  serves  approximately  150  students  per  day.  In  light  of  the  concern  to  not 
cut  teachers  delivering  services  to  a  large  number  of  students  Mr.  Morita  was  reinstated. 

Respondent  Martz  does  not  have  the  seniority  or  qualifications  to  fill  any  of  the 

positions  reinstated  by  the  Governing  Board.  Kim  Ferguson,  who  is  currently  in  an 
elementary  school  pull-out  position  supported  by  the  general  fund,  was  hired  August  30, 
2001,  and  holds  a  multiple-subject  credential.  She  is  senior  to  respondent  Martz  and  can 
“bump”  her. 

10. 

On  April  19,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  created  a  middle  school  Opportunity 

Class  for  the  2006-07  School  Year,  and  the  position  was  thereafter  posted.  The  collective 
bargaining  agreement  with  the  teachers’  association  provides  that  a  teacher  may  request  a 
transfer  to  a  different  school  or  reassignment  to  another  grade  level  of  subject.  Such  a 
request  must  be  filed  within  ten  days  of  the  posting  of  the  notice  of  a  vacancy.  Requests  are 
evaluated  on  the  basis  of  educational  needs,  employee  aptitude  and  seniority. 

  

2  Generally  speaking,  a  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  a  position  held  by  a  junior 
teacher  if  the  senior  teacher  is  properly  credentialed.  That  displacement  of  a  junior  teacher  is  known  as  “bumping.” 
The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and  a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential/skill  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more 
senior  teacher  is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by  statute  (Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision 
(d)(1))  and  appellate  law.  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Santa  Clara 
Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.

  

Dr.  Martin  described  that  the  opportunity  class  position  could  be  filled  by  a  teacher 

with  a  multiple  subject  credential  or  a  single  subject  credential  with  multiple  authorizations. 
He  opined  that  respondent  Martz  would  have  the  necessary  credentials  and  could  apply  for 
the  position. 

11. 

The  District’s  Regional  Occupational  Program  (ROP)  is  supported  by  a 

combination  of  approximately  $70,000  from  the  general  fund  and  $195,000  in  state  funds 
monitored  by  the  County  Office  of  Education.  Of  the  $195,000  approximately  $90,000  is 
spent  on  teacher  salaries;  the  general  fund  money  supplements  the  amount  paid  for  teachers 
by  ROP  funds.  Most  of  the  six  teachers  in  the  ROP  program  teach  regular  as  well  as  ROP 
classes.  For  example,  Robert  Bolach  is  a  full-time  teacher  who  teaches  only  two  ROP 
sections, 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  reduced  the  District’s  Regional  Occupational 

Program  (ROP),  by  1.0  FTE  ROP/Work  Experience  Program  Services.  Respondent 
Albertson’s  seniority  date  is  April  17,  2000,  and  she  holds  a  Vocational  Education 
(Computer  Applications,  Office  Occupations,  Small  Business  Owner)  credential,  and  teaches 
work  experience  in  the  ROP  program. 

The  other  ROP  teachers  include  Robert  Bolach  who  was  hired  August  28,  1988,  and 

has  single  subject  Industrial  Arts  and  Agricultural  Mechanics  credentials.  He  teaches 
agricultural  mechanics  in  the  ROP  program,  and  other  classes  in  the  secondary  school.  Patsy 
Pachie  was  hired  August  28,  1992,  and  Dan  Renninger  was  hired  August  31,  1999.  They  are 
vocational  education  teachers  significantly  senior  to  respondent  Albertson.  Mr.  Renninger 
holds  a  single  subject  Social  Science  credential  with  an  authorization  in  Computer  Concepts 
and  Applications;  Ms.  Pachie  holds  a  single  subject  Agriculture  credential  and  a  multiple 
subject  credential.  Jennifer  Pyzer  holds  a  single  subject  Business  Education  credential  and 
teaches  in  the  ROP  program;  her  seniority  date  is  August  27,  1991.  Karen  Jones  holds  a 
Vocational  Education  (Agricultural  Business  Management  and  Marketing)  credential,  and 
was  hired  August  27,  2002. 

Respondent  Albertson’s  vocational  education  credential  authorizes  her  to  teach 

business  and  non-technical  computer  applications  such  as  bookkeeping,  file  management, 
etc.  She  does  not  hold  a  credential  to  teach  floral  design,  animal  husbandry,  or  agricultural 
mechanics.  No  District  employee  other  than  respondent  Albertson  teaches  business 
experience,  and  she  does  not  have a  credential  that  would  let  her  “bump”  any  other 
employee. 

12. 

The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  difficulties.  The  Board’s  decision  to  limit  the  effect  of 
reductions  for  teachers  who  serve  the  greatest  number  of  students  is  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the  proposed  reductions  in  services  would 
violate  any  statutory  or  regulatory  requirement  governing  the  District. 

      
    

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (a),  provides  in  relevant  part  that: 

No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section 
44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her 
designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent 
by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and 
stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907 
and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no 
probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position 
for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949, 
inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  a  particular  kind  of  service 
is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of 
the  following  school  year,  ...  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary 
by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of 
permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may 
terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding 
percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district, 
permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school 
year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of 
this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other 
employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any

  

employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance 
with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing 
board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to 
give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 
not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments 
in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any 
service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to 
render.  ... 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may 
deviate  from  terminating a  certificated  employee  in  order  of 
seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the 
laws. 

3. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this 
The  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

proceeding. 
44944  and  44945  were  met. 

4. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  05-05-06  are  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d 
167).  The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its 
pupils. 

  

     

5. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469).  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers, 
Local  2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116 
Cal.App.3d  831). 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  either  respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  such  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Respondent  Martz  argues,  without  citation  to  authority,  that  the  District  is  required  to 

continue  her  employment  in  the  Opportunity  Class,  a  position  which  does  not  exist  at  the 
current  time.  The  argument  is  not  persuasive.  The  relative  rights  of  affected  teachers  are 
determined  as  of  the  March  15  notice.  Respondent  Martz  may  apply  for  the  position, 
consistent  with  the  collective  bargaining  agreement.  Should  the  District  select  another 
employee  to  fill  the  position  respondent  Martz  may  have  reemployment  rights,  but  she  is  not 
entitled  to  a  position  which  was  not  in  existence  as  of  the  date  of  the  March  15  notice. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  Bonnie  Albertson  and  Tara  Martz  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2003-2004  School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

+t 
i 

v 

  M.  AMANDA’ BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

    

  

