@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LAKE  TAHOE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Reduction  of  Particular 
Kinds  of  Services  affecting: 

OAH  No.  N2006030436 

JOANN  ALLISTER,  MARIA  LUQUIN, 
MELISSA  BERRY, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14,  2006,  in  Lake  Tahoe,  California. 

Allen  R.  Vinson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Lake  Tahoe  Unified  School 

© 

District  (District). 

Leslie  Beth  Curtis,  Attorney at Law,  represented  respondents.  ' 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  30,  2004. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

James  R.  Tarwater,  Ph.D.  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  Beth  Delacour 

is  Director  of  Human  Resources,  for  the  District.  Their  actions  and  the  actions  of  the 
Governing  Board  of  the District (Governing  Board)  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2. 

Before  March  15,  2006,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice 

that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents.  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the 

  

'  Although  Attorney  Curtis  is  attorney  of  record  for  Joanne  Allister,  Joanne  Allister  represented  herself  in  the 
hearing  in  respect  to  her  argument  that  her  seniority  date  should  be  earlier  than  that  assigned  by  the  District.  Maria 
Luquin  was  represented  by  Attorney  Curtis,  but  Ms.  Luquin  did  not  present  an  argument  or  defense.  The  District 
has  agreed  to  retain  Ms.  Luquin  to  teach  1  class  (.167  FTE).  The  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  against  Melissa 
Berry  on  April  7,  2006.  Ms.  Berry  appeared  at  the  hearing,  but  did  not  present  evidence. 

© 

  

1 

 

Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS) 
which  reduced  the  certificated  staff  by  18.182  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated 
positions.  53  certificated  employees  were  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be  reduced 
or  eliminated  in  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

3. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

4. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation.  ” 

5. 
District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

6. 

On  March  10,  2006,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  Governing  Board,  the 

Governing  Board  was  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated 
employees  holding  18.182  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

7. 

On  March  10,  2006,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2005/2006- 

21,  providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  totaling  18.182 
FTE  in  instruction. 

8. 

The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all 

schools  of  the  District  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  was  in  session  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  declined  below  that  of  the  corresponding  period  of  the  first  six  months  of 
the  2004-2005  school  year.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  and  eliminate 
teaching  services  affecting  employment  of  18.182  FTE  certificated  positions.  The 
Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  solely  for 
the  welfare  of  students. 

9, 

Supervisor  Tarwater,  Human  Resources  Director  Beth  Delacour  and  other 

District  employees  were  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the 
layoff.  The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’ 
seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  (tenured,  probationary  or  temporary)  and 
credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  were  obtained  from 
the  District’s  records. 

  

*  The  District  named  39  employees  in  the  Accusation.  Most  of  the  Accusations  were  ultimately  withdrawn.  Of 
those  whose  Accusations  were  not  withdrawn,  Greg  Kuntz  (1FTE)  and  Cynthia  Pastore  Walker  (1FTE)  did  not 
present  a  defense  or  appear  for  the  hearing. 

 

© 

  
  
  

10. 

.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 
senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of 
affected  service,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  known 
vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The 
District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump” 
other  employees.  The  District  then  looked  at  employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as 
opposed  to  other  positions. 

11. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  leaves  of  absence,  resignations, 
retirements  and  requests  for  transfer in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff 
notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

12. 

Joann  Allister  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Single  Subject  Credential  with  an 
authorization  in  Physical  Education.  She  currently  teaches  health  and  physical  education. 
The  District  determined  that  her  seniority  date  is  March  12,  2003,  the  first  date  of  paid 
service  in  probationary  status.  Ms.  Allister  asserts  that  her  first  date  of  paid  service  is  August 
28,  2000,  and  thus  she  should  be  entitled  to  “bump”  another  physical  education  teacher, 
Rhonda  Riggs,  whose  seniority  date  is  September  11,  2000. 

13. 

The  District  cites  California  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  section  338,  for  the 

proposition  that  Ms.  Allister  should  have  raised  the  issue  of  her  seniority  date  within  three 
years  of  the  date  of  hire,  and  is  barred  from  challenging  the  seniority  date  now.  The 
District’s  argument is  not  persuasive.  California  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  section  338,  does 
not  govern  this  proceeding,  but  sets  statutes  of  limitations  for  the  commencements  of  civil 
actions.  The  California  Education  Code  does  not  impose  a  time  limitation  by  which  a 
certificated  employee  is  required  to  challenge  a  seniority  date  assigned  by  the  District. 

14. 

The  District  argues  that  Ms.  Allister  is  barred  by  the  doctrine  of  latches  from 
challenging  her  seniority  date  in  this  hearing.  Specifically,  the  District  asserts  that  it  posted 
and  distributed  seniority  lists  identifying  the  March  12,  2003  seniority  date.  Further,  the 
District  sent  Ms.  Allister  a  letter  on  January  23,  2006,  setting  forth  her  seniority  date  and 
advising  her  that  they  were  “checking  the  seniority  date  of  all  certificated  personnel  to  verify 
our  seniority  list.”  Ms.  Allister  was  present  during  settlement  negotiations  with  the  District 
and  did  not  raise  the  issue  of  her  seniority  date.  During  settlement  negotiations,  the  District 
acted  in  reliance  upon  the  March  12,  2003,  seniority  date  and  withdrew  the  Accusation 
against  Rhonda  Riggs. 

15. 

Although  Ms.  Allister  did  not  personally  raise  the  issue  of  her  seniority  date 

with  the  District  during  settlement  negotiations,  there  was  a  meeting  between  human 
resources  and  the  president  of  the  union  to  discuss  the  seniority  date.  Ms.  Allister  advised  her 
union  representative  that  she  had  a  disagreement  with  the  seniority  date  and  was  told  the 
union  would  handle  it.  It  appears  Ms.  Allister  took  issue  with  her  seniority  date  when  she 

was  advised  in  January  2006  of  the  date  the  District  was  relying  on.  She  sought  assistance  

ON 

@ 

from  her  union,  filed  a  request  for  hearing  when  served  with  notice  of  lay  off  and  filed  a 
notice  of  defense  when  served  with  an  Accusation.  None  of  these  documents  require  the 
respondent  to  set  forth  with  particularity  the  defenses  asserted.  The  Education  Code  does  not 
require  that  a  certificated  employee  challenge  an  assigned  seniority  date  at  any  particular 
time  during  the  reduction  in  force  process.  Ms.  Allister  properly  raised  the  issue  at  hearing. 

16. 

On  the  date  of  her  employment  with  the  District,  Ms.  Allister  did  not  hold  a 
teaching  credential.  The  District  issued  her  a  temporary  county  certificate  and  backdated  it 
to  September  1,  2000.  Ms.  Allister  applied  for  an  emergency  single  subject 
credential/permit,  which  was  granted  on  November  7,  2000,  and  which  was  valid  for  one 
year.  During  the  2000-2001  school  year,  Ms.  Allister  served  as  a  physical  education  teacher 
in  the  middle  school.  She  was  rehired  the  following  year  to  work  in  the  high  school, 
continuing  to  work  on  the  emergency  permit.  The  emergency  permit  expired  on  November 
1,  2001,  and  Ms.  Allister  continued  teaching  the  term  without  an  emergency  permit.  She  was 
laid  off  in  the  spring  of  2002,  because  she  had  no  emergency  permit.  She  worked  as  a 
substitute  teacher  during  that  semester.  She  was  hired  again  as  a  temporary  teacher  for  the 
fall  semester  of  2002  and  laid  off  in  the  spring  of  2003.  She  taught  as  a  substitute  in  the 
spring  of  2003.  She  obtained  a  single  subject  professional  clear  credential  in  physical 
education  from  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  on  January  23,  2003. 
There  had  been  some  problems  in  the  processing  of  her  application  for  a  credential,  which 
caused  delay  in  issuance.  Her  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  I  employee  was 
March  12,  2003.° 

17. 

|  Ms.  Allister  claims  she  was  hired  as  a  probationary  teacher  on  August  28, 
2000,  and  her  seniority  begins  on  that  date.  She  claims  she  was  told  she  was  hired  as  a 
probationary  employee,  even  though  the  contracts  she  signed  stated  she  was  temporary.  Ms. 
Allister  contends  there  is  evidence  that  she  was  not  initially  hired  as  a  temporary  teacher. 
She  points  to  the  following  evidence:  when  hired,  she  was  not  replacing  an  absent  teacher  but 
filling  an  empty  position;  the  “temporary”  box  on a  District  payroll  form  is  not  checked;  and 
on  at  least  one  occasion  a  District  teacher  with  only  an  emergency  permit  was  assigned  a 
seniority  date  on  a  date  when  that  teacher  held  only  an  emergency  permit. 

18. 

Although  Ms.  Allister’s  first  date  of  paid  service  is  August  28,  2000,  the 

evidence  established  that  she  was  hired  as  a  temporary  employee  at  that  time.  The  contract 
she  signed  with  the  District  states  in  its  title  that  it  is  a  “Limited  Contract  For  Temporary 
Certificated  Employees.”  The  contract  states  that  the  Governing  Board  agreed  to  employ 
Ms.  Allister  to  a  full-time  position  of  temporary  teacher,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44954.  The  contract  identifies  her  position  as  a  temporary  certificated  employee.  The  Board 
renewed  the  Limited  Contract  for  Temporary  Certificated  Employee  for  Ms.  Allister  on 
October  28,  2003,  for  .4  FTE  temporary  teacher.  The  contract  was  renewed  for  .6  FTE  on 
November  19,  2003  and  .8  December  10,  2003. 

  

*  Ms.  Allister  began  employment  with  a  .2  FTE  and  was  increased  to  a  .2,  .4,  .6,  .8  and  then  full  time  position,  In 
2004-2005  she  was  hired  to  teach  health. 

@ 

  

  
 
  

The  evidence  further  establishes  that  Ms.  Allister  was  employed  as  a  temporary 
teacher  between  August  2000  and  March  2003,  with  breaks  in  temporary  employment  in  the 
spring  semesters  of  2002  and  2003.  She  held  no  teaching  credential  until  March  of  2003. 
Until  March  of  2003,  she  taught  either  under  an  emergency  credential,  under  an  expired 
emergency  credential  or  as  an  uncredentialed  substitute  teacher.  Thus,  the  District  at  no  time 
treated  her  as  a  probationary  employee  and  she  had  no  expectations  of,  and,  in  fact,  was  not 
given  continuing  employment. 

Ms.  Allister’s  argument  that  the  District  had  a  practice  of  establishing  seniority  dates 
as  the  first  date  of  service  with  an  emergency  credential  was  not  persuasive.  She  introduced 
in  evidence  documents  showing  that  in  January  of  2002,  the  District  agreed  with  the  State 
Teacher’s  Employment  Association  to  establish  a  1999  seniority  date  fora  teacher  who  _ 
taught  on  an  emergency  credential  and  who  apparently  did  not  possess  a  Professional  Clear 
Single  Subject  Credential  until  March  of  2002.  One  instance  does  not  establish  a  practice, 
nor  is  the  District  bound  to  enter  similar  agreements  with  all  emergency  credential  holders, 
regardless  of  the  individual  circumstances  of  their  employment  and  credentialing. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1, 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  2005/2006-21,  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number 
of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 

.  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4, 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 

   

deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

| 

| 

@ 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  Zalac  y.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689. 

6. 

No  certificated  employees  with  seniority  dates junior  to  Maria  Loquin  and 

Joanne  Allister  are  being  retained  to  teach  classes  for  which  Ms.  Loquin  and  Ms.  Allister  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

7. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide 

notice  to  respondent  Maria  Loquin  that  .833  of  the  1  FTE  service  she  provides  will  not  be 
required  in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955  to  provide  notice  to  respondent  Joanne  Allister  that  1  FTE  service  she  provides  will 
not  be  required in  the  ensuing  school  year.  Such  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

e 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employee  Maria  Luquin  that  .833  FTE  of  her  services  will 

not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance 
of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Joann  Allister  that  1.00  FTE  of  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  4,  2006 

   

QD IH  bab 

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

IN 

  
  

  

