BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
DURHAM  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

KATHLEEN  ANDERSON,  MICHELLE 
EATON,  BRIAN  GLOVER,  KATHY 
HARRIS,  JACQUELINE  LINCOLN  and 
BILL  STEVENS, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2006030916 

DECISION 

Muriel  Evens,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Durham,  California,  on  April  18,  2006. 

School  and  College  Legal  Services  of  California,  by  Elizabth  B.  Mori,  Assistant 

General  Counsel,  represented  the  Durham  Unified  School  District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Dr.  Penny  Chennell,  Superintendent  of  the  Durham  Unified  School  District, 

made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  her  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  District  employees. 

2. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2006,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section 

44949  and  44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (the 
Board)  and  respondents  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  respondents 
be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 
Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  that 

respondents  be terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to  their  competency  as  teachers.  

4. 

On  and  before  March  15,  2006,  a  notice  of  termination  was  delivered  to  each 

respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  the  notice  of  termination  in  the 
United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  respondent’s  last  known 
address. 

The  written  notices  of  termination  specifically  stated  that  respondents’  services  would 

not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

Each  notice  advised  respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each  respondent  had 

to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Each  appearing  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to 
determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  ensuing  year. 

6. 

Accusations  were  timely  served  on  respondents  thereafter.  Each  respondent 

appearing  in  this  matter  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All Il  prehearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  were  met. 

7. 

The  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds 

of  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year: 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 
Durham  Elementary  School: 

  

Classroom 
Physical  Education 
VAPA 

Durham  Intermediate  School 

Exploratory  (Agriculture) 

Durham  High  School 

Foreign  Language  (Spanish) 
Social  Studies  (World  History,  Econ./Civics) 
English  (English  IT) 
Science  (Biology) 
Art  (Drama) 
Industrial  Arts  (Welding) 
Independent  Study 

Total 

1.5  FTE 
.16  FTE 
5S  FTE 

.20  FTE 

.20  FTE 
40  FTE 
.20  FTE 
.20  FTE 
.20  FTE 
.20  FTE 
.20  FTE 
3.61FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  total  3.61  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

8. 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  The  Board’s  decision  to 

  

     

reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

10. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  leaves,  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 

requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render  except  as  otherwise 
discussed  below. 

12. 

Respondent  Lincoln  has a  seniority  date  of  October  1,  1995,  and  holds  a 

permanent  .68  FTE  position  in  the  elementary  school.  Respondent  Harris  has  a  seniority  date 
of  February  9,  1998,  and  holds  a  permanent  .40  FTE  position  in  the  elementary  school,  with 
.04  FTE  reemployment  rights  as  a  result  of  a  previous  layoff.  Both  respondents  hold  only  the 
Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credentials.  Neither  teacher  has  held  a  greater 
FTE  position  than  set  forth  here. 

Both  Lincoln  and  Harris  are  senior  to  certain  elementary  teachers  being  retained,  and 

certificated  and  competent  to  teach  the  elementary  classes  taught  by  those  retained. 
However,  the  retained  teachers  are  permanent,  full-time  teachers  in  self-contained 
classrooms.  It  would  not  be  efficient  or  in  the  interests  of  the  children  to  break  up  the 
teaching  day  or  week  by  dividing  the  teaching  assignment  between  multiple  teachers  for  one 
elementary  classroom.  While  the  District  has  permitted  two  elementary  teachers  to  take  a 
leave  for  .20  FTE  of  their  full-time  assignments,  the  District  has  not  sought  to  expand  that 
number. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  for  the  Durham 
Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for 
the  reduetion  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges 
set  forth  in  the  Accusations.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  respondents  notice 
before  May  15,  2006,  that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District. 

   

BY 

The  Accusations  served  on  the  named  respondents  are  sustained.  Notice  shall  be 
given  to  respondents  before  May  15,  2006,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  because  of 
the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

ORDER 

e 

Dated:  May  5,  2006 

MURIEL  EVENS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

   

