BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GOLD  OAK  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2006040075 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusation 
(Reduction  In  Force)  Against: 

SUSAN  LANDON, 
THERESA  ROBINSON, 

Respondents. 

  

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  5,  2006,  in  Placerville/Pleasant  Valley, 
California. 

Heather  Edwards,  Attorney  at  Law  of  Girard,  Vinson  &  Trujillo  LLP,  represented  the 

_  Gold  Oak  Union  School  District  (District). 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law  of  Huguenin  Law  Office,  represented 

respondents  Susan  Landon  and  Theresa  Robinson. ' 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  May  5,  2006. 

  

'  Carol  Rowberg  was  named  in  the  Accusation  as  a  respondent.  She  did  not  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the 
Accusation and  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing.  Due  to  her  failure  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense,  Carol  Rowberg  is  not 
considered  a  respondent  in  this  hearing. 

*  The  hearing  of  this  matter  was  continued  from  April  17,  2006  to  May  5,  2006,  a  period  of  eighteen  days.  The 
parties  executed  written  waivers  waiving  the  requirement  of  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (e)(c),  that 
the  Administrative  Law  Judge  submit  the  proposed  decision  to  the  goveming  board  by  May  7,  2006,  and  Education 
Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  requiring  that  the  governing  board  provide  notice  of  termination  of  services 
before  May  15,  2006. 

The  waivers  acknowledged  that  the  dates  for  submission  of  the  proposed  decision  to  the  governing  board  and  the 
date  by  which  the  board  shall  provide  written  notice  of  termination  of  services  are  extended  for  eighteen  days 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (e). 

:  

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Richard  Williams  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions  and  the 

© 

actions  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  were  taken  in  their  official 
capacities.  The  District  is  comprised  of  three  schools;  Gold  Oak  School  (grades  K-5), 
Pleasant  Valley  School  (grades  6-8)  and  a  Charter  School  (grades  4-8). 

2. 

On  March  14,  2006,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice 
that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents,  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the 
Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  certificated  staff  by  2.5  full-time  equivalent  (FTE) 
certificated  positions. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

3, 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations,  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

4, 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

On  March  13,  2006,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  Governing  Board,  the 

Governing  Board  was  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated 
employees  holding  2.5  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

. 

7. 

On  March  13,  2006,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  06-03-01 

providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  totaling  2.5  FTE  (2 
FTE  in  elementary  classroom  instruction  at  Gold  Oak  School,  and  .5  FTE  counseling). 

8. 

The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  in 

all  schools  of  the  District  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  was  in  session  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  declined  below  that  of  the  corresponding  period  of  the  previous  school 
years.  The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  ADA  had  declined  as  follows: 

5. 

6. 

03/04  school  year  -ADA  =695.64 
04/05  school  year  —  ADA  =716.28 
05/06  school  year  -  ADA  =  681.51 

  

 
  

  

Accordingly,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  and  eliminate  teaching  services 
and  counseling  services  affecting  employment  of  2.5  FTE  certificated  positions.  The  2  FTE 
elementary  classroom  instruction  positions  are  at  issue  in  this  hearing. 

9, 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  (tenured,  probationary  or  temporary)  and 
classroom  assignments.  The  District  also  maintains  records  of  credentials  and  authorizations 
of  all  certificated  employees. 

10. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 
senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  Denise  Lambert 
is  the  least  senior  certificated  employee  in  the  District,  with  a  first  date  of  paid  service  of 
11/7/05.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  for  elementary  school  and  taught  4th  grade 
in  the  2005-2006  school  year.  She  tendered  her  resignation  to  the  District  before  the 
Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  06-03-01. 

11. 

Susan  Landon,  Teresa  Robinson  and  Christie  Clary  are  the  remaining  least 

senior  certificated  employees  in  the  District.  Each  has  8/15/05  as  her  first  date  of  paid 
service.  Each  holds a  professional  clear  multiple  subject  credential  for  elementary  school 
and  a  CLAD  certificate.  Robinson  currently  teaches  grades  K  and  1  in  Gold  Oak  Elementary 
School.  Landon  currently  teaches  grade  K in  Gold  Oak  Elementary  School.  Clary  currently 
teaches  elementary  « classes  | in  the  Charter  School. 

12. 

The  District  determined  to  “skip”  Clary  because  her  services  were  required  in 
the  Charter  School.  Although  Clary  holds  the  same  credential  as  Landon  and  Robinson,  she 
has  college  coursework  in  algebra  and  math  and  currently  teaches  pre-algebra  and  algebra  in 
grades  4  through  8  in  the  Charter  School.  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)  (1) 
provides  in  pertinent  part  that  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated 
employee  in  order  of  seniority  if  the  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study.  Landon  and  Robinson  did  not  present  evidence 
that  either  was  competent  to  teach  these  mathematics  classes.  The  District’s  determination  to 
retain  Clary  because  of  her  competence  in  mathematics  was  appropriate  and  was  in  the  best 
interests  of  the  students  in  the  District. 

13. 

Landon  and  Robinson,  as  the  least  senior  certificated  employees  in  the 

District,  would  ordinarily  be  subject  to  a  lay  off,  properly  instituted  under  Education  Code 
section  44955.  However,  the  District’s  Resolution  is  flawed  in  two  respects,  and  the  flaws 
are  fatal  to  the  District’s  efforts  to  lay  off  Landon  and  Robinson. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes 
other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to 
44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 

position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  

inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the 
schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session 
shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous 
two  school  years,  ...  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced 
or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year, 
...  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have 
become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number 
of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate 
the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at 
the  close  of  the  school  year....  (emphasis  added) 

14. 

In  keeping  with  the  mandates  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision 

(b),  the  District  did  calculate  the  ADA  of  all  schools  in  the  District  for  the  current  schoo] 
year  and  the  previous  two  school  years.  However,  the  District’s  calculations  were  based  on 
ADA  figures  gleaned  from  the  first  of  two  State  reporting  periods  (P1).  The  P1  reporting 
period  contains  ADA  reporting  from  the  first  date  of  school  until  October  or  December.’ 
The  statute  mandates  that  the  District  calculate  the  ADA  data  for  the  first  six  months  in 
which  school  is  in  session.  The  P1  reporting  period  the  District  relied  upon  in  calculating 
ADA  did  not  comply  with  the  statute’s  mandate. 

15.  |  Moreover,  once  a  District  properly  determines  that  its  ADA  has  declined,  it 

may  only  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  District  calculated  the 
percentage  of  ADA  decline  and  the  corresponding  percentage  of  certificated  FTEs.  Even  had 
the  District’s  ADA  calculations  been  accurate,  there  would  be  no  cause  to  terminate  2.5 
FTEs.  From  the  District’s  data,  the  decline  in  ADA  between  04/05  and  05/06  is  34.77 
(716.28  minus  681.51).  This  is  a  percentage  decline  of  .0485.  A  corresponding  percentage 
of  the  38  FTE  certificated  employees  in  the  District  would  be  1.843  FTE  (.0485  percentage 
decline  x  38  FTEs=  1.83  FTE),  less  than  the  2.5  FTE  reduction  the  District  proposed. 

16. 

The  District’s  Resolution  to  reduce  certificated  employees,  due  to  decline  in 
ADA,  did  not  comply  with  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b).  However,  the 
District  also  resolved  to  eliminate  or  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services;  specifically  2  FTE 
in  elementary  classroom  instruction  at  Gold  Oak  School  and.5  FTE  counseling.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  a  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS  is  not 
contingent  upon  a  reduction  in  ADA.  Here,  the  District  properly  resolved  to  eliminate  PKS 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

. 

  

*  Superintendent  Williams  testified  that  he  was  unsure  whether  the  ADA  data  on  the  P2  was  filed  in  October  or 
December  of  the  year. 

 

@ 

  
  
  

Nevertheless,  the  District’s  efforts  to  lay  off  Landon  and  Robinson.in  conformance 

with  this  Resolution  must  also  fail.  This  is  because  the  District  does  not  intend  to  eliminate  2 
PKS  of  elementary  classroom  instruction  in  the  school  year  2006-2007.  The  evidence 
revealed  that  the  reduction  in  services  is  actually  taking  place  at  the  middle  school,  resulting 
in  the  displacement  of  two  senior  teachers.  As  evidenced  by  the  testimony  of  Superintendent 
Williams  and  three  “Job  Opening  Announcements”  for  elementary  school  teachers  at  Gold 
Oak  School, it  is  clear  that  the  District  intends  to  fill  the  positions  now  held  by  Landon  and 
Robinson,  with  senior  teachers  from  Pleasant  Valley  Middle  School.  According  to 
Superintendent  Williams,  the  District  is  reorganizing  the  middle  school  and  as a  result  will 
have  to  involuntarily  transfer  some  of  the  middle  school  teachers.  The  District  is  currently 
advertising  three  elementary  teaching  positions  internally  in  the  hopes  that  some  interested 
middle  school  teachers  will  voluntarily  transfer  to  elementary  school  positions.  This  strategy 
would  avoid  involuntary  reassignments  of  middle  school  teachers. 

17. 

The  District’s  PKS  reduction  does  not  comply  with  Education  Code  section 

44955,  subdivision  (b).  The  PKS  that  is  actually  being  reduced  is  an  unknown  FTE  of 
middle  school  instruction,  not  2  FTE  in  elementary  classroom  instruction  at  Gold  Oak 
School.* 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  sections  44949  and 
44955  were  met. 

2. 

Legal  cause  does  not  exist  under  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions 

(a)  and  (b),  to  deprive  Landon  and  Robinson  of  their  positions.  As  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  1  through  15,  the  District  did  not  establish  a  decline  in  ADA  between  the  first  six 
months  of  the  2005-2006  school  year  and  a  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  two 
preceding  school  years.  As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  17,  the  District  did  not 
establish  that  2  FTEs  of  elementary  teaching  at  Gold  Oak  School  were  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-2007  school  year.  A  District  may 
reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining 
that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone, 
or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent 
because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”°  The  burden . 
is  on  the  District  to  demonstrate  that  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of 

  

‘  The  Board  could  have  complied  with  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  and  properly  laid  off  Landon 
and  Robinson,  by  specifying  in  the  Resolution  the  PKS  in  middle  school  it  intended  to  eliminate  in  the  2006-2007 
school  year.  Landon  and  Robinson,  as  the  most  junior  District  employees  could  then  be  “bumped”  by  the  senior 
teachers  holding  the  eliminated  middle  school  assignments. 

>  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.

    

services  is  reasonable  and  that  the  District  carefully  considered  its  needs  before  laying  off 
any  certificated  employee.°  The  District  has  not  met  this  burden. 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  1  through  17,  and  in  the  Legal 

Conclusions,  cause  does  not  exist  to  issue  a  final  notice  of  layoff  to  Landon  and  Robinson. 

ORDER 

_ 

The  Accusations  against  respondents  Landon  and  Robinson  are  DISMISSED  and 

preliminary  notices  of  layoff  served  on  these  respondents  are  RESCINDED. 

All  other  contentions  and  claims  not  specifically  mentioned  were  considered  and  are 

DENIED. 

DATED:  May  11,  2006 

ANN ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

°  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  y,  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.  3d  796,  807-808

  
  
  

