© 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
PLUMAS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
PLUMAS  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Proposed  Dismissal  of: 

WILLIAM  CULLINGFORD 

OAH  No.  N2006010297 

  

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  February  15,  2006,  in  Quincy,  California,  Leonard  L.  Scott,  Administrative  Law 

Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter.  — 

, 

Michelle  L.  Cannon,  Attorney  at Law,  represented  the  complainant. 

Donald  A.  Selke,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  William  Cullingford. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

In  late  August  of  2005,  the  Plumas  Unified  School  District  (School  District) 

hired  respondent  as  a  full-time,  certificated,  probationary  employee to  teach  mathematics  and 
science  at  Quincy  High  School. 

2. 

The  School  District,  acting  pursuant  to  the  authority  granted  by  Education 

Code  section  44948.2,  has  elected  to  proceed  with  probationary  teacher  discipline  pursuant  to 
the  provisions  of  Section  44948.3.  In  addition,  the  School  District  has  written  criteria  for 
evaluating  the  performance  of  teachers,  as  required  by  Section  44660,  et  seq. 

  

 

3. 

In  a  letter  dated  December  16,  2005,  Bruce  Williams  (Williams),  School 
District  Assistant  Superintendent,  notified  respondent  that  he  was  being  placed  on  paid 
administrative  leave  from  his  position,  effective  Tuesday,  January  3,  2006,  and  continuing 
until  further  notice  or  until  respondent’s  employment  was  terminated. 

4. 

. 

On  December  21,  2005,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44948.3,  Michael 

H.  Chelotti,  School  District  Superintendent  (Chelotti),  personally  served  on  respondent 
written  notice  that  he  was  recommending  that  respondent  be  dismissed  from  his  employment 
as  a  full-time,  certificated,  probationary  teacher  at  Quincy  High  School  for  unsatisfactory 
performance.  Chelotti  gave  respondent  written  notice  that,  if  he  wished  to  appeal,  he  had  15 
_days  from  receipt  of  the  written  notice  to  file  a  written  request  for  hearing.  With  the  written 
notice,  Chelotti  served  on  respondent  a  copy  of  the  performance  evaluation  of  respondent,  a 
copy  of  Education  Code  section  44948.3,  anda  blank  Request  for  Hearing  form. 

5. 

On  or  about  December  21,  2005,  Attorney  Selke,  acting  for  respondent,  filed  a 

written  Request  for  Hearing  with  the  School  District.  The  request  was  filed  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44948.3. 

6. 

Respondent  was  hired  at  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year  and  is  a 

first  year  probationary  teacher.  Before  the  start  of  the  school  year,  the  School  District 
provided  a  one-day  general  orientation  to  all  new  teachers  in  the  district.  Respondent 
attended  the  orientation.  The  orientation  included  training  regarding  teaching  and 
disciplinary  techniques.  Although  respondent  was  new  to  the  School  District,  he  had 
approximately  nine  years  teaching  experience  elsewhere. 

7, 

Peter  Gallagher  (G allagher),  the  principal  at  Quincy  High  School,  supervises 

and  administers  the  high  school,  and  supervises  and  evaluates  the  teachers  at  the  high  school. 
His  duties  include  observing  and  evaluating  new  teachers  at  least  twice  each  school  year. 
Before  evaluating  respondent  the  first  time,  Gallagher  went  over  with,  and  explained  the 
evaluation  process  to,  respondent.  During  each  evaluation,  Gallagher  fills  out  an  observation 
form_and,  afterward,  provides  a  copy  to  the  teacher  and  reviews  it  with  the  teacher. 

8, 

On  September  8,  2005,  Gallagher  performed  his  first  observation  of  respondent 

teaching  a  class,  an  8th  grade  science  class,  and  wrote  down  his  observations.  He  observed 
the  whole  class  period.  The  class  started  without  respondent  providing  an  introduction  to 
what  he  would  teach  that  day.  Nor  did  respondent  write  a  daily  plan  on  the  board  so  the 
students  would  know  what  to  expect  that  day.  Respondent  failed  to  monitor  the  class  to  see  if 
the  students  were  attentive,  about  half  of  them  were,  and  used  little in  the  way  of 
motivational  techniques  to  involve  the  students in  the  lesson.  Gallagher  was  concerned  about 
respondent’s  apparent  failure  to  have  a  teaching  strategy.  After  the  class,  Gallagher  provided 
a  copy  of  his  observations  to  respondent,  and  discussed  his  concerns  with  respondent, 
including  the  need  for  an  introduction  at  the  start  of  the  class  period. 

     
  

9. 

On  September  20,  2005,  Gallagher  again  observed  respondent  teaching  a  class 

and  wrote  down  his  observations.  Respondent  started  the  class  without  providing  an 
introduction  to  inform  the  students  of  what  they  would  cover  or  to  connect  what  they  had 
covered  the  previous  day  to  the  new  material  or  to  future  material.  Respondent  started  out  by 
writing  some  notes  on  the  blackboard,  but  failed  to  tell  the  students  what  to  do  with  the  notes. 
Two  boys  talked  during  the  whole  class  without  respondent  even  attempting  to  stop  them,  or 
quiet  them,  and  end  their  disruption  of  class.  During  the  class,  respondent  did  not  use 
students  to  pass  out  or  collect  papers.  When  respondent  asked  questions,  students  did  not 
raise  their  hands  and  wait  to  be  called  upon,  they  just  blurted  out  answers.  Respondent  failed 
to  control  the  class,  which  concerned  Gallagher.  Gallagher  gave  a  copy  of  his  written 
observations  to  respondent. 

| 

10. 

On  September  27,  2005,  Gallagher  and  Shepard  K.  Porter  (Porter),  School 

District  curriculum  director,  observed  respondent  teaching  a  class. 
observation  of  respondent  teaching  and  Porter’s  first. 

It  was  Gallagher’s  third 

- 

_ 

Gallagher  observed  respondent  during  the  whole  class  period.  Respondent  started  the 

class  without  providing  an  introduction  to  what  he  would  teach  that  day,  instead  he  just 
started  writing  equations  on  the  board.  As  respondent  wrote,  he  provided  little  explanation 
and  had  little  interaction  with  the  students.  Respondent  failed  to  explain  what  sort  of 
problems  the  equations  could  be  used  to  solve.  The  students  just  watched,  and  some  copied 
the  equations.  Without  allowing  the  students  to  ask  any  questions  and  without  advance 
warning,  respondent  passed  out  worksheets  for  the  students  to  complete  using  the  equations. 
As  the  students  started  work  on  the  worksheets,  there  was  noise  and  talking  among  some  of 
the  students,  not  necessarily  about  the  problems.  Respondent  did  not  even  attempt  to  stop  the 
talking  and  noise.  During  this  class,  respondent  failed  to  properly  control  the  students,  failed 
to  provide  a  procedure  regarding  how  the  students  should  work  independently,  and  failed  to 
allow  them  to  ask  questions  as  they  worked  independently.  Gallagher  wrote  down  his 
observations  and  gave  a  copy  to  respondent. 

| 

Porter  observed  respondent  teaching  during  the  whole  class  period.  Some  of  the 
students  were  engaged  in  the  class,  but  others  were  not  paying  attention  and  were  having 
conversations  among  themselves.  Porter  wrote  down  his  observations  and  respondent 
received  a  copy. 

11. 

In  late  September  or  early  October,  Gallagher  attempted  to  arrange  for  another 
teacher,  who  previously  taught  the  classes  being  taught  by  respondent,  to  mentor  respondent. 
He  met  and  discussed  the  mentoring  with  respondent  and with  the  other  teacher,  but  the 
mentoring  did  not  occur  because  of  various  problems  encountered  by  respondent  and  by  the 
other  teacher,  including  respondent  becoming  ill.

  

  

co 

12. 

|  On  November  15,  2005,  assistant  superintendent  Williams  observed 

@ 

respondent  teaching  a  class.  Respondent  failed  to  make  a  good  connection  between  an 
interesting  demonstration  and  the  lesson  to  be  learned  that  day.  The  way  respondent 
proceeded  was  more  presentation  than  teaching.  Respondent  failed  to  control  the  class  and 
there  was a lot  of  loud  talking  out  of  turn,  and  constant  talking  throughout  the  class  period. 
Although  there  was  a  rule  against  eating  in  class,  one  student  ate  sunflower  seeds  during  the 
whole  class.  Respondent’s  failure  to  control  those  talking  in  class  allowed  them  to  continue, 
and  to  disturb  those  who  were  trying  to  learn.  Although  respondent  asked  some  students  to 
behave,  when  they  did  not  comply,  respondent  failed  to  use  the  tools  available  to  him  to 
enforce  discipline  and  failed  to  make  them  behave.  Respondent’s  failure  to  control  his  class, 
and  to  stop  disturbances  in  class,  interfered  with  the  learning  process.  Williams  wrote  down  - 
his  observations  and  a  copy  was  provided  to  respondent. 

13. 

On  November  17,  2005,  Porter  observed  respondent  teaching  a  class  for  the 

second  time.  Respondent  again  failed  to  control  the  students.  During  class,  some  of  the 
students  were  talking,  others  were  flipping  through  books  or  doing  paperwork  for  other 
classes.  Porter  wrote  down  his  observations  and  respondent  received  a  copy. 

14. 

On  November  21,  2005,  Gallagher  observed  respondent  teaching  a  class  for  a 

forth  time.  The  students  did  not  have  assigned  seats  and  respondent  did  not  have a  seating 
chart.  The  boys  sat  on  one  side  of  the  room  and  the  girls  on  the  other.  Respondent  only 
spoke  to  three  or  four  students  by  name,  and  simply  pointed  at  the  others.  Again  there  were 
problems  with  respondent’s  teaching,  and  with  his  lack  of  management  and  control  of  the 
class.  Many  of  the  students  were  talking  and  were  not  paying  attention  during  class.  There 
‘was  so  much  talking  that  it  interfered  with  effective  learning,  yet,  respondent  failed  to 
attempt  to  control  the  students  and  to  stop  the  talking.  In  addition,  many  students  were  not 
following  along  as  respondent  went  over  answers  to  a  worksheet,  and  the  class  was  so. 
disorganized  that  many  of  the  students  did  not  know  what  to  do.  Gallagher  gave  a  copy  of 

_  his  observations  to  respondent  and  they  discussed  the  concerns.  » 

+. 15. ___On  November 

29, 2005,  Gallagher  filled  out  a  Certificated  Teacher  Evaluation 
Form  (Evaluation)  regarding  respondent’s  teaching  performance.  In  the  Evaluation,  he  cited 
his  classroom  observations  of  respondent  on  September  8  and  20,  2005, but,  in  rating 
respondent’s  performance,  Gallagher  considered  all  of  his  observations  of  respondent  and 
those  of  curriculum  director  Porter  and  assistant  superintendent  Williams.  Respondent’s 
overall  rating  was  unsatisfactory. 

16. 

Respondent  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  biochemistry  from  the 
University  of  London  and  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  in  music  from  the  San  Francisco 
Conservancy  of  Music.  He  completed  a  mid-career  change  program  in  mathematics  and 
science  at  Mills  College.  He  has  California  teaching  credentials  in  mathematics  and  physical 
science,  with  supplementary  credentials  in  music. 

 
  

Respondent  previously  taught  at  Haywood  High  School  and,  for  the  Sierra  Plumas 

Unified  School  District,  at  Pliocene  Ridge  High  School.  When  Pliocene  Ridge  High  School 
closed,  he  was  offered  a  teaching  position  in  Loyalton,  but  took  this  position  at  Quincy  High 
School  instead. 

At  Quincy  High  School,  respondent  taught  8th  grade  mathematics,  algebra  I  to  grades 

9  to  12,  and  earth  science  to  grades  9  to  12. 

On  November  30,  2005,  respondent  met  with  Gallagher  prior  to  going  on  sick  leave. 
_  The  sick  leave  started  on  December  1,  2005  and  was  initially  scheduled  to  end  on  December 
16,  2005.  At  the  meeting,  respondent  provided  Gallagher  with  lesson  plans for the  class  days 
he  would  be  absent.  During  the  meeting,  Gallagher  showed  the  written  Evaluation  to 
respondent  and  they  discussed  it. 

In  a  note  dated  December  13,  2005,  respondent’s  doctor  extended  his  sick  leave  and 
released  him  to  return  to  work  on  January  3,  2006.  Respondent  gave  a  copy  to  the  school  | 
district. 

On  or  about  December  14,  while  respondent  was  out  on  sick  leave,  he  met  with 
Williams  and  on  December  16,  2005,  Williams  informed  respondent  that  he  was  being  placed 
on  paid  administrative  leave  and  was  removed  from  the  classroom,  and  provided  him  with  a 
copy  of  the  written  notice.  Williams  also  showed  him  a  copy  of  the  letter  dated  December 
21,  2005,  recommending  that  respondent  be  terminated.  Respondent  said  that  this  was  the 
first  notice  he  received  that  the  School  District  was  considering  terminating  him. 

Respondent  complained  that  at  the  start  of  the  school  year Gallagher  said  that  he 
would  be  evaluating  respondent,  and  did  not  warn  respondent  that others  might  also  observe 
respondent’s  classes.  This  complaint  was  poorly  founded  because  there  is  no  legal 
prohibition  against  a  school  principal  enlisting  other  administrators  to  assist  in  observing  a 
teacher’s_performance,-and,  as_a  practical  matter,  it  is  a  good  way  to  secure  a  variety  of 
viewpoints. 

_ 

Respondent  said  that  in  about  mid-October  Gallagher  suggested  that  another  teacher 

assist  respondent  in  improving  his  performance.  Respondent  spoke  with  the  proposed  mentor 
teacher  soon  after,  but  that  teacher  wanted  to  check  on  the  administrative  requirements  before 
starting.  Respondent  and  that  teacher  met  again  in  November  to  set  up  the  mentoring,  and 
‘were  ready  to  start  when  respondent  went  out  on  sick  leave. 

Respondent  blamed  his  problems  in  various  classes  upon:  the  physical  characteristics 

of  his  classroom,  the  late  arrival  of  text  books  for  one  class,  the  shortage  of  text  books  for 
another  class,  and  the  late  arrival  of  workbooks  for  another  class.  He  complained  that  the

  

 
e
a
c

classroom  was  just  a  plain,  ordinary  classroom,  rather  than  one  designed  for  teaching  science, 
and  it  had  poor  ventilation.  He  said  the  earth  science  text  books  did  not  arrive  until  the 
second  week  of  school.  He  said  he  coped  with  the  shortage  of  algebra  I  text  books  by 
copying  the  text  book.  He  complained  that  not  only  did  the  workbooks  for  earth  science 
arrive  four  to  six  weeks  after  the  start  of  the  semester,  but  he  received  too  few  of  them. 

© 

Respondent  also  complained  that  his  algebra  I class  was  an  alternate  pathways  class 

for  students  who  had  more  difficulties  or  had  failed  or  had  recently  transferred in  or  who 
needed  extra  help,  which  meant  he  had  more  students  with  behavior  problems.  He  said  he 
had  a  few  behavior  problem  students  in  each  class,  and  spoke  with  some  parents  on  the 
telephone  about  the  problems.  In  addition  respondent  said  he  referred  about  10  students  to 
the  vice principal  for  disciplinary  problems. 

Respondent  blamed  his  failure  to  refer  more  students  on  a  statement  the  vice  principal 
allegedly  made  during  the  orientation.  Respondent  said  that  the  vice  principal  told  them  that 
too  many  students  had  been  referred  for  discipline  during  the  previous  school  year. 
However,  even  if  the  vice  principal  did  make  this  statement,  it  did  not  excuse  respondent 
from  taking  reasonable  measures  to  establish  and  maintain  control  in  his  classes,  measures 
available  to  respondent  and  which  did  not  require  referring  a  student  to  the  vice  principal. 

Respondent  failed  to  even  attempt  to  stop  the  misbehavior  during  classes,  such  as  the 
talking,  eating  and  moving  around,  and  the  misbehavior  interfered  with  the  learning  process. 
Respondent  failed  to  properly  control  his  students  during  class  and is  responsible  for  his 
failure. 

— 

© 

17. 

|  Respondent's  failure  to  properly  control  his  students  during  class  allowed 

disruptions  that  interfered  with  the  learning  process  and  harmed  those  students  who  were 
trying  to  learn.  The  disruptions  stymied  or  interfered  with  respondent’s  eff orts  to  teach  and 
students’  efforts  to  learn.  . 

: 

Respondent?s-failures  to-provide  introductions 

to the material and  explanations  of  the 

  

objectives  of  the  material  made  it  more  difficult  for  the  students  to  learn  and  to  connect  the 
material  with  prior  and  subsequent  related  material. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44932  is  entitled  Grounds  for  dismissal  of  permanent 

employee;  Suspension  of  permanent  or  probationary  employee  for  unprofessional  conduct, 
and  provides,  in  relevant  part: 

  

  

 

  

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 

following  causes: 

(4)  Unsatisfactory  performance. 

Education  Code  section  44938  is  entitled Unprofessional  conduct  or 

2. 
unsatisfactory  performance;  Notice,  and  provides,  in  relevant  part: 

(b)  The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  shall  not  act  upon  any  charges 
of  unsatisfactory  performance  unless  it  acts  in  accordance  with  the  provisions 
of  paragraph  (1)  or  (2): 

(1)  At  least  90  calendar  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  filing,  the  board  or  its 
authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against  whom  the  charge  is 
filed,  written  notice  of  the  unsatisfactory  performance,  specifying  the  nature 
thereof  with  such  specific  instances  of  behavior  and  with  such  particularity  as 
to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or  her  faults  and 
overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall  include  the 
evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11  (commencing  with  Section  44660)  of 
Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee. 

(2)  The  governing  board  may  act  during  the  time  period  composed  of  the  last 
one-fourth  of  the  schooldays  it  has  scheduled  for  purposes  of  computing 
apportionments  in  any  fiscal  year  if,  prior  to  the  beginning  of  that  time  period, 
the  board  or  its  authorized  representative  has  given  the  employee  against 
whom  the  charge is  filed,  written  notice  of  the  unsatisfactory  performance, 
specifying-the-nature-thereof-with-such specific  instances.of  behavior and  with —______.__ 
such  particularity  as  to  furnish  the  employee  an  opportunity  to  correct  his  or 
her  faults  and  overcome  the  grounds  for  the  charge.  The  written  notice  shall 
include  the  evaluation  made  pursuant  to  Article  11  (commencing  with  Section 
44660)  of  Chapter  3,  if  applicable  to  the  employee. 

(c)  "Unsatisfactory  performance"  as  used  in  this  section  means,  and  refers  only 
to,  the  unsatisfactory  performance  particularly  specified  as  a  cause  for 
dismissal  in  Section  44932  and  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal 
specified  in  Section  44932.

  

3. 

Education  Code  section  44948.2  is  entitled  Dismissal  of  probationary 

certificated  employees,  and  provides: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a)  of  Section  44948  and  subdivision  (c)  of 
Section  44948.3,  the  governing  board  of  any  school  district  having  an  average 
daily  attendance  of  less  than  250  may  elect  to  dismiss  probationary  employees 
during  the  school  year  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Section  44948.3.  Once  a 
district  has  made  an  election  pursuant  to  this  section,  it  shall  only  dismiss 
probationary  certificated  employees  during  the  school  year  pursuant  to  this 
section. 

4, 

Education  Code  section  44948.3  is  entitled  Dismissal  of  probationary 

employees,  and  provides: 

. 

(a)  First  and  second  year  probationary  employees  may  be  dismissed  during  the 
school  year  for  unsatisfactory  performance  determined  pursuant  to  Article  11 
(commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  or  for  cause  pursuant  to 
Section  44932.  Any  dismissal  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  in  accordance 
with  all  of  the  following  procedures: 

(1)  The  superintendent  of  the  school  district  or  the  superintendent's  designee 
shall  give  30  days'  prior  written  notice  of  dismissal,  not  later  than  March  15  in 
the  case  of  second  year  probationary  employees.  The  notice  shall  include  a 
statement  of  the  reasons  for  the  dismissal  and  notice  of  the  opportunity  to 
appeal,  In  the  event  of  a  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance,  a  copy  of 
the  evaluation  conducted  pursuant  to  Section  44664  shall  accompany  the 
written  notice. 

(2)  The  employee  shall  have  15  days  from  receipt  of  the  notice  of  dismissal  to 
submit  to  the  governing  board  a  written  request  for  a  hearing.  The  governing 
board-may-establish-procedures  for_the-appointment_of an  administrative  law 
judge  to  conduct  the  hearing  and  submit  a  recommended  decision  to  the  board. 
The  failure  of  an  employee  to  request  a  hearing  within  15  days  from  receipt  of 
a  dismissal  notice  shall  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

(b)  The  governing  board,  pursuant  to  this  section,  may  suspend  a  probationary 
employee  for  a  specified  period  of  time  without  pay  as  an  alternative  to 
dismissal. 

(c)  This  section  applies  only  to  probationary  employees  whose  probationary 
period  commenced  during  the  1983-84  fiscal  year  or  any  fiscal  year  thereafter, 

  

  
 
  

 
e
m

 
t
o
s

@ 

and  does  not  apply  to  probationary  employees  in  a  school  district  having  an 
average  daily  attendance  of  less  than  250  pupils. 

‘5. 

Education  Code  section  44660  is  entitled  Legislative  intent;  Establishment  of 

uniform  systern,  and  provides: 

It  is  the  intent  of  the  Legislature  that  governing  boards  establish  a  uniform 
system  of  evaluation  and  assessment  of  the  performance  of  all  certificated 
personnel  within  each  school  district  of  the  state,  including  schools  conducted 
or  maintained  by  county  superintendents  of  education.  The  system  shall 
involve  the  development  and  adoption  by  each  school  district  of  objective  — 
evaluation  and  assessment  guidelines  which  may,  at  the  discretion  of  the 
governing  board,  be  uniform  throughout  the  district  or,  for  compelling  reasons, 
be  individually  developed  for  territories  or  schools  within  the  district,  provided 
that  all  certificated  personnel  of  the  district  shall  be  subject  to  a  system  of 
evaluation  and  assessment  adopted  pursuant  to  this  article. 

This  article  does  not  apply  to  certificated  personnel  who  are.  employed  on  an 
hourly  basis in  adult  education  classes. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44662  is  entitled  Evaluation  and  assessment 

guidelines,  and  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  The  governing  board  of  each  school  district  shall  establish  standards  of 
expected  pupil  achievement  at  each  grade  level  in  each  area  of  study. 

(b)  The  governing  board  of  each  school  district  shall  evaluate  and  assess 
certificated  employee  performance  as  it  reasonably  relates  to: 

(1)  The  progress  of  pupils  toward  the  standards  established  pursuant  to 

_subdivision (a) and,  if  applicable, the state  adopted  academic  content  standards 

as  measured  by  state  adopted  criterion  referenced  assessments. 

  

(2)  The  instructional  techniques  and  strategies  used  by  the  employee. 

(3)  The  employee's  adherence  to  curricular  objectives. 

(4)  The  establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  suitable  learning  environment, 
within  the  scope  of  the  employee’  s  responsibilities. 

. 
“written  reaction;  Discussion  of  evaluation,  and  provides  in  relevant  part:

Education  Code  section  44663  is  entitled  Employee's  copy  of  evaluation  and 

7, 

(a)  Evaluation  and  assessment  made  pursuant  to  this  article  shall  be  reduced  to 
writing  and  a  copy  thereof  shall  be  transmitted  to  the  certificated  employee  not 
later  than  30  days  before  the  last  schoolday  scheduled  on  the  school  calendar 
adopted  by  the  governing  board  for  the  school  year  in  which  the  evaluation 
takes  place.  The  certificated  employee  shall  have  the  right  to  initiate  a  written 
reaction  or  response  to  the  evaluation.  This  response  shall  become  a  permanent 
attachment  to  the  employee's  personnel  file.  Before  the  last  schoolday 
scheduled  on  the  school  calendar  adopted  by  the  governing  board  for  the 
school  year,  a  meeting  shall  be  held  between  the  certificated  employee  and  the 
evaluator  to  discuss  the  evaluation. 

8. 

Education  Code  section  44664  is  entitled  Frequency  of  evaluation  and 

assessment;  Areas  of  improvement;  Unsatisfactory  performance;  Persons  excluded,  and 
provides,  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  Evaluation  and  assessment  of  the  performance  of  each  certificated 
employee  shall  be  made  on  a  continuing  basis  as  follows: 

(1)  At  least  once  each  school  year  for  probationary  personnel. 

(b)  The  evaluation  shall  include  recommendations,  if  necessary,  as  to  areas  of 
improvement  in  the  performance  of  the  employee.  If  an  employee  is  not 
performing  his  or  her  duties  in  a  satisfactory  manner  according  to  the  standards 
prescribed  by  the  governing  board,  the  employing  authority  shall  notify  the 
employee  in  writing  of  that  fact  and  describe  the  unsatisfactory  performance. 
The  employing  authority  shall  thereafter  confer  with  the  employee  making 
specific  recommendations  as  to  areas  of  improvement  in  the  employee's 

___-performance_and_endeavor 

assist  the  employee  in  his  or  her  performance.  If _ 
any  permanent  certificated  employee  has  received  an  unsatisfactory  evaluation, 
the  employing  authority  shall  annually  evaluate  the  employee  until  the 
employee  achieves  a  positive  evaluation  or  is  separated  from  the  district. 

to 

(c)  Any  evaluation  performed  pursuant  to  this  article  which  contains  an 
unsatisfactory  rating  of  an  employee's  performance  in  the  area  of  teaching 
methods  or  instruction  may  include  the  requirement  that  the  certificated 

_  employee  shall,  as  determined  necessary  by  the  employing  authority, 
participate  in  a  program  designed  to  improve  appropriate  areas  of  the 
employee's  performance  and  to  further  pupil  achievement  and  the  instructional 

  

  
  

10

objectives  of  the  employing  authority.  If  a  district  participates  in  the  Peer 
Assistance  and  Review  Program  for  Teachers  established  pursuant  to  Article 
4.5  (commencing  with  Section  44500),  any  certificated  employee  who  receives 
an  unsatisfactory  rating  on  an  evaluation  performed  pursuant  to  this  section 
shall  participate  in  the  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  Program  for  Teachers. 

9. 

Respondent,  citing  Education  Code  section  44938,  subdivision  (b)(1),  argues 

that  the  School  District  violated  respondent’s  due  process  rights  when  it  failed  to  give  © 
respondent  at  least  90  days  notice  of  his  unsatisfactory  performance  and  an  opportunity  to 
correct  his  deficiencies  before  proceeding  with  this  action.  However,  in  so  arguing, 
respondent  fails  to  take  into  account  the  entirety  of  Section  44938,  because  subdivision (c) 
states  that: 

. 

(c)  "Unsatisfactory  performance"  as  used  in  this  section  means,  and  refers  only 
to,  the  unsatisfactory  performance  particularly  specified  as  a  cause  for 
dismissal  in  Section  44932  and  does  not  include  any  other  cause  for  dismissal 
specified  in  Section  44932. 

Upon  referring  to  Section  44932,  we  find  that  it  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  dismissed  except  for  one  or  more  of  the 
following  causes: 

(4)  Unsatisfactory  performance. 

Thus,  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44938  only  apply  to  instances 

where  a  school  district  is  attempting  to  discipline  a  permanent,  certificated  employee 
(teacher)  for  unsatisfactory  performance,  and  therefore,  does  not  apply  to  respondent. 

    

When  school  districts  of  this  size  are  dealing  with  probationary,  certificated 

employees,  the  controlling  sections  are  Education  Code  sections  44948.2  and  44948.3. 
Section  44948.2  allows  a  school  district  to  elect  to  proceed  against  probationary,  certificated 
employees  pursuant  to  Section  44948.3,  which  is  what  occurred  here. 

Section  44948.3  establishes  the  time  frames  for  disciplinary  actions  against 

probationary,  certificated  employees,  which  occur  before  March  15  of  a  school  year. 
provides  in  relevant  part: 

It 

(a)  First  and  second  year  probationary  employees  may  be  dismissed  during  the 
school  year  for  unsatisfactory  performance  determined  pursuant to  Article  11 

  

11

  

(commencing  with  Section  44660)  of  Chapter  3,  or  for  cause  pursuant  to 
Section  44932.  Any  dismissal  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  in  accordance 
with  all  of  the  following  procedures: 

(1)  The  superintendent  of  the  school  district  or  the  superintendent's  designee 
shall  give  30  days'  prior  written  notice  of  dismissal,  not  later  than  March  15  in 
the  case  of  second  year  probationary  employees.  The  notice  shall  include  a 
statement  of  the  reasons  for  the  dismissal  and  notice  of  the  opportunity  to 
appeal.  In  the  event  of  a  dismissal  for  unsatisfactory  performance,  a  copy  of 
the  evaluation  conducted  pursuant  to  Section  44664  shall  accompany  the 
written  notice. 

(2)  The  employee  shall  have  15  days  from  receipt  of  the  notice  of  dismissal  to 
submit  to  the  governing  board  a  written  request  for  a  hearing.  The  governing 
board  may  establish  procedures  for  the  appointment  of  an  administrative  law 
judge  to  conduct  the  hearing  and  submit  a  recommended  decision  to  the  board. 
The  failure  of  an  employee  to  request  a  hearing  within  15  days  from  receipt  of 
a  dismissal  notice  shall  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

Acting  pursuant  to  the  authority  granted  by  Section  44948.2,  the  School  District 
elected  to  proceed  pursuant  to  Section  44948.3,  and  established  teacher  evaluation  criteria  as 
required  by  Section  44660,  et  seq. 
probationary,  certificated  employee,  the  School  District  complied  with  the  notice 
requirements  of  Section  44948.3. 

In  taking  action  against  respondent, a  first  year, 

© 

Specifically,  the  School  District  served  a  written  notice  of  dismissal  at  least  30  days 

prior  to  the  dismissal.  The  notice  stated  the  reason  for  dismissal,  unsatisfactory  performance, 
was  issued  prior  to  March  15,  and  informed  respondent  of  his  right  to  file  an  appeal  within  15 
days  of  receipt  of  the  notice.  A  copy  of  the  evaluation  conducted  pursuant  to  Section  44664 
accompanied  the  written  notice. 

Neither  Morrison  v.  State  Board  of Education  (1969),  1  Cal3d  214,  nor  Tarquin  v 
Commission  on  Professional  Competence  (1978),  84  CA3  251,  apply  to  this  proceeding 
because  respondent is  a  probationary  teacher.  Those  cases  specifically  « deal  with  the  rights of 
permanent,  certificated  employees  under  the  laws  controlling  the  discipline  of  such 
employees,  and  clearly  so  stated,  not  with  the  rights  of  probationary  employees  under  quite 
different  statutes. 

10. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44948.3,  for 

unsatisfactory  performance,  to  dismiss  respondent  from  the  position  as a  first-year, 

12

  

  
  
  

probationary,  certificated  employee  of  the  School  District,  as  found  in  Findings  6  through  15, 
and  17. 

—  The  dismissal  of  respondent  William  Cullingford  is  sustained,  and  his  appeal  is 

dismissed,  pursuant  to  Legal  Conclusions  1  through  10. 

ORDER 

Dated:  Deck  /  x  ALOE 

  

  

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

13

  

