BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
SAN  JUAN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Layoff): 

PROPOSED  REDUCTION  OR 
ELIMINATION  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS 
OF  SERVICES  BY  121.35  FULL  TIME 
EQUIVALENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES 

Respondents. 

  

  

OAH  No.  N2006020107 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  19  and  20,  2006,  in  Sacramento,  California,  Leonard  L. Scott, 

Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this 

matter. 

District  (School  District). 

Diana  D.  Halpenny,  General  Counsel,  represented  the  San  Juan  Unified  School 

Michael  N.  McCallum,  Attorney  at  Law,  assisted  by  his  Paralegal  Robin  Thompson, 

represented  all  of  the  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  evidentiary  part  of  the  hearing  was  closed,  but  the 
record  was  left  open  until  May  1,  2006,  for  the  receipt  of  written  closing  arguments.  The 
School  District's  written  closing  argument  was  received  on  or  before  May  1,  2006,  was 
marked  for  identification  and  admitted  for  jurisdictional  purposes  as  the  Schoo!  District 
Exhibit  29.  Respondents’  written  closing  argument  was  received  on  or  before  May  1,  2006, 
was  marked  for  identification  and  admitted  for  jurisdictional  purposes  as  Respondents’ 

Exhibit  CC.  Respondents  also  submitted,  by  facsimile,  a  two  page  document,  a  cover  page   

 

  

and  a  copy  of  an  April  26,  2006  memorandum.  The  two  page  document  was  marked  for 
identification  as  Respondents’  Exhibit  DD,  but  was  not  admitted  into  evidence  and  was  not 
considered  in  reaching  this  decision. 
May  1,  2006. 

The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on 

. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  or  about  February  14,  2006,  Board  of  Education  (Board)  of  the  School 

District  adopted  Resolution  No.  2360  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services 
and  thus  eliminating  118.35  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the 
2005-2006  school  year. 

2. 

Subsequently,  on  or  about  March  14,  2006,  Board  adopted  Resolution  No. 

2360  (Revised)  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  thus  eliminating 
121.35  FTE  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year.  The  action  was 
taken  in  the  best  interests  of  the  School  District  and  of  the  students. 

The  Resolution  provided  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  following 

particular  kinds  of  services: 

Administrators 

Elementary  Principals 

Middle  School  Vice  Principals 

Director  (Instruction) 

Subtotal 

Non-Administrative  Certificated  Services 

— 

  

Multiple  Subject/Self  Contained 

Elementary  Specialists 

English 

Math 

Science 

Social  Science 

Physical  Education 

  

 

. 

FTEs 

2.00 

3.00 

1.00 

6.00 

FTEs 

60.00 

5.00 

9.40 

9.40 

9.40 

9.40 

2.82 

NN 

@ 

  

  

French 

Fine  Arts 

Business 

“Nurse 

Counselors 

ROP,  Computer  Repair 

Counselor,  Independent  Studies 

Subtotal 

TOTAL 

2.82 

1.88 

1.88 

1.00 

0.15 

2.20 

0.40 

115.35 

121.35 

3. 

The  Board  directed  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  or 

designee,  to  send  notices  to  certificated  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2006-2007  school  year,  and  that  said  notices  should  be  sent  to  the  appropriate  number  of 
certificated  employees  in  order  to  effectuate  a  reduction  of  certificated  staff  in  an  amount 
equal  to  121.35  FTE  positions. 

4. 

Prior  to  March  15,  2006,  Larry  Graser  (Graser),  Director,  Human  Resources, 
notified  the  Board  of  the  names  of  the  certificated  personnel  who  would  be  sent  a  March  15 
notice  of  layoff. 

5. 

On  or  about  February  14,  2006,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  2361, 
which  established  criteria  to  break  ties  among  certificated  staff  (teachers)  with  the  same  date 
of  hire.  The  Board  of  Education  based  the  criteria  upon  the  needs  of  the  School  District  and 
of  its  students,  and  acted  within  its  discretion  in  creating  the  tie  breaking  criteria. 

6. 

On  or  about  April  4,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2360  (Revised) 
with  the  same  reductions  or  discontinuances  of  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  as  in  the 
March  14  revision,  eliminating  121.35  FTE  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006 
school  year,  but  retitled  one  category  from  Multiple  Subject/Self  Contained  to  K-6/Multiple 
Subject/Self  Contained. 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2006,  the  Associate  Superintendent  for  Human 

Resources  gave  written  notice  to  respondents  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be 
given  to  respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  due 
to  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  notice  set  forth  the 

reasons  for  the  recommendation,  as  required  by  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.   
 

  

  

Attached  to  the  notices  were  blank  Request  for  Hearing  forms  and  copies  of  relevant 

@ 

Education  Code  sections. 

8. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  to  determine  whether  there is 

cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44949,  subdivision  (b). 

9. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  2360,  on  or  about  March  27,  2006,  Graser  signed 
and  had  timely  served  upon  respondents  an  Accusation.  Graser  acted in  his  official  capacity. 

10. 

Respondents  timely  signed  and  served  Notices  of Defense  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(1),  and  Government  Code  section  11506. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  School  District. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

On  or  about  November  17,  2005,  Human  Resources  sent  a  letter  to  each 
certificated  employee  of  the  School  District,  asking  that  they  verify  the  information  shown  on 
the  letter  regarding  their  seniority  date,  credentials,  address,  telephone  number,  total  FTE 
worked,  and  whether  permanent  or  probationary.  The  letter  asked  the  certificated  employees 
to  make  any  changes,  sign,  date  and  return  the  form  by  December  9,  2005. 

@ 

After  receiving  responses  from  certificated  personnel,  Human  Resources,  where 

appropriate,  incorporated  any  new  or  changed  information  into  its  records  and  adjusted  the 
seniority  list  accordingly.  The  School  District  posted  copies  of  the  Seniority  List  in  two 
formats:  one  in  alphabetical  order  and  one  by  date  of  hire  (i.e.  seniority)  to  allow  teachers  to 
point  out  any  remaining  inaccuracies. 

In  a  letter  dated  February  15,  2006,  Human  Resources  notified  all  certificated 
employees  that  the  revised  seniority  list  was  available  and  encouraged  them  to  review  the  list 
to  ensure  accuracy  of  the  information  shown.  Human  Resources  reviewed  the  corrections, 
and,  where  appropriate,  incorporated  the  corrections  into  the  seniority  list. 

The  court  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 

Cal.App.3d  627,  dealt  with  the  question  of  when a  school  district  must  consider 
positively  assured  attrition  in  a  layoff,  and  when  it  need  not. 

At  page  635,  the  court  held  that  a  school  district  must  consider  positively  assured 

attrition  where  a  layoff  is  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA): 

14. 

  
  

 

  

  

  

Courts  have  previously  held  that  in  terminating  certificated  employees  because 
of  a  decline  in  ADA a  district  must  consider  all  positively  assured  attrition. 
(Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze,  supra,  109  Cal.App.3d  648;  Degener  Vv. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689  [136  Cal.Rptr.  801];  Lewin  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977  [133  Cal.Rptr.  385];  Burgess  v. 
Board  of Education  (1974)  41  Cal.App.3d  571  [116  Cal.Rptr.  183].) 
"Positively  assured  attrition"  is  attrition  which  has  actually  occurred  and  is  to 
be  distinguished  from  "potential  attrition"  which  may  be  anticipated  but  is  still 
unknown. 

At  pages  635-636,  the  court  held  that  a  school  district  need  not  consider  positively 

assured  attrition  where  a  layoff  is  due  to  discontinuation  or  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  (PKS),  and  contrasted  it  with  a  layoff  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance 
(ADA): 

A  board's  decision  as  to  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of 
service  is  not  tied  in  with  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  reduction  in  the 
number  of  students.  The  number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by  PKS 
reductions  depends  totally  upon  the  district's  decision  as  to  how  many  services 
to  reduce.  Put  another  way,  the  language  of  section  44955  that  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  "may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of said  district"  is  only 
applicable  to  ADA  terminations  based  upon  an  actual  reduction  in  attendance. 
Where  the  governing  board  determines  to  discontinue  or  reduce  a  particular 
kind  of  service,  there  is  no  way  to  calculate  a  "corresponding  percentage," 
hence  it  is  within  the  discretion  of  the  board  to  determine  the  amount  by  which 
it  will  reduce  a  particular  service. 

Pursuant  to  San  Jose,  supra,  the  School  District  is  not  legally  required  to  consider 

positively  assured  attrition  when  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services. 
Conversely,  positively  assured  attrition  must  be  considered  if  a  layoff  is  due  to  a  decline  in 
average  daily  attendance. 

Because  this  layoff  is  due  to  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services,  the  School  District  was  not  required  to  consider  positively  assured  attrition  before 
determining  which  teachers  would  be  laid  off.  However,  although  not  required  to  consider  it, 
the  School  District  considered  the  positively  assured  attrition  that  had  actually  occurred,  but 
not  speculative  attrition  that  might  occur  in  the  future. 

15.  | Human  Resources  determined  which  certificated  personnel  were  in 

positions  affected  by  the  reduction  in  PKS,  then,  where  appropriate,  bumped  more  

senior  certificated  personnel  into  positions  occupied  by  more  junior  personnel,  as 
required  by  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  to  determine 
those  to  be  actually  noticed  for  layoff.  That  is,  those  whose  positions  were 
affected  by  the  cuts  moved  into  the  bumping  process  and,  depending  on  seniority, 
credentials  and  competence,  bumped  into  the  assignments  of  those  less  senior, 
until  those  actually  affected  by  the  layoff  were  determined. 

16. 

Prior  to  the  hearing,  the  School  District  decided  not  to  cut  the  nurse 
position  by  0.15  FTE.  This  would  reduce  the  layoff  to  121.20  FTE  but  not  affect 
those  identified  as  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

After  negotiations  with  respondents,  the  School  District  dismissed  certain 

respondents  from  these  proceedings,  or  reduced  the  amount  of  his  or  her 
assignment  subject  to  layoff.  However,  the  School  District  did  not  state  whether 
such  changes  affected  the  total  amount  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  in  PKS. 
The  respondents.no  longer  subject  to  layoff  due  to  the  dismissals  were  as  follows: 

FTE  retained/laid  off  .  DOH/Status 

  

Respondent 

Coulombe,  Heidi 

Ferris,  Sara 

Goin,  Tamaryn 

Hall,  Darcy 

Liby,  Vanessa 

Misner,  Jennifer 

Reidel,  Elisa 

Rovai-Wieler,  Amy 

Sayasy,  Phetsavane 

Smith,  Damon 

0.70/  0.10 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

10-10-02,  perm 

09-23-02,  perm 

08-31-04,prob 

08-20-04,  prob 

11-04-02,  perm 

11-19-02,  perm 

09-20-02,  perm 

09-19-03,  perm 

08-20-04,  prob 

09-30-02,  perm 

The  School  District  also  amended  the  seniority  list  to  reflect  that  Robert  Meng  was 

permanent  rather  than  probationary. 

During  the  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  that  the  following  credentialed  employees 

would  be  retained,  Oleg  Petrik,  hire  date  August  20,  2004,  for  0.80  FTE,  and  Stephanie 
Ghazanfari,  hire  date  August  20,  2004,  for  0.80  FTE.  The  parties  stipulated  that  this  resolved 
the  issue  regarding  the  reduction  in  English. 

  

 

  
  

17. 

Tenure  is  the  relationship  between a  teacher  and  the  school  district  which  gives 

the  teacher  greater  job  security. 

Seniority  is  the  relationship  between  the  teachers  within  a  school  district.  Among  the 
teachers  credentialed  to  provide  a  given  service,  greater  seniority  in  the  school  district  gives  a 
greater  legal  entitlement  to  a  position.  (Ferner  v.  Harris  (1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  363.) 

18. 

A  teacher  who  serves  over  75  percent  of  the  regular  school  year,  either 

as  a  temporary  or  in  one  position  replacing  one  teacher  partially  as  a  long  term 
substitute  and  partially  as  a  temporary,  receives  credit  toward  tenure  for  the  whole 
school  year.  In  either  instance,  the  teacher  receives  credit  toward  seniority  from  the 
start  of  service  as  a  temporary  if  rehired  at  the  start  of  the  ensuing  school  year  without 
a  break  in  service. 

However,  if  there  is  a  break  in  service,  even  of  one  day,  then  seniority  starts  after  the 
break  in  service,  see  Education  Code  section  44909  and  Kamin  v.  Governing  Board  (1977) 
72  Cal.App.3d  1014.  Thus,  if  there  is  a  break  in  service  between  the  qualifying  service  for 
working  over  75  percent  of  a  school  year  and  the  start  of  service  in  the  next  school  year, 
whether  the  break  is  at  the  end  of  the  one  school  year  or  at  the  start  of  the  next  school  year, 
the  teacher  is  given  credit  toward  tenure  for  the  earlier  school  year  but  credit  toward  seniority 
starts  with  the  first  day  of  paid  service  of  the  later  school  year. 

The  School  District  correctly  applied  these  rules  in  determining  the  tenure  dates  and 

date  of  hire  for  the  teachers  affected  by  this  layoff. 

19. 

At  the  start  of  the  school  year,  the  School  District  hired  certificated  employees 
(teachers)  as  substitutes;  some  to  replace  absent  teachers  and  others  to  teach  classes  while  the 
School  District  determined  whether  it  needed  additional  teachers,  and,  if  so,  how  many.  At 
the  start  of  a  school  year,  the  School  District  had  only  an  estimate  of  the  number  of  students 
who  would  enroll,  and  thus  only  an  estimate  of  the  number  of  teachers  required.  Once  the 
students  were  enrolled  and  school  started,  the  School  District  could  determine  its  actual 
enrollment,  and,  thus,  the  number  of  teachers  it  needed. 

Respondents  claim  that  the  School  District  may  only  hire  substitutes  to  replace  absent 

teachers  one  for  one,  and  cite  Education  Code  section  44917.  Respondents  claim  that  any 
substitutes  hired  in  excess  of  the  number  needed  to  replace  absent  teachers  automatically 
become  temporary  employees,  and  because  they  do  not  have  contracts  stating  that  they  are 
temporary,  they  become  probationary  pursuant  to  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union 
High  School  District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911.

    

Education  Code  section  44917  provides,  in  relevant  part: 

Except  as  provided  in  Sections  44888  and  44920,  governing  boards  of  school 
districts  shall  classify  as  substitute  employees  those  persons  employed  in 
positions  requiring  certification  qualifications,  to  fill  positions  of  regularly 
employed  persons  absent  from  service. 

Section  44917  requires  school  districts  to  classify  as  a  substitute  those  teachers  hired 
to  fill  the  positions  of  absent  teachers,  until  those  teachers  return.  However,  Section  44917 
does  not  prohibit  hiring  substitutes  to  fill  other  teaching  positions;  positions  that  may  or  may 
not  exist,  while  the  School  District  determines  its  actual  needs. 

Section  44888  has  been  repealed.  Section  44920  establishes  the  requirements  for 

employing  temporary  teachers.  It  provides,  in  relevant  part: 

Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  Sections  44917  and  44919,  the  governing 
board  ...  may  employ  as  a  teacher,  for  a  complete  school  year,  but  not  less  than 
one  semester  during  a  school  year  ...  any  person  holding  appropriate 
certification  documents,  and  may  classify  such  person  as  a  temporary 
employee.  The  employment  of  such  persons  shall  be  based  upon  the  need  for 
additional  certificated  employees  during  a  particular  semester  or  year  because 
a  certificated  employee  has  been  granted  leave  for  a  semester  or  year,  or  is 
experiencing  long-term  illness,  and  shall  be  limited,  in  number  of  persons  so 
employed,  to  that  need,  as  determined  by  the  governing  board. 

Section  44920  requires  school  districts  to  use  temporary  employees  only  to  fill  the 

positions  of  absent  teachers,  until  those  teachers  return,  on  a  one  for  one  basis.  Section 
44920  prohibits  using  temporary  employees  to  fill  other  teaching  positions  that  may  or  may 
not  exist  for  only  a  short  time.  Thus,  section  44920  prohibits  doing  exactly  what  respondents 
claim  should  be  done,  that  is,  it  prohibits  using  temporary  teachers  to  fill  in  those  teaching 
positions  that  may  or  may  not  exist. 

20. 

The  School  District  classifies  Julie  Finney  (Finney)  as  a  probationary 

employee,  but  she  asserts  that  she  should  be  permanent.  Her  date  of  hire  was  August  19, 
2002,  and  she  has  been  with  the  School  District  for  four  school  years.  However,  she  taught 
full  time  for  only  one  school  year  before  taking  a  leave  of  absence  for  one  school  year.  When 
she  returned  to  work,  she  voluntarily  chose  to  work  half  time  and  share  a  position  with 
another  teacher,  who  also  worked  half  time.  Finney  has  worked  half  time  for  two  school 
years  sharing  the  1.0  FTE  position.  While  working  half  time,  Finney  has  not  worked  at  least 
seventy-five  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  school  was  in  session  during  either  school 
year.  Instead,  she  has  only  worked  approximately  half  of  the  days  the  school  was  in  session 
during  the  school  year,  because  she  works  three  days  one  week  and  two  days  the  next  week. 

     

Finney  cited  Education  Code  sections  44908  and  44929.21,  and  Ferner  v.  Harris 
(1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  363,  as  the  basis  for  her  position  that  she  became  permanent  at  the 
commencement  of  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

The  School  District  cited  Education  Code  sections  44908,  44914  and  44929.21  as  the 

basis  for  its  position  that  Finney  has  not  met  the  legal  requirements  to  become  permanent. 

Education  Codes  section  44908  states  that  a  “probationary  employee  who,  in  any  one 

school  year,  has  served  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the 
district  in  which  he  is  employed  are  maintained  shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete 
school  year.” 

Education  Code  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b),  provides  that  employees  “who, 
after  having  been  employed  by  the  district  for  two  complete  consecutive  years  in  a  position  or 
positions  requiring  certification  qualifications,  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school 
year  to  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
succeeding  school  year”  become  permanent. 

In  Griego  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (1994)  28  Cal.App.4th  515,  519,  the 

court  held  that  there  are  two  distinct  csiteria  in  section  44929.21  regarding  the  two  years  of 
service.  The  first  is  that  it  must  be  two  complete  school  years  and  the  second  is  that  the 
school  years  must  be  consecutive. 

_ 

Education  Code  section  44975  modifies  the  meaning  of  the  word  consecutive,  by 

providing  that  a  leave  of  absence  does  not  constitute  a  break  in  the  service  required  for 
tenure,  but  that  the  time  spent  on  a  leave  does  not  count  toward  fulfillment  of  the  two  years 
service  requirement  under  section  44908. 

) 

Pursuant  to  section  44908,  a  probationary  employee  must  serve  75  percent  of  days  the 

school  is  in  session  to  receive  credit  for  serving  a  complete  school  year.  And  pursuant  to 
section  44929.21,  an  employee  must  work  two  complete  school  years  to  become  permanent 
at  the  commencement  of  the  succeeding  school  year. 

Unfortunately  for  Finney,  her  half  time  work,  wherein  she  served  one-half  of  the  days 
the  school  was  in  session  does  not  meet  that  requirement  of  section  44908,  regarding  serving 
75  percent  of  the  days.  And  nothing  in  section  44908  or  elsewhere  in  the  Education  Code 
specifically  requires  the  amalgamating  of  two  half  years  to  meet  the  requirement  for  a 
complete  school  year.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  prohibits  adding  the  two  half  school  years, 
either.  However,  because  it  is  not  required,  it  is  within  the  discretion  of  the  School  District  to 
decide  whether  or  not  to  amalgamate  the  two  half  years.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the 
School  District  abused  its  discretion  when  it  chose  not  to  add  the  two.  »

Respondent  cited  Ferner  v.  Harris  (1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  363,  368,  as  a  basis  for  her 

@ 

position.  Ferner  was  a  community  college  instructor,  who  was  initially  hired  to  teach  full 
time  as  a  probationary  employee.  After  he  taught  full  time  for  two  years,  he  was  subject  to.a 
layoff  and  accepted  a  part  time  position.  He  then  taught  part  time  for  another  year.  (A 
community  college  instructor  had  to  teach  for  three  years  to  receive  tenure  [become 
permanent].)  Based  upon  the  fact  that  he  was  a  probationary  employee,  not  a  temporary 
employee,  the  court  held  that  he  was  tenured  part  time: 

Although  Education  Code  section  13304  is  silent  on  the  question,  the  case  law 
has  long  sanctioned  the  creation  of  tenure  limited  to  part-time  teaching.  Most 
recently  in  Vittal  v.  Long  Beach  Unified  Sch.  Dist.,  8  Cal.App.3d  112  [87 
Cal.Rptr.  319],  the  court  held  at  page  120  that  "It  was  the  apparent  intent  of  the 
Legislature  in  enacting  the  'tenure'  statutes  that  teachers  who  have  faithfully 
served  the  indicated  portion  of  the  school  year  for  three  consecutive  years 
should  be  entitled  to  permanent  classification  upon  their  contracting  to  teach  a 
fourth  year."  Also  in  accord  are  Holbrook  v.  Board  of Education,  37  Cal.2d 
316  [231  P.2d  853],  and  Crawford  v.  Board  of Education,  20  Cal.App.2d  391 
[67  P.2d  348]. 

The  College  contends  that  the  teacher  is,  under  authority  of  the  above  cases, 
tenured  only  as  to  13/45ths  of  a  full-time  teaching  position  and,  therefore,  only 
entitled  to  a  preference  under  Education  Code  section  13448  to  such  a  part- 
time  position.  Based  on  the  above  cases,  it  is  true  that  he  is  tenured  only  as  to 
13/45ths  of  a  full-time  teaching  position. 

@ 

However,  there  are  distinctions  between  the  Ferner  case  and  this  matter.  Whether 

Ferner  worked  75  percent  of  the  days  the  school  was  in  session  was  not  an  issue  in  the  Ferner 
case;  instead,  the  court  was  only  concerned  with  whether  he  had  worked  for  three 
consecutive  school  years.  In  this  case,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44908  and 
44929.21,  an  employee  must  work  at  least  75  percent  of  the  days  the  schools  are  in  session  to 
have  a  qualifying  complete  school  year  and  must  work  two  complete  school  years  to  become 
permanent  at  the  commencement  of  the  succeeding  school  year.  In  Hunt  y.  Alum  Rock  Union 
Elementary  School  District  (1970)  7  Cal.App.3d  612,  the  court  held  that: 

..  Education  Code  sections  13328  and  13304  ...  provide  that  a  probationary 
employee  must  serve  at  least  75  percent  of  each  school  year  (Ed.  Code,  § 
13328)  for  three  consecutive  school  years  in  order  to  be  certified  as  a 
permanent  employee  of  a  school  district  (Ed.  Code,  §  13304). 

In  Brightman  v.  Board  of Education  (1935)  4  Cal.App.2d  394,  the  court  held  that 
because  Brightman  had  not  served  the  required  number  of  days,  the  service  did  not  count  in 

       
  

10

determining  a  question  as  to  permanent  tenure  status.  And  in  Wood  v.  Los  Angeles  City 
School  District  (1935)  6  Cal.App.2d  400,  the  court  held  that  a  teacher  who  served  less  than 
the  number  of  days  constituting  the  school  year,  was  not  entitled  to  classification  as  a 
permanent  employee. 

Therefore,  Finney  is  properly  classified’as  probationary. 

21. 

Pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d), 
the  School  District  decided  to  exempt  those  with  certain  credentials  from  the  layoffs  due  to 
the  need  for  certificated  personnel  with  those  credentials  and  the  difficulty  encountered  hiring 
qualified  people  with  those  credentials.  The  exempted  credentials  are  special  education, 
mathematics,  physics  and  agriculture.  The  School  District  skipped  a  number  of  individuals 
because  they  are  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  one  of  these  areas.  The  skipping  is 
legal,  so  long  as  each  of  the  skipped  individuals  is  assigned  only  to  teach  in  the  specified 
subject  area.  If  any  of  them  were  assigned  to  teach  another  subject,  where  a  more  senior 
certificated  employee  was  laid  off,  it  would  violate  the  requirements  of  Education  Code 
section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c). 

22. 

Pursuant  to  the  authority  granted  by  Education  Code  sections  44225, 
subdivisions  (d),  (g)  and  (q),  and  44300,  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing 
promulgated  regulations  for  the  issuance  and  renewal  of  emergency  and  limited  assignment 
teaching  permits,  including  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  sections  80023.2, 
80024.3.2,  80026  and  80027.  Pursuant  to  the  criteria  found  in  these  sections,  securing  an 
emergency  or  limited  assignment  teaching  permit  is  not  an  easy  process  nor  is  the  end  result  a 
foregone  conclusion. 

In  general,  emergency  or  limited  assignment  permits  must  be  renewed  each  year.  In 

order  to  qualify  for  a  renewal,  certificated  personnel  must  complete  six  (6)  units  of  course 
work  toward  the  credential  area,  math.  Both  the  School  District  and  the  teacher  must  agree 
to  any  renewal.  And  the  School  District  must  file  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  such  services. 
The  issuance  or  renewal  must  be  sought  annually  from  the  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing,  which  makes  the  final  determination  regarding  whether  to  renew. 

Section  80023.2  establishes  the  basic  criteria  for  the  issuance  of  an  emergency  permit. 
It  requires  that  applicants,  who  already  possess  a  California  teaching  credential,  must  meet  a 
number  of  additional  requirements,  including:  subdivision  (c)  applicant  must  satisfy  the 
relevant  permit  criteria  for  the  requested  permit  as  specified  in  Sections  80024.1  through 
80024.8;  subdivision  (d)  the  school  district  must  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully 
Qualified  Educators  that  satisfies  the  provisions  of  Section  80026;  and  subdivision  (f) 
applicant  must  submit  a  complete  application  packet,  including  a completed  Application  for 
Credential  Authorizing  Public  School  Service. 

11

Section  80024.1  establishes  the  criteria  for  the  issuance  or  renewal  of  an  Emergency 
Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit.  It  requires  that  applicants,  who  already  possess 
a  California  teaching  credential,  must  satisfy  a  number  of  additional  requirements,  including: 
subdivision  (a)(1)  applicant  and  the  school  district  must  meet  the  general  requirements 
specified  in  Section  80023.2;  subdivision  (a)(2)  applicant  must  provide  a  written  affirmation 
of  his  or  her  intent  to  complete  the  requirements  set  forth  in  Section  80026.6  during  the 
period  of  the  permit;  subdivision  (a)(3)  applicant  must  provide  evidence  of  qualification  for 
the  initial  permit;  subdivision  (b)  for  renewal,  applicant  must  meet  the  above  requirements, - 
and  either  provide  evidence  of  completion  of  six  hours  of  course  work  toward  the  credential 
or  pass  the  subject  matter  examination. 

Section  80026  requires  that  the  employing  agency  annually  submit  a  Declaration  of 

Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  as  a  prerequisite  to  the  issuance  of  any  emergency  or 
limited  assignment  teaching  permit  to  certificated  employees  of  that  agency.  Subdivision  (a) 
requires  that  the  declaration  must  specify  the  number  of  each  type  of  emergency  permit 
sought.  Subdivision  (b)  requires  a  brief  description  of  efforts  that  the  employing  agency  has 
undertaken  to  locate  and  recruit  individuals  who  hold  the  needed  credentials.  Subdivision  (c) 
requires  information  about  efforts  to  train  people  to  fill  the  need,  such  as  by  co-sponsoring 
internships  or  other  certification  programs.  Subdivision  (d)  requires  the  employing  agency  to 
certify  that  there  are  an  insufficient  number  of  certificated  persons  who  meet  the  criteria  to 
fill  the  positions.  Subdivision  (e)  requires  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  to  adopt 
the  Declaration  of  Need. 

Section  80027,  subdivision  (a),  establishes  the  criteria  for  the  issuance  of  a  limited 
assignment  permit.  It  requires  that  applicants,  who  already*possess  a  California  teaching 
credential,  must  satisfy  a  number  of  additional  requirements,  including:  subdivision  (a)(1) 
requires  the  employing  agency  to  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need;  subdivision  (a)(6)  requires 
written  agreement  by  the  teacher  to  serve  under  the  limited  assignment  permit;  and 
subdivision  (a)(7)  requires  that  the  teacher  submit  a  completed  Application  for  Credential. 
For  renewal,  subdivision  (b)  requires  the  applicant  meet  the  criteria  for  issuance,  and 
pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)(3)(C)  verify  completion  of  at  least  six  semester  units,  or  the 
equivalent  quarter  units,  in  the  subject  area.  Subdivision  (b)(6)  allows  only  two  renewals  of 
the  permit.  Subdivision  (d)  provides  that  the  limited  assignment  permit  shall  be  valid  for  one 
year. 

As  can  be  seen  from  the  above  criteria,  issuance  or  renewal  of  permits  is  not 
automatic  and  there  is  no  assurance  that  one  will  be  issued.  Not  only  must  the  applicant 
demonstrate  compliance  with  the  criteria,  but  the  School  District  must  submit  a  Declaration 
of  Need  each  year. 

MATHEMATICS 

  

12 

     

23. 

Jeffrey  Allen,  hire  date  August  27,  2004,  teaches  grades  7-8  pre-algebra  for  0.4 

FTE  and  science  for  0.6  FTE.  He  has a  single  subject  credential,  which  authorizes  him  to 
teach  physical  education,  and  an  emergency  single  subject  permit  in  science,  which 
authorizes  him  to  teach  geology.  He  does  not  have  a  mathematics  credential  or  special 
authorization  or  permit  to  teach  mathematics,  so  he  was  mis-assigned  this  school  year  and 
cannot  bump  into  a  mathematics  class.  In  addition,  his  emergency  single  subject  permit  will 
expire  at  the  end  of  the  school  year  and  would  have  to  be  renewed.  As a result,  he  is  subject 
to  the  layoff  for  the  whole  1.0  FTE. 

24. 

Rocco  Marrongelli,  hire  date  October  20,  2003,  teaches  grades  7-8  pre-algebra 

and  one  period  of  history  for  1.0  FTE.  He  has  a  single  subject  credential  in  social  science 
with  clad  emphasis  and  an  emergency  single  subject,  limited  assignment  permit  for 
mathematics.  His  limited  assignment  permit  for  mathematics  will  expire  at  the  end  of  this 
school  year  and  would  have  to  be  renewed  for  him  to  teach  mathematics  next  school  year. 
Renewal  would  require  a  Declaration  of  Need  from  the  School  District  and  approval  by  the  - 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing.  Marrongelli  did  not  notify  the  Schoo!  District  before 
March  15,  2006,  whether  he  had  or  had  not  completed  the  required  six  units  this  year. 
Whether  his  permit  would  be  renewable  and  whether  it  would  be  renewed  is  unknown. 
Marrongelli  is  subject  to  the  layoff  for  the  whole  1.0  FTE. 

25. 

The  School  District  appropriately  skipped  the  following  individuals  because 

they  are  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  mathematics,  so  long  as  each  of  them  is 
assigned  only  to  teach  mathematics. 

Amanda  Blair,  hire  date  January  24,  2005,  teaches  grades  7-8  pre-algebra  for  0.4  FTE 
and  mathematics  for  0.6  FTE.  She  has  a  single  subject  credential  that  authorizes  her  to  teach 
mathematics. 

Pardeep  Bains,  hire  date  August  18,  2005,  teaches  grades  7-8  pre-algebra  for  1.0  FTE. 

She  has  a  single  subject  credential  that  authorizes  her  to  teach  mathematics. 

Jesse  MacDonald,  hire  date  August  20,  2004,  teaches  trigonometry  for  0.67  FTE  and 
advanced  placement  economics,  a  social  science  class,  for  0.33  FTE.  MacDonald  has  single 
subject  credentials  that  authorize  teaching  mathematics  and  economics.  MacDonald  would 
not  be  exempt  from  layoff  if  assigned  to  teach  economics,  a  social  science. 

PHYSICS 

26.  |  The  School  District  appropriately  skipped  the  following  individuals  because 

they  are  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  physics,  so  long  as  each  of  them  is  assigned 
only  to  teach  physics. 

13

Scott  Martinez,  date  of  hire  August  19,  2005,  teaches  physics  1.0  FTE.  He  has  a 

@ 

single  subject  credential  that  authorizes  him  to  teach  science:  physics. 

Charles  Saylor,  date  of  hire  August  20,  2004,  teaches  physics  for  0.4  FTE  and  earth 
science  for  0.6  FTE.  He  has  a  single  subject  credential  that  authorizes  him  to  teach  science: 
physics,  and  a  supplementary  authorization  for  introductory  science. 

AGRICULTURE 

27. 

The  School  District  appropriately  skipped  the  following  individual  because  she 

is  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  agriculture,  so  long  as  she  is  assigned  only  to  teach 
agriculture. 

Christina  Tannehill,  date  of  hire  January  20,  2006,  teaches  agriculture  1.0  FTE.  She 
has  a  single  subject  credential  in  agricultural  science  that  authorizes  her  to  teach  agriculture 
classes.  She  is  the  only  certificated  employee  with  an  agricultural  credential. 

SPECIAL  EDUCATION 

28. 
credentials. 

INDEPENDENT  STUDIES  COUNSELOR 

Neither  party  raised  any  issue  about  skipping  those  with  special  education 

29. 

The  School  District  is  laying  off  regular  school  counselors  and  reducing  or 

discontinuing  0.4  FTE  counselor  position  in  the  Independent  Studies  program. 

Karen  Murphy  (Murphy)  is  a  counselor  at  the  Independent  Study  High  School.  She 

started  with  the  School  District  in  1995-1996  as  a  substitute,  then  received  her  counseling 
pupil  personnel  services  credential.  She  has  worked  as  a  counselor  in  the  Independent 
Studies  program  since  1997,  When  she  took  the  position,  she  was  not  aware  that  certificated 
personnel  in  the  Independent  Studies  program  were  on  a  different  seniority  track  than 
certificated  personnel  in  the  regular  schools.  She  was  aware  that  it  was  possible  to  transfer 
between  the  Independent  Studies  program  and  the  regular  school  program,  with 
administrative  approval.  However,  she  did  not  submit  a  request  for  voluntary  transfer  to  the 
regular  school.  If  she  had  submitted  a  request,  it  would  have  been  up  to  the  School  District 
whether  to  grant  it  or  not. 

The  Independent  Study  High  School  is  accredited  by  the  Western  Association  of 

Schools  and  Colleges.  It  has  its  own  California  Department  of  Education  code  number  and 
generates  its  own  revenue.  Independent  Studies  operates  as  a  separate  and  distinct  alternative 
education  program  for  students.  Students  must  sign  up  and  qualify  to  participate  in  it,  and 

  

  
  

14

once  in  it,  they  receive  instruction  only  once  each  week,  then  do  the  assigned  work 
independently.  It  is  an  alternative  for  high  school  students  who  voluntarily  transfer  into  the 
program  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  and  who  qualify  for  admission  based  on  an  assessment  of 
their  ability  to  learn  independently. 

Certificated  personnel,  teachers  and  counselors,  are  specifically  hired  for  the 

Independent  Studies  program  based  on  the  needs  of  the  program  and  the  special 
qualifications  of  the  counselor  or  teacher.  Education  Code  section  44865  permits  the  district 
to  assign  a  teacher  or  counselor  to  the  Independent  Studies  program,  with  the  consent  of  the 
teacher  or  counselor,  if  the  person  meets  the  requirements  of  Section  44865. 

Certificated  personnel  working  in  the  Independent  Studies  program  are  employed 
subject  to  different  contract  provisions  than  those  employed  in  the  regular  school,  have  a 
different  pay  scale,  different  class  sizes,  work  different  hours,  and  work  a  different  number  of 
days  each  school  year.  Certificated  personnel  in  the  Independent  Studies  program,  like  those 
in  the  adult  school  program,  are  on  separate  seniority  tracks  from  the  certificated  personnel  in 
the  regular  school.  Just  as  the  regular  school  certificated  personnel  cannot  bump  into  the 
Independent  Studies  program,  certificated  personnel  in  the  independent  Studies  program 
cannot  bump  into  the  regular  school. 

However,  even  if  it  were  held  that  certificated  personnel  could  bump  between  the 

Independent  Studies  program  and  the  regular  school,  Murphy  would  not  qualify.  She  would 
not  qualify  because  she  failed  to  request  a  voluntary  transfer  to  the  regular  school  prior  to  the 
March  15  notice.  Pursuant  to  the  union  contract,  the  School  District  could  not  have 
transferred  her  without  her  consent  to  the  reassignment.  Murphy’s  failure,  to  give  her 
consent  and  request  a  transfer  prior  to  March  15,  prevented  the  School  District  from  taking 
any  responsive  action  before  the  March  15  notice.  Instead,  she  waited  until  after  the  March 
15  notices  had  been  sent  to  make  this  claim.  Her  delay  in  acting  caused  prejudice  to  the 
School  District  because  the  School  District  was  required  by  law  to  determine  which 
certificated  employees  were  affected  by  the  layoff,  and  give  them  the  March  15  notice. 

The  appellate  courts  have  dealt  with  similar  situations,  and  provided  guidance  to  us  in 

resolving  this  matter. 

In  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d 
796,  814-815,  the  court  held  that  it  was  each  respondent’s  duty  to  timely  have  on  file  at  the 
School  District  office  all  credentials,  transcripts  and  any  other  qualification  documentation 
that  might  qualify  him  or  her  to  teach  additional  subjects,  such  as  special  education, 

In  Johnson  v.  City  of Loma  Linda  (2000)  24  Cal.4th  61,  77,  the  California  Supreme 

Court  held:  “The  doctrine  of  laches  bars  a  cause  of  action  when  the  plaintiff  unreasonably  

  

delays  in  asserting  or  diligently  pursuing  the  cause  and  the  plaintiff  has  acquiesced  in  the  act 
about  which  the  plaintiff  complains,  or  the  delay  has  prejudiced  the  defendant.” 

In  American  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Board  of Education  (1977)  77  Cal.App.3d 
100,  the  court  held  that  where  a  temporary  teacher  failed  to  make  a  claim  that  she  should 
have  been  classified  as  probationary  until  after  March  15,  the  point  in  time  when  a  school 
district  was  required  to  issue  a  notice  of  non-reelection,  the  teacher  was  guilty  of  laches  and 
was  estopped  from  impeaching  the  temporary  nature  of  her  employment.  The  court  held  that 
her  actions  foreclosed  the  school  district  from  giving  her  the  dismissal  notice,  which  must  be 
given  by  March  15,  and  thereby  caused  prejudice  to  the  school  district. 

Like  the  above  cases,  Murphy  failed  to  timely  raise  the  issue  before  March  15,  and  her 

failure  prejudiced  the  School  District.  Murphy  is  barred  by  laches  and  estoppel  from 
claiming  that  the  School  District  should  have  transferred  her. 

30. 

Alain  Negretot,  date  of  hire  August  20,  2004,  teaches  French  for  1.0  FTE.  He 
has  a  provisional  credential  to  teach  French  and  expects  to  receive  his  clear  credential  at  the 
end  of  this  school  year.  He  was  hired  in  the  fall  of  2004.  He  believes  he  should  be  skipped 
because  he  is  part  of  a  unique  program  at  Mira  Loma  High  School,  which  offers  an 
International  Baccalaureate  diploma.  He  completed  a  special,  four-day  training  course  to 
qualify  to  teach  in  the  International  Baccalaureate  program.  He  is  subject  to  the  layoff 
because  the  School  District  is  reducing  or  discontinuing  French  and  he  is  less  senior. 

31.  |  No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is 

being  retained  to  perform  a  service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Those  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  being  retained  will  provide 
services  which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

32. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  can  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and 
was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

33. 

The  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  resultant  reduction  in 

full  time  equivalent  certificated  positions  are  for  the  welfare  of  the  School  District  and  the 
pupils.  The  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  is  the  sole  cause  for  not  re-employing 
respondents. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides: 

16 

  

   

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the 
governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the 
employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or 
his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by 
the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been  recommended 
that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or 
has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor 
shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be 
necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.  However,  the  violation  of  this 
requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be 
construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this 
section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in 
writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to 
subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall 
not  be  less  than  seven  days 
after  the  date  on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon 
the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date 
specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or 
her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise 
the  employee  of  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be 
conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing 
with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code 
and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein, 
except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five 
days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be 
notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code 
shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service 
of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government 

Code  shall  so  indicate.  

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall 
prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as 
to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for 
the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of 
the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing 
board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and 
disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations 
contained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge 
shall  be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors 
committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall 
not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial 
errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing 
board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the 
proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of 
the  administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the 
district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not 
inconsistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate 
this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in 
person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the 
United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known 
address  of  the  employee. 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continuance  is 
granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the  dates 
prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of  granting  the 
continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which 
occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  shall  be  extended  for  a  period 
of  time  equal  to  the  continuance. 

. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes 
other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to 
44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949, 
inclusive. 

| 

  

18 

     

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the 
schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall 
have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two 
school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board  determines  that  attendance  in  a 
district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of  the  termination  of  an 
interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state 
law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any 
of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the 
district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district, 
permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as 
otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a 
service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this  section 
for  a  newly  formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school  of  the  district 
shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  a  school  of  the  newly  formed  or  reorganized 
district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school  years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the 
same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely 
on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request 
of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing 
board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination 
and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the 
other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board 
provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of 
termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right 
or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of 
May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such 

employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  —  

  

employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary 
employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in 
Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a 
manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning 
or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has 
not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
Studies  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the 
employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach a  specific 
course  or  course  of  Studies,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for 
a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  Studies  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

3, 

Education  Code  section  44956(a)(1)  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  Any  permanent  employee  whose  services  have  been  terminated  as  provided 
in  Section  44955  shall  have  the  following  rights: 

(1)  For  the  period  of  39  months  from  the  date  of  such  termination,  any 
employee  who  in  the  meantime  has  not  attained  the  age  of  65  years  shall  haye 
the  preferred  right  to  reappointment,  in  the  order  of  original  employment  as 
determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44831 
to  44855,  inclusive,  if  the  number  of  employees  is  increased  or  the 
discontinued  service  is  reestablished,  with  no  requirements  that  were  not 
imposed  upon  other  employees  who  continued  in  service;  provided,  that  no 
probationary  or  other  employee  with  less  seniority  shall  be  employed  to  render 
a  service  which  said  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
However,  prior  to  reappointing  any  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or 
she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 

20

  
  
  

credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
Studies  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the 
employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

4, 

Education  Code  section  44908  provides: 

A  probationary  employee  who,  in  any  one  school  year,  has  served  for  at  least 
75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  in  which  he 
is  employed  are  maintained  shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete  school 
year.  In  case  of  evening  schools,  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  evening 
schools  of  the  district  are  in  session  shall  be  deemed  a  complete  school  year. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44909  provides: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  may  employ  persons  possessing  an 
appropriate  credential  as  certificated  employees  in  programs  and  projects  to 
perform  services  conducted  under  contract  with  public  or  private  agencies,  or 
categorically  funded  projects  which  are  not  required  by  federal  or  state 
statutes.  The  terms  and  conditions  under  which  such  persons  are  employed 
shall  be  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  employee  and  the  governing  board  and 
such  agreement  shall  be  reduced  to  writing.  Service  pursuant  to  this  section 
shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to 
attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent  employee  unless 
(1)  such  person  has  served  pursuant  to  this  section  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the 
number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  by  which  he  is  employed  are 
maintained  and  (2)  such  person  is  subsequently  employed  as  a  probationary 
employee  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications.  Such  persons  may 
be  employed  for  periods  which  are  less  than  a  full  school  year  and  may  be 
terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially  funded  project  without 
regard  to  other  requirements  of  this  code  respecting  the  termination  of 
probationary  or  permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918. 

Whenever  any  certificated  employee  in  the  regular  educational  program  is 
assigned  to  a  categorically  funded  project  not  required  by  federal  or  state 
statute‘and  the  district  employs  an  additional  credentialed  person  to  replace 
that  certificated  employee,  the  replacement  certificated  employee  shall  be 
subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  44918. 

This  section  shall  not  be  construed  to  apply  to  any  regularly  credentialed 
employee  who  has  been  employed  in  the  regular  educational  programs  of  the 
school  district  as  a  probationary  employee  before  being  subsequently  assigned 
to  any  one  of  these  programs. 

21

6. 

Education  Code  section  44914  provides: 

a  substitute,  or 

a  probationary  employee  of  the  district  in 

a 
If  an  employee  has  served  as 
position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  for  one  complete  school  year, 
and  in  the  year  immediately  preceding  the  service  as  probationary  employee 
a  substitute  and  probationary  employee, 
has  served  as 
serving  in  both  capacities  during  the  same  school  year  in  the  schools  of  the 
district  at  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district 
were  maintained,  the  governing  board  may  count  the  year  of  employment  as  a 
substitute  or  as  a  substitute  and  probationary  employee  as  one  year  of  the 
probationary  period  which  he  is  required  by  law  to  serve  as  a  condition  to 
being  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  of  the  district. 

as 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44916  provides: 

The  classification  shall  be  made  at  the  time  of  employment  and  thereafter  in 
the  month  of  July  of  each  school  year.  At  the  time  of  initial  employment  during 
each  academic  year,  each  new  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall 
receive  a  written  statement  indicating  his  employment  status  and  the  salary  that 
he  is  to  be  paid.  If  a  school  district  hires  a  certificated  person  as  a  temporary 
employee,  the  written  statement  shall  clearly  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of 
the  employment  and  the  length  of  time  for  which  the  person  is  being 
employed.  If  a  written  statement  does  not  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of  the 
employment,  the  certificated  employee  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  probationary 
employee  of  the  school  district,  unless  employed  with  permanent  status. 

8. 

Education  Code  section  44917  provides: 

Except  as  provided  in  Sections  44888  and  44920,  governing  boards  of  school  districts 
shall  classify  as  substitute  employees  those  persons  employed  in  positions  requiring 
certification  qualifications,  to  fill  positions  of  regularly  employed  persons  absent  from 
service. 

After  September  1  of  any  school  year,  the  governing  board  of  any  school  district  may 
employ,  for  the  remainder  of  the  school  year,  in  substitute  status  any  otherwise 
qualified  person  who  consents  to  be  so  employed  in  a  position  for  which  no  regular 
employee  is  available,  including  persons  retired  for  service  under  the  State  Teachers’ 
Retirement  System.  Inability  to  acquire  the  services  of  a  qualified  regular  employee 
shall  be  demonstrated  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Commission  for  Teacher  Preparation 
and  Licensing. 

  

  
  

22

Any  person  employed  for  one  complete  school  year  as  a  temporary  employee  shall,  if 
reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  in  a  position  requiring  certification 
qualifications,  be  classified  by  the  governing  board  as  a  probationary  employee  and 
the  previous  year's  employment  as  a  temporary  employee  shall  be  deemed  one  year's 
employment  as  a  probationary  employee  for  purposes  of  acquiring  permanent  status. 

9. 

Education  Code  section  44920  provides: 

Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  Sections  44917  and  44919,  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  may  employ  as  a teacher,  for  a  complete  school  year, 
but  not  less  than  one  semester  during  a  school  year  unless  the  date  of  rendering 
first  paid  service  begins  during  the  second  semester  and  prior  to  March  15th, 
any  person  holding  appropriate  certification  documents,  and  may  classify  such 
person  as  a  temporary  employee.  The  employment  of  such  persons  shall  be 
based  upon  the  need  for  additional  certificated  employees  during  a  particular 
semester  or  year  because  a  certificated  employee  has  been  granted  leave  for  a 
semester  or  year,  or  is  experiencing  long-term  illness,  and  shall  be  limited,  in 
number  of  persons  so  employed,  to  that  need,  as  determined  by  the  governing 
board. 

Any  person  employed  for  one  complete  school  year  as  a  temporary  employee 
shall,  if  reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  in  a  vacant  position 
requiring  certification  qualifications,  be  classified  by  the  governing  board  as  a 
probationary  employee  and  the  previous  year's  employment  as  a  temporary 
employee  shall  be  deemed  one  year's  employment  as  a  probationary  employee 
for  purposes  of  acquiring  permanent  status. 

For  purposes  of  this  section  "vacant  position"  means  a  position  in  which  the 
employee  is  qualified  to  serve  and  which  is  not  filled  by  a  permanent  or 
probationary  employee.  It  shall  not  include  a  position  which  would  be  filled  by 
a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  except  for  the  fact  that  such  employee 
is  on  leave. 

10. 

Education  Code  section  44929.21  defines  tenure: 

(a)  Every  employee  of  a  school  district  of  any  type  or  class  having  an  average 
daily  attendance  of  250  or  more  who,  after  having  been  employed  by  the 
district  for  three  complete  consecutive  school  years  in  a  position  or  positions 
requiring  certification  qualifications,  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding 
school  year  to  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  succeeding  school  year  be  classified  as  and  become  a 
permanent  employee  of  the  district. 

.  23

This  subdivision  shall  apply  only  to  probationary  employees  whose 
probationary  period  commenced  prior  to  the  1983-84  fiscal  year. 

(b)  Every  employee  of  a  school  district  of  any  type  or  class  having  an  average 
daily  attendance  of  250  or  more  who,  after  having  been  employed  by  the 
district  for  two  complete  consecutive  school  years  in  a  position  or  positions 
requiring  certification  qualifications,  is  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding 
school  year  to  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications  shall,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  succeeding  school  year  be  classified  as and  become  a 
permanent  employee  of  the  district. 

The  governing  board  shall  notify  the  employee,  on  or  before  March  15  of  the 
employee's  second  complete  consecutive  school  year  of  employment  by  the 
district  in  a  position  or  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications,  of  the 
decision  to  reelect  or  not  reelect  the  employee  for  the  next  succeeding  school 
year  to  the  position.  In  the  event  that  the  governing  board  does  not  give  notice 
pursuant  to  this  section  on  or  before  March  15,  the  employee  shall  be  deemed 
reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year. 

This  subdivision  shall  apply  only  to  probationary  employees  whose 
probationary  period  commenced  during  the  1983-84  fiscal  year  or  any  fiscal 
year  thereafter. 

11. 

|  Education  Code  section  44225,  subdivisions  (d),  (g)  and  (q),  provide: 

The  commission  shal!  do  all  of  the  following: 

(d)  Establish  standards  for  the  issuance  and  renewal  of  credentials,  certificates, 
and  permits.  In  setting  standards,  the  commission  shall  seek  to  ensure,  through 
its  credentialing  of  teachers,  that  public  school  teachers  satisfy  all  of  the 
following  criteria: 

(1)  Are  academically  talented. 

(3)  Are  creative  and  energetic. 

(2)  Are  knowledgeable  of  the  subjects  to  be  taught  in  the  classroom. 

(4)  Have  the  human  skills  to  motivate  and  inspire  pupils  to  achieve  their  goals. 

  

  
  

24

(5)  Have  the  sensitivity  to  foster  self-esteem  in  pupils  through  recognition  that 
each  pupil  has  his  or  her  own  goals,  talents,  and  levels  of  development. 

(6)  Be  willing  to  relate  the  educational  process  and  their  instructional strategies 
to  meet  pupils’  needs. 

(7)  Are  able  to  work  effectively  with  and  motivate  pupils  from  a  variety  of 
ethnic,  socioeconomic,  cultural,  academic,  and  linguistic  backgrounds. 

(8)  Have  an  understanding  of  principles  and  laws  related  to  educational  equity, 
and  the  equitable  practice  of  the  profession  of  education  among  all  pupils 
regardless  of  their  ethnicity,  race,  gender,  age,  religious  background,  primary 
language,  or  handicapping  condition. 

(g)  Establish  alternative  methods  for  entry  into  the  teaching  profession,  and 
into  other  certificated  roles  in  the  schools,  by  persons  in  varying 
circumstances,  including  persons  who  have  been  educated  outside  of 
California,  provided  that  each  applicant  satisfies  all  of  the  requirements 
established  by  the  commission.  One  alternative  method  shall  be  the  successful 
completion  of  at  least  two  years  of  classroom  instruction  under a  district  intern 
certificate,  pursuant  to  Article  7.5  (commencing  with  Section  44325).  In 
establishing  alternative  methods  for  entry  into  the  teaching  profession,  the 
commission  shall  develop  strategies  to  encourage  classroom  aides  to  become 
credentialed  teachers. 

(q)  Propose  appropriate  rules  and  regulations  to  implement  the  act  which 
enacts  this  section. 

12. 

|  Education  Code  section  44300  provides: 

(a)  Commencing  January  1,  1990,  the  commission  may  issue  or  renew 
emergency  teaching  or  specialist  permits  in  accordance  with  regulations 
adopted  by  the  commission  corresponding  to  the  credential  types  specified  in 
paragraphs  (1),  (2),  and  (3)  of  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44225,  provided  that 

all  of  the  following  conditions  are  met:  

(1)  The  applicant  possesses  a  baccalaureate  degree  conferred  by  a  regionally 
accredited  institution  of  higher  education  and  has  fulfilled  the  subject  matter 
requirements  of  Section  44301. 

(2)  The  applicant  passes  the  state  basic  skills  proficiency  test  as  provided  for 
in  Section  44252. 

(3)  The  commission  approves  the  justification  for  the  emergency  permit 
submitted  by  the  school  district  in  which  the  applicant  is  to  be  employed.  The 
justification  shall  include  all  of  the  following: 

(A)  Annual  documentation  that  the  district  has  implemented  in  policy  and 
practices  a  process  for  conducting  a  diligent  search  that  shall  include,  but  is 

_  not  limited  to,  distributing  job  announcements,  contacting  college  and 

university  placement  centers,  advertising  in  local  newspapers,  exploring  the 
incentives  included  in  the  Teaching  As  A  Priority  Block  Grant  established 
pursuant  to  Section  44735,  participating  in  the  state  and  regional  recruitment 
centers  established  pursuant  to  Sections  44751  and  90530,  and  participating  in 
job  fairs  in  this  state,  but  has  been  unable  to  recruit  a  sufficient  number  of 
certificated  teachers,  including  teacher  candidates  pursuing  full  certification 
through  internship,  district  internship,  or  other  alternative  routes  established 
by  the  commission. 

(B)  A  declaration  of  need  for  fully  qualified  educators  based  on  the 
documentation  set  forth  in  subparagraph  (A)  and  made  in  the  form  of  a 
motion  adopted  by  the  governing  board  of  the  district  or  the  county  board  of 
education  at  a  regularly  scheduled  meeting  of  the  governing  board  or  the 
county  board  of  education.  The  motion  may  not  be  part  of  the  consent  agenda 
and  shall  be  entered  in  the  minutes  of  the  meeting. 

(b)  The  commission  may  deny  a  request  for  an  emergency  permit  that  does 
not  meet  the  justification  set  forth  in  subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph  (3)  of 
subdivision  (a). 

(c)  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Legislature  that  all  of  the  following  occur: 

(1)  The  commission  shall  issue  preintern  certificates  in  place  of  emergency 
teaching  permits  as  sufficient  resources  are  made  available  to  school  districts 
to  provide  services  pursuant  to  Article  5.6  (commencing  with  Section  44305) 
to  preinterns  pursuing  multiple  subject  or  single  subject  teaching  credentials. 

  

26 

     

(2)  If  the  examination  of  the  Pre-Internship  Teaching  Program  required  by 
this  chapter  demonstrates  that  the  program  should  continue  because  it  has 
been  successful  in  better  preparing  and  retaining  preintern  teachers  than  the 
emergency  permit  system,  sufficient  resources  to  fully  fund  the  Pre-Internship 
Teaching  Program  shall  be  appropriated  by  July  2002.  For  purposes  of  this 
paragraph,  two  thousand  dollars  ($  2,000)  in  state  funding  per  preintern  shall 
be  deemed  to  be  sufficient  resources. 

(3)  The  commission  shall  continue  to  issue  emergency  teaching  permits  to 
individuals  employed  by  school  districts  defined  in  regulations  as  remote  from 
regionally  accredited  institutions  of  higher  education. 

(d)  Commencing  January  1,  1990,  the  commission may  issue  and  reissue 
emergency  permits  corresponding  to  the  credential  types  specified  in 
paragraph  (4)  of  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44225.  The  commission  shall 
establish  appropriate  standards  for  each  type  of  emergency  permit  specified  in 
paragraph  (4)  of  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44225. 

(e)  The  exclusive  representative  of  certificated  employees,  if  any,  as  provided 
under  Chapter  10.7  (commencing  with  Section  3540)  of  Division  4  of  Title  1 
of  the  Government  Code,  may  submit  a  written  statement  to  the  commission 
agreeing  or  disagreeing  with  the  justification  submitted  to  the  commission 
pursuant  to  paragraph  (3)  of  subdivision  (a). 

(f)  Commencing  January  1,  1990,  a  person  holding  an  emergency  teaching  or 
specialist  permit  shall  attend  an  orientation  to  the  curriculum  and  to 
techniques  of  instruction  and  classroom  management,  and  shall  teach  only 
with  the  assistance  and  guidance  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  district  who 
has  completed  at  least  three  years  of  full-time  teaching  experience,  or  the 
equivalent  thereof.  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Legislature  to  encourage  districts  to 
provide  directed  teaching  experience  to  new  emergency  permitholders  with  no 
prior  teaching  experience. 

(g)  The  holder  of  an  emergency  permit  shall  participate  in  ongoing  training, 
coursework,  or  seminars  designed  to  prepare  the  individual  to  become a fully 
credentialed  teacher  or  other  educator  in  the  subject  area  or  areas  in  which  he 
or  she  is  assigned  to  teach  or  serve.  The  employing  agency  shall  verify  that 
employees  applying  to  renew  their  emergency  permits  are  meeting  these 
ongoing  training  requirements. 

27 

   

  

(h)  Emergency  permits  for  pupil  personnel  services  shall  not  be  valid  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  pupil  eligibility  for  placement  in  any  special 
education  class.or  program. 

(i)  This  section  shall  not  apply  to  the  issuance  of  an  emergency  substitute 
teaching  permit,  or  of  an  emergency  permit  to  a  teacher  who  has  consented  to 
teach  temporarily  outside  of  his  or  her  field  of  certification,  for  which  the 
commission  shall  establish  minimum  requirements. 

13. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80023.2  provides: 

The  following  requirements  apply  to  the  initial  issuance  of  all  emergency 
permits  specified  in  Section  80023. 

(a)  The  applicant  must  possess  a  baccalaureate  or  higher  degree  from  a 
regionally  accredited  college  or  university. 

(b)  The  applicant  must  verify  passage  of  the  California  Basic  Educational 
Skills  Test  (CBEST),  unless  exempt  by  statutes  or  regulations. 

(c)  The  applicant  must  satisfy  the  requirements  for  the  permit  being  requested 
as  specified  in  Sections  80024.1  through  80024.8. 

(d)  The  employing  agency  must  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully 
Qualified  Educators  that  satisfies  the  provisions  of  Section  80026. 

(e)  If  the  applicant  does  not  already  have  fingerprint  clearance  on  file  with  the 
Commission,  the  permit  application  must  include  two  fingerprint  cards  and  the 
completed  Application  for  Character  and  Identification  Clearance  (form  41- 
CIC,  rev  11-93),  and  fee(s).  No  permit  will  be  issued  until  the  clearance 
process  is  completed. 

(f)  Issuance  of  an  emergency  permit  also  requires  the  submission  of  a  complete 
application  packet,  including  a  completed  Application  for  Credential 
Authorizing  Public  School  Service  (form  41-4,  rev  11-94),  payment  of  the 
fee(s)  required  by  Section  80487,  and  other  documents  required  by  the 
Commission  to  verify  completion  of  all  requirements  for  the  emergency 
permit. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80024.1  provides: 

14. 

28   

     

(a)  Requirements  for  the  initial  issuance  of  an  Emergency  Multiple  or  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Permit  include  all  of  the  following: 

(1)  The  applicant  and  the  employing  agency  must meet  the  general 
requirements  specified in  Section  80023.2. 

(2)  The  applicant  must  provide  a  written  affirmation  of  his  or her  intent  to 
complete  the  requirements  set  forth in  Section  80026.6  during  the  period  of  the 
permit. 

(3)  The  applicant  must  verify  one  of  the  following: 

(A)  Passage  of  the  appropriate  subject  matter  examination(s)  approved  by  the 
Commission  for  the  related  credential;  or 

(B)  Successful  completion  of  the  specified  number  of  semester  units,  or 
equivalent  quarter  units,  of  appropriate  course  work  taken  at  a  regionally 
accredited  college  or  university  as  follows: 

1.  For  the  Emergency  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit,  at  least  18  semester 
units,  or  nine  upper  division  or  graduate  semester  units,  of  course  work in  the 
subject  to  be  taught;  or 

2.  For  the  Emergency  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Permit,  at  least  10  semester 
units  of  course  work  in  each  of  at  least  four  of  the  following  subject  areas  or  at 
least  10  semester  units  of  course  work  in  each  of  three  subject  areas  and  an 
additional  10  semester  units  in  a  combination  of  two  of  the  remaining  subject 
areas.  The  subject  areas  are  as  follows:  language  studies,  history,  literature, 
humanities,  mathematics,  the  arts,  science,  physical  education,  social  science, 
and  human  development. 

(b)  To  reissue  an  Emergency  Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit,  the 
applicant  and  the  employing  agency  must  meet  the  requirements  for  reissuance 
of  emergency  permits  specified  in  Section  80026.6. 

(1)  The  applicant  who  has  not  completed  the  subject  matter  knowledge 
requirement  specified  in  Section  80413(a)(3)  may,  for  the  first  reissuance  only, 
take  all  components  of  the  appropriate  subject  matter  examination  as  described 
in  Section  80071  in  lieu  of  six  semester  units  of  coursework  from  a  regionally 
accredited  college  or  university. 

29

(c)  Authorization: 

(1)  An  Emergency  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Permit  authorizes  the  same 
service  as  a  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential. 

(2)  An  Emergency  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit  authorizes  the  same  service 
as  a  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  the  authorized  field(s)  listed  on  the 
permit. 

15. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80026  provides: 

Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators 

Submission  of  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  by  the 
employing  agency  shall  be  a  prerequisite  to  the  issuance  of  any  emergency 
permit  and/or  limited  assignment  permit  for  that  agency.  Charter  schools  as 
defined  in  Education  Code  Section  47600  shall  be  exempt  from  submitting  a 
Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators.  The  Declaration  of  Need 
for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  by  an  employing  agency  shall  be  valid  for  no 
more  than  twelve  months,  and  shall  expire  on  the  June  30  following  its 
submission  to  the  Commission,  unless  the  employing  agency  has  an  approved 
Plan  to  Develop  Fully  Qualified  Educators  which  specifies  a  period  of  validity 
longer  than  twelve  months.  The  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified 
Educators  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Commission  on  a  form  to  be  provided  by 
the  Commission,  and  shall  include  all  of  the  following  information: 

(a)  Estimated  Need:  This  shall  include  the  title(s)  and  number  of  each  type  of 
emergency  permit  and  limited  assignment  permit  which  the  employing  agency 
estimates,  based  on  previous  year  actual  needs  and  projections  of  enrollment,  it 
will  need  during  the  year  covered  by  the  Declaration.  In  addition,  it  shall 
include  each  subject  to  be  listed  on  Emergency  Single  Subject  and  Limited 
Assignment  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permits  and  the  target  language  on 
Emergency  Multiple  Subject  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permits  with  a 
Bilingual,  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD) 
Emphasis  or  on  Emergency  BCLAD  Permits.  The  Declaration  of  Need  for 
Fully  Qualified  Educators  shall  be  revised,  when  the  number  of  emergency 
permits  and  limited  assignment  permits  needed  exceeds  the  estimate  by  ten 
percent,  by  the  governing  board  or  superintendent/administrator  of  the 
employing  agency,  as  specified  in  subsection  (e)  below. 

(b)  Efforts  to  Recruit  Certified  Personnel.  This  shall  include  a  brief  description 
of  efforts  that  the  employing  agency  has  undertaken  to  locate  and  recruit 

  

  
  
  

30

individuals  who  hold  the  needed  credentials,  such  as  dated  copies  of  written 
announcements  of  its  vacancy  or  vacancies  which  were  mailed  to  college  or 
university  placement  centers. 

(c)  Efforts  to  Establish  Alternative  Training  Options.  The  Declaration  shall: 

(1)  identify  the  names  of  institutions  of  higher  education  co-sponsoring 
internships  or  other  certification  programs  with  the  employing  agency  or,  if  no 
such  programs  exist,  briefly  explain  why; 

. 

(2)  if  the  employing  agency  participates  in  pre-internship  or  internship 
programs,  estimate  the  number  which  the  employing  agency  reasonably 
expects  to  employ  during  the  year  covered  by  the  Declaration;  and 

(3)  indicate  whether  the  employing  agency  has  considered  developing  a  "Plan 
to  Develop  Fully  Qualified  Educators"  in  cooperation  with  other  education 
agencies  in  the  region  pursuant  to  Section  80026.4,  or  if  not,  briefly  explain 
why. 

(d)  Stipulation  of  Insufficiency  of  Suitable  Applicants.  The  employing  agency 
shall  certify  that  there  is  an  insufficient  number  of  certificated  persons  who 
meet  the  employing  agency's  specified  employment  criteria  to  fill  necessary 
positions, 

(e)  Adoption  of  the  Declaration.  The  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified 
Educators  shall  be  adopted  by  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  by 
the  superintendent  of  a  county  office  of  education  or  by  the  administrator  of  a 
state  school  or  nonpublic,  nonsectarian  school  or  agency. 

(1)  A  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  by  a  school  district 
shall  be  adopted  by  the  governing  board  in  a  regularly-scheduled,  public 
meeting  of  the  board.  The  entire  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified 
Educators  shall  be  included  in  the  board  agenda,  and  shall  not  be  adopted  by 
the  board  as  part  of  a  consent  calendar. 

(2)  A  superintendent  of  a  county  office  or  the  administrator  of  a  state  school  or 
nonpublic,  nonsectarian  school  or  agency  shall  publicly  announce  his  or  her 
intent  to  adopt  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  at  least  72 
hours  prior  to  adopting  the  Statement.  The  adopted  Statement  shall  be  signed 
by  the  superintendent  or  administrator. 

16. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80027 

—  

Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit 

(a)  Requirements  for  the  initial  issuance  of  a  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or 
Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit  include  all  of  the  following: 

(1)  The  employing  agency  must  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully 
Qualified  Educators  that  satisfies  the  provisions  of  Section  80026. 

(2)  Applicant  is  currently  employed  by  the  local  governing  board  requesting, 
such  assignment. 

(3)  Applicant  holds  a  valid  California  teaching  credential  based  on  a 
baccalaureate  degree  and  a  professional  preparation  program,  including  student 
teaching  or  the  equivalent. 

(4)  Applicants  who  have  not  obtained  permanent  status  as  defined  in  Education 
Code  44929.21  or  44929.22  or  44929.23  shall  be  assigned  an  experienced 
educator  by  the  employing  agency  in  the  subject  area  of  the  Limited 
Assignment  Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit  who  has  completed  3 
years  of  full-time  classroom  teaching  experience  in  that  subject  area. 

(5)  The  Limited  Assignment  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit  may  be  issued  in 
the  subject  areas  listed  in  Education  Code  Section  44257. 

(6)  The  employing  agency  must  keep  on  file  a  written  statement  verifying 
consent  of  the  teacher  to  serve  on  the  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Permit. 

(7)  The  applicant  submits  a  completed  Application  for  Credential  Authorizing 
Public  School  Service  (form  41-4,  rev.  8/00),  and  the  fee(s)  as  specified  in 
Section  80487. 

(b)  Requirements  for  the  renewal  of  a  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Permit. 

(1)  Applicant  is  currently  employed  by  the  local  governing  board  requesting 
such  assignment. 

(2)  Applicant  holds  a  valid  California  teaching  credential  based  on  a 
baccalaureate  degree  and  a  professional  preparation  program,  including  student 
teaching  or  the  equivalent. 

  

32 

     

(3)  An  application  for  the  renewal  of  a  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Permit  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Commission  by  the 
employing  agency,  and  shall  include  all  of  the  following. 

(A)  A  completed  Application  for  Credential  Authorizing  Public  School 
Service  (form  41-4,  rev.  8/00). 

(B)  Payment  of  the  fee(s)  required  by  Section  80487. 

(C)  Verification  of  the  completion  of  at  least  six  semester  units,  or  the 
equivalent  quarter  units,  of  course  work  required  for  issuance  of  the  related 
credential. 

(4)  The  employing  agency  must  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully 
Qualified  Educators  that  satisfies  the  provisions  of  Section  80026. 

(5)  Validation  of  Professional  Development  Statement.  The  holder  of  a 
Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit  who  has 
previously  taught  three  or  more  years  on  a  credential  other  than  an  emergency 
credential  or  permit  may  submit  the  following  in  lieu  of  the  required  6 
semester  units: 

(A)  Verification  that  he  or  she  has  completed  ninety  hours  of  professional 
development  activities  that  are  directly  related  to  the  subject  or  class 
authorized  by  the  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching 
Permit;  and 

(B)  Submission  of  a  Validation  of  Professional  Development  Statement,  signed 
by  the  employing  agency  and  the  permit  holder,  that  includes a  brief 
description  of  the  content  of  the  teacher's  professional  development program,  a 
brief  description  of  the  means  by  which  the  employing  agency  validated  the 
quality  and  appropriateness  of  the  teacher's  professional  development  program,  ~ 
and  a  brief  description  of  the  manner  in  which  the  results  of  the  teacher's 
professional  development  program  were  evaluated. 

(6)  An  individual  may  renew  a  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single  Subject 
Teaching  Permit  in  any  one  specific  subject  only  twice  during  his  or  her 
lifetime. 

(7)  The  employing  agency  must  keep  on  file  a  written  statement  verifying 
consent  of  the  teacher  to  serve  on  the  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Permit. 

33   

  

(c)  Authorization: 

(1)  A  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Permit  authorizes  the 
same  service  as  a  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential: 

(2)  A  Limited  Assignment  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permit  authorizes  the  same 
service  as  a  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  the  authorized  field(s)  listed 
on  the  permit. 

(d)  The  Limited  Assignment  Multiple  or  Single  Subject  Teaching--Permit  shall 
be  valid  for  no  less  than  one  year  and  expires  one  calendar  year  from  the  first 
day  of  the  month  immediately  following  the  date  of  issuance. 

17.  |  The  Governing  Board  may  reduce  or  discontinue a  particular  kind  of  service 

and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another  manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571,  [rehearing  denied,  review  denied]  and  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of Trustees  of Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.) 

18. 

In  the  course  of  reducing  or  discontinuing  a  particular  kind  of  service,  the 

Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services 
which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Moreland  Teachers 
Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648  and  Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62 
Cal.App.3d  977.) 

19, 

A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  statute  either  by 

determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the 
number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

20. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities,  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local 
2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d 
831.) 

34 

  

     

21. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

22. 

With  the  changes  noted  in  the  Findings  regarding  which  respondents  are 

affected  by  the  layoff,  cause  exists  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  and  of  121.20  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006 
school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Therefore,  cause  exists 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  notice  to  the  affected 
respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2006-2007. 

ORDER 

The  School  District  may  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  121.20 

full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year,  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  affected  respondents 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2003-2004,  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 
respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  [leg  gy  a o 2O 

Lonel  Glial 

LEONARD  L.  SCOTT” 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

35   

