BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PLEASANT  VALLEY  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against 
Certificated  Employees: 

KATHLEEN  GRANT,  DEBORAH 
QUEEN,  SUSAN  LIMA,  ELLEN  HOFF- 
MAN  AND  BETH  BAKER, 

Respondents. 

  

  

OAH  No.  N2006030939 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  on  April  25,  2006,  before  Administrative  Law  Judge  Tamara 

M.  Colson,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  at  the  Pleasant  Valley 
Elementary  School  District  office,  in  Penn  Valley,  California. 

James  E.  Young,  Esq.,  of  the  Law  Offices  of  Spector,  Middleton,  Young  &  Minney, 

LLP,  represented  the  Pleasant  Valley  Elementary  School  District  (District).  Jim  Voss, 
Superintendent,  was  present  at  the  hearing  on  behalf  of  the  District. 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis,  Esq.,  of  Langenkamp  &  Curtis,  LLP,  represented  respondents 
Deborah  Queen,  Ellen  Hoffman  and  Beth  Baker,  all  of  whom  were  present  at  the  hearing. 
There  were  no  other  respondents  against  whom  Accusations  were  pending  at  the  time  of 
hearing.  Cheryl  Dachtler,  President  of  the  Pleasant  Valley  Teachers  Association  (Associa- 
tion),  was  present  at  the  hearing  on  behalf  of  the  Association. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  25,  2006.  The  District 

identified  Jim  Voss,  Superintendent,  as  the  person  designated  to  receive  this  Proposed 
Decision  via  facsimile  at  (530)  432-7314  or  via  United  States  mail  at  14806  Pleasant  Valley 
Road,  Penn  Valley,  California  95946.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

The  District  operates  elementary  and  junior  high  schools,  providing 

educational  services  to  approximately  667  students  in  kindergarten  through  eighth  grade. 
The  District  employs  certificated  employees  to  teach  kindergarten  through  sixth  grade 
students  in  self-contained  classrooms  designated  by  grade  level. 
employees  to  teach  single  subject  classes  to  sixth,  seventh  and  eight  grade  students  in  a 
departmentalized  setting.  Further,  the  District  employs  certificated  employees  in  specialist 
positions. 

It  also  employs  certificated 

Jim  Voss  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

On  February  14,  2006,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 

#06-01,  providing  for  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  within  the 
District.  Resolution  #06-01  defined  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  as  follows: 

"Eight  and  eight-tenths  (8.8)  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  teaching  positions 
One  four-tenths  (.4)  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  psychologist  position." 

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2006,  the  District  gave  written  notice  to  nine 

certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  stating  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  written  notice  specifically  stated  that  "[t]he  governing 
board  has  adopted  a  resolution  reducing  or  eliminating  certain  certificated  services  for  the 
2006-07  school  year."  A  copy  of  Resolution  #06-01  was  included  with  the  notice.  Hearings 
were  timely  requested  by  the  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  including  respondents’, 
to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  terminating  their  services  for  the  2006-07  school  year.  No 
issues  were  raised  regarding  the  timeliness  and  service  of  any  notice  or  request  for  hearing. 

5. 

Superintendent  Voss,  acting  solely  in  his  official  capacity,  filed  the  Accusation 

dated  March  30,  2005,  against  certificated  employees  Kathleen  Grant,  Deborah  Queen, 
Susan  Lima,  Ellen  Hoffman  and  Beth  Baker.  Respondents’  counsel  filed  a  timely  Notice  of 
Defense  dated  March  27,  2006,  on  behalf  of  respondents.  There  were  no  issues  related  to  the 
timeliness  and  service  of  the  Accusation  and  Notice  of  Defense. 

6. 

At  various  stages  of  the  process  between  the  time  that  the  resolution  was 

adopted  and  hearing,  many  of  the  notices  were  withdrawn  by  the  District.  At  hearing,  the 
District  confirmed  that  only  2.4  FTE  positions  were  now  subject  to  reduction  and  at  issue  in 
the  hearing,  and  the  only  respondents  still  subject  to  layoff  were  Deborah  Queen,  Beth  Baker 
and  Ellen  Hoffman.  The  District  stipulated  that  it  has  withdrawn  the  notices  for  Kathleen 

. 

  

'  The  evidence  provided  by  the  District  included  requests  for  hearing  from  the  five  certificated  employees  against 
whom  the  Accusation  was  filed.  The  evidence  was  unclear  as  to  whether  the  other  employees  that  received  notices 
requested  hearings  but  the  requests  were  not  included  in  the  packet  because  those  employees  were  not  subject  to  the 
Accusation,  or  rather,  the  notices  to  those  employees  were  withdrawn  before  hearings  were  requested. 

  

     

Grant  and  Susan  Lima,  Ms.  Grant  and  Ms.  Lima  will  not  be  laid  off,  and  the  District  is  no 
longer  proceeding  against  Ms.  Grant  and  Ms.  Lima  in  this  matter. 

7. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated 
employees  of  the  District.  According  to  the  seniority  list,  respondents  hold  the  following 
credentials:  Deborah  Queen  holds  a  clear  pupil  personnel/school  psychology  credential; 
Ellen  Hoffman  holds  a  clear  multi-subject  credential;  and  Beth  Baker  holds  a  clear  multi- 
subject  credential  and  clear  CLAD  certificate.  There  were  no  issues  raised  at  hearing  related 
to  the  credentials  held  by  respondents  as  indicated  on  the  seniority  list. 

8. 

The  Superintendent  testified  that  he  recommended  to  the  Board  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  reductions  contained  in  the  resolution.  His  recommendation  was  based  on 
the  District’s  fiscal  situation  and  need  to  maintain  the  required  financial  reserves  for  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  students.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the 
identified  services  as  recommended  by  the  Superintendent  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious.  The  District  determined  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by 
teachers  and  other  certificated  employees  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not 
related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to 
be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

9. 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority 
dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  employment  status,  current  site  assignment,  current  FTE, 
and  credentialing  information.  The  District  made  the  seniority  list  available  to  employees  by 
providing  it  to  the  Association's  President.  The  seniority  list  was  used  to  determine  which 
employees  would  be  subject  to  layoff  and  which  employees  would  not.  Superintendent  Voss 
testified  that  three  teachers  less  senior  than  respondents  are  being  retained  by  the  District 
because  one  possesses  a  special  education  credential,  one  possesses  a  credential  with  a 
language  supplement,  and  one  possesses  a  single  subject  math  credential.  Additionally,  in 
the  2006-07  school  year,  the  District  intends  to  employ  a  temporary  teacher  with  a  single 
subject  science  credential.  Respondents  are  not  credentialed  to  teach  special  education,  nor 
to  teach  math,  English  or  science  in  a  departmentalized  setting  to  the  junior  high  school 
students  of  the  District.  In  Superintendent  Voss'  testimony,  he  did  not  clearly  indicate  his 
understanding  of  the  particular  type  of  teaching  assignment  that  the  Board's  resolution 
directed  him  to  reduce  for  the  reduction  in  "credentialed  teaching  positions." 

10. 

One  of  the  respondents,  Beth  Baker,  believed  that  her  seniority  date  was 

incorrect.  At  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  that  her  seniority  date  is  actually  October  13, 
2003,  not  August  16,  2004,  as  indicated  on  the  seniority  list  in  evidence  as  Exhibit  D-2;  thus, 
she  is  number  39  on  the  seniority  list  and  Ellen  Hoffman  is  number  40,  rather  than  vice 
versa.  There  were  no  other  issues  related  to  seniority  raised  at  the  hearing. 

11.  |  Deborah  Queen  is  currently  employed  1.0  FTE  in  the  District's  psychologist 

position.  She  works  .6  FTE,  which  equates  to  three  days  per  week,  in  the  District.  Pursuant 
to  a  contract  between  the  District  and  the  Ready  Springs  School  District,  she  works  .4  FTE, 
which  equates  to  two  days  per  week,  in  the  Ready  Springs  School  District.  She  spends  90 

  

 

percent  of  her  time  performing  work  related  to  special  education  services.  The  District  is 
mandated  by  law  to  provide  special  education  services.  These  mandated  services  include 
performing  special  education  assessments.  Additionally,  if  counseling  services  are  included 
in  a  special  education  student's  individual  education  plan  (IEP),  the  District  must  provide 
those  services.  Ms.  Queen  provides  counseling  services  to  five  students  pursuant  to  the 
students’  IEPs  and  to  seven  students  that  do  not  receive  counseling  pursuant  to  an  IEP.  She 
contends  that  she  cannot  provide  the  mandated  special  education  services  that  the  District 
relies  on  her  to  perform  in  .6  FTE,  which  will  be  her  employment  if  the  District  is  allowed  to 
reduce  her  position  by  .4  FTE. 

@ 

12. 

Superintendent  Voss  testified  that  he  believes  that  the  District  will  be  able  to 

continue  to  provide  all  of  the  mandated  special  education  services  through  Ms.  Voss  if  she  is 
employed  .6  FTE,  rather  than  1.0  FTE.  He  indicated  that  between  the  two  districts,  Ms. 
Queen  serves  approximately  60  students  that  are  subject  to  IEPs.  A  full  assessment,  which 
only  must  be  done  for  each  student  tri-annually,  takes  approximately  one  day.  There  are  182 
days  in  the  school  year,  and  .6  FTE  is  108  days.  Even  if  the  District  had  to  perform  full 
assessments  for  all  60  students  subject  to  IEPs,  Ms.  Queen  would  still  have  38  days  to 
perform  other  services.  He  believes  this  is  sufficient.  Additionally,  he  testified  that  if  he  has 
underestimated  the  amount  of  time  necessary  for  the  District  to  provide  required  special 
education  services,  he  intends  to  increase  Ms.  Queen's  FTE. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

. 

2. 

Pursuant  to  the  District's  stipulation  that  it  is  no  longer  proceeding  against 
Kathleen  Grant  and  Susan  Lima  in  this  matter  and  the  employees  will  not  be  laid  off,  the 
_  Accusations  against  Ms.  Grant  and  Ms.  Lima  are  dismissed. 

3. 

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44949, 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  "either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  'reduce  services!  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved."  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5, 

Respondents  contend  that  the  2.0  FTE  reduction  in  "certificated  teaching 

@ 

positions"  must  be  disallowed  because  this  service  is  not  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  may 

  

  
  

 

  

be  reduced  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  District  employs  certificated 
teachers  to  teach  elementary  classes,  where  one  teacher  teaches  many  subjects  to  the  same 
student.  This  type  of  service,  most  often  identified  as  classroom,  elementary  or  K-5/6,  is  a 
particular  kind  of  service  that  may  be  reduced.  (San  Jose  Teachers’  Association  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638.)  The  District  also  employs  certificated  teachers  to  teach  in 
a  departmentalized  setting,  where  students  have  different  teachers  for  different  subjects.  This 
type  of  service,  when  identified  by  subject  area  or  other  quantifiable  characteristic,  is  a 
particular  kind  of  service  that  may  be  reduced.  (California  Teachers’  Association  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  of the  Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32,  36.) 

All  of  the  teachers  employed  by  the  District,  whether  providing  elementary  or 
departmentalized  services,  hold  "certificated  teaching  positions"  within  the  District.  Hence, 
the  phrase  "certificated  teaching  positions,"  without  further  definition,  includes  both 
elementary  self-contained  classroom  teaching  and  departmentalized  teaching.  Therefore,  by 
specifying  teaching  positions  generally,  rather  than  identifying  particular  kinds  of  services, 
the  Board's  resolution  has  identified  teaching  generally.  San  Jose  Teachers'  Association  v. 
Allen,  supra,  permits  this  type  of  generalization  for  particular  kinds  of  services  layoff  only  at 
the  elementary  level  where  all  of  the  teaching  is  self-contained  classroom  teaching. 
However,  more  specificity  is  required  when  the  District  services  encompass  both  self- 
contained  classroom  teaching  and  departmentalized  teaching. 

The  broad  phrase  "certificated  teaching  positions"  contained  in  the  Board's  resolution 
fails  to  direct  the  Superintendent  to  reduce  a  particular  kind  of  service  and  provides  him  with 
unfettered  discretion  to  determine  which  teachers  will  be  subject  to  layoff.  Additionally,  the 
phrase  "certificated  teaching  positions"  can  encompass  any  teacher  in  the  District,  thus,  fails 
to  provide  notice  to  the  teachers  that  he  or  she  may  be  at  risk  for  layoff.  Moreover,  even  at 
the  hearing,  it  was  not  clear  from  the  evidence  whether  the  District  intended  to  reduce  self- 
contained  classroom  teaching  positions  at  the  elementary  level,  or  simply  teaching  positions 
within  the  District.  Granted,  the  two  respondents  are  elementary  level  teachers,  but  it  is  not 
clear  they  are  subject  to  layoff  because  elementary  teaching  services  are  being  reduced,  or 
because  they  were  the  least  senior  teachers  not  certificated  to  teach  math,  science,  English  or 
special  education. 

The  District  has  failed  to  identify  a  particular  kind  of  service.  Therefore,  cause  does 
not  exist  for  the  District  to  reduce  "certificated  teaching  positions"  by  2.0  FTE  for  the  2006- 
07  school  year. 

; 

6. 

Based  on  Legal  Conclusion  5,  the  other  issues  raised  by  respondents  related  to 

the  layoff  of  2.0  FTE  "certificated  teaching  positions"  are  moot. 

7. 

Respondents  did  not  contend  that  the  .4  FTE  "psychologist  position"  failed  to 
identify  a  particular  kind  of  service.  As  indicated  in  the  Factual  Findings,  more  than  half  of 
the  counseling  services  provided  by  Ms.  Queen  are  not  pursuant  to  an  IEP.  Additionally,  the 
District  has  provided  a  reasonable  basis  for  its  belief  that  the  mandated  services  can  be 
provided  at  the  reduced  rate. 

It  was  not  established  that  this  reduction  will  inappropriately

  

reduce  a  mandated  service  below  the  legally  required  level.  (See  San  Jose  Teachers' 
Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.3d  at  p.  639-640  [rejecting  contention  counselors 
providing  special  education  services  must  be  retained,  rather  services  simply  must  be 
provided].)  Therefore,  cause  exists  for  the  District  to  reduce  the  "psychologist  position"  by 
.4  FTE  for  the  2006-07  school  year. 

@ 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusations  against  Kathleen  Grant  and  Susan  Lima  are  dismissed. 

Pursuant  to  the  stipulation,  Beth  Baker's  seniority  date  shall  be  changed  to  Oc- 

3, 

The  District  shall  not  reduce  "certificated  teaching  positions"  for  the  2005-06 

2. 
tober  13,  2003. 

school  year. 

4. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Deborah  Queen  that  .4  FTE  of  her  counseling  position 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the 2006-07  school  year  because  of  a  reduction  of  the 
particular  kind  of  service. 

 

Dated:  May  3,  2006 

incon 

Co 

TAMARA  M.  C@LSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  
  
  

