BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
FALLBROOK  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
SAN  DIEGO  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  L2006031031 

24  PERMANENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES,  including  DAVID  REILLY, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Fallbrook,  California,  on  April  19,  2006. 

Pamela  A.  Dempsey,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary 

School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  David  Reilly,  who  was  present 

throughout  the  administrative  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  19,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District 

1. 

The  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District  (the  District)  is  nestled  in  the 

coastal  foothills  about  50  miles  northeast  of  San  Diego,  California.  The  District  has  nine 
schools,  seven  within  the  Fallbrook  area  and  two  on  the  military  base  of  Camp  Pendleton. 

The  District  extends  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  east  to  Interstate  15  and  includes  seven 

elementary  schools,  one  middle  school,  and  a  home  school  program.  The  District  serves 
about  5,600  students  from  kindergarten  through  eighth  grade  and  employs  over  300 
certificated  employees  to  carry  out  its  educational  mission. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  a  five  member  Board  of  Education  (the  Board), 

each  member  being  a  duly  elected  official.  

The  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  James  M.  Choate,  the  Superintendent  of  Schools.  The 

Executive  Cabinet  includes  an  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Instruction,  an  Assistant 
Superintendent  of  Business  Services,  and  an  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Employer- 
Employee  Relations. 

@ 

James  C.  Whitlock  (Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock)  is  responsible  for  human 
resource  matters,  including  reductions  in  force,  in  his  role  as  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of 
Employer-Employee  Relations. 

Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major  source  of 

assured  revenue  for  the  funding  of  public  education.  Following  the  passage  of  Proposition 
13,  a  public  school  district  primarily  looks  to  the  State  of  California  and  other  governmental 
entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  funding  it  will  receive  until  the  state 

budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  must  take  precautionary  steps  to  make  certain  that  financial  ends 
meet  in  the  event  that  a  worst-case  funding  scenario  develops.  To  meet  its  duty  to  be  fiscally 
responsible,  a  school  board  frequently  reviews  the  particular  kinds  of  services  it  provides 
through  its  certificated  employees  and  then  determines  if  some  of  those  services  can  be 
reduced  or  eliminated. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  a  budget  in  light  of  a  potential  but  unknown 
shortfall  often  requires  that  teachers,  administrators  and  other  valued  certificated  employees 
be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices,  i.e.,  notices  warning  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  in  the  next  school  year.  Under  Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary 
layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  more  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of 
permanent  employees  over  probationary  employees. 

The  Situation  at  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District 

4, 

Around  January  2006,  the  Board  and  the  District  became  aware  of  pending 
funding  issues.  The  Board  was  concerned  with  the  impact  of  these  issues  on  the  District’s 
operations.  The  District  looked  into  ways  to  trim  the  budget,  which  included  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  being  provided  by  certificated  employees. 

The  District  determined  where  positions  had  to  be  eliminated  within  the  District 
through  a  process  involving  the  allocation  of  Personnel  Staffing  Units  (PSU)  to  each  school. 
In  all,  it  was  determined  that  the  budget  had  to  be  reduced  by  about  two  dozen  full-time 
equivalent  certificated  positions.  On  the  basis  of  the  District’s  evaluation,  it  was  concluded 

2

@ 

  
  

  

one  position  held  by a  certificated  employee  at  Potter  Junior  High  School  had  to  be 
eliminated,  thereby  reducing  the  certificated  staff  at  Potter  Junior  High  School  from  46  to  45 
employees. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock  contacted  Lisa  Denham  (Principal  Denham),  the 
Principal  of  Potter  Junior  High  School,  and  advised  her  of  the  District’s  need  to  reduce  her 
staff  by  one  teacher.  Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock  asked  her  to  review  the  situation  at 
Potter  Junior  High  School-and  to  provide  the  Executive  Cabinet  with  a  recommendation. 
Principal  Denham  was  told  to  make  a  recommendation  that  would  result  in  the  least  adverse 
educational  impact. 

Principal  Denham  evaluated  the  situation  at  Potter  Junior  High  School  and  reluctantly 

concluded  that  eliminating  the  Woodshop  program  would  have  the  least  adverse  impact  on 
the  educational  process.  The  Woodshop  program  required  one  full-time  equivalent  position. 

In  reaching  this  determination,  she  relied  on  her  three  years  experience  as  Principal, 
Acting  Principal,  and  Assistant  Principal  of  Potter  Junior  High  School;  her  understanding  of 
what  core  classes  needed  to  be  retained  to  meet  the  District’s  educational  objectives;  what 
was  actually  being  taught  in  the  classrooms  based  upon  her  classroom  visits;  the  credentials 
held  by  those  persons  teaching  elective  classes;  and,  the  relative  level  of  interest  based  on 
past  and  current  attendance  in  elective  classes  including  Woodshop,  Art,  Computer 
Technology,  Music  and  Band,  and  AVID.  Principal  Denham  did  not  interview  either 
respondent  (who  taught  five  eighth  grade  classes  of  Woodshop  and  one  class  of  Yearbook, 
who  held  an  Industrial  Arts  teaching  credential  and  a  Social  Sciences  teaching  credential,  and 
whose  seniority  date  was  August  21,  2002)  or  Julie  Hinkhouse  (who  taught  two  7"  grade  Art 
classes  and  six  8"  grade  Art  classes,  who  held  a  Single  Subject  Art  teaching  credential,  and 
whose  seniority  date  was  August  22,  2003). 

. 

After  concluding  that  the  elimination  of  the  Woodshop  program  would  pose  the  least 

risk  of  harm  to  the  ongoing  educational  process  at  her  school,  Principal  Denham  reported 
back  to  the  Executive  Cabinet.  She  explained  her  reasoning  to  the  Executive  Cabinet,  which 
agreed  with  her  conclusion. 

With  regard  to  respondent’s  employment,  it  was  determined  respondent  did  not  have 

a  teaching  credential  which  would  permit  him  to  teach  Art  and  that  no  teacher  holding  a 
Social  Sciences  teaching  credential  who  was  hired  after  respondent  was  going  to  be  retained. 

The  District’s  decisions  concerning  reductions  in  force  were  made  in  the  best  interests 

of  the  District  and  its  students. 

5. 

Under  Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock’s  supervision,  a  certificated 

seniority  list  was  developed  for  those  certificated  employees  providing  services  in  the  2005- 
2006  school  year.  That  list  contained  the  teacher’s  name,  a  seniority  date  based  upon  the 
teacher’s  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  bargaining  unit  position  under  the  collective 
bargaining  agreement,  the  teacher’s  assignment,  the  school  to  which  the  teacher  was 
assigned,  the  credential(s)  held  by  the  teacher,  whether  the  teacher  should  receive  a 

3  

preliminary  layoff  notice,  the  full-time  equivalent  positions  the  teacher  held,  and  whether  the 
position  held  by  the  teacher  was  subject  to  the  proposed  reduction. 

6. 

Thereafter,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Board  that  a  number  of 

full-time  equivalent  positions  within  the  District  be  eliminated  including  four  Assistant 
Principal/Coordinator  positions,  four  Lead  Teacher  positions,  one  Lead  Teacher/Counselor 
position,  three  Counselor  positions,  one  Psychologist  position,  two  Categorical  Teaching 
Service  positions,  one  Ecology  Center  Teacher  position,  eight  Classroom  Teaching  positions, 
and  the  Woodshop  program. 

7. 

On  March  6,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  #16-05/06,  based  on  its 
determination  that  it  was  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds 
of  certificated  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

8. 

Resolution  No.  #16-05/06  stated: 

“WHEREAS,  Sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code  require  action 
by  the  Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  eliminate  services  and  permit  the 
layoff  of  certificated  employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Superintendent  of  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School 
District  has  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds  of 
services  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-2007 
school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning 
of  the  2006-2007  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  positively  assured 
attrition  which  has  occurred  to  date,  that  is,  all  deaths,  resignations, 
retirements  and  other  permanent  vacancies  in  reducing  these  services  and,  but 
for  the  attrition  already  assured,  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  reduce 
additional  particular  kinds  of  services. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District: 

That  all  of  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from 
revenue  being  insufficient  to  maintain  the  current  levels 
of  programs,  and  necessary  program  changes  resulting 
there  from,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to 
render  or  eliminate  from  those  positions  set  forth  in 
Exhibit  A  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference 

4 

1, 

2. 

  

   

 
a

herein,  listing  by  level,  subject  field  or  classification,  and 
full  time  equivalent,  those  positions  which  shall  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
2006-20007  school  year. 

That  because  of  the  elimination  and  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  listed  in  Exhibit  A  it  is 
necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006 
school  year  certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to 
the  positions  affected  in  the  reduction  or  eliminate  of  the 
above-described  service. 

That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some  of  the 
employees  in  the  services  being  reduced  or  eliminated 
are  such  that  they  have  displacement  rights  by  virtue  of 
seniority,  and  that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while 
a  less  senior  employee  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  the  more  senior  is  both  certificated  and  competent 
to  render. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent 
certificated  employees  who  shall  receive  notice  of 
termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  requires  the  Governing  Board  to  state 
specific  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  termination 
of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service 
to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on  the 
same  date. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of 
termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary 
position  on  the  same  date  are  listed  and  described  in 
Exhibit  B,  which  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by 
reference  herein. 

The  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of 
termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  to  the  Governing  board  in  a  probationary 
position  on  the  same  date.  Listed  and  described  in 
Exhibit  B,  are  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  Fallbrook 
Union  Elementary  School  District  and  the  students 
thereof. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent 
certificated  employees  who  shall  received  notice  of 

5 

   

  

termination  pursuant  to  this  resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  allows  the  Governing  Board  to  deviate 
from  terminating a  certificate  employee  in  order  of 
seniority  by  virtue  of  their  competence,  credential(s), 
assignment,  and  the  specific  needs  of  the  District  and  its 
students. 

That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from 
terminating  certificated  employees  who  may  otherwise 
be  terminated  by  order  of  seniority  will  be  based  on  the 
needs  of  the  students  of  the  District,  and  will  ensure  that 
no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior 
employee  is  retained  to  render  service  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

| 

That  the  Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative 
will  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  possibly 
affected  by  virtue  of  the  reduction  and  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services.  — 

That  the  action  of  this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any 
way,  be  considered  to  prejudice  the  rights  of  certificated 
employees  to  whom  notice  will  be  given  as  to  the 
Superintendent’s  consideration  of  any  proposed  decision 
by  ad  administrative  law  judge  in  the  event  a  hearing  is 
requested  by  any  employee. 

10. 

11. 

ADOPTED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary 
School  District  this  Sixth  day  of  March  2006.” 

9. 

Exhibit  A  set  forth  the  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  number  of  full-time 

equivalent  teaching  positions  as  follows: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services  or  Programs 

Number  of  Full-Time  Equivalent 
Positions 

Assistant  Principal/Coordinator 
Lead  Teacher 
Lead  Teacher/Counselor 
Counselor 
Psychologist 
Categorical  Teaching  Services 
Ecology  Center  Teacher 
Opportunity  Classroom  Teacher 
Woodshop  Program 

 
D
E

 
R
A

 
e
W
 
R
O
N

 
e
e
e
m

  

    

   

Classroom  Teaching  Services 

8 

(24)' 

Exhibit  B  set  forth  tie-breaking  criteria  which  are  not  relevant  to  this 

proceeding. 

10. 

11. 

Twenty-four  certificated  employees  were  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff 

notice  dated  March  7,  2006,  to  which  was  attached  Board  Resolution  No.  #16-05/06, 
Exhibits  A  and  B,  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  a  blank  Request 
for  Hearing  Form  that  was  to  be  completed  and  returned  to  Assistant  Superintendent 
Whitlock.  Respondent  was  one  of  the  certificated  employees  who  received  the  preliminary 
layoff  notice  and  attachments. 

Respondent  requested  a  hearing  immediately  after  he  was  served  with  the 

aforementioned  layoff  notice  and  attachments. 

The  Administrative  Proceeding 

12. 

Respondent  and  the  other  certificated  employees  who  requested  a  hearing  were 
personally  served  with  a  notice  of  accusation  and  acknowledgment  of  request  for  hearing,  the 
accusation,  a  blank  notice  of  defense,  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
and  copies  of  Government  Code  sections  11500,  11505,  11506,  11507.5,  11507.6,  11507.7, 
11590  and  11520. 

Respondent  filed  a  notice  of  defense  dated  March  30,  2006.  The  matter  was  set  for  an 

administrative  hearing. 

13. 

On  April  19,  2006,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  stipulations  were  received,  the  District’s  motion  to 
dismiss  the  accusations  filed  against  all  certificated  employees  other  than  respondent  was 
granted,”  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  closing  arguments  were 
given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  Woodshop  Program 

|  The  Woodshop  program  at  Potter  Junior  High  School  has  been  in  existence  for 
as  long  as  Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock  could  remember,  and  he  did  not  dispute  that  it 

14. 

  

The  number  of  FTEs  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination  actually  added  up  to  26.  Why  the  number  (24)  was 
' 
set  forth  in  Exhibit  A  was  not  established.  If  there  was  an  error  in  addition,  it  was  not  significant  in  this  proceeding 
since  it  resulted  in  fewer  employees,  rather  than  more  employees,  being  given  notice. 

Between  the  date  the  accusation  was  filed  and  the  date  of  the  hearing,  all  but  one  of  the  positions  for  which 

2 
layoff  notices  were  served  became  open  as  a  result  of  retirements  and  the  granting  of  unpaid  leaves.  Only 

respondent’s  position  remained  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination.   

may  have  been a part  of  the  school  for  45  years.  He  described  the  Woodshop  program  as  a 
“source  of  pride”  and  praised  respondent’s  efforts  and  skills. 

15. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock  and  Principal  Denham  admired  respondent, 

both  personally  and  professionally,  and  it  was  obvious  that  having  to  eliminate  the 
Woodshop  program  at  Potter  Junior  High  School  was a  difficult  matter  that  was  required  by 
the  financial  circumstances  and  not  any  animus  against  respondent. 

16. 

Respondent  has  an  extensive  teaching  background.  He  taught  woodshop  at  the 
high  school  and  junior  high  school  level:  stagecraft  (set  design  and  construction);  a  variety  of 
drafting  classes,  blueprint  reading,  and  architectural  model  construction;  graphic  arts, 
newspaper  production,  photography  and  video  production  at  the  high  school  level;  yearbook 
at  the  high  school  and  junior  high  school  level;  U.S.  History  at  the  high  school  level;  and 
Algebra  and  Remedial  Math.  He  served  as  an  Assistant  Principal  at  Warner  Middle  School 
and  was  twice  selected  Mentor  Teacher  by  his  peers  at  Leuzinger  High  School.  In  addition 
to  his  teaching  experience,  respondent  was  a  member  of  the  California  Army  National  Guard 
and  he  holds  a  general  contractor’s  license, 

Respondent  understands  the  value  in  creating  finished  projects  from  raw  materials 
and  the  satisfaction  that  can  bring  to  students.  He  proudly  displayed  a  number  of  unique, 
well-crafted  mirrors,  frames  and  shelves  made  by  his  8""  grade  Woodshop  students.  He 
introduced  copies  of  letters  from  students  and  parents  who  appreciated  his  thoughtful  care  in 
teaching  woodworking. 

Respondent  argued  that  students  learn  through  a  variety  of  experiences,  and  that 

woodworking  opens  paths  to  many  students  who  would  otherwise  find  learning  difficult  or 
uninteresting.  He  believes  the  Woodshop  program  reinforces  the  core  subjects  in  countless 
ways,  and  that  it  meets  the  District’s  core  values. 

Respondent  argued  Principal  Denham’s  belief  that  Woodshop  was  the  least  popular, 
least  attended  elective  was  untrue.  He  produced  his  own  statistical  study  which  showed  that 
Woodshop  provided  educational  services  to  more  8"  graders  than  Art,  and  that  Woodshop 
was  not  available  to  7"  graders  although  Art  was. 

Respondent  testified  in  a  credible  and  sincere  fashion.  He  clearly  enjoys  his  work  as 

Woodshop  teacher  and  the  satisfaction  that brings. 

The  Reduction  or  Elimination  of 
Particular  Kinds  of Services  and  Programs 

17. 

The  elimination  of  the  Woodshop  program  involved  the  exercise  of  discretion. 

The  decision  was  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c). 
reasonably  made,  even  though  others  may  have  reached a  different  decision.  The Woodshop 
program  was  a  “particular  kind  of  service”  the  Board  was  authorized  to  discontinue  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

It  was  a  difficult  decision  that  was 

8

@ 

  
  
  

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  that  particular  kind  of  service  was  not 

fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  an  appropriate  exercise  of  the  Board’s 
discretion.  The  extent  to  which  the  particular  kind  of  service  was  reduced  was  a  matter  well 
within  the  Board’s  discretion. 

No  certificated  employee  who  was  junior  to  respondent  was  retained  to  provide 
services  within  the  District  which  respondent  was  competent  and  qualified  to  render  by 
reason  of  his  teaching  certificate.  Respondent  does  not  have  a  credential  to  teach  Art. 

No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated 

by  state  or  federal  law. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  respondent  David  Reilly. 

2. 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 

services  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  a  district’s  decision  as  to  how 
many  services  will  be  reduced.  It  is  within  the  board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  amount  by 
which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  645-636. 

3. 

“In  determining  whether  the  decision  of  a  school  board  is  reasonable  as 

distinguished  from  fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious,  its  action  is  measured  by  the  standard 
set  by  reason  and  reasonable  people,  bearing  in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may  permit  a 
difference  of  opinion  on  the  same  subject.”  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott 
(1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  808. 

4, 

Cause  exists  to  affirm  the  Board’s  elimination  of  the  Woodshop  program  as 
identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  #16-05/06.  The  Board’s  decision  was  not  arbitrary  or 
capricious,  but  was  a  valid  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  elimination  of  this 
particular  kind  of  service  was  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

5. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  David 

Reilly  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  by  the  District  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  David  Reilly  under  Education  Code  section  44955  that  his 

© 

services  will  not  be  required  by  the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District  for  the 
2006-2007  school  year. 

DATED: 

4S, Zo  ZL  OG 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

10 

    

