BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
SACRAMENTO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SACRAMENTO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of: 

CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED  BY  THE  SACRAMENTO 
CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

OAH  No.  N2006030552 

  

Respondents. 

    

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stephen  J.  Smith,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California  heard  this  matter  in  Sacramento,  California  on  April  25,  26,  27  and  28,  2006. 

Alison  C.  Neufeld,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Ruiz  and  Sperow,  L.L.P.,  represented  the 

Sacramento  City  Unified  School  District  (District).  She  was  assisted  by  Nicholas  Calderon, 
Attorney  at  Law,  of  Ruiz  and  Sperow  on  April  26,  2006. 

Margaret  Geddes,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Beeson,  Tayer  and  Bodine,  Attorneys, 
represented  the  Sacramento  City  Unified  Teacher’s  Association  (the  Association),  which 
represented  111  of  the  certificated  District  employees  receiving  notice  that  their  services 

_  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  are  members. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Respondents  Ryan  Fernald,  Audrey  Tuthill,  Staci  DiSantis,  Julie  Caldwell,  Mahn 

Wenthe,  Oriana  Wehner,  and  Jenny  Reinke  represented  themselves,  even  though  many  were 
also  members  of  the  Association,  due  to  potential  conflicts  of  interest,  since  each  of  these 
respondents  have  the  same  first  day  of  paid  service. 

RESOLUTIONS  OF  MOTIONS  PENDING  FROM  PREHEARING  CONFERENCE 

1, 

The  Association’s  motion  in  limine  to  offer  evidence  of  positively  assured 

attrition  known  to  the  District  between  March  15,  2006  and  May  15,  2006  was  denied  at  the 
evidentiary  hearing.  “A  district  need  not  consider  positively  assured  attrition  occurring 
between  the  preliminary  notice  and  the  final  notice  in  determining  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  to  be  terminated  by  reason  of  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of

  

ol 

As a  practical  matter,  however,  positively  assured  attrition  that  occurs  between  the 

service.”’ 
preliminary  and  final  notice  dates  will  have  an  impact  in  determining  the  number  of  final 
notices  that  the  District  must  send  to  its  certificated  employees. 

© 

2. 

The  District’s  motion  to  exclude  respondents  receiving  a  March  15,  2005 

notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  (the  preliminary 
notice)  who  failed  to  timely  file  Notices  of  Defense  was  made  moot  be  developments  at  the 
evidentiary  hearing.  Respondents  Danilo  Campos  and  Susan  McSherry  Higgins,  who  were 
the  subjects  of  the  motion,  were  each  notified  by  the  District  during  the  evidentiary  hearing 
that  they  were  to  be  retained  for  the  upcoming  school  year,  and  that  preliminary  notices 
served  on  each  of  them  were  rescinded. 

3. 

The  District’s  motion  to  seal  two  confidential  Resolutions  of  the  Governing 

Board  regarding  nonreelection  of  probationary  teachers  in  the  District  was  granted.  The 
Resolutions  were  ordered  sealed,  not  to  be  opened  except  by  a  duly  designated  and 
authorized  representative  of  the  Board,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  or  another  ALJ 
assigned  to  preside  over  further  proceedings  in  the  matter,  or  by  a  reviewing  court  of 
competent  jurisdiction. 

4, 

The  Association’s  motion  to  exclude  evidence  of  reductions  in  average  daily 

attendance  (ADA)  was  granted. 

EXTENSION  OF  SUBMISSION  DATES 

5. 

The  parties  requested  leave  to  submit  closing  argument  and  points  and 

authorities  in  writing.  The  parties  agreed  that  the  closing  arguments  would  be  due  May  4, 
2006,  six  days  past  the  close  of  the  evidentiary  portion  of  the  hearing.  The  parties  stipulated 
that  the  statutory  time  requirements  for  submission  of  the  Proposed  Decision  to  the 
Governing  Board  by  the  ALJ,  and  for  the  Governing  Board’s  consideration  and  action  on  the 
Proposed  Decision  are  waived  and  are  extended  by  an  equivalent  period  of  time. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

The  District  is  a  large  urban  school  district  that  provides  elementary,  middle 

and  high  schools,  a  continuation  high  school,  a  charter  school  and  an  adult  center  community 
school.  The  District  provides  services  to  approximately  48,000  students  at  83  school  sites  in 
and  surrounding  the  City  of  Sacramento. 

2. 

Carol  Mignone  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Personnel  and  Human 

Resources  of  the  District.  M.  Magdelena  Carillo  Mejia,  Ed.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the 
District. 

  

'  San  Jose  Teacher's  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  630. 

 

  
  

  

3. 

The  District  has  experienced  declining  enrollment  over  the  last  several  years 

and  increasing  costs.  In  January  2006,  the  Board  was  advised  that  the  District  faces  a 
projected  $9.5  million  budget  shortfall  for  the  upcoming  school  year,  if  services  offered  and 
staffing  remain  the  same  during  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Board  directed  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  and  her  staff  to  determine  whether  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  could  be  made  for  the  upcoming  school  year  to  close  the  projected  budget 
gap.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  and  her  staff  met  and  formed  a  District  wide  budget 
committee  (the  Committee)  composed  of  stakeholders  charged  with  the  task  of  coming  up 
with  ways  to  conserve  the  District’s  programs  and  meet  the  budget  restraints.  The 
Committee  presented  its  findings  to  the  Board.  The  Board  then  directed  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  to  identify  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for 
the  upcoming  school  year,  in  accordance  with  its  direction. 

A. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  and  her  staff  met  and  compiled a list  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  eliminated  and  not  fall  beneath 
minimum  state  mandates.  On  March  9,  2006,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  notified  the 
Board  of  her  conclusions  and  recommended  to  the  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services 
being  offered  by  the  District  be  discontinued  or  reduced.  The  Assistant  Superintendent 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  Board  approved  the  recommendations  and, 
following  the  adoption  of  the  Resolution  set  forth  below,  directed  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  to  implement  the  recommendations.  The  Board  also  charged  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  and  her  staff  to  identify  an  equivalent  number  of  certificated  personnel  and 
give  those  certificated  employees  notice  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  recommendation 
that  any  certificated  personnel  so  identified  for  layoff  from  employment  with  the  District  was 
not  related  to  their  skills  or  competence  as  teachers. 

5. 

In  response  to  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  recommendation  above,  the 

Board  adopted  Resolution  #  2447  on  March  9,  2006.  The  Board  resolved  that  the  District 
needs  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  as  recommended  by  the  Assistant 
Superintendent,  and  accordingly,  it  was  resolved  that  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  the 
employment  of  an  equivalent  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the 
reductions.  Resolution  #2447  authorized  the  Assistant  Superintendent  to  take  action  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2006-2007  school 
year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

I, 

Il. 

Administrators 
High  School  Assistant  Principals 

4.0 

Teachers 
Elementary  Teachers-Class  Size  Reduction 
Elementary  Teachers 

60.0  (K  or  3d  Grade) 
35.0 

  

 

Il. 

Other  Teachers 
Middle  School  Counselors 
Librarians 
School  Social  Workers 
Home  Economics 
Art 
Industrial  Art 
Designated  Subjects:  Airframe  and 

. 

Powerplant  Mechanics 

Designated  Subjects:  Landscaping 
Adult  Education  Program  Specialist 
Adult  Education  Teacher 

5.0 
11.6 
4.0 
1.0 
5.0 
2.0 
«10 

1.0 
1.0 
5.0 

135.6  FTE’s 

The  proposed  reductions  total  135.6  FTE,  with  an  equivalent  number  of  certificated 

positions. 

6. 

Resolution  #2447  specified  certain  exceptional  District  needs  in  its  future 

staffing  that  the  Board  directed  should  be  preserved,  regardless  of  seniority,  and  directed  that 
these  needs  be  accommodated  in  determining  which  certificated  employees  should  receive 
preliminary  notices  of  layoff  and  who  should  not.  The  Resolution  acknowledged  a  “severe 
statewide  shortage  of  certificated  employees  qualified  to  serve  the  needs  of  K-12  students 
with  respect  to  the  following  programs  and  services:  Special  Education,  English  Language 
Learner  (ELL)  and  Bilingual  Education.”  The  Resolution  also  noted  that  ELL/Bilingual 
Education  are  highly  specialized  programs  that  require  the  possession  of  additional, 
specialized  credentials  by  certificated  employees.  The  Board  noted  a  special  need  to  retain 
employees  with  these  specialized  credentials,  regardless  of  seniority. 

7. 

At  the  same  meeting,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  #2448.  This 

Resolution  set  forth  criteria  for  breaking  ties  when  two  or  more  certificated  employees  with 
the  same  first  day  of  paid  service  were  facing  potential  layoff.  The  Board  gave  particular 
preferences  in  determining  these  criteria  to  those  employees  who  possessed  English 
Language Learner (ELL)  certifications  and  those  who  were  teaching  subjects  within  their 
college  majors.  In  case  of  ties  continuing  through  listed  criteria,  a  lottery  was  to  be  used  to 
break  such  ties. 

8. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2447  are  “particular  kinds  of  services” 

that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  . 
The  Association  contended  that  the  selection  of  “Designated  Subjects:  Airframe  and 
Powerplant  Mechanics,  and  “Designated  Subjects:  Landscaping”  are  not  legitimately 
particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  because  they  do  not  set  forth  services  or  positions 

  

  
  

© 

 

  

to  be  reduced,  but  rather  by  designating  the  credentials  required  for  the  service,  it  actually 
singles  out  individuals  to  be  terminated  without  cause.  The  contention  lacks  merit. 

9. 

There  was  no  dispute  that  the  District  offers  one  FTE  of  classes  of 

Landscaping  and  one  FTE  of  Airframe  and  Powerplant  Mechanics.  The  District  intends  to 
eliminate  these  offerings  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  If  the  individuals  staffing  these 
classes  possess  credentials  and  qualifications  that  would  permit  them  to  bump  into  other 
classes  the  District  is  retaining,  they  will  have  the  same  rights  as  all  those  other  District 
employees  being  displaced  by  this  reduction  in  services  but  who  have  enough  seniority  to 
bump  into  a  continuing  assignment.  The  elimination  was  not  of  the  particular  individual 
staffing  these  FTEs  but  of  the  classes  in  these  disciplines,  which  require  specific  single 
subject  credentials  to  teach.  No  evidence  was  offered  that  either  of  the  individuals  staffing 
these  classes  has  a  credential  or  qualifications  that  would  permit  them  to  bump  into  any  other 
classes  being  retained  by  the  District. 

. 

10.  |  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 

particular  kinds  of  services  was  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2447  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  the 
Board’s  discretion,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

11. 

On  March  13,  2003,  the  District  personally  served  a  written  preliminary  notice 

that  advised  the  respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  preliminary  notices  were 
served  on  177  certificated  employees  of  the  District.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolution  #2447, 
reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  by  136.5  FTE  positions. 

12. 

Each  preliminary  notice  was  served  by  certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested. 

Of  the  177  employees  served  a  preliminary  notice,  139  certificated  employees  timely 
requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

13. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 
139  certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  timely  requested  a  hearing  after  receipt  of  the 
preliminary  notice.  It  was  not  disputed  that  the  Accusations,  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense,  were  timely  served  on  the  responding  employees. 

14. 

Of  the  139  District  employees  served  a preliminary  notice,  19  failed  to  timely 

file  a  Notice  of  Defense  requesting  an  evidentiary  hearing. 

15. 

The  Board  determined  on  April  20,  2006  to  rescind  the  elimination  of  the  60.0 
FTE  of  Elementary  Teachers-Class  Size  Reduction  K-3.  These  services  are  to  be  retained  for 
the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  and  her  staff  reviewed  the  District’s 
master  seniority  list  to  determine  which  employees  that  received  a  preliminary  notice  of

layoff  could  be  advised  that  their  preliminary  notice  was  rescinded.  The  process  of  so 
advising  such  affected  employees  continued  through  the  time  of  the  evidentiary  hearing.  On 
the  first  day  of  the  evidentiary  hearing,  the  District  mailed  written  notices  to  55  certificated 
employees  who  had  received  preliminary  notices  that  those  notices  had  been  rescinded.  By 
the  final  day  of  the  evidentiary  hearing,  the  District  had  rescinded  notices  to  all  but  43  of 
those  originally  served  with  a  preliminary  notice  of  layoff. 

© 

METHOD  OF  EFFECTUATING  THE  REDUCTION  IN  SERVICES  AND  IDENTIFYING  AFFECTED 
EMPLOYEES 

16. 

The  Board’s  Resolutions  delegated  to  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  her 
designees  the  authority  to  implement  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  the  listed  particular 
kinds  of  services,  to  identify  and  determine  which  District  employees  would  be  affected  by 
the  reductions  and  to  draft  and  serve  the  preliminary  notices  upon  those  identified 
employees.  The  District  divides  its  schools  into  four  geographic  learning  service  units 
(LSUs)  and  assigns  a  human  resources  analyst  to  each,  all  of  whom  are  supervised  by  the 
Assistant  Superintendent.  Immediately  following  the  passage  of  the  Resolutions,  the 
Assistant  Superintendent  met  with  her  four  personnel  analysts  and  instructed  them  to  work 
together  to  identify  employees  of  the  District  who  would  be  affected  by  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  the  Resolution. 

17. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  gave  the  analysts  admittedly  brief,  general 

instructions  and  guidance,  including  directions  to  review  the  District’s  comprehensive  master 
seniority  list  and  select  the  least  senior  employees  of  the  District  teaching  in  the  positions 
that  would  be  eliminated  or  reduced.  She  testified  the  analysts  had  considerable  experience 
between  them in  analyzing  the  District’s  master  seniority  list  and  effectuating  District 
reductions in  force in  previous  years.  She  provided  a  copy  of  the  Resolutions  to  each  analyst 
for  reference  and  reviewed  with  them  the  Board’s  directions  and  preferences  set  forth  in 
each.  She  also  instructed  the  analysts  to  identify  any  positively  assured  attrition  that 
occurred  before  service  of  the  preliminary  notices,  such  as  deaths,  resignations,  confirmed 
leaves  of  absence  or  retirements. 

INTERNS  AND  TEMPORARIES 

. 

18. 

As  part  of  her  instructions,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  advised  the  four 

analysts  during  this  initial  briefing  that  the  District  was  releasing  all  interns  and  162 
temporary  employees.  The  analysts  testified  that  they  understood  this  to  mean  that  any 
position  being  currently  held  by  an  intern  or  a  temporary  employee  was  available  for 
potential  reassignment  for  a  certificated  employee  subject  to  layoff  due  to  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2447.  The  analysts 
prepared a list  of  all  interns  serving  in  the  District  (Exhibit  13).  The  analysts  identified  117 
interns  serving  in  the  District  during  the  current  school  year.  The  analysts  also  identified  184 
temporary  employees  serving  in  the  District  and  prepared a  list  of  these  persons  (Exhibit  12). 
Each  list  sets  forth  the  names  of  each  temporary  employee  or  intern,  and,  in  the  case  of  the 
interns,  lists  the  school  site  where  the  intern  is  assigned.  Neither  list  shows  how  many  FTE 

 

  

  
  

|  @ 

  

or  portion  thereof,  or  the  class  assignments  each  temporary  employee  or  intern  occupies. 
The  Assistant  Superintendent  advised  the  analysts  that  the  Board  had  already  authorized  the 
release  of  162  of  the  temporary  employees,  and  that  the  Board  intended  to  release  an 
additional  85  temporary  employees  on  or  before  June  30,  2006.  There  was  no  evidence  that 
the  analysts  had  any  difficulty  identifying  the  vacancies  that  will  be  created  by  the  release  of 
the  interns  and  the  temporary  employees. 

PROBATIONARY  NONREELECTS 

19. 

The  Board  acted  pursuant  to  two  confidential  Resolutions  adopted  March  2, 

2006  and  March  9,  2006,  to  not  reelect  certain  first  and  second  year  probationary  teachers  in 
the  District.  These  nonreelections  were  an  appropriate  exercise  of  the  Board’s  absolute  right 
not  to  reelect  probationary  teachers.  By  necessary  implication,  some  probationary  teachers 
in  the  District  were  reelected,  but  since  they  are  probationary,  they  have  relatively  low 
seniority  in  the  District,  and  are  thus  potentially  subject  to  layoff  in  this  process.  There  was 
no  evidence  that  any  probationary  teacher  that  was  reelected  was  being  retained  in  favor  of  a 
more  senior  teacher  for  an  assignment  where  that  more  senior  teacher  was  credentialed  and 
competent  to  teach. 

| 

20. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  told  the  analysts  that  the  Board  had  met  and 

list  of  these  employees,  identifying  32  such  persons  by  current 

adopted  the  two  confidential  resolutions  and  instructed  the  analysts  to  also  account  for  the 
release  of  these  probationary  nonreelects  in  determining  which  employees  must  be  given 
preliminary  notices  of  layoff.  The  analysts  identified  the  probationary  teachers  being 
released  and  made a 
assignment  and  school  site.  There  was  no  evidence  this  information  was  inadequate  or 
insufficient  to  enable  any  respondent  receiving  a  preliminary  notice  to  determine  whether  he 
or  she  would  be  qualified  to  occupy  the  positions  being  vacated  by  the  termination  of  the 
probationary  employees.  The  other  probationary  employees  who  were  not  terminated  by  the 
nonreelection  process  were  still  subject  to  the  layoff,  and  if  they  occupied  a  position  being 
eliminated  or  reduced,  or  if  the  analysts  determined  they  could  be  bumped  by  a  more  senior 
employee,  they  received  a  preliminary  notice.  No  probationary  employee  except  Mr. 
Garrison  (below)  was  identified  who  is  being  retained  to  teach  in  a  position  for  which  a  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  who  is  subject  to  the  layoff. 

MASTER  SENIORITY  LIST  AND  SUBLISTS 

21. 

|  The  analysts  worked  long  hours  between  March  10  and  March  13,  2006  to 

compile  a  list  of  177  certificated  employees  they  determined  would  need  to  receive 
preliminary  notices  of  layoff  in  order  to  effectuate  the  135.6  FTE  reductions  in  particular 
kinds  of  services  authorized  by  Resolution  #2447.  The  analysts  acknowledged  that  they 
“over-noticed”  in  order  to  account  for  unanticipated  problems  such  as  potential  errors  or 
additional  changes  and  in  view  of  the  limited  time  they  had  to  determine  the  individuals  who 
would  be  subject  to  receiving  notices  in  order  to  effectuate  the  reduction  in  the  services.  The 
analysts  accomplished  the  task  by  pulling  out  and  creating  a  separate  seniority  sublist 
specific  to  each  area  or  classification  of  service  being  reduced  or  discontinued.  These

sublists  were  created  by  extracting  those  employees  serving  in  the  specific  assignments 
subject  to  reduction  or  elimination  from  the  District’s  comprehensive  master  seniority  list. 
Thus,  sublists  were  created  for  those  serving  as  “Administrators-High  School  Assistant 
Principals,”  “Elementary  Teachers,”  “Counselors,”  “Social  Workers,”  Librarians,”  and  so 
forth,  for  each  service,  even  if  the  service  was  for  one  FTE.  The  analysts  testified  they  used 
the  sublists  in  conjunction  with  the  master  seniority  list.  The  sublists  proved  to  be  effective 
and  useful  in  determining  and  identifying  individuals  who  would  be  impacted  by  the 
reduction  and  elimination  of  the  services  authorized  by  the  Board. 

‘ 

@ 

ELEMENTARY  TEACHING  SUBLISTS 

22. 

The  analysts’  sublist  for  “Elementary  Teachers”,  according  to  the  analysts, 

reflected  their  effort  to  pull  out  of  the  master  seniority  list  and  flag  every  certificated 
employee  teaching  in  an  elementary  (K-6)  classroom  in  the  District.  The  Elementary 
Teachers  sublist  was  assembled  by  culling  the  master  seniority  list  for  teachers  teaching  in 
the  District  job  assignment  “Teacher,  Elementary.”  In  all  but  a  few  instances,  the 
Elementary  Teachers  sublist  was  effective. 

23. 

However,  the  analysts  acknowledged  that  the  District  has  some  K-8  schools, 

where  some  elementary  classrooms  exist  along  with  single  subject  classrooms  for  the  middle 
school  grades.  The  analysts  and  the  District’s  credential  specialist  acknowledged  in  their 
respective  testimonies  that  a  certificated  employee  teaching  at  a  District  middle  school  with 
only  a  multiple  subjects  (MS)  credential  could  only  be  assigned  to  an  elementary  self- 
contained  classroom,  and  could  not  be  assigned  to  teach  specific  individual  subjects.  Only 
employees  with  a  single  subject  credential  or  authorization  could  be  assigned  to  teach  the 
specific  subjects,  such  as  math,  English  or  science,  offered  at  the  middle  schools  in  the 
District.  No  person  teaching  in  a  District  elementary  or  K-8  school  was  identified  as  having 
a  current  assignment  requiring  that  employee  to  teach  outside  of  that  employee’s  credential 
and  authorizations.  Thus,  by  necessary  implication,  persons  assigned  to  a  District  K-8  school 
possessed  of  only  a  MS  credential  must  have  been  assigned  to  teach  self-contained 
elementary  classrooms  at  the  K-8  school.  The  analysts  acknowledged  that  they  did  not  look 
for  and  attempt  to  identify  any  District  employees  teaching  at  a  K-8  school  who  were 
teaching  a  wholly  self-contained  elementary  classroom.  It  was  evident  that  there  were  three 
District  teachers  who  were  so  assigned,  as  set  forth  below.  The  analysts  were  not  directed  to 
seek  out  and  identify  District  employees  teaching  in  self-contained  elementary  classrooms  in 
District  K-8  schools.  The  analysts  did  not  create  any  separate,  sublists  for  District  job 
classifications  “Teacher,  Middle  School,”  “Teacher,  Elementary  Special  Subjects,”  or 
“Teacher,  K-8,”  that  might  have  identified  these  individuals. 

.  © 

 

24. 

The  Association  contended  that  since  no  sublist  specific  to  K-8  assignments, 

such  as  “Teacher-Middle  School,”  and  no  sublist  that  included  other  elementary  school 
classifications,  such  as  “Teacher-Elementary-Special  Subjects,”  were  created,  no  person 
teaching  in  an  elementary  classroom  in  a  K-8  school,  even  if  that  person  was  possessed  only 
of  a  multiple  subjects  (MS)  credential,  was  identified  and  noticed  for  layoff.  It  was  also 
contended  that  some  of  those  retained  who  were  assigned  to  the  middle  schools  were  junior 

  

© 

  
  

to  those  classified  as  elementary  teachers  and  given  preliminary  notices.  The  contentions 
have  merit. 

25. 

The  Association  identified  four  employees,  Ms.  Power,  Ms.  Schnack,  Ms. 

Cooperman  and  Mr.  Searle,  who  allegedly  “should  have”  received  preliminary  notices 
because  they  were  teaching  at  a  District  middle  school  and  have  only  MS  credentials,  and,  by 
implication,  must  have  been  teaching  self-contained  elementary  classes.  The  District  offered 
no  evidence  to  rebut  the  contentions,  and  did  not  demonstrate  that  any  of  these  teachers  were 
teaching  in  the  middle  schools  in  other  than  an  elementary  classroom.  It  was  not  disputed 
that  these  individuals  have  only  MS  credentials  with  no  other  credentials  or  authorizations. 
It  was  alleged  that  these  individuals  are  junior  to  some  individuals  teaching  elementary 
classrooms  at  District  K-6  schools  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination.  The  contention  is 
incorrect  for  Mr.  Searle  and  inaccurate  for  the  three  women.  Mr.  Searle  is  not  subject  to 
layoff,  and  had  he  been  initially  identified  as  a  person  who  should  have  received  a 
preliminary  notice  of  layoff,  his  notice  would  have  been  rescinded  at  or  before  the 
commencement  of  the  evidentiary  hearing.  The  District  noted  at  the  evidentiary  hearing  that 
all  elementary  teachers  who  received  a  preliminary  notice  and  have  a  seniority  date  before 
September  7,  2004  are  being  retained  and  their  preliminary  notices  of  layoff  are  in  the 
process  of  being  rescinded.  In  addition,  evaluation  of  the  37  employees  with  the  same  first 
day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  September  7,  2004  shows  that  as  of  the  close  of  the 
evidentiary  hearing,  all  but  six  of  these  persons  are  being  retained.  Mr.  Searle  would  either 
not  have  received  notice  or  would  have  had  his  notice  rescinded  before  the  close  of  the 
hearing. 

26. 

The  three  women  identified  above  have  the  same  seniority  date  as  six 

elementary  teachers  who  are  still  subject  to  layoff  after  application  of  the  District’s  tie 
breaker  criteria  (below).  These  three  women  all  have  seniority  dates  of  September  7,  2004, 
as  do  40  other  District  employees,  which  makes  them  among  some  of  the  most  junior 
employees  in  the  District.  These  three  women  with  September  7,  2004  seniority  dates  were 
not  placed  into  the  tie  breaker  evaluation  or  considered  against  all  the  others  with  the  same 
seniority  date,  as  they  were  overlooked  as  elementary  classroom  teachers  because  they  were 
serving  in  a  middle  school.  Absent  persuasive  evidence  to  the  contrary,  which  was  not 
‘produced,  it  appears  these  three  employees  should  have  received  preliminary  notices  and 
added  to  the  tie  breaker  analysis  along  with  the  40  other  District  employees  teaching  in 
elementary  classrooms  who  have  the  same  September  7,  2004  seniority  date. 

27. 

Beyond  the  three  employees  set  forth  just  above,  there  was  no  persuasive 

evidence  that  there  is  any  teacher  teaching  in  a  District  K-6  elementary  classroom  who  was 
given  a  preliminary  notice  who  should  have  been  retained  because  there  exists  a  teacher 
junior  to  him  or  her  that  is  being  retained  to  teach  in  any  elementary  classroom  in  a  District 
K-6  or  K-8  school. 

  

 

SKIPS 

28. 

The  Board’s  resolution  directed  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  her  staff  to 

retain,  regardless  of  seniority  (“skip”),  any  employee  possessed  of  certain  credentials  that 
were  identified  by  the  Board  as  being  of  particular  need  to  the  District.  In  performing  their 
analysis  of  which  elementary  teachers  were  to  receive  a  preliminary  notice,  the  analysts 
“skipped”  a  few  junior  employees  who  were  possessed  of  the  credentials  identified  in  the 
Resolution;  Special  Education,  ELL  or  Bilingual!  Education  credentials.  There  was  no 
difficulty  interpreting  the  first  two  portions  of  the  Board’s  directions,  but  the  Association 
challenged  the  portion  of  the  Resolution  authorizing  retention  of  “Bilingual  Education 
credentials”  as  impermissibly  vague.  The  challenge  lacks  merit. 

29. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  and  the  analysts  interpreted  the  “Bilingual 

Education  credentials”  portion  of  the  Resolution  to  mean  that  in  order  for  an  employee  to 
meet  the  standard  and  be  skipped,  the  employee  must  have  both  a  BCLAD  credential 
authorization  and  be  currently  assigned  to  a  classroom  where  that  BCLAD  authorization  was 
required  to  staff  that  assignment.  Thus,  seven  junior  elementary  teachers  possessed  of 
BCLAD  certifications  but  not  assigned  to  a  classroom  requiring  BCLAD  certification  were 
identified  for  layoff,  while  three  elementary  classroom  teachers  whose  assignments  did 
require  BCLAD  certification  were  skipped.  The  Association  contended  the  skipping  of  the 
three  BCLAD  teachers  and  laying  off  more  senior  elementary  teachers  is  an  abuse  of  the 
District’s  discretion,  and  that  Resolution  #2447’s  language  describing  what  positions  may  be 
skipped  is  impermissibly  vague.  The  Association  also  contends  that  the  District  failed  to 
present  evidence  of  any  teacher  being  skipped  due  to  having  special  education  credentials 
who  is  junior  to  teachers  being  laid  off. 

30. 

The  analysts’  interpretations  of  the  Board’s  direction  were  reasonable  and 

appropriate,  and  it  was  not  demonstrated  otherwise.  The  analysts  did  not  just  skip  any  junior 
employee  with  a  BCLAD  certification,  as  they  might  have  done  under  the  broad 
authorization  of  the  Resolution;  they  only  skipped  those  with  BCLADs  who  were  actually 
using  the  certification  to  discharge  their  classroom  duties.  One  could  argue  the  analysts’ 
interpretation  was  an  overly  narrow  reading  of  the  Resolution’s  direction,  but  if  that  is  so, 
then  at  least  seven  more  junior  teachers  would  have  to  be  retained  at  the  expense  of  more 
senior  teachers  who  did  not  possess  the  BCLAD  certification.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the 
Association  wanting  a  skipping  provision  to  be  applied  more  broadly  than  it  was,  when  to  do 
so  would  result  in  the  layoff  of  several  more  senior  teachers  than  would  have  otherwise  been 
necessary.  The  interpretation  was  reasonable  and  was  effectuated  reasonably. 

BUMPS 

© 

 

31. 

The  analysts  then  checked  to  see  if  any  employee  not  skipped  and  identified  as 

a  potential  recipient  of  a  preliminary  notice  had  the  credentials  and  competencies  necessary 
to  “bump”  anyone  being  retained  who  was  junior  to  them  and  was  providing  a  service  they 
were  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach.  On  a  number  of  occasions,  the  analysts  made 
outside  contacts,  such  as  calling  the  school  site  where  the  affected  teacher  was  assigned,  to 

  

®@ 

10 

  

verify  assignments.  They  did  not  contact  every  school  site  to  verify  the  assignment  of  every 
employee  who  was  a  potential  recipient  of  a  layoff  notice,  but  did  check  each  time  there  was 
a  question  or  a  conflict,  with  an  eye  toward  reassigning  everyone  they  could,  limited  by  that 
employee’s  credentials  and  competencies.  The  analysts  prepared  several  Reassignment 
Analysis  Worksheets  (  Exhibit  11).  The  worksheets  reveal  the  District  has  many  openings, 
but  most  of  those  require  specialized  credentials  and  qualifications  that  many  of  those 
receiving  a  preliminary  notice  do  not  possess. 

TIE  BREAKER  FOR  SEPTEMBER  7,  2004  TEACHERS 

32. 

|  The  analysts  found  40  elementary  teachers  serving  in  the  District  that  had  the 
same  first  day  of  paid  service,  September  7,  2004.  The  analysts  had  already  determined  that 
not  all  of  these  employees  were  required  to  receive  a  preliminary  notice  to  effectuate  the 
layoff.  The  analysts  created  a  score  sheet  and  scored  each  of  the  40  using  the  tie  breaker 
criteria  set  forth  in  Resolution  #  2448.  Use  of  the  tie  breaker  criteria  to  determine  their 
relative  seniority  was  necessary.  Application  of  the  tie-breaker  criteria  of  Board  Resolution 
resulted  in  some  reranking  of  the  employees,  but  fifteen  teachers  were  still  tied  after  the 
application  of  the  criteria.  The  relative  seniority  of  these  remaining  fifteen  was  then 
determined  by  a  lottery  in  which  their  names  were  written  on  pieces  of  paper  and  placed 
inside  a  box.  It  was  decided  that  the  first  name  drawn  would  be  most  senior,  the  second 
name  would  be  next  senior,  and  so  forth,  until  the  least  senior.  One  of  the  analysts  drew  the 
names,  with  another  as  a  witnesses  and  scribe  of  the  results.  The  employees’  names  were 
drawn  and  10  were  selected  that  were  required  to  receive  a  preliminary  notice. 

- 

33. 

Of  the  ten  employees  who  were  selected  in  the  lottery,  the  District  rescinded 

the  preliminary  notices  to  four.  The  District  stipulated  that  preliminary  notices  sent  to 
employees  Fernauld,  Tran,  Kothman  and  Scott  were  being  rescinded,  leaving  only  six  of  the 
original  40  with  the  same  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  still  subject  to  the  layoff. 
These  six  are  Mr.  Rule;  Mr.  Moore;  Ms.  Wehner;  Ms.  DiSantis;  Ms.  Wenthe  and  Ms.  Tuthill. 

34. 

Several  of  the  employees  subject  to  the  lottery  objected  to  the  manner  in  which 

the  analysts  applied  the  scoring  criteria,  and  contended  the  application  was  thus  arbitrary, 
unfair  and  capricious.  The  complaints  concern  denial  of  credit  for  major,  and  denial  of  credit 
for  participation  in  quasi-mandatory  teacher  support  programs,  particularly  the  District’s  two 
year  teacher  support  program,  Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assessment  (BTSA).  Some 
of  the  respondents  complained  that  the  affected  teachers  were  not  informed  of  the  criteria  in 
time  to  submit  additional  information  or  challenge  the  application  of  the  criteria. 

INDIVIDUAL  RESPONDENTS  SUBJECT  TO  THE  TIE  BREAKER 

35. 

The  District  has  broad  discretion  to  select  its  criteria  for  breaking  ties  in  first 

days  of  paid  service.  That  discretion  is  only  limited  by  the  fact  that  the  criteria  must  be 
rational  and  fairly  applied  to  all  affected  employees.  The  District  decided  not  to  recognize  or 
give  credit  for  time  spent  in  the  BTSA  program,  for  general  studies  majors  such  as 
Humanities  or  Liberal  Studies,  even  where  the  employees  subsequently  passed  the  CSET  or 

1]

  

  

MSAT  subject  matter  competency  examinations,  participation  in  the  District’s  “Passport” 
program,  for  time  dedicated  to  coaching,  mentoring  or  for  certification  as  a  “highly  qualified 
teacher.”  The  District  also  determined  not  to  provide  credit  for  previous  service  to  the 
District  in  the  form  of  substitute  teaching,  but  did  provide  credit  for  temporary  teaching 
under  a  contract.  The  District’s  rejection  of  the  criteria  advanced  by  the  individual 
respondents  as  worthy  of  consideration  was  not  an  abuse  of  the  District’s  broad  discretion  to 
make  such  choices.  It  did  not  appear  that  the  Board  failed  to  find  these  qualifications  worthy 
or  valuable,  particularly  participation  in  its  BTSA  program.  It  appears  that  these  exclusions 
were  more  likely  the  product  of  quick  work  without  larger  consideration  of  the  value  to  the 
District  of  having  its  teachers  have  these  achievements  and  participations,  and  delegation  of 
implementation  of  the  determinations  to  the  analysts.  The  District’s  failure  to  give  tie 
breaker  credit  for  participation  in  BTSA,  which  requires  a  considerable  amount  of  a  new 
teacher’s  time  and,  although  not  mandatory,  is  “highly  recommended,”  or  for  other  time 
consuming  extra  curricular  service  to  the  District  was  arguably  unwise  and  sends  a 
discouraging  message  to  its  young  teachers,  but  it  is  not  an  abuse  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

36. 

|  However,  the  analysts  did  make  some  mistakes.  They  were  given  broad 

discretion  with  little  guidance  in  interpreting  and  applying  the  criteria.  The  mistakes  were 
made  with  respect  to  denying  credit  for  majors  for  some  respondents,  and  a  mistake 
regarding  bilingual  competence  for  another.  To  the  analysts’  credit,  the  facts  supporting 
each  of  these  claims  were  not  fully  known  until  the  evidentiary  hearing,  and  under  the 
extreme  compression  of  time  for  this  layoff  were  understandable.  Ms.  Wehner  and  Ms. 
DiSantis  received  no  credit  for  their  college  majors  in  the  application  of  the  tie  breaking 
criteria.  Ms.  DiSantis  and  Ms.  Wehner  both  majored  in  childhood  development  with 
precredential  preparation.  This  major  prepares  a  teacher  candidate  for  teaching  at  the 
elementary  level.  The  major  focuses  on  childhood  cognitive  development  and  preparation 
for  teaching  in a  linguistically  diverse  environment.  Unlike  liberal  studies  or  humanities, 
which  truly  are  general  education  majors,  the  childhood  development  majors  taken  by  Ms. 
DiSantis  and  Ms.  Wehner  are  directly  related  to  the  subject  matter  and  the  manner  in  which 
they  teach  in  the  elementary  classrooms  they  staff  for  the  District.  The  analysts  erred  when 
they  excluded  points  for  major  credit  for  these two  employees.  They  did  not  err  when  they 
declined  to  credit  the  much  more  general  humanities  or  liberal  studies  majors  of  many  of  the 
other  employees.  Had  the  major  credit  been  given  to  Ms.  Wehner  and  Ms.  DiSantis,  both 
would  not  have  been  subject  to  the  lottery  and  would  have  had  their  preliminary  notices 
rescinded,  as  did  others  with  the  additional  credits. 

37. 

|  Ms.  Wenthe  is  a  liberal  studies  major  and  received  no  credit  for  her  major. 
However,  she  is  bilingual  and  has  BCLAD  type  multicultural  education  training.  She  is  a 
Mien  speaker,  but  since  there  is  only  one  Mien  speaker  in  her  present  elementary  classroom, 
she  is  not  considered  to  be  serving  in  a  bilingual  required  classroom.  She  has  sought  to 
obtain  a  BCLAD  certification,  but  has  been  advised  that  there  is  no  one  certified  and 
It  appears  Ms.  Wenthe  has  bilingual  assets  the  Board 
available  to  test  and  certify  her. 
identified  should  be  retained  in  the  District,  regardless  of  seniority.  There  was  no  way  the 
analysts  could  have  known  she  had  these  linguistic  competencies  because  the  District  records 
do  not  show  the  competency  until  it  has  been  certified.  Even  then,  there  was  evidence  the 

12 

 

©® 

  
  
  

District  record  keeping  system  is  significantly  behind  in  bringing  employee  records  of. 
certifications  and  competencies  up  to  date.  Since  the  District  did  not  skip  BCLAD  possessed 
employees  who  were  not  serving  in  classrooms  where  BCALD  certification  was  mandatory 
to  staff  the  classroom,  it  is  unlikely  Ms.  Wenthe  would  have  been  skipped  for  her  de  facto 
possession  of  BCLAD  certification  in  Mien.  But  she  should  have  been  credited  for  the 
competency  in  the  tie  breaker,  which  would  have  removed  her  from  the  lottery  and  would 
have  resulted  in  her  notice  being  rescinded. 

PKS-  4.0  FTE  ADMINISTRATORS 

38, 

The  4.0  FTE  of  administrators  being  eliminated  by  Resolution  #2447  were  . 
identified  as  four  high  school  assistant  principals  who  are  being  reassigned  to  the  classroom. 
There  was  no  issue  regarding  whether  the  reassignments  were  appropriate  or  whether  any  of 
the  administrators  being  reassigned  were  certificated  and  competent  to  take  the 
reassignments  made. 

SKIP  OF  SHANNON  TORRES 

39.  |  Shannon  Torres  teaches  the  “Pregnant  Minor”  program  at  the  District’s 
American  Legion  Continuation  High  School.  Her  seniority  date  is  March  28,  2005.  She  has 
a  MS  credential  and  no  other  certifications  and  competencies.  The  analysts  testified  that  they  _ 
skipped  her  from  receiving  a  preliminary  notice  because  of  the  “unique  nature  of  the  program 
and  the  assignment.”  It  is  not  disputed  that  many  of  the  respondents  receiving  preliminary 
notices  are  senior  to  her.  The  District  is  not  terminating  the  Pregnant  Minors  program  in 
these  proceedings.  But  it  is  intending  to  lay  off  several  teachers  senior  to  Ms.  Torres  who 
also  have  MS  credentials.  The  analyst’s  determination  that  the  program  is  “unique”  does  not 
determine  whether  another  more  senior  teacher  with  the  same  credentials  and  competencies 
can  bump  into  that  assignment.  The  District  produced  no  evidence  that  would  support  a 
conclusion  that  Ms.  Torres,  despite  her  credentials,  was  uniquely  qualified  over  the  more 
senior  teachers  being  laid  off  to  staff  that  class.  The  Board  did  not  direct  in  its  Resolutions  to 
skip  the  person  staffing  this  program.  This  decision  was  that  of  the  analyst  alone,  and  it 
cannot  stand.  The  most  senior  of  the  remaining  respondents  possessed  of  a  MS  credential 
and  still  subject  to  layoff  may  bump  into  that  class,  and  the  preliminary  notice  as  to  that 
teacher  must  be  rescinded. 

40. 

Preliminary  notices  issued  to  these  two  employees  were  rescinded  by  the 

RACHEL  CLARIN  AND  JOHN  SYNHORST 

District  and  they  have  been  reassigned. 

SHEILA  PAGE 

41. 

Sheila  Page’s  District  seniority  date  is  January  17,  2001.  She  is  currently 

assigned  as  an  elementary  teacher.  She  was  not  given  a  preliminary  notice  of  layoff, - 
evidently  because  of  this  seniority  date.  An  inference  was  raised  that  Ms.  Page’s  seniority 

13

  

@ 

@ 

date  may  have  been  an  error.  Her  records  with  the  District  show  her  as  a  “first  year 
probationary”  teacher.  One  or  the  other  entry  in  the  District’s  records  is  likely  an  error. 
There  was  some  speculation  from  one  of  the  analysts  regarding  how  these  discrepancies 
might  have  occurred,  including  the  possibility  that  Ms.  Page  taught  special  education  in  the 
District  in  2001,  then  had  a  break  in  service,  and  taught  elementary  beginning  in  2004-2005 
when  she  obtained  her  MS  credential  in  November  2004.  Ms.  Page  certified  in  January  2006 
that  her  seniority  date  of  January  17,  2001  was  correct.  The  District  was  entitled  to  rely  on 
the  certification  when  the  preliminary  notices  were  sent.  Speculation  about  how  Ms.  Page’s 
seniority  date  might  not  have  been  accurate  is  not  evidence.  If  there  is  indeed  an  error  in  Ms. 
Page’s  seniority  date,  the  District  is  obligated  to  correct  it,  but  not  as  part  of  these 
proceedings. 

SARAH  CHANEY 

42. 

Sarah  Chaney  occupies  one  of  the  District’s  CBET  Program  specialist 
positions,  which  is  a  categorically  funded  program  in  the  District’s  Adult  Education 
Program.  Ms.  Chaney  was  previously  “surplussed”  from  this  position,  and  has  been  retained 
and  paid  in  the  Program  Specialist  position,  even  though  it  has  been  eliminated.  The  District 
has  permitted  her  to  teach  English  as  a  Second  Language  (ESL)  in  an  hourly  position,  and 
intends  to  continue  to  do  so,  as  long  as  there  is  enrollment  to  support  the  position.  It  was  not 
disputed  that  Ms.  Chaney  must  be  reassigned  or  laid  off  due  to  the  overfilling  of  the 
categorically  funded  program  in  which  she  now  teaches.  Ms.  Chaney  has  a seniority  date  of 
March  1,  2002  and  a  credential  in  Designated  Subjects:  Adult  Education,  with  an  ESL 
authorization.  It  was  not  disputed  that  the  District  intends  to  offer  at  least  some  ESL 
programs  in  its  Adult  Education  Program  in  the  upcoming  year.  Two  of  the  current  ESL 
teachers  are  temporaries  and  Ms.  Hayes  testified  the  District  will  not  be  rehiring  them.  But 
the  District’s  Adult  Education  specialist  testified  that  the  District  does  not  set  the  classes 
until  the  summer,  and  cannot  determine  in  advance  what  the  enrollment  will  be.  Staffing  is 
based  entirely  upon  enrollment  in  this  program.  It  may  be  that  Ms.  Chaney  will  be 
reemployed  to  teach  ESL,  and  it  appeared  the  District  thought  that  likely.  There  is  no 
evidence  the  District  intends  at  this  time  to  retain  any  employee  junior  to  her  to  teach  ESL  in 
the  upcoming  school  year  in  the  Adult  Education  Program.  If  the  enrollment  materializes  in 
the  summer,  Ms.  Chaney  is  entitled  to  teach  ESL  before  any  other  employee  junior  to  her,  if 
the  classes  are  offered. 

LIBRARIANS 

43. 

The  Board  reduced  the  District’s  13.0  FTE  librarian  services  by  11.6,  leaving 

1.4  FTE.  Twelve  librarians  received  preliminary  notices  of  layoff.  All  twelve  were 
reassigned  and  retained.  Nine  were  reassigned  to  teach  single  subject  courses  and  three  were 
reassigned  to  elementary  classrooms.  The  most  senior  librarian  is  Ms.  Vann.  She  has  a 
special  education  certification  and  has  been  reassigned  to  teach  1.0  FTE  special  education. 
Mr.  Campos  is  the  least  senior  librarian.  He  received  a  preliminary  notice  but  did  not  timely 
request  a  hearing.  He  is  being  retained  to  staff  a  split  assignment,  .6  FTE  social  studies  and 
4  FTE  librarian.  The  Association  contends  that  Ms.  Vann,  the  most  senior  librarian,  is  being 

© 

  

  

14 

  

 

improperly  terminated  from  her  librarian  position  and  is  entitled  to  bump  Mr.  Campos  from 
the  .4  FTE  librarian  position.  Characterization  of  the  retention  of  Ms.  Vann  and  her 
reassignment  to  teach  a  1.0  FTE  of  special  education  as  a  “termination”  from  her  position  as 
a  librarian  is  inaccurate.  Ms.  Vann  is  not  being  terminated.  She  is  being  retained  and 
reassigned.  The  details  of  the  conflict  with  her  reassignment  and  that  of  Mr.  Campos  is 
beyond  the  scope  of  these  proceedings,  which  are  to  address  only  whether  a  senior  person  is 
being  terminated  from  employment  where  a  junior  person  is  being  retained  to  teach  what  the 
senior  person  is  certificated  to  teach.  Ms.  Vann  certainly  has  an  arguable  claim  to  the  .4  FTE 
library  assignment  based  on  her  seniority,  but  both  Ms.  Vann  and  Mr.  Campos  are  being 
retained,  and  the  District  is  vested  with  discretion  to  determine  how  to  assign  and  reassign  its 
employees  after  the  decision  to  reelect  them  both  has  been  made.  This  dispute  is  more 
appropriately  addressed  in  a  grievance,  if  the  District  does  give  the  .4  FTE  library  assignment 
to  Mr.  Campos  over  Ms.  Vann. 

ART 

44. 

Art  teaching  was  reduced  by  the  District  by  5.0  FTE.  Five  employees  received 
preliminary  notices.  Mr.  Wadsworth  is  the  most  senior  of  the  five  receiving  notice.  He  has  a 
single  subject  credential  in  Art,  and  no  other  authorizations.  One  of  the  five  art  teachers  has 
a  single  subject  authorization  in  English.  She  is  able  to  be  reassigned.  The  other  four, 
including  Mr.  Wadsworth,  do  not  have  any  additional  authorizations  and  cannot  be 
reassigned. 

45. 

The  Association  contends  that  the  District  failed  to  make  all  possible 

reassignments  that  would  avoid  laying  off  senior  art  teachers.  The  evidence  was  very 
muddled  with  respect  to  where  Mr.  Wadsworth  might  bump,  if  at  all.  This  is  the  product  of 
the  fact  that  the  District  is  laying  off  all  its  art  teachers,  from  the  most  to  the  least  senior.  The 
Association  sought  to  offer  master  schedule  from  certain  school  sites  to  demonstrate  that 
there  were  art  classes  being  offered  in  the  current  year  being  staffed  by  persons  junior  to  the 
five  art  teachers  given  preliminary  notices  who  were  being  retained.  The  evidence  was 
excluded  as  irrelevant.  Since  the  District  is  eliminating  all  its  art  classes,  any  such  junior 
employees  teaching  art  at  any  school  will  have  to  be  reassigned.  The  only  art  teacher 
escaping  the  process  has  an  additional  authorization  that  allows  her  to  teach  in  another  non- 
art  assignment.  If  the  District  offers  Art  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  it  may  not  employ  any 
employee  junior  to  Mr.  Wadsworth  to  teach  that  subject. 

INDUSTRIAL  ARTS 

46. 

Mr.  Olcese  has  an  Industrial  Technology  and  Education  single  subject 

credential.  His  seniority  date  is  September  3,  1991.  He  received  a  preliminary  notice  of 
layoff  as  part  of  the  2.0  FTE  reduction  in  Industrial  Arts  teaching  in  the  District.  Mr. 
Garrison  has  the  same  credential  and  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  7,  2004.  Mr. 
Garrison  teaches  small  engine  technology  at  Rosemont  High  School.  Mr.  Garrison  did  not 
receive  a  preliminary  notice.  Mr.  Olcese  is  competent  and  credentialed  to  teach  the  small 
engine  technology  class. 

15

 

47, 

The  District  contends  Mr.  Garrison  is  a  temporary  employee  as  a  matter  of  law 

and  will  be  terminated  along  with  the  rest  of  the  temporary  employees.  However,  his  name 
does  not  appear  on  the  District  list  of  temporary  employees  to  be  released  that  was  prepared 
by  the  analysts.  Testimony  from  Ms.  Fong,  one  of  the  analysts,  at  the  evidentiary  hearing 
established  that  the  small  engine  technology  class  is  funded  through  the  Regional  Occupation 
Program  (ROP),  a  categorical  program.  She  testified  that  Mr.  Garrison  is  classified  by  the 
District  on  the  master  seniority  list  as  a  second  year  probationary  employee.  There  was  no 
evidence  he  was  included  on  the  District’s  list  or  probationary  nonreelects.  There  was  no 
evidence  where  Mr.  Garrison  taught  during  his  first  year  with  the  District.  Mr.  Garrison’s 
contracts  for  the  current  and  past  school  years  were  not  offered  in  evidence.  A  certificated 
employee  of  the  District  who  has  been  employed  in  the  District’s  noncatagorical  teaching 
programs  and  then  is  assigned  to  teach  in  the  ROP  program  is  not  subject  to  the  provisions  of 
Education  Code  section  44910,  upon  which  the  District  relies.  On  this  record,  it  cannot  be 
determined  whether  Mr.  Garrison  was  or  was  not  employed  in  a  District  noncatagorical 
position  during  his  first  year,  or  what  his  contract  status  was.  It  is  apparent  the  District 
discovered  the  discrepancies  with  Mr.  Garrison’s  status  and  records  after  the  evidentiary 
hearing  was  concluded  but  before  it  filed  its  closing  brief.  The  District  did  not  prove  enough 
facts  to  support  its  contention  that  Mr.  Garrison  is  a  temporary  employee  as  a  matter  of  law. 
The  District’s  contention  that  Mr.  Garrison is  a  temporary  employee  for  the  purposes  of  these 
proceedings  fails  for  lack  of  evidentiary  support. 

48. 

|  However,  it  is  apparent  that  there  is  no  other  position  in  the  District  into  which 

Mr.  Olcese  may  bump.  The  District  has  not  committed  to  offering  the  small  engine 
technology  class  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  and  does  not  yet  know  whether  the  ROP 
funding  will  be  provided  for  the  program.  If  the  class  is  offered  and  the  program  is  funded, 
Mr.  Olcese  must  be  assigned  to  teach  it,  as  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  it,  and  is 
more  senior  than  any  other  District  employee  who  is  certificated  to  teach  it  who  was  not 
already  assigned  or  reassigned.  It  appears  Mr.  Garrison  will  not  be  rehired,  regardless  of  the 
final  determination  of  his  status. 

AIRFRAME  AND  POWERPLANT  MECHANICS  AND  LANDSCAPING 

49. 

As  briefly  set  forth  above,  the  Association  contended  the  layoffs  of  the  1.0 

FTE  for  each  of  these  two  positions  was  inappropriate  because  the  Resolution  described  the 
elimination  of  these  services  by  the  credentials  of  the  employees  staffing  them.  The 
contention  lacks  merit.  There  are  instances  where  the  description  of  the  teaching  service  and 
the  credentials  required  to  teach  it  are  similar,  if  not  identical.  This  is  particularly  so  in 
specialized  vocational  or  technical  subjects,  such  as  these  at  issue.  Although  more  care  in 
finding  a  more  artful  fashion  of  describing  the  particular  kind  of  service  to  be  eliminated 
could  have  avoided  this  issue,  there  is  no  real  issue  regarding  what  service  is  being 
eliminated.  Where  1.0  FTE  of  a  highly  specialized  service  is  being  eliminated  and  there  is 
only  one  class  of  that  service  in  the  District,  with  one  employee  staffing  it,  a  claim  can 
always  be  made  that  the  elimination  of  the  service  is  really  an  elimination  of  the  teacher. 
Such  a  claim  requires  additional  proof  that  a  particular  teacher  has  been  singled  out  for  layoff 

  

  

16 

and  that  the  elimination  of  the  service  is  a  pretext  to  eliminate  the  teacher.  The  claim  is 
easily  made  but  difficult  to  prove.  It  was  not  proved  here. 

50. 

Landscaping  is  a  categorically  funded  program.  The  employee  receiving  the 
preliminary  notice  cannot  displace  any  other  person  in  the  District.  The  employee  teaching 
Airframe  and  Power  Mechanics  has  a  specialized  credential  and  cannot  bump  any  other 
employee. 

COUNSELING 

51.  The  Association  contended  the  layoff  of  counselors  should  have  been  a  model  for 

the  determination  of  how  elementary  teachers  were  selected  for  receipt  of  preliminary 
notices.  The  analysts  selected  all  counselors  serving  in  the  District,  regardless  of  at  what 
level,  in  any  capacity  and  at  any  school,  assembled  the  list  and  worked  up  from  the  least 
senior  to  the  most  in  determining  who  got  preliminary  notices.  The  contention  has 
considerable  merit,  and  had  the  same  process  been  followed  with  the  elementary  teachers  as 
was  with  the  counselors,  a  considerable  amount  of  work  and  emotional  upset  with  the 
employees  might  have  been  avoided.  But  the  fact  that  the  effectuation  of  the  reduction  in 
counseling  in  the  District  was  performed  efficiently  and  effectively  does  not  affect  the 
outcome  of  any  issue  here.  There  was  some  question  raised  regarding  counselor  Ms.  Joseph. 
She  was  subject  to  a  tie  breaker  analysis  with  another  employee.  The  District  noted  that.Ms. 
Joseph  prevailed  in  the  application  of  the  criteria  and  will  be  retained. 

SOCIAL  WORK;  HOME  ECONOMICS;  AND  ADULT  SCHOOL  TEACHING; 

52. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  effectuation  of  the  layoff  of  a  corresponding 

number  of  certificated  employee  of  the  District  necessitated  by  the  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  eliminate  social  work  services,  home  economics  classes  and  adult  school  teaching 
was  not  accomplished  appropriately. 

WELFARE  OF  THE  DISTRICT  AND  ITS  STUDENTS 

53. 

Several  of  the  Association’s  contentions  suggest  that  the  Board  did  not 

consider  the  welfare  of  District  students  in  determining  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2447.  To  the  extent  the  contention  is  actually 
advanced,  it  is  not  persuasive.  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services, 
and  cost  savings  are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Board’s  decision  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

54. 

Other  than  that  set  forth  particularly  above,  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s 
analysts  correctly  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated  employee 
is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render,  unless  skipped,  as  set  forth  above. 

17

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  sections  44949  and 
44955  were  met. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”*  The  burden  is  on  the  District  to  demonstrate  that  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  reasonable  and  that  the  District 
carefully  considered  its  needs  before  laying  off  any  certificated  employee.? 

3. 

Legal  cause  exists  to  reduce  or  eliminate  135.6  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  offered  by  the  District  as  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  Factual  Findings.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and 
pupils,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

4, 

Legal  cause  also  exists  to  accordingly  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 

employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  exists  to  retain  those  credentialed  and  qualified  to  teach  Special  Education, 
English  Language  Learner  and  Bilingual  Education,  as  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2448, 
regardless  of  seniority,  and  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  under  the  subheading  “Skips.” 

© 

5. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.’ 
Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers 
possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.”  Legal 
cause  exists  to  permit  certain  respondents  having  appropriate  credentials  and  competencies  to 
“bump”  into  other  existing  District  positions,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings,  particularly 
those  under  the  subheading  “Bumps.” 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  25  and  26,  three  persons  identified  as  teaching 

elementary  classes  at  the  middle  school  level,  all  of  whom  have  the  same  seniority  date, 

  

?  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179. 

3 4  Campoell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.  3d  796,  807-808 
«Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469,  474 
>  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers,  Local  2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831. 

  

© 

18

  

  

September  7,  2004,  and  all  of  whom  appear  to  have  only  MS  credentials,  were  overlooked 
for  inclusion  in  the  District’s  tie  breaker  analysis  for  elementary  teachers  having  the  same 
first  day.  of  service  of  September  7,  2004.  These  three  persons  did  not  receive  a  preliminary 
notice,  but  should  have.  It  is  not  known  whether  any  of  these  three  have  credentials  and 
qualifications  that  would  have  resulted  in  scoring  high  enough  when  the  analysts  applied  the 
tie  breaker  criteria  to  avoid  the  lottery.  The  District  simply  missed  these  employees,  to  the 
prejudice  of  the  others  who  were  identified  and  received  preliminary  notices.  It  is  not  the 
purpose  of  these  proceedings  to  speculate  what  might  have  happened,  had  these  three 
employees  been  identified  and  evaluated  with  all  the  others  with  the  tie  breaker  criteria.  It  is 
also  not  the  province  of  these  proceedings  to  fix  the  errors  that  were  inevitable  and  were 
identified  by  this  process.  The  District  must  ultimately  evaluate  these  three  employees 
against  the  tie  breaker  criteria  to  determine  their  seniority  relative  to  the  40  other  persons 
with  the  same  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District.  But  for  now,  the  preliminary  notices 
issued  to  the  corresponding  number  of  remaining  elementary  classroom  teachers  still  subject 
to  layoff  must  be  rescinded.  Since  the  three  from  the  middle  school  were  not  given 
preliminary  notices,  they  are  retained  in  any  event. 

7. 

Application  of  the  tie-breaker  criteria  to  certain  respondent  elementary 

teachers  was  inaccurate,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  under  the  subheading  “Individual 
Respondents  Subject  to  the  Tie  Breaker.”  Cause  does  not  exist  to  issue  a  final  notice  of 
layoff  to  respondents  Ms.  Wenthe,  Ms.  DiSantis  and  Ms.  Wehner.  Preliminary  notices  of 
layoff  issued  to  these  three  employees  must  be  rescinded. 

8. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  issue  a  final  notice  of  layoff  to  the  most  senior  of  the 

respondent  elementary  teachers  with  seniority  dates  of  September  7,  2004  still  subject  to 
layoff.  That  one  respondent  may  bump  into  the  pregnant  minor  program  at  the  continuation 
high  school.  The  District  failed  to  produce  evidence  that  Ms.  Torres,  who  currently  staffs  the 
position,  has  special  qualifications,  credentials  or  experience  that  she  should  be  skipped,  as 
she  is  junior  to  the  respondent  elementary  teachers  being  laid  off.  The  District  may  still 
exercise  its  discretion  to  assign  Ms.  Torres  to  this  valuable  assignment.  But  it  may  not  lay 
off  a  more  senior  and  equally  qualified  teacher  in  order  to  accomplish  that  outcome. 

9. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  rescind  the  preliminary  notices  issued  to  respondents 

Chaney,  Wadsworth  and  Olcese.  However,  if  the  District  offers  ESL  classes  at  the  adult 
school  or  small  engine  technology  in  the  ROP  program  or  Art  in  any  single  subject 
classroom  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  these  employees  are  entitled  to  be  rehired  and  to 
staff  these  classes.  At  the  present  time,  however,  legal  cause  does  not  exist  to  retain  any  of 
these  employees. 

10. 

Other  than  the  foregoing,  no  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent 

is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Except  as  set  forth  above,  the  Board  may  give  the  remaining  respondents  whose 
preliminary  notices  have  not  been  rescinded  final  notice  before  May  15,  2006,  that  their 
services  are  longer  required  by  the  District. 

19

  

ORDER 

The  Accusations  against  respondents  Wenthe,  DiSantis,  Wehner  and  four  of  the  most 
senior  remaining  elementary  teacher  respondents  with  a  September  7,  2004  seniority  date  are 
DISMISSED  and  preliminary  notices  of  layoff  served  on  these  respondents  are 
RESCINDED. 

Prior  to  issuing  final  notices  of  layoff  to  any  of  the  six  remaining  elementary  teachers 
with  first  day  of  paid  service  of  September  7,  2004  and  identified  as  still  subject  to  layoff  as 
a  result  of  the  tie  breaker  lottery,  the  District  shall  apply  the  tie  breaker  criteria  set  forth  in 
Resolution  #2448  to  the  three  middle  school  teachers  identified  in  this  Decision  to  determine 
how  they  rank  against  the  other  teachers  having  the  same  seniority  date,  September  7,  2004, 
in  accordance  with  the  guidance  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusion  6.  One  or  more  preliminary 
notices  of  layoff  may  have  to  be  rescinded  and  final  notices  of  layoff  not  given,  depending 
upon  the  results. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  remaining  respondents  before  May  15,  2006,  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  135.6  FTE  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

All  other  contentions  and  claims  not  specifically  mentioned  were  considered  and  are 

_ 
DENIED. 

DATED:  Hay  ub  wb 

STEPHEN  J.  SMITH  *” 
Administrative 
Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

20 

 
    

