BEFORE  THE  SHASTA  COUNTY 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2006030346 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Joni  Branstetter,  Bill  Dehart,  Kathy  George, 
Sharon  Goldsberry,  Michael  Kelly,  Elizabeth 
Hughes-Komar,  Jennifer  Levens,  Karin 
Lindsey,  Elizabeth  Maco,  Marjorie  McAleer, 
Charlene  Pearce,  Eric  Relph,  Michael 
Roscoe,  Wendy  Sanders,  Judy  Tofflemire, 
Christopher  Van  Meier,  Carie  Webb,  Cheryl  | 
Wilke,  Sara  Winston, 

Respondents.   

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2006,  at  the  Shasta 
County  Office  of  Education  in  Redding,  California. 

Joseph  Kinkade,  Attorney  at  Law,  School  and  College  Legal  Services, 

represented  Shasta  County  Office  of  Education  (SCOE). 

Donald  Selke,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Wells,  Small,  &  Selke,  was  present  on 

behalf  of  the  following  respondents  who  did  not  personally  appear:  Joni  Branstetter, 
Elizabeth  Hughes-Komar,  Charlene  Pearce,  and  Judy  Tofflemire.’ 

The  following  respondents  were  present  and  represented  themselves:  Bill 

Dehart,  Jennifer  Levens,  Karin  Lindsey,  and  Marjorie  McAleer. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  SCOE  and  the  respondents,  individually,  or 
through  their  attorney,  had  an  opportunity  to  present  closing  argument.  The  record 
was  then  closed.  On  April  28,  2006,  the  record  was  reopened  for  the  submission  by 
SCOE  of  additional  documents,  admitted  as  Exhibit  12,  establishing  service  of  the 
Accusation  on  five  respondents  who  did  not  file  a  Notice  of  Defense.  The  matter  was 
submitted  for  decision  on  May  1,  2006. 

  

"Mr.  Selke  also  represented  respondents  Sharon  Goldsbery  and  Sara  Winston  and  timely  filed  a  notice  of 
defense  on  their  behalf.  As  indicated  in  Finding  8,  infra,  their  layoff  notices  were  rescinded  by  SCOE.

  

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

The  Shasta  County  Office  of  Education  provides  educational  services 

to  students  involved  in  the  juvenile  justice  court  system,  as  well  as  education  and 
related  designated  instruction  services  to  special  education  students  who  reside  in 
school  districts  within  its  service  area.  In  addition,  SCOE  provides  education  through 
its  community  schools  and  independent  study  programs  to  a  wide  variety  of  students 
who  have  not  been  successful  in  a  comprehensive  high  school  setting,  including  those 
who  have  been  expelled,  referred  by  probation  or  by  the  school  attendance  review 
board.” 

2. 

Carolyn  Whitmer  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Shasta  County  Office  of 

Education.  The  superintendent  is  an  elected  official  who  serves  as  the  primary 
decision-maker  for  the  County  Office  of  Education. 
‘section  1294,  for  the  purposes  of  teacher  layoffs  under  Education  Code  Sections 
44949  and  44955,  the  Superintendent  performs  any  duty  or  power  imposed  by  statute 
on  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code 

3. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  SCOE  who  are  paid  from 

the  County  School  Service  Fund. 

4. 

Preliminary  Notice  of Layoff:  On  March  9,  2006,  Superintendent 
Whitmer  served  a  written  notice  on  respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  2006  -  2007  school  year.*  The  Superintendent  further  informed 
respondents  that  their  layoff  was  necessitated  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Reduction  in  Alternative  Education  Teaching  Services 

4.00  FTE 

Reduction  in  Independent  Study  Services 

Reduction  in  Special  Education  Programs 

1.00  FTE 

11.50  FTE 

Teaching  Services 
Home  &  Hospital  Services 
Nursing  Services 
Psychological  Services 
Speech  Pathology  Services 
Adaptive  Physical  Ed.  Services 

4.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
2.00  FTE  | 
1.50  FTE 
1.50  FTE 
1.50  FTE 

  

*  Education  Code  section  1700  et  seq.,  describes  the  variety  of  educational  services  that  may  be  provided 
by  county  offices  of  education,  funded  through  the  county  school  service  funds. 
*  Because  the  determination  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  was  made  by  the  Superintendent  rather 
than  a  school  board,  there  is  no  board  resolution  that  determined  the  need  for  this  reduction. 

 
  
  

Reduction  in  Teachers  on  Special  Assignment  Services 

1.00  FTE 

Total  Reduction 

17.50  FTE  positions 

Respondents  were  notified  that  they  would  not  be  reemployed by SCOE 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  that  no  probationary  or 
permanent  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority  were  being  retained  who  would 
render  services  for  which  the  respondents  were  currently  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.  Respondents  were  further  advised  that  they  may  request  a  hearing  to 
determine  whether  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  following  year, 
and  that  any  such  request  must  be  made  by  no  later  than  March  21,  2006. 

This  Notice  was  served  on  respondents  by  both  certified  and  regular  mail, 

along  with  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  a  Request  for 
Hearing  form,  a  Layoff  Agreement  signed  by  Ms.  Whitmer  with  a  signature  block  for 
the  individual  respondent,  and  a  Notice  of  Acknowledgment  and  Receipt. 

5. 

Request for  Hearing:  On  March  21,  2006,  attorney  Donald  A.  Selke, 

Jr.,  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  on  behalf  of  all  19  certificated  SCOE  employees  who 
had  received  the  above  notice. 

6. 

Filing  and  Service  of Accusation: 

On  March  31,  2006,  SCOE’s 

Assistant  Superintendent  for  Educational  Services,  Kathy  Thompson,  made  and  filed 
the  Accusation  against  the  19  certificated  SCOE  employees  as  respondents,  in  her 
official  capacity.  The  Accusation  identified  the  seniority  date  of  each  named 
respondent  by  providing  the  date  of  first  paid  service  to  SCOE,  and  the  need  to  reduce 
17.50  full  time  equivalent  positions  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  previously  identified  in Finding  3,4 

The  Accusation  was  served  on  respondents  with  a  Statement  to  Respondent,  a 
blank  Notice  of  Defense,  a  Notice  of  Hearing,  and  copies  of  pertinent  Education  and 
Government  Code  sections.  The  Statement  to  Respondent  notified  respondents  that 
unless  a  written  Request  for  a  Hearing  signed  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  was 
delivered  or  mailed  to  SCOE  within  five  days  after  the  Accusation  was  served,  the 
hearing  would  proceed  as  a  default,  and  that  “failure  to  request  a  hearing  to  contest 
the  charges  by  filing  a  Notice  of  Defense  within  the  period  specified  above  will 
constitute  a  waiver  of  your  rights  to  contest  the  charges  made  in  the  Accusation....” 
Specifically, 

  

* 
The  Accusation  also  alleged  that  written  Layoff  Agreements,  that  included  waivers  ofa  right  to  a 
hearing,  were  signed  by  Michael  Kelly,  Carrie  Webb,  Michael  Roscoe,  Bill  Dehart,  and  Christopher  Van 
Meier.  The  only  Layoff  Agreement  SCOE  submitted  in  evidence,  however,  was  that  signed  by  Mr.  Dehart.

On  March  31,  2006,  SCOE  served  the  Accusations  with 

a. 
accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  on 
Mr.  Selke  on  behalf  of  his  clients. 

b. 
On  April  3,  2006,  SCOE  served  the  Accusations  with 
accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  on  following 
respondents  by  certified  mail:  Marjorie  McAleer,  Karin  Lindsey, 
Jennifer  Levens,  Bill  Dehart,  Joni  Branstetter,  Michael  Kelly,  Eric 
Relph,  Michael  Roscoe,  Wendy  Sanders,  and  Carie  Webb.” 

7. 

Notice  of Defense:  Notices  of  Defense  were  thereafter  filed  with  SCOE 

by  the  following  respondents: 

a. 
On  March  31,  2006,  Notices  of  Defense  were  filed  by 
respondents  Bill  Dehart,  Jennifer  Levens,  Karin  Lindsey,  and 
Marjorie  McAleer. 

On  April  4,  2006,  Mr.  Selke  timely  filed  a  Notice  of 
b. 
Defense  on  behalf  of  respondents  Elizabeth  Hughes-Komar, 
Charlene  Pearce,  and  Judy  Tofflemire. 

On  April  5,  2006,  Joni  Branstetter  filed  her  Notice  of 

C. 
Defense.  Thereafter,  at  the  hearing,  Mr.  Selke  represented  Ms. 
Branstetter  . 

Status  of Kathy  George,  Elizabeth  Maco,  Sharon  Goldsbery,  Sara  Winston,  Cheryl 
Wilke,  and  Christopher  Van  Meier 

8. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  hearing,  SCOE  confirmed  that  it  had  rescinded 

the  layoff  notices  of  Kathy  George,  Elizabeth  Maco,  Sharon  Goldsbery,  Sara 
Winston,  Cheryl  Wilke,  and  Christopher  Van  Meier.  Accordingly,  these  individuals 
are  no  longer  respondents  to  this  matter. 

Status  of Michael  Kelley,  Eric  Relph,  Michael  Roscoe,  Wendy  Sanders  and 
Carrie  Webb 

9. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  not  filed  by  the  following  certificated 

employees  who  were  properly  served  with  the  Accusation  and  supporting  documents: 
Michael  Kelley,  Eric  Relph,  Michael  Roscoe,  Wendy  Sanders,  and  Carrie  Webb. 

  

>  At  the  hearing,  SCOE  asserted  that  Michael  Kelly,  Eric  Relph,  Michael  Roscoe,  Wendy  Sanders,  and 
Carie  Webb  had  not  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  thereby  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing;  however,  SCOE 
did  not  provide  proof  that  the  Accusation  and  Statement  to  Respondent  notifying  employees  of  their  right 
to  a  hearing  by  filing  a  Notice  of  Defense  had  been  served  on  these  respondents.  These  proofs  of  service 
were  subsequently  provided  in  Exhibit  12, 

@ 

  
  
 

None  of  these  individuals  appeared  at  the  hearing,  either  personally  or  through 
counsel.  By  failing  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  after  being  appropriately  served  with 
the  Accusation,  Statement  to  Respondent,  blank  Notice  of  Defense,  Notice  of  Hearing 
and  related  statutes,  these  five  individuals  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing  and  are  not 
parties  to  this  matter. 

Status  of Bill  Dehart 

10. 

SCOE  challenged  Bill  Dehart’s  participation  in  the  hearing  based  upon 
a  Layoff  Agreement  he  signed  on  March  9,  2006.  This  Layoff  Agreement,  signed  by 
Superintendent  Whitmer,  was  mailed  to  all  respondents  with  the  preliminary  notice  of 
intent  to  layoff. 

The  two-page  Layoff  Agreement  provided  that  Mr.  Dehart  and  the 
Superintendent  jointly  agreed  that  there  was  cause  under  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955  to  lay  off  Mr.  Dehart  effective  June  30,  2006.  The  Agreement 
further  specifically  provided  that  Mr.  Dehart  would  be  offered  reemployment  as  a 
half-time  counselor  for  the  2006-2007  school  year,  and  that  his  insurance  benefits 
would  continue  through  October  2006.  Included  among  the  11  specific  agreements  in 
this  document  is  the  following: 

The  Employee  waives  and  relinquishes  his/her  right  to  a  hearing 
as  provided  by  Education  Code  Sections  44949,  et  seq.,  44955,  et 
seq.,  and  Government  Code  Sections  11500,  et  seq.  No  other  notice 
of  layoff  or  non  reemployment  is  required  to  be  issued  to  the  employee 
under  Education  Code  Sections  44955  or  44949  to  complete  layoff 
-of  the  employee.  This  agreement  constitutes  notice  of  layoff  and 
nonreemployment. 

After  signing  the  Layoff  Agreement,  on  March  31,  2006,  Mr.  Dehart  filed  a 

Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation.  At  hearing,  Mr.  Dehart  testified  that  he  did  not 
read  the  two-page  Layoff  Agreement  before  he  signed  it  and  believed  he  was  signing 
to  acknowledge  his  receipt  of  documents  rather  than  waiving  any  of  his  rights.  Mr. 
Dehart  also  testified  that  only  one  of  his  two  hearing  aides  was  functioning  at  the  time 
his  supervisor  called  him  into  his  office  and  presented  him  with  these  documents. 
When  Mr.  Dehart  later  received  a  copy  of  the  Accusation  and  Notice  of  Defense,  he 
requested  a  hearing.  Mr.  Dehart’s  actions  following  receipt  of  the  Accusation  support 
his  testimony  that  he  did  not  read  the  Layoff  Agreement  before  he  signed  it. 

Nonetheless,  SCOE  argues  persuasively  that  it  is  entitled  to  rely  on  Mr. 
Dehart’s  written  consent  to  the  Layoff  Agreement,  with  its  specific  waiver  of  a  right 
to  a  hearing.  SCOE  would  clearly  be  prejudiced  if  Mr.  Dehart  were  allowed  to 
rescind  this  agreement  because  it  relied  on  his  agreement  to  make  reductions  and 
reassignments.  Furthermore,  a  review  of  the  two-  page  Layoff  Agreement  reveals 
that  its  terms  are  extremely  specific  and  unambiguous  regarding  Mr.  Dehart’s  waiver

    

of  a  right  to  a  hearing  upon  consent  to  the  agreement.  Accordingly,  Mr.  Dehart 
waived  his  right  to  a  hearing  and  is  not  a  party  to  this  action. 

Status  of Respondents  Who  Filed  a  Notice  of Defense  and  Did  Not  Sign  a  Layoff 
Agreement 

11. 

Ofthe  19  certificated  employees  named  in  the  Accusation,  the  rights  of 
seven  respondents  remain  at  issue  in  this  hearing.  These  seven  respondents,  with  their 
relative  seniority  dates  and  positions,  are  as  follows: 

Employee 

Seniority 

Position 

Elizabeth  Hughes-Komar  12/11/87 
8/23/95 
Joni  Branstetter 
8/22/02 
Judy  Tofflemire 
8/13/03 
C.  Pearce 
8/19/05 
Marjorie  McAleer 
9/01/05 
Karin  Lindsey 
9/02/05 
Jennifer  Levens 

speech/lang.  pathologist 
speech/lang.  pathologist 
speech/lang.  pathologist 
nurse 
teacher 
teacher 
teacher 

12. 

SCOE’s  assistant  superintendent  Karen  Thompson  described  the 

circumstances  that  led  to  the  Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 
services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students.  Ms.  Thompson  made  the 
initial  reduction  recommendation.  Superintendent  Whitmer  confirmed  that  it  was 
necessary  to  make  the  recommended  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services  and 
began  implementation  of  the  layoff  recommendation,  by  sending  letters  notifying  the 
affected  employees,  based  upon  the  following  facts: 

First,  SCOE  has  historically  provided  special  education  and  related  services  to 

special  education  students  enrolled  in  various  school  districts  in  the  county,  at  the 
request  of  the  school  districts.  This  year,  the  school  districts  advised  SCOE  that  they 
would  “take  back”  their  preschool  special  education  services  and  provide  those 
services  themselves  with  district  employees.  The  districts  further  advised  SCOE  that 
they  would  take  back  school  age  special  education  and  related  services  for  individuals 
with  moderate  to  severe  disabilities  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  The  Special 
Education  Local  Plan  Area  (SELPA)  voted  to  approve  this  transfer  of  special 
education  services  back  to  the  districts,  effective  July  1,  2006.  As a  result  of  this  take 
back,  SCOE  lost  a  special  day  class  program  that  served  kindergarten  through  twelfth 
grade  students  in  nine  classrooms,  with  11.5  full  time  equivalent  positions  in  the  areas 
of  teaching,  nursing,  counseling,  psychology,  and  adaptive  physical  education. 

Second,  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff  is  required  in  SCOE’s  “at  risk” 
programs  that  service  students  in  its  community  schools  due  to  the  low  enrollment  in 
these  programs  at  the  outset  of  the  school  year.  Ms.  Thompson  indicated  that, 
historically,  enrollment  in  SCOE’s  at  risk  programs  at  Oasis  community  school 

     

increases  over  time.  While  SCOE’s  past  practice  and  current  intent  is  to  rescind 
layoff  notices  as  enrollment  again  increases,  the  decision  to  reduce  this  particular  kind 
of  service  was  based  upon  current  enrollment  figures. 

13. 

The  services  identified  in  Superintendent  Whitmer’s  March  9,  2006, 
letter  and  in  the  Accusation,  as  further  described  in  Ms.  Thompson’s  testimony,  are 
particular  kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code 
section  44955.  No  mandated  services  were  reduced.  SCOE’s  decision  was  not 
related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  certificated  individuals  whose 
services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated.”  Rather,  its  decisions  were  based 
on  the  welfare  of  SCOE  and  its  pupils.  The  Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  her  discretion. 

14. 

To  identify  the  employees  affected  by  the  necessary  reductions,  Ms. 
Thompson  reviewed  the  number  of  positions  that  were  no  longer  needed,  SCOE’s 
Seniority  List,  and  the  respondents’  assignments,  locations,  advanced  degrees, 
credentials,  and  authorizations. 

SCOE’s  Seniority  List  identifies  employees’  seniority  dates  based  upon  their 
first  date  of  paid  service.  SCOE  made  the  Seniority  List  available  to  its  certificated 
employees.  None  of  the  affected  respondents  raised  any  questions  regarding  the 
accuracy  of  the  Seniority  List.  Using  the  Seniority  List,  SCOE  then  determined  in 
inverse  order  of  seniority  the  names  of  the  employees  who  would  be  affected.  As 
discussed  above,  these  individuals  were  then  served  with  preliminary  notice  of  intent 
to  layoff,  the  Accusation,  and  all  supporting  documentation. 

SCOE’s  Request  to  “Skip”  Less  Senior  Teacher  Respondents 

15. 

In  relation  to  certificated  teachers  being  affected  by  the  reduction  in 

particular  kinds  of  services,  SCOE  determined  that  three  of  the  least  senior  teachers  — 
Marjorie  McAleer,  Jennifer  Levens,  and  Karin  Lindsay  --should  be  “skipped”  in  the 
layoff  process  because  it  needed  their  specialized  skills  for  its  independent  study 
program,  and  because  teachers  with  more  seniority  did  not.  possess  the  specialized 
training  and  experience  to  perform  these  services. 

Ms.  Thompson  testified  that  SCOE  hired  these  three  teachers  in  the  fall  of 
2005,  after  the  closure  of  Options  for  Youth  Charter  School,  which  had  provided  a 
unique  independent  study  program  for  students  in  Shasta  County  whose  educational 
needs  were  not  being  otherwise  met.  On  closure  of  Options  for  Youth,  SCOE 
determined  to  expand  its  independent  studies  program  to  add  the  Magnolia  Program 
which  is  designed  to  ensure  that  this  student  population  will  be  provided  appropriate 
educational  services.  Ms.  Thompson  explained  that  the  traditional  independent 
studies  program  would  not  address  the  needs  of  these  students.  Rather,  this 

  

independent  studies  program  provides  specialized  year-round,  measured  curriculum  

with  advanced  placement  courses  that  are  designed  to  prepare  students  for  post 
secondary  education.  Options  for  Youth  Charter  School  was  accredited  by  the 
Western  Association  of  Schools  and  Colleges  (WASC).  After  its  closure,  its  former 
students  discovered  that  their  WASC  credits  were  not  being  accepted  by  area  high 
schools,  SCOE  determined  that  these  students  would  not  return  to  its  Oasis 
Community  School  and  were  at  great  risk  of  dropping  out  of  school. 

Each  of  these  respondents  had  experience  working  with  Options  for  Youth. 

Each  has  received  specialized  training  from  SCOE  in  attendance  and  accounting  for 
independent  studies  programs,  including  how  to  provide  high  school  credits  and  how 
to  develop  transcripts.  This  later  course  of  study  is  critical  to  the  success  of 
independent  studies  program  because  students’  credits  are  earned  based  upon  work 
produced.  Furthermore,  Ms.  Thompson  provided  a  detailed  description  of  the  specific 
specialized  training  and  experience  possessed  by  Ms.  McAleer,  Ms.  Levens,  and  Ms. 
Lindsay  which  was  not  shared  by  more  senior  teachers.  For  example,  each  of  these 
three  respondents  has  experience  working  with  the  WASC-certified  independent 
study  program,  and  each  has  achieved  the  “highly  qualified”  teacher  status  under  the 
No  Child  Left  Behind  law  (referred  to  as  “NCLB  compliant”)  in  multiple  core  high 
school  subjects,  specifically  tailored  for  delivery  in  the  context  of  an  independent 
study  program.  Ms.  McAleer  is  NCLB  compliant  in  English,  math,  social  science, 
and  science  for  independent  study  at  the  high  school  level.  Ms.  Lindsey  is  NCLB 
compliant  in  English,  social  science,  and  reading/language  arts  for  independent  study 
at  the  high  school  level.  Jennifer  Levens  is  NCLB  compliant  in  English,  and  Social 
Sciences  for  independent  study  at  the  high  school  level.  By  contrast,  none  of  the 
more  senior  teachers  was  compliant,  or  as  compliant,  at  the  high  school  level. 

Ms.  Thompson  determined  that  if  any  more  senior  teachers  were  allowed  to 

bump  any  of  these  three  respondents  it  would  place  SCOE’s  independent  studies 
program  and  its  students  at  great  risk  for  educational  failure. 

16. 

SCOE  met  its  burden  of  demonstrating  that  it  is  appropriate  to  “skip” 

respondents  McAleer,  Levens,  and  Lindsay.  First,  the  only  certificated  employees 
who  would  be  adversely  affected  by  this  decision  (Michael  Roscoe,  Carie  Webb, 
Karin  Morgan,  Charles  Hetzer,  Eric  Relph,  and  Mike  Kelly)°  did  not  appear  at  the 

  

°  SCOE’s  Seniority  List  establishes  the  following  seniority  order  for  these  employees,  each  of  which  is 
more  senior  that  those  employees  being  skipped: 

9/27/02 
10/25/02 
3/10/03 
2/25/99 
8/19/02 
10/12/04 
Mr.  Hetzer  has  an  emergency  credential  that  will  expire  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

Charles  Hetzer 
Karin  L.  Morgan 
Carie  Webb 
Michael  Kelly 
Erik  Relph 
Michael  Roscoe 

     

hearing  and  no  evidence  or  argument  was  presented  on  their  behalf.  Rather,  these 
individuals  signed  Layoff  Agreements  with  SCOE,  or  were  properly  served  with  the 
Accusation  and  failed  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense,  or  were  never  included  in  the  class 
of  employees  potentially  affected  by  the  layoff.  Second,  SCOE’s  uncontradicted 
evidence  established  that  it  has  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  courses  in  a 
specialized  independent  study  program  and  that  Ms.  McAleer,  Ms.  Levens,  and  Ms. 
Lindsay  each  possess  specialized  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  those 
courses  which  other  teachers  more  senior  than  they  do  not  possess. 

17. 

SCOE  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  that  the  Superintendent  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No 
junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 
more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

County  Offices  of  Education  are  subject  to  the  same  statutory 

requirements  as  school  districts  where  they  seek  to  layoff  certificated  teaching  staff 
due  to  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  Education  Code  section  1294 
provides  that  whenever  any  duty  or  power  is  imposed  on  the  governing  board  of  a 
school  district  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955,  “the  power  or 
duty  shall,  for  the  purposes  of  this  section,  be  deemed  to  be  granted  to  or  imposed  on 
the  county  superintendent  of  schools  or  his  or  her  employee,  respectively.  When 
‘district’  is  used  in  those  provisions,  it  shall,  for  the  purposes  of  this  section,  be 
deemed  to  mean  ‘county  superintendent  of  schools.’” 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  4  through  7,  all  notice  and 

jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
were  met. 

3. 

Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides  in  pertinent 

part: 

part: 

Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions 
of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other 
employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render. 

4. 

Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  provides  in  pertinent 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate

from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority 
for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1) 

The  district  demonstratés  a  specific  need  for 

personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to 
provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for 
a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course 
of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess. 

5. 

A  school  district  or  a  county  office  of  education  may  reduce  services 
within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a 
certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone, 
or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in 
extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.” 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  4  through  7  and  12  through  14,  cause 
exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  SCOE  due  to  the  reduction 
and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  testimony  of  assistant 
superintendent  Ms.  Thompson  established  that  SCOE’s  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  SCOE’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer 
In  doing 
to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that 
position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469).  A  school 
district  may  move  upward  from  the  bottom  of  the  seniority  list,  “skipping”  over  and 
retaining  junior  employees  who  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  services 
which  more  senior  employees  are  not.  (See,  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1983) 
139  Cal.App.  3d  567.  571.)  Thus,  junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority 
over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which 
their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School 
District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399,  405.) 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  15  and  16,  SCOE  met  its  burden  of 

establishing  that  respondents  Marjorie  McAleer,  Karin  Lindsey,  and  Jennifer  Levens 
are  properly  “skipped”  and  given  retention  priority  over  more  senior  teaching 
employees. 

9. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained 

  

  
  

® 

10

© 

to  render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
Accordingly,  cause  exists  to  give  notice  to  respondents  Elizabeth  Hughes-Komar, 
Joni  Branstetter,  Judy  Tofflemire,  and  Charlene  Pearce  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required,  or  will  be  reduced,  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  full-time  equivalent  certificated 
positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  due  to 
the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Notice  shall  be  given 
in  inverse  order  of  seniority,  but  shall  skip  respondents  Marjorie  McAleer,  Karin 
Lindsay,  and  Jennifer  Levens. 

Dated:  May 1, 2006 

NN. 

sr 

Meet  tlhe 

Marly  A.  Wobllard~ 
Administrative 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

Law  Judge 

/ 

 

11 

  

