BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  TWAIN  HARTE-LONG  BARN 
UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

SUZANNE  DeLACY, 

OAH  No.  N2006030678 

  

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Twain  Harte,  California,  on  May  22,  2006. 

Thomas  M.  Griffin,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  complainant. 

Matthew  J.  Gauger,  Attorney  at  Law,  of Weinberg,  Roger  &  Rosenfeld,  represented 
the  California  Federation  of  Teachers,  and  respondent,  Suzanne  DeLacy.  Also  present  was 
Greg  Eddy,  Field  Representative,  California  Federation  of  Teachers  (Federation). 

Evidence  was  received,  the  hearing  was  closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May 

22,  2006.’ 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Mike  Brusa,  Superintendent,  Twain  Harte-Long  Barn  Union  School  District  of 
Tuolumne  County  (District),  State  of  California,  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

1. 

2. 

On  March  1,  2006,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 
No.  2006-03-01  (Resolution).  The  Resolution  was  based  on  a  recommendation  from  the 

  

'  Respondent  waived  the  statutory  deadlines  in  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  to  June  7,  2006 
(proposed  decision)  and  June  15,  2006  (final  decision). 

 

  EN 

Superintendent,  that  a  .5  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  position  be  eliminated  because  the 
District  anticipated  a  $30,000  reduction  of  federal  funds.  The  Resolution  stated  that  if  the 
District’s  27.75  FTE  certificated  positions  and  the  District’s  .5  FTE  position  funded  by 
federal  funds  were  to  continue  into  the  subsequent  school  year,  state  and  federal  funding 
would  not  likely  be  sufficient  to  fund  all  certificated  personnel.  The  Resolution  directed  the 
Superintendent  to  give  notice  to  a  certificated  employee  filling  one  half-time  Title  1  position 
that  his/her  services  and  position  would  be  eliminated  in  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

© 

3. 

By  letter  dated  March  6,  2006,  the  Superintendent  provided  written  notice  to 

Suzanne  DeLacy  (DeLacy)  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  her, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  her  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  ensuing  year  (“March  15  Notice”). 
The  Resolution  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation  was  attached  to  the  March  15  Notice. 

4, 

DeLacy  made a  timely  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Accusation  was  timely 
served  on  DeLacy,  and  DeLacy  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing 
Jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

5. 

DeLacy  is  presently  employed  as  a  half-time  certificated  employee  of  the 

District,  in  a  Title  I  special  education  position.  She  holds  a  Life  Standard  Elementary 
Teaching  Credential  and  a  Clear  Specialist  Instruction  Credential  in  Special  Education, 
Authorized  Field:  Learning  Handicapped.  Prior  to  her  employment  with  the  district,  she  was 
employed  part-time  as  a  special  education  teacher  by  a  Tri-County  Consortium  that  provided 
special  education  services  to  the  District  and  other  schoo!  districts  in  the  area.  Pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44903.7,  when  DeLacy’s  position  was  transferred  to  the  District  in 
August  of  1997,  she  retained  her  original  seniority  date  based  on  employment  with  the  Tri- 
County  Consortium,  i-e.,  September  1,  1990.  At  all  times  since  her  employment  with  the 
District,  respondent  has  worked  half-time  (.5  FTE). 

6. 

In  2002,-De  Lacy  was  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  Her 
position  was  eliminated  pursuant  to  a  Board  Resolution  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services. 
She  contested  the  Board’s  action  and  requested  a  hearing.  De  Lacy  maintained  that  the 
District  must  retain  her  because  the  District  was  retaining  less  senior  permanent  employees 
and  a  probationary  employee  to  provide  services  which  she  was  certificated  and  competent  to 
render,  as  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b).  The  District 
maintained  that  De  Lacy  was  not a  full-time  employee  of  the  District;  the  part-time  position 
she  held  had  been  eliminated  by  the  District;  and  the  only  employees  junior  to  her  who  were 
providing  services  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render  were  full-time  employees 
of  the  District. 

7. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  found  that  “[t]he  District  is  not  required  to 

create  a  part-time  position  for  respondent,  and  respondent  may  not  “bump” a  full-time 
employee  out  of  his  or  her  position;  nor  is  respondent  entitled  to  a  full-time  position  with  the 
District.  Murray  vy.  Sonoma  County  Office  of  Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456,  460.

© 

  

  

  

Respondent’s  efforts  to  distinguish  Murray  on  the  grounds  that  it  is  a  reinstatement  case  and 
not  an  initial  layoff  case  are  not  persuasive.”  The  Board  adopted  the  decision  of  the 
Administrative  Law  Judge.  De  Lacy  filed  a  Writ  of  Mandamus  (Writ)  in  the  Superior  Court, 
challenging  the  Board’s  decision. 

8. 

While  the  Writ  was  pending,  the  District  and  DeLacy  entered  into  settlement 
negotiations.  On  December  18,  2002,  Mike  Brusa,  on  behalf  of  the  District,  Greg  Eddy,  on 
behalf  of  the  Federation,  and  De  Lacy,  executed  a  “Settlement  Agreement  And  Release  of 
All  Claims”  (Settlement  Agreement).  The  “subject”  of  the  Settlement  Agreement  was 
identified  as  follows:  “this  Agreement  is  a  settlement  and  release  of  all  existing  claims  and 
differences  between  the  parties  concerning  the  layoff  of  DeLacy  by  the  District  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  2001-2002  school  year  and  her  claim  for  reemployment  during  the  fall 
2002  semester.”  In  exchange  for  DeLacy’s  dismissal  of  the  Writ,  the  District  agreed  to  pay 
De  Lacy  $4,  453.  The  District  also  agreed  to  the  following  terms: 

A.  DeLacy  will  be  rehired  in  a  .5  FTE  Title  1  teaching  position,  which  will  be 

designated  a  year-to-year  categorically  funded  position  under  Education  Code 
section  44909.  She  will  be  provided  with  a  temporary  contract. 

B.  The  District  will  follow  the  layoff  process  described  in  Education  Code  section 
44955  if  the  District  seeks  to  eliminate  the  Title  1  teaching  position.  If  this 
process  results  in  DeLacy’s  layoff,  she  will  have  reemployment  rights  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44956  and  will  retain  her  seniority  date  of  September  1, 
1990. 

C.  Through  the  end  of  the  Spring  2006  semester,  DeLacy  shall  be  permitted  to 

voluntarily  transfer  from  her  .5  FTE  Title  1  position  into  any  .5  F.T.E.  or  less 
probationary/permanent  teaching  position  which  the  District  may  establish  and  for 
which  she  is  qualified  to  teach. 

9. 

The  parties  agree  herein  that  the  Settlement  Agreement  controls  the  manner  in 

which  the  instant  reduction  in  services  may  be  conducted,  since  the  reduction  in  services 
results  in  the  elimination  of  .5  FTE  Title  1  teaching  position  presently  occupied  by  DeLacy. 
DeLacy  contends  that  the  District  is  in  breach  of  the  Settkement  Agreement  in  several 
respects,  and  must  retain  her  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

10. 

The  initial  point  of  dispute  is  whether  DeLacy  is  a  permanent  or  temporary 

employee  of  the  District.  DeLacy  was  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District  in  2002  when 
she  was  initially  subject  to  lay  off.  The  District  maintains  that  DeLacy  relinquished  her 
permanent  status  and  agreed  to  become  a  temporary  employee  in  exchange  for  employment 
in  the  2002-2003  school  year.  Since  she  was  deemed  a  temporary  employee,  she  would 
ordinarily  be  subject  to  non-re-election.  To  protect  her  from  non-re-election  in  subsequent 
years,  the  District  agreed  to  extend  to  her  the  lay  off  protections  of  Education  Code  section 
44909.  Likewise,  the  District  agreed  to  furnish  her  with  the  reinstatement  rights  a  permanent 
employee  would  hold  under  Education  Code  section  44956.  In  support  of  its  position,  the 
District  points  to  the  terms  of  the  Settlement  Agreement  to  wit:  “She  will  be  provided  with  a. 
temporary  contract,”  and  the  fact  that  in  each  successive  school  year,  since  the  2002 

3 

 

BY 

Settlement  Agreement,  DeLacy  has  entered  into  temporary  employment  contracts  with  the 
District. 

@ 

11. 

DeLacy  maintains  that  she  did  not  relinquish  her  permanent  status  with  the 

District,  but  merely  accepted  temporary  assignments  after  the  2001-2002  school  year.  The 
lay  off  and  reinstatement  protections  were  added  to  the  Settlement  Agreement  only  to  ensure 
that  even  though  she  occupied  a  temporary  position,  she  would  retain  the  rights  ofa 
permanent  employee.  She  points  as  additional  evidence  to  the  language  of  the  contract.  The 
contract  specifies  that  she  retains  her  original  seniority  date  and  permits  her  to  step  into  any 
permanent/probationary  .5  FTE  position  the  District  may  establish  until  the  end  of  the  2006 
school  year,  provided  she  was  qualified  for  the  position.. 

12. 

The  issue  of  whether  DeLacy  has  permanent  or  temporary  status  is  only 

pertinent  here  when  addressing  the  issue  of  whether  DeLacy  is  eligible  to  “bump”  permanent 
and  probationary  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority,  or  whether  she  may  only  bump 
temporary  employees  with  less  seniority.  DeLacy  maintains  that  she  may  bump  several 
junior  teachers: 

Judy  Skoglund  is  a  temporary  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy.  She 
holds  a  Elementary  Credential  and  occupies  1  FTE  in  grade  K-1. 

Karoline  Waggle  is  a  temporary  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy. 
She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  and  occupies  1  FTE  in  grade  7/8  Math.  Ms. 
Waggle  was  non-re-elected  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

Margaret  Martin  is  a  temporary  employee,  who  resigned  her  position  of  temporary  1 
FTE  teaching  SDC/RS.  She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential.  Ms.  Martin  was 
non-re-elected  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  Her  position  is  currently  vacant  and 
the  District  is  advertising  the  position,  as  1  FTE  in  special  education. 

Michael  Brown  is  a  temporary  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy.  He 
holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential,  Science  &  CLAD,  and  occupies  1  FTE  in  grades 
3-5, 

Kathleen  Olson  is  a  permanent  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy.  She 
holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  &  CLAD  and  occupies  .75  FTE  in  Title  1. 

James  Micheletti  is  a  permanent  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy. 
He  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  &  English  and  occupies  1  FTE  in  grade  8 
LA/SS.  He  is  currently  on  a  leave  of  absence  and  the  position  is  being  advertised. 

Karen  Stapp  is  a  permanent  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy.  She 
holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  Clear  and  LH  Emergency  and  occupies  1  FTE  in 
Title  1. 

@ 

  

 

Kimstar  Herbert  is  a  permanent  employee,  with  a  seniority  date  junior  to  DeLacy. 
She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  &  CLAD  and  occupies  1  FTE  in  grade  K-2. 

In  making  its  determination  to  lay  off  DeLacy,  the  District  did  not  consider  her  to  fill 

any  of  these  positions.  The  District  relies  on  three  rationales  for  its  failure  to  consider 
DeLacy  for  any  of  these  positions.  (1)  The  District  considers  DeLacy  a  temporary  employee 
who  can  not  bump  the  permanent  employees.  (2)  The  District  considers  DeLacy  unqualified 
to  teach  the  position  vacated  by  Karoline  Waggle  because  the  position  requires  course  work 
in  mathematics,  and  the  position  vacated  by  James  Micheletti  because  the  position  requires 
coursework  or  certification  in  language  arts.  (3)  The  District  did  not  consider  DeLacy  for 
any  of  these  positions  because  she  is  a  .5  FTE  and  all  positions  (except  Olson’s  .75  FTE)  are 
1  FTE.  The  District  maintains  that  it  can  not  be  compelled  to  create  part  time  positions  and  it 
cannot  be  compelled  to  hire  DeLacy  for  an  additional  .5FTE  in  order  to  avoid  laying  her 
off. 

13. 

The  District’s  last  argument  is  persuasive,  and  therefore  it  becomes 

unnecessary  to  decide  the  issue  of  whether  DeLacy  is  now  a  temporary,  as  opposed  to  a 
permanent,  employee.  She  cannot  bump  either  permanent  or  temporary  employees  out  of  a  1 
FTE,  or  a  .75  FTE  position,  when  she  holds  a  .5  FTE.  There  are  no  .5  FTE  (or  lesser  FTE) 
positions  she  can  bump  into.*  Nor  can  the  District  be  compelled  to  hire  her  in  a  full  time 
position,  to  carve  vacant  full  time  positions  into  half  time  positions,  or  to  divide  the  .75  FTE 
position  into  fractional  parts. 

At  the  outset,  the  District  has  sound  economic  reasons  to  create  only  full  time 

positions.  It  is  difficult  to  recruit  part-  time  teachers,  especially  in  a  rural  area,  and 
uneconomical  to  retain  them.  It  is  difficult  to  organize  class  offerings  around  part-time 
positions.  The  Superintendent  voiced  these  concerns  at  hearing  and  verified  that  no  part  - 
time  positions  will  be  created  or  advertised  in  the  2006-2007  school  year.  Additionally,  case 
law  is  clear  that  a  District  is  not  required  to  create  part-time  positions,  and a  part-time 
employee  may  not  bump  a  full-time  employee  out  of  his  or  her  position.  The  fact  that 
DeLacy  is  willing  to  fill  a  full  time  position  is  not  relevant.  A  part-time  employee  is  not 
entitled  to  a  full-time  position  with  the  District  and  DeLacy  is  not  entitled  to  greater 
employment  rights  than  she  possessed  prior  to  the  lay  off  action.  (Murray  v.  Sonoma  County 
Office  of Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456,  460.) 

14. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 
may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
decision  to  reduce  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise 
of  the  District’s  discretion.  A  district  may  properly  consider  its  financial  situation  in 

  

*  The  District  maintains  that  DeLacy  is  free  to  apply  for  any  full  time  position  advertised,  and  she  has  not  done  so. 
Nor  has  she  applied  for  any  full  time  position  in  the  many  years  of  her  employment  with  the  District. 
>  There  is  within  the  District  a  5  FTE  special  education  position  currently  occupied  by  Steve  Brown,  a 

permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  senior  to  DeLacy.   

1  FTE 

  

  

determining  to  reduce  services.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d 
627,  630.) 

@ 

15.  .  Permanent  and  temporary  certificated  employees  junior  to  DeLacy  are  being 

retained  to  perform  services  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  However,  DeLacy 
is  a.SFTE  employee  and  said  junior  employees  are  retained  to  perform  |  FTE  and  .75  FTE 
services.  DeLacy  may  not  bump  these  junior  employees  out  of  a  portion  of  their  positions  and 
is  not  entitled  to  employment  rights  in  excess  of  her  .5  FTE. 

16. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  District’s  Title  1  services  by 
.)  FTE,  with  reduction  in  a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  as 
determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondent  Suzanne 
DeLacy  occupying  .5  full-time  equivalent  positions  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings.  The 
cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949, 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondent  Suzanne  DeLacy  that  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  June  7,  2006 

ZAK 

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

— 

@

  
  

