BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
CARPINTERIA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

. 

AMBER  CROYMANS  and  ELIZABETH 
AGUILAR, 

|

 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  L2006031008 

PROPOSED  DECISION  | 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  17,  2006,  in  Carpinteria. 

Pamela  A.  Dempsey,  Esq.,  Parham  &  Rajcic,  represented  Complainant. 

Lawrence  Rosenzweig,  Esq.,  represented  Respondent  Amber  Croymans,  who  was 

present.  Respondent  Elizabeth  Aguilar  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  given.  The  record  was 

closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Parties  &  Jurisdiction 

1, 

2. 

3. 

Complainant  Paul  A.  Cordeiro is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Carpinteria  Unified 

School  District  (District)  and  he signed  the  Accusations  in  that  official  capacity. 

Respondents  were  at  all  times  mentioned  certificated  District  employees. 

On  March  9,  2006,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 

Board  Resolution  No.  06-513,  which  proposed  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds 
of  services  encompassing  5.  00  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  at  the  end  of  the  current 
school  year. 

4, 

On  March  9,  2006,  the  Board  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 

Respondents  and  others  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.

  

  

Before  adoption  of  Board  Resolution  No.  06-  513,  the  Board  considered  all 

known  assured  attrition. 

5. 

6. 

Prior  to  March  15,  2006,  the  two  Respondents,  as  well  as  Laurie  Richards, 

John  Fowler,  and  Peter  Cotte,  were  each  given  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

| 

7. 

Of  the  five  persons  to  whom  the  above-described  notice  was  given,  only 

Respondents  Amber  Croymans  and  Elizabeth  Aguilar  timely  requested  a  hearing  to 
determine  if  there is  cause  for  not  requiring  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.’ 
Respondents  Croymans  and  Aguilar  were  thereafter  timely  served  with  an  Accusation. 

The  District’s  Layoff Decision 

8. 

Board  Resolution  No.  06-513  provides  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 

following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  Positions 

  

Secondary  — 

Health 
Spanish 

Math 

~ 

Middle  School 

Social  Studies 

: 

| 

1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE 

5.0  FTE 

Total  Reduction 

| 

9, 

Board  Resolution  No.  06-513  also  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to 

determine  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on 
the  same  date. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  5.0  FTE  positions  will  not  reduce  services 

below  mandated  levels, 

  

By  failing  to  request  a  hearing,  Laurie  Richards,  John  Fowler,  and  Peter  Cotte  each  waived  the  right  to  a  hearing, 

' 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (b). 

 

11. 

The  decision  was  made  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  5.0  FTE  positions  because 

of  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being  insufficient  to  maintain  the  current 
levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program  changes  resulting  therefrom,  including  Six  years 
of  declining  student  enrollment. 

12. 

The  District  compiled  a  Seniority  List  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  that 

contains  certificated  personnel  seniority  dates,  current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials 
and  other  authorizations  and  employment  status.  The  Seniority  List  is  accurate. 

13. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  In 
determining  who  would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  each  kind  of  particular  service  reduced,  the 
District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies  or  attrition, 
and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

With  regard  to  the  4.0  FTE  positions  other  than  the  1.0  FTE  health  position,  it 

was  established  that  those  are  particular  kinds  of  services  being  reduced  or  eliminated. 

The  1.0  FTE  health  position  is  currently  performed  by  Respondent  Amber  . 

Croymans,  who  is  in  her  first  year  teaching  at  the  District  and  is  thus  a  probationary 
employee.  She  has  a  preliminary  single  subject  credential  in  health  science.  Respondent 
Croymans  is  a  full-time  employee  and  is  the  only  person  who  teaches  health  classes  at 
Carpinteria  High  School  (CHS)  this  school  year.  There  are  no  other  certificated  District 
employees  with  a  health  science  credential. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

Certificated  District  employees  Richard  Olmstead  and  Debra  Leiter  are 

permanent  employees  who  have  more  seniority  than  Respondent  Croymans.  It  was 
established  that  both  are  competent  and  credentialed  to  teach  health  classes  at  CHS  next 
school  year.  Mr.  Olmstead  was  issued  a  standard  secondary  physical  education  credential 
before  1981.2  Mr.  Olmstead  has  also  taught  health  classes  at  CHS  for  many  years  in  the  past, 
including  at  least  as  late  as  1997.  Ms.  Leiter  has  a  professional  clear  single  subject  life 
science  credential.’ 

17. 

There  currently  exists  uncertainty  regarding  how  many  health  classes  at  CHS 
will  be  needed  next  school  year.  Respondent  Croymans  was  advised  by  District  counselors 
that  the  number  of  pupils  taking  health  classes  next  school  year  will  probably  increase. 
Complainant  did  not  present  evidence  contradicting  the  counselors’  current  estimates.  In 
fact,  as  discussed  below,  Complainant  has  planned  for  the  contingency  of  the  same  number 
of  pupils  or  more  being  enrolled  in  health  classes  next  school  year. 

  

Pursuant  to  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80004,  subdivision  (b)(3),  the  holder  of  a  single  sub- 
2 
ject  teaching  credential  in  physical  education  (issued  before  January  1,  1981)  is  authorized  to  teach  health  science. 

Pursuant  to  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80004,  subdivision  (b)(2),  the  holder  of  a  single  sub- 

3 
ject  teaching  credential  in  life  science  is  authorized  to  teach  health  science.

18. 

If  three  health  classes  or  less  are  needed  next  school  year,  the  plan  is  for  Mr. 
Olmstead  to  teach  them;  he  would  also  act  as  the  CHS  Athletic  Director  (AD),  which  would 
be  a  part-time  position,  Mr.  Olmstead  is  currently  the  AD  at  CHS,  which  is  now a full-time 
position.  If  more  than  three  health  science  classes  are  needed  next  school  year,  Complainant 
testified  that  Ms.  Leiter  would  teach  the  additional  classes.  Ms.  Leiter  currently  teaches 
science  classes  at  the  Carpinteria  Middle  School  (CMS).  She  is  a  part-time  employee,  i.e. 
she  teaches  60%  of  a  full-time  teacher’s  schedule.  The  specifics  were  not  established  of  how 
Ms,  Leiter  will  be  available  next  year  to  teach  CHS  health  classes.  It  is  presumed  that  for 
each  CHS  health  class  she  would  assume  next  year,  she  would  drop  a  CMS  science  class. 

. 

19. 

With  regard  to  the  1.0  FTE  health  position  which  Respondent  Croymans 

currently  performs,  it  was  not  established  that  the  service  next  year  will  be  performed  in  a 
different  method  or  manner,  or  that  there  will  be  a  change  in  the  service  itself, 

20. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described  particular 

kinds  of  services,  other  than  the  1.0  FTE  health  position,  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
but  instead  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

21. 

The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds 
of  services,  other  than  the  1.0  FTE  health  position,  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
in  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

22. 

Except  as  otherwise  provided,  no  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less 

seniority  will  be  retained  to  render  a  service  that  those  subject  to  the  notice  of  this  proceeding 
are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1-7.) 

2, 

The  party  asserting  a  claim  or  making  charges  in  an  administrative  hearing 
generally  has  the  burden  of  proof.  (Brown  v.  City  of Los  Angeles  (2002)  102  Cal.App.4th 
155.)  For  example,  in  administrative  hearings  dealing  with  personnel  matters,  the  burden  of 
proof  is  ordinarily  on  the  agency  prosecuting  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of Fountain  Valley 
(1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113.)  In  personnel  matters  concerning  the  dismissal  of  a  teacher 
for  cause,  the  burden  of  proof  is  similarly  on  the  discharging  school  district.  (Gardner  v. 
Commission  on  Prof,  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035.)  Thus,  in  this  case,  the 
Complainant  has  the  burden  of  proof  of  establishing  cause  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees. 

-

3. 

A  school  district  has  broad  discretion  in  making  economic  decisions  regarding 
  eliminating  and/or  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.)  Such 
decisions  may  be  overruled  if  proven  to  be  arbitrary  or  capricious.  (/d.  at  p.  808.) 

  

  
 

4A. 

Moreover,  a  school  district  can  terminate  a  certificated  employee  when  the 
particular  kind  of  service  performed  by  that  employee  will  continue  the  following  school 
year  in  a  different  manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571,  1584.) 

4B. 

For  example,  in  Gallup,  a  school  district  was  allowed  to  layoff  psychologists . 
employed  by  the  district  in  favor  of  hiring  independent  contractors  to  do  the  same  work.  The 
court  found  this  was  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service  because  there  was  a  change  in 
the  manner  in  which  the  services  would  be  delivered,  i.e.  from  in-house  certificated 
employees  to  outside  contractors,  even  though  the  work  done  was  essentially  the  same. 
(Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees,  supra,  41  Cal.App.4th  at  1587-1588.)  In  Zalac  v.  Governing 
Board  of Ferndale  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  C.A.4th  838,  854,  the  court  found  a 
reduction  of  particular  services  existed  where  one,  less  senior,  employee’s  position  was 
subsumed  by  making  classes  larger  or  regrouping  them.  In  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  Dist. 
(1934)  2  Cal.2d  770,  the  school  district  discontinued  the  service  of  traveling  art  teachers, 
experts  who  traveled  to  various  schools  to  teach  art.  The  school  district  continued  thereafter 
to  offer  art  instruction  by  regular  departmental  teachers  who  were  not  experts  and  who  did 
not  travel  to  the  schools.  The  Davis  court  found  that  the  school  district  had  discontinued  a 
particular  service,  i.e.  art  taught  by  traveling  experts. 

4C. 

However,  a  school  district  may  not  dismiss  an  employee  and  yet  continue  the 

identical  kind  of  service  and  position  held  by  the  terminated  employee.  (Santa  Clara 
Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School 
District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  844.)  In  Santa  Clara,  the  district  had  decided  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  health  services,  necessitating  the  termination  of  5.4  FTE  positions  that  were 
held  by  nurses.  The  court  found  that  such  was  not  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service, 
because  there  was  nothing  in  the  record  demonstrating  that  there  would  “be  a  difference  in 
the  method  or  manner  of  providing  these  health  services,  or  in  the  services  themselves|,]” 
and  because  “the  difference  is  only  that  a  person  other  than  the  nurses  will  provide  these 
services.”  (Id.  at  p.  844.) 

SA. 

With  regarding  to  Respondent  Croymans,  it  was  not  established  that  cause 

exists  to  give  her  notice  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year, 
in  that  Complainant  did  not  meet  his  burden  of  establishing  that  there  will  be  a  reduction  of 
the  1.0  FTE  health  position  that  she  now  performs.  The  record  does  not  indicate  that  the 
manner  or  method  of  that  service  next  school  year  will  be  any  different,  other  than  the  fact 
that  two  different  people  would  be  teaching  the  health  classes  next  year.  It  was  not 
established  that  fewer  classes  will  be  offered  next  year.  In  fact,  it  appears  that  the  same  or 
more  pupils  will  take  health  classes  next  year.  Put  another  way,  one  teacher  this  year  has 
taught  health  classes  at  CHS;  next  year,  one  or  two  teachers  would  teach  it.  There  appears  to 
be  no  other  difference  in  the  health  position  next  year.  (Factual  1-22.)

5B. 

This  situation  is  not  similar  to  that  presented  in  the  Gallup  case,  in  that  District 
employees  would  replace  a  District  employee.  This  situation  is  not  similar  to  the  Zalac  case, 
because  there  was  no  evidence  indicating  that  the  health  classes  next  year  will  be  made 
larger,  smaller,  or  different.  In  fact,  it  appears  that  the  class  sizes  will  remain  at  current 
levels.  This  situation  is  not  similar  to  the  Davis  case,  in  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the 
health  classes  will  be  taught  in  a  different  manner.  This  situation  is  more  akin  to  the  Santa 
Clara  case,  in  that  the  only  difference  in  the  health  classes  will  be  who  teaches  them.  In  this 
case,  Complainant  argued  that  though  the  credentials  of  Mr.  Olmstead  and  Ms.  Leiter  were 
different  than  Respondent  Croymans’,  they  were  still  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  the 
health  classes  next  year.  Thus,  the  difference  in  credentials  does  not  appear  to  be  an 
important  distinction. 

5C. 

The  record  in  this  case  indicates  that  there  will  be  a  reduction  in  the  AD 

position  at  CHS  next  year;  and  that  if  pupil  enrollment  in  health  classes  remains  at  or  above 
the  current  levels,  there  will  also  be  a  reduction  in  Ms.  Leiter’s  CMS  science  position.  Yet 
neither  of  those  two  reductions  is  reflected  in  the  Board’s  Resolution  No.  06-513. 

6. 

The  services  idenfified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  06-513,  other  than  the  1.0 
FTE  health  position,  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  those 
identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion.  Services  will  not  be  reduced  below  mandated  levels.  However,  as  to  the  1.0  FTE 
health  position,  it  was  not  established  that  such  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  will  be 
reduced  or  discontinued.  The  Board’s  decision  in  that  regard  was  not  demonstrated  to  be  a 
reasonable  exercise  of  its  discretion,  but  rather  is  arbitrary  and  capricious.  (Factual  Findings 
1-22.) 

7. 

Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  services,  other  than 
the  1.0  FTE  health  position,  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

8. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  other  than  the  1.0 FTE 
health  position.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

9. 

Except  as  otherwise  provided,  no  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to 
be  retained  to  perform  services  that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  (Factual  Findings  1-22.) 

M1 

H/ 

Hil 

 

ORDERS 

1, 

The  Accusation  is  DISMISSED  as  against  Respondent  Amber  Croymans. 

Notice  shall  NOT  be  given  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school 
year. 

2, 

The  Accusation  is  SUSTAINED  as  against  Respondent  Elizabeth  Aguilar. 

- 

Notice  SHALL  be  given  to  her,  as  well  as  the  other  certificated  employees  to  whom  notice  of 
this  proceeding  was  given  (other  than  Respondent  Croymans),  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year,  and  such  notice  SHALL  be  given  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority. 

Dated:  May  3,  2006 

  

ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

