BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  LOMA  PRIETA  JOINT  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

ANTHONY  ARIAS,  LYNELL  HANCK, 
MICHELE  IGNOFFO,  ANNA  KENT, 
PADDY  O’REGAN,  KATHERINE  RAY, 
DEBRA  SHOEMATE,  and  KARREN  ZOOK, 

  

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

OAH  No.  N  2006030493 

  

 

On  April  19,  2006,  in  Los  Gatos,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the  Loma 

Prieta  Joint  Union  School  District,  at  23800  Summit  Road,  Los  Gatos,  Santa  Clara 
County,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Patricia  P.  White,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Littler  Mendelson,  50  West  San  Fernando 
Street,  14"  Floor,  San  Jose,  California  951  13-2431,  represented  Superintendent  Henry 
Castaniada. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Attorney  at  Law,  10  Almaden  Boulevard,  Suite  1250,  San 
Jose,  California  95113,  represented  respondents  Anthony  Arias,  Lynell  Hanck,  Paddy 
O’Regan,  and  Michele  Ignoffo. 

Neither  Respondent  Anna  Kent,  nor  Respondent  Katherine  Ray,  nor  Respondent 
Karren  Zook  appeared  at  the  proceeding,  nor  did  they  appoint  a  representative  to  appear 
on  their  respective  interests.  By  those  individuals’  refusal  or  failure  to  appear, 
notwithstanding  proper  service  upon  them  of  the  Accusation  and  Notice  of  Hearing,  the 
hearing  concluded  against  those  three  respondents  as  a  default  proceeding  under 
Government  Code  section  11520. 

The  record  was  held  open  to  afford  opportunities  to  lawyers  for  the  parties  to  file 

written  closing  arguments.  On  April  26,  2006,  OAH  received  Closing  Argument  on 
behalf  of  the  Superintendent,  which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  “11.”  Also,  on  April  26, 
2006,  OAH  received  written  argument  for  Respondents  Anthony  Arias,  Lynell  Hanck, 
Paddy  O’Regan,  and  Michele  Ignoffo  that  was  titled  “Respondents’  Closing  Brief,” 
which  was  marked  as  Exhibit  “D.” 

  

On  April  26,  2006,  the  parties  were  deemed  to  have  submitted  the  matter  and  the 

record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  24,  2006,  in  his  official  capacity,  Henry  Castaniada, 

Superintendent  (the  Superintendent),  Loma  Prieta  Joint  Union  School  District  (the 
District),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  regarding  respondents  Anthony  Arias,  Lynell 
Hanck,  Paddy  O’Regan,  Michele  Ignoffo,  Anna  Kent,  Katherine  Ray,  Debra  Shoemate 
and  Karren  Zook  (respondents). 

2. 

Respondents  are  fully  credentialed  and  certificated  employees  of  the 

District.  The  District  recognizes  the  designation  for  each  respondent  as  that  of 
permanent  teacher. 

3. 

On  or  before  March  8,  2006,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s 
Board  of  Trustees  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of 
services  (PKS),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the 
District  for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2006-2007). 

4. 

On  March  8,  2006,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  06-XII.  The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44955,  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  eliminate,  no 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-2007  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the 
form  of  6.0  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

Kindergarten  to  5"  Grade  Elementary  Teaching  positions; 
Spanish  Language  Teaching  Position;  and 
Science  Teaching  Position. 

5.0 
0.4 
0.6 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  9,  2006,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices!  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to 
eliminate  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice. 
Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service 
now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not 
reemploy  the  named  individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked  over  the 
past  school  year. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  9,  2006,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s 

resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective 

  

! 

“Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services  Shall  Be  Reduced  or  Discontinued.” 

  

       

respondent  would  be  retained  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  each 
respondent  was  credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s 
competency  criteria. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  Superintendent 

set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s  Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  course 
as  taught  by  respondents. 

7. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

8. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the  Accusation, 
dated  March  21,  2005,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of 
defense. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  Superintendent  withdrew  the  Accusation 

as  filed  against  Respondent  Debra  Shoemate. 

By  its  withdrawal  of  the  Accusation,  the  District  will  retain  the  services  of  Debra 

9. 

10. 

Shoemate. 

11. 

Henry  J.  Castaniada,  in  his  capacity  as  the  Superintendent,  appeared  at  the 

hearing.  He  provided  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2006-2007 

school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s 
budget.  Also,  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the 
declining  pupil  census  for  the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  In  order  to  partially 
aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s 
Superintendent  recommended  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack 
of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of  teachers’  work  within  District  schools. 

12, 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District 
was  required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  his  staff,  took  steps  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the 
District’s  teachers. 

13. 

|  On  March  9,  2005,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  personally  placed  in 

the  mail  all  notices  to  affected  permanent  teachers  that  their  services  would  not  be 
needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year.

  

Respondents’  Contentions 

14. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective  and 

improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does  not 
fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of 
credentialed  employees  who  are  junior  in  time,  or  equal  in  time,  relative  to  the  service  by 
Respondents. 

Respondents  contend  that  because  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  did  not 
specify  that  the  proposed  teacher  layoff  was  due,  in  part,  to  declining  attendance  by 
pupils  and  because  testimony  from  the  Superintendent  did  indicate  that  the  PKS  lay-off 
proceeding  was  due  to,  in  part,  to  declining  enrollment  of  pupils,  that  respondents  were 
not  afforded  proper  notice  of  such  basis  for  the  layoff. 
sufficient  notice  was  not  afforded  them  to  develop  a  defense  to  the  superintendent’s 
testimony  regarding  declining  pupil  enrollment  so  that  the  entire  layoff  proceeding 
should  be  dismissed. 

Hence,  respondents  aver 

Respondent  Anthony  Arias  contends  that  the  District  promulgated  criteria,  which 

included  holding  a  CLAD  certificate,  in  order  to  define  competency  of  teachers  in 
determining  seniority,  but  the  District  erred  in  executing  the  criteria  regarding 
competency  when  the  Superintendent  authorized  another  teacher  to  bump  Respondent 
Arias  from a  social  science  teaching  position  even  though  the  other  teacher  does  not  hold 
a  CLAD  certificate. 

Respondent  Michele  Ignoffo  contends  that  since  August  1998,  when  she  first 

rendered  paid  service  to  the  District,  personnel  within  the  District’s  Office  of  the 
Manager  of  Administrative  Services  have  possessed  a  copy  of  a  multiple  subject 
teaching  credential  for  her  in  addition  to  a  single  subject  science  teaching  credential. 
She  contends  that  District’s  personnel  erred  when  they  concluded  Respondent  Ignoffo 
had  failed  to  deliver  to  the  school  district  a  copy  of  a  valid  multiple  subject  credential 
before  March  15,  2006.  Respondent  Ignoffo  further  contends  that  that  the  District  had 
ample  notice  that  she  possessed  not  only  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  but  also  a 
CLAD,  both  of  which  should  have  been  reported  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Hence, 
Respondent  Ignoffo  avers  the  District  erred  when  it  did  not  provide  her  with  status  on 
the  seniority  list  that  would  enable  the  District  to  retain  her  services  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  in  light  of  the  fact  the  District  has  determine  to  reemploy  another  teacher, 
with  a  multiple  subject  credential,  with  the  same  date  hire  as  Respondent  Ignoffo,  but 
who  lacks  a  CLAD  certificate. 

Respondent  Lynell  Hanck  contends  that  the  District  erred  in  setting  out  on  the 
seniority  list  for  credentialed  employees  her  first  day  of  paid  service.  Respondent  Hanck 
avers  that  she  should  occupy  on  the  seniority  list  the  same  date  of  hire  as  two  teachers 
who  began  the  provision  of  services  to  the  District  in  August  2001. 

  

     

  

Except  for  Respondent  Ignoffo,  respondents  contentions  are  without  merit  and 

are  not  persuasive,  or  supported  by  the  evidence. 

Individual  Respondents 

Anthony  Arias 

15. 

|  Respondent  Anthony  Arias  (Respondent  Arias)  has a first  date  of  paid 

service  as  a  probationary-one  teacher  of  August  20,  2003.  He  now  holds  a  preliminary 
single  subject  credential  in  social  science.  Respondent  Arias  occupies  the  penultimate 
position  on  the  District’s  Certificated  [Employee]  Seniority  List  (seniority  list)  because 
only  Karen  Geyer  is  junior  to  him.  But  Karen  Geyer,  whose  hire  date  was  August  29, 
2005,  is  being  retained  by  the  District  for  ensuing  school  year  in  that  she  holds  a 
Professional  Clear  Clinical  or  Rehabilitative  Services  Language  Speech  and  Hearing 
credential,  which  is  a  service  that  is  being  retained  by  the  Board’s  Resolution  number 
06-XII. 

The  teaching  service,  namely  social  science,  provided  by  Respondent  Arias  is  not 

a  service  that  is  being  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  subject  board  resolution.  Rather, 
Respondent  Arias  is  subject  to  an  exercise  of  bumping  rights  by  Christie  Sanden  (Ms. 
Sanden),  whose  fourth  grade  classroom  teaching  position  is  being  eliminated  by 
Resolution  number  06-XII.  Ms.  Sanden,  whose  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District 
was  August  30,  1987,  occupies  ranking  number  18  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Ms. 
Sanden  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  with  a  Social  Science  Authorization  that 
expires  on  June  1,  2007. 

16. 

On  March  8,  2006,  the  Board  promulgated  Resolution  number  06-X  that 

for  the  purpose  of  adopting  a  definition  of  competence  for  the  purpose  of  making 
determinations  regarding  which  employees  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  a 
service  during  the  reduction  in  force  or  during  reappointment  from  layoff.  The  Board 
resolution  prescribed  the  Board’s  determination  that  “competence  to  provide a  particular 
kind  of  service  is  defined  as  possession  of a  current  valid  credential  and  CLAD 
certification.”  (Emphasis  added.)  Ms.  Sanden  does  not  possess  a  CLAD  (Crosscultural, 
Language  and  Academic  Development)  certificate,  likewise  Respondent  Arias  does  not 
hold  a  CLAD  certification. 

17. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  Superintendent  asserted  that  although  he 

had  considered  making  a  recommendation  to  the  Governing  Board  that  a  certificated 
employee’s  prior  experience  teaching  in  a  subject  area  be  set  out  as  a  basis  to  determine 
competence,  the  Superintendent  decided  to  recommend  to  the  Board  prior  teaching 
experience  should  only  be  listed  as  a  criterion  for  tie-breaking  purposes  among  teachers 
with  the  same  first  day  of  employment  with  the  District.  He  exercised  his  judgment  and 
discretion  to  prescribe  in  the  resolution  that  defines  competency  that  prior  teaching 
experience  in  a  particularized  subject  would  not  be  a  criterion  to  define  competency. 

-5.

  

  

18. 

The  District,  through  the  Superintendent,  exercised  its  discretion  to 
determine  that  Ms.  Sanden  is  competent  to  teach  social  science,  the  area  in  which 
Respondent  Arias  has  rendered  services. 

19. 

Respondent  Arias,  who  was  present  at  the  hearing,  did  not  offer 

testimonial  evidence  to  show  that  he  has  greater  competency  to  teach  social  science 
classes  in  place  of  Respondent  Sanden.  He  did  not  show  that  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students  would  be  better  served  by  retaining  him  over  a  more  senior  teacher  in  the 
person  of  Ms.  Sanden. 

20. 

Respondent  Arias  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Arias  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach. 

Lynell  Hanck 

21. 

Respondent  Lynell  Hanck  (Respondent  Hanck)  initially  was  employed  by 

the  District  on  August  23,  2001,  under  a  temporary  teacher  contract. 

Under  a  temporary  teacher’s  contract,  Respondent  Hanck  taught  first  grade  full 

time  for  the  entire  school  year  for  2001-2002. 

The  District  hired  Respondent  Hanck  for  the  next  school  year  (2002-2003)  when 
she  taught  in  a  full  FTE  first  grade.  Asa  probationary  teacher  Respondent  Hanck  has  a 
first  date  of  paid  service  of  August  22,  2002. 

After  the  school  year  2002-2003,  the  District  hired  Respondent  Hanck  for  the 
school  year  2003-2004,  when  she  taught  grades  “K  —  1”  classes  in  a  full  time  position. 
She  was  a  subject  of  a  lay-off  proceeding  that  year  that  resulted  in  the  District  not 
retaining  her  services  for  the  2004-2005  school  year. 

During  the  2004-2005  school  year,  Respondent  Hanck  worked  as  a  substitute 

teacher  during  the  concluding  few  months  of  the  school  year. 

Respondent  Hanck  returned  to  the  District  as  a  teacher  for  the  current  school  year 

2005-2006. 

Respondent  holds  a  CLAD  and  a  multiple  subject  credential,  which  she  received 

before  she  first  worked  for  the  District. 

Respondent  Hanck  occupies  the  29"  position  of  the  31  person  seniority  list  of  the 

District. 

   

22. 

Respondent  Hanck  was  the  subject  of  a  lay  off  proceeding  in  the  school 
2003-2004  so  that  she  was  not  hired  as  a  permanent  teacher  for  the  2004-2005  school 
year.  For  that  school  year,  she  worked  sporadically  as  a  substitute  teacher.  However, 
the  District  rehired  Respondent  Hanck  for  the  current  school  year  2005-2006.  She 
provides  services  as  a  first  grade  teacher,  which  is  a  position  that  is  being  reduced  or 
eliminated  under  Board  Resolution  number  06-XII. 

23. 

Respondent  Hanck’s  seniority  must  be  measured  from  the  first  date  on 

which  she  actually  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  in  a  probationary  status.  She  was 
not  persuasive  that  Education  Code  section  44917,  which  pertains  to  rights  afforded  a 
person  who  first  works  as  a  temporary  teacher,  alters  the  authority  of  Education  Code 
sections  44845  and  87414. 

Contrary  to  her  argument,  Respondent  Hanck  is  not  tied  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  with  Respondents  Karen  Zook  and  Respondent  Anna  Kent,  who  each  have 
hire  dates  of  August  23,  2001.  Rather,  Respondent  Hanck’s  first  date  of  paid  service  on 
August  22,  2002,  places  her  in  position  29  on  the  District’s  total  list  that  numbers  31 
positions. 

24. 

Respondent  Hanck  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 
retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  to  teach  in  an  area  for  which  Ms.  Hanck  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  competent  to  teach. 

Paddy  O’Regan 

25. 

Respondent  Paddy  O’ Regan  has a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District 
of  August  26,  1999.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  CLAD  certification 
with  a  single  subject  Spanish  Authorization  credential.  For  the  current  school  year,  Re- 
spondent  O’Regan  teaches  “CTE/Spanish,”  under  an  0.8  FTE. 

Board  Resolution  number  06-XII  specifies  that  the  District  will  reduce  or 

eliminate  0.4  FTE  of  a  Spanish  teaching  position.  For  the  ensuing  school  year, 
Respondent  O’Regan  will  have  a  0.4  FTE  teaching  position  in  a  Spanish  language  class. 

26. 

Respondent  O’Regan  provides  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  in  an  area  for  which  Ms.  O’Regan  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  teach. 

Michele  Ignoffo 

27. 

There  is  no  dispute  that  Respondent  Michele  Ignoffo  (Respondent 
Ignoffo)  holds  a  clear,  single  subject  credential  in  Life  Science  with  a  Nutrition 
Authorization.  She  has a  hire  date  of  August  28,  1998.  For  the  current  school  year,  she 
has  taught  “CTE/Science.”

  

28. 

Under  the  proposed  lay-off  action,  Respondent  Ignoffo’s  1.0  FTE  teacher 
position  for  science  will  be  reduced  by  0.2.  The  District  proposes  to  retain  Respondent 
Ignoffo  in  a  0.8  FTE  position. 

© 

29. 

Respondent  Ignoffo  offered  credible  and  persuasive  evidence  at  the 

hearing  of  this  matter.  By  her  demeanor,  the  consistency  of  her  manner  and  presentation 
and  her  attitude  towards  the  proceeding,  Respondent  Ignoffo  established  that  she  was  a 
credible’  and  reliable  witness. 

On  August  17,  1998,  the  Santa  Clara  County  Office  of  Education  registered  at 
least  two®  credential  certificates  as  issued  by  the  Commission  of  Teacher  Credentialing 
that  bore  the  name  of  Respondent  Ignoffo.  The  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential 
showed a valid  period  of  licensure  from  January  9,  1996,  to  February  1,  2001.  The  San 
Clara  County  Office  of  Education  showed  for  each  credential  certificate  that  Respondent 
was  affiliated  with  “District  —  Loma  Prieta.” 

Respondent  Ignoffo  persuasively  testified  that  sometime  near  her  original  hire 
date  (August  26,  1999),  she  delivered  copies  of  the  two  credential  certificates  into  the 
possession  of  the  senior  administrator,  who  occupied  the  same  role  as  the  District’s 
current  Manager  of  Administrative  Services,  Ms.  Monica  Torres.  Respondent  Ignoffo 
was  believable  when  she  asserted  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  that  on  or  about  August 
17,  1998,  she  gave  Jodine  Grabeel,  then  the  District’s  Manager  of  Administrative 
Services,  a  copy  of  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  CLAD  certificate. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  the  District’s  entire  personnel  file  that  pertains  to 

Respondent  Ignoffo  was  shown  to  include  pink-colored  copies  of  the  credential 
certificates  that  bore  registration  dates  of  August  17,  1998. 
The  pink-colored 
photocopies  are: 
a  Preliminary  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential,  valid  for  the 
period  January  9,  1996,  to  February  1,  2001;  a  CLAD,  valid  for  April  8,  1999,  and 
Single  Subject  Authorization  for  Food  and  Nutrition,  January  9,  1996,  to  February  1, 
2001. 

On  September  6,  2002,  the  Santa  Clara  County  Office  of  Education  registered  for 
Respondent  Ignoffo  a  Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential 
certificate.  The  credential  certificate*  shows  the  period  of  valid  licensure  as  January  16, 
2001,  to  February  1,  2006. 

  

2 

Government  Code  section  11425  .50,  subdivision  (b),  third  sentence. 
3 
The  documents  were  “Preliminary  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential  (Authorized  Field:  General 
Subjects)”,  and  a  “Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  (Authorized  Field:  Life  Science)  with  Sup- 
plementary  Authorization:  Food  and  Nutrition.” 

The  documents  prescribes,  “This  credential  authorizes  the  holder  to  teach  all  subjects  in  a  self- 

4 
contained  class  and,  as  a  self-contained  classroom  teacher,  to  team  teach  or  to  regroup  students  across  class- 
rooms,  in  grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool.  . 

.  .” 

-8-

} 

@ 

  

  

30. 

In  February  2006,  Respondent  Ignoffo  met  with  the  Superintendent  in  his 

office  where  he  informed  Respondent  Ignoffo  that  part  of  her  science  class  might  be 
reduced  by a  lay-off  proceeding.  During  the  meeting,  Respondent  Ignoffo  asked  the 
Superintendent  whether  or  not  he  had  knowledge  that  she  possessed  a  multiple  subject 
credential.  The  Superintendent  conveyed  to  Respondent  Ignoffo  in  February  2006  he 
was  not  aware  that  Respondent  Ignoffo  possessed  a  multiple  subject  credential. 

31. 

After  February  8,  2006,  when  the  District’s  Manager  of  Administrative 
Services  posted  a  copy  of  the  District’s  seniority  list,  Respondent  Ignoffo  went  to  the 
District’s  administrative  offices  to  correct  the  seniority  list.  She  wrote  “multiple  subject 
credential  and  CLAD”  on  the  list  for  her  credentials  and  Respondent  Ignoffo  signed  her 
name  to  the  list.  (Respondent  Ignoffo  interacted  with  a  secretary  other  than  the  District’s 
manager  for  personnel  matter  when  she  wrote  onto  the  posted  copy  of  the  seniority  list.) 
And,  Respondent  Ignoffo  did  not  send  a  reply  e-mail  to  Ms.  Torres  regarding  the  fact 
that  she  possessed  credentials  other  than  as  expressed  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  as 
distributed  in  February  2006. 

32. 

Ms.  Monica  Torres,  the  District’s  Manager  of  Administrative  Services 

(Ms.  Torres),  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

Since  December  1,  2004,  Ms.  Torres  has  been  an  employee  of  the  District. 
Among  her  duties  in  the  human  resources  area,  Ms.  Torres  attends  to  credentials, 
verification  of  employee  and  usual  “HR”  functions  that  arise  in  a  school  district.  One  of 
her  responsibilities  is  to  maintain  the  certificated  employees’  seniority  list. 

33. 

Ms.  Torres  has  been  with  the  District  for  the  past  two  years  for  lay-off 
proceedings.  For  the  current  lay-off  action,  as  well  as  the  previous  year’s  lay-off,  Ms. 
Torres  used  the  seniority  list  that  had  been  created  by  her  predecessor  who  held  the  role 
of  Manager  of  Administrative  Services  for  the  District.  Ms.  Torres  has  distributed  to 
teachers  the  earlier  prepared  seniority  list  for  input  for  corrections  or  amendments. 

Ms.  Torres  has  never  personally  studied  or  analyzed  the  respective  personnel  files 

of  teachers  regarding  credentials  or  other  documents  so  as  to  prepare  seniority  lists  for 
the  District  certificated  employees.  In  particular,  Ms.  Torres  has  never  examined  the 
personnel  file  of  Respondent  Torres  to  ascertain  the  existence  of  a  multiple  subject 
credential. 

34. 

About  February  6,  2006,  Ms.  Torres  sent  to  all  teachers  a  copy  of  the 

District’s  seniority  list,  along  with  a  memorandum.  Ms.  Torres  caused  the  seniority  list 
to  be  sent  by  e-mail  to  each  teacher  of  the  District,  and  she  placed  the  list  into  the  mail 
box  for  each  teacher  as  well  as  posted  the  list  in  each  teacher  “break  room”  of  the  school 
facilities.  After  mid-February  2006,  two  teachers  notified  her  regarding  erroneous 
entries  on  the  seniority  list  so  that  correction  could  be  made.  However,  before  March  8, 
2006  (the  date  of  the  Board’s  layoff  resolutions),  Ms.  Torres  did  not  personally  know 
Respondent  Ignoffo  had  communicated  to  a  District  employee,  and  written  onto  a  posted 

-9.

  

copy  of  the  District’s  seniority  list  that  she  possessed  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  a 
CLAD  certificate. 

@ 

35. 

On  March  13,  2006,  Respondent  verbally  informed  Ms.  Torres  that  she 

possessed  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  CLAD.  On  that  date,  which  was  four  days 
after  the  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  lay-off  notices  to  affected  teachers,  Ms.  Torres 
asked  that  Respondent  Ignoffo  establish  in  writing  that  she  held  such  credential  and 
CLAD  certificate. 

36. 

—  Ms.  Torres  verbally  informed  the  Superintendent  on  March  13,  2006,  that 

Respondent  Ignoffo  had  told  her  that  she  possessed  a  Multiple  Subject  credential  in 
addition  to  the  single  subject  credential  that  appeared  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

37. 

On  March  15,  2006,  Respondent  gave  Ms.  Torres  a  copy  of  a  Professional 

Clear  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  Credential,  which  had  been  renewed  for  the  period 
February  1,  2006,  to  February  1,  2011. 

On  March  15,  2006,  at  10:52  a.m.,  Ms.  Torres  received  an  e-mail  message  from 
Respondent  Ignoffo.  The  subject  of  the  e-mail  was  titled,  “credentials.”  The  message 
read:  “This  is  just  a  reminder  that  to  check  and/or  update  my  credentials  for  the  seniority 
list. 
I  have  a  Single  Subject  Life  Science,  a  multiple  subject,  Nutrition  supplement  and 
CLAD...  .” 

38. 

The  District’s  error  in  failing  to  carefully  analyze  the  extant  personnel  file 

that  pertains  to  Respondent  Ignoffo  and  to  record  on  the  seniority  list  Respondent 
Ignoffo’s  possession  of  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  and  CLAD  certification  was not, 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(3),  a 
“nonsubstantive  procedural  error.”  Rather,  the  failure  to  carefully  study  and  analyze  the 
District’s  own  personnel  file  that  pertained  to  Respondent  Ignoffo  is  a  substantive  error 
that  necessitates  dismissal  of  the  Accusation  against  her. 

39. 

Ms.  Shoemate  has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  August  28, 

1998,  which  is  the  same  date  of  hire  for  Respondent  Ignoffo  with  the  District. 

Ms.  Shoemate  does  not  possess  a  CLAD,  which  is  one  of  the  District’s  criteria  for 

determining  competency.  Respondent  Ignoffo  holds  a  CLAD  certificate. 

The  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  against  Ms.  Shoemate  so  as  to  retain  her 

services  to  teach  under  a  Multiple  Subject  credential. 

Because  Respondent  Ignoffo  holds  a  CLAD  as  well  as  a  Multiple  Subject 

credential,  Ms.  Shoemate  is  not  senior  to  Respondent  Ignoffo  insofar  as  competency 
may  be  determined. 

~-10. 

© 

 

  
  

40. 

Respondent  Ignoffo  provided  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  a  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Ignoffo  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach. 

41. 
must  be  reversed. 

The  District’s  layoff  action  against  Respondent  Ignoffo  was  erroneous  and 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed  Against  Respondents,  Other  Than  Respondent 
Ignoffo 

42. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the 

District  faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State 
of  California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of 
teacher  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 
including  the  positions  held  by  respondents. 

43. 

Except  as  to  Respondent  Ignoffo,  the  recommendation  of  the 

Superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  certain  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  held  by  each  respondent  other  than  Respondent 
Ignoffo,  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the 
District’s  discretion,  except  for  Respondent  Ignoffo. 

44. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 

positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents  (other  than  in  the 
instance  of  Respondent  Ignoffo),  for  the  ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

45. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of 
the  next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of 
the  elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent,  except  for 
Respondent  Ignoffo. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l, 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955, 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9  inclusive. 

-l1- 

 

The  effect  of  a  teacher’s  failure  to  obtain,  hold  or  file  a  proper  credential  in  a 

timely  manner  is  governed  by  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott,  supra,  76 
Cal.App.3d  796.  In  that  decision,  a  teacher  caused  the  proper  recordation  of a  critical 
credential  one  day  after  the  final  notice  that  she  was  been  laid  by  the  governing  board  of 
the  teacher’s  employing  school  district.  The  Campbell  court  set  out,  “The  governing 
board  is  not  to  be  held  responsible  for  the  fact  that  [the  affected  teacher]  recorded  her 
credential  after  all  notices  had  been  sent,  a  hearing  held,  and  a  decision  rendered.” 

@ 

Fine  v.  Los  Angles  Unified  School  District,  supra,  116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  dealt 

with  a  teacher  who  began  work  under  an  emergency  teaching  permit  but  who  in  a 
subsequent  year  of  employment  secured a  credential.  The  essence  of  the  Fine  court’s 
holding  was  that  the  employing  school  district  had  no  duty  to  classify  the  teacher  as 
probationary  to  a  date  retroactive  to  the  actual  validity  date  of  the  credential.  The  basis 
of  the  result  in  the  Fine  opinion  was  that  a  necessary  requisite  for  a  teacher’s  service  is 
the  registration  of  a  teaching  credential.  Thus  “a  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency 
permit  continues  to  serve  under  that  permit,  and  under  the  contract  to  which  she  agreed, 
until  the  teacher  is  issued  a  credential  and  registers  it  with  the  District.”  (Fine,  supra, 
116  Cal.App.4th  at  1078.) 

In  another  decision,  the  court  noted  a  teacher  was  too  late  when  the  teacher  filed  a 

credential  on  a  date  six  months  after  the  layoff  hearing  was  held,  the  ALJ  had  recom- 
mended  layoff  as  to  60  percent  of  a  full-time  position,  and  the  board  had  reduced  him  to 
40  percent  of  a  full-time  position.  “Should  a  teacher  be  allowed  to  present  a  certificate 
to  the  governing  board  after  March  15  and  thereby  obligate  the  board  to  continue  to  em- 
ploy  that  teacher,  the  board  would  by  that  date  be  precluded  from  serving a  layoff  notice 
to  a  junior  teacher.”  Daux  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d 
555,  568. 

©} 

But  in  the  afore-cited  appellate  court  decisions,  the  affected  teacher  presented  the 
employing  school  district  with  a  credential  after  the  administrative  hearing  and  after  the 
issuance  of  a  final  lay-off  notice  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district.  In  the 
important  decision  of  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott,  supra,  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  the  County  Office  of  Education,  through  a  clerical  error,  had  never 
registered  the  affected  teacher’s  classroom  teacher’s  credential,  and  hence  the  governing 
board  could  not  be  charged  “with  information  which  it  did  not  have  and  was  not 
responsible  for  recording.”  (76  Cal.App.3d  at  814.) 

In  this  matter,  in  1978  the  Santa  Clara  County  Office  of  Education  had  registered 

Respondent  Ignoffo’s  multiple  subject  credential  and  CLAD  certificate.  Thereafter,  in 
1998,  Respondent  Ignoffo  had  personally  delivered  the  documents  to  the  District’s 
Manager  for  Administrative  Services.  Respondent  met  the  burden  of  recording  her  own 
credential.  Contrary  to  the  facts  in  the  Campbell  Teachers  Association  decision, 
Respondent  did  not  record  “her  credential  after  all  notices  had  been  sent,  a  hearing  held, 
and  a  decision  rendered.”  (76  Cal.App.3d  at  815.) 

-13-

  

  

  

Here,  the  error,  if  any,  by  Respondent  Ignoffo  was  that  she  presented  a  recently 

renewed  credential  to  the  District’s  personnel  officer  about  five  days  after  the  dispatch  in 
the  mail  of  the  preliminary  lay-off  notice,  and  on  the  last  day  (March  15)  for  the  District 
to  serve  such  preliminary  notice.  But  the  weight  of  credible  evidence  shows  that  the 
District’s  file  contained  the  subject  credential  and  certificate  for  more  than  seven  years, 
and  that  District  personnel  had  overlooked  the  copies  of  the  credential  and  certificate, 
which  lay  in  the  personnel  file  for  Respondent  Ignoffo. 

The  District  bears  a  greater  duty  to  carefully  analyze  its  own  records  (that  is, 

personnel  files  of  certificated  teachers)  in  crafting  seniority  lists  that  serve  as  a  tool  in 
lay-off  notices  than  as  shown  by  the  District  in  the  instance  of  Respondent  Ignoffo. 
reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  26  to  40,  the  Accusation  against 
Respondent  Ignoffo  must  be  dismissed. 

By 

6. 

Respondent  Arias  presented  a  compelling  argument.  He  advanced  that 
neither  the  District  nor  Ms.  Sanden,  a  fourth  grade  teacher  of  general  subjects,  showed 
that  Ms.  Sanden  had  greater  competency  to  teach  a  social  science  class  now  offered  by 
Respondent  Arias.  He  based  his  assertion  of  the  lack  by  Ms.  Sanden  of  a  CLAD  certifi- 
cate.  His  argument  alluded  to  lack  of  proof  of  teaching  by  Ms.  Sanden  of a  social  sci- 
ence  class.  But,  Respondent  Arias  does  not  possess  a  CLAD,  and  he  offered  no  evi- 
dence  that  he  has  a  greater  degree  of  competency  than  Ms.  Sanden.  Moreover,  “the  Dis- 
trict  was  acting  within  its  ‘discretion’  in  evaluating  whether  the  qualifications”  (Royal 
King  v.  Berkeley  Unified  School  District,  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016.)  between  Respon- 
dent  Arias  and  Ms.  Sanden  so  as  to  retain  Ms.  Sanden  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

7. 

Board  Resolution  number  06-X11,  as  adopted  on  March  8,  2006,  stated 

that  it  was  the  Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 
A  decline  in  average  daily 
attendance  was  not  cited  as  a  basis  for  eliminating  five  full  time  equivalent  certificated 
positions  in  the  District’s  corps  of  teachers. 

The  preliminary  layoff  notice,  dated  March  9,  2006,  stated  that  the  reason  for  the 

notice  was  due  to  a  decision  “to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the 
District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-2007  school  year.  A  copy  of  the  Revised 
Resolution  No.  06-X11  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein  as  if  set  forth  in 
length.  [{]]  As  a  result  of  the  reductions  and  eliminations  of  services  . .  .,  the  Board  has 
determined  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  reduce  the  certificated  staff  by  a  corresponding 
number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions.” 
The  preliminary  notice  did  not  mention  a 
decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  authorizes a  district’s  governing 

board  to  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of 
employees  whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  for  all  schools  in 

-14. 

  

 

* 

the  first  six  months  has  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the 
previous  school  year  or  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year. 

@ 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a),  requires  that  no  later  than  March 
15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by  the 
superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be  given  to 
employees  and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation.  The  preliminary  notice  is  intended 
to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed  of  the  facts  upon  which  they  can 
reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be  reemployed.  The  preliminary 
notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  (Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education 
(1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355. 

A  notice  that  specifies  both  grounds,  that  is  PKS  reduction/elimination  and 
declining  average  daily  attendance,  is  suspect.  (See,  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze 
(1980)  109  Cal.App.  3d  648.)  And,  where a  notice  specifies  one  of  the  two  statutory 
reasons  for  a  teacher  layoff,  a  governing  board  may  not  later  attempt  to  justify  dismissal 
on  the  other  ground.  (Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education,  supra,  39  Cal.App.3d  355°.) 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services 
need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number 
of  students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number  of  terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within  the 
Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a 
particular  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

The  procedural  defect  or  error  in  Karbach  may  be  distinguished  from  the  facts 

pertaining  to  this  matter.  Unlike  Karbach,  the  Loma  Prieta  Joint  Union  School  District’s 
Governing  Board  did  not  propose  layoffs  for  any  reason  not  specified  in  the  preliminary 
notice  as  sent  to  certificated  employees.  The  projection  of  declining  pupil  attendance  or 
enrollment,  as  offered  in  evidence  by  the  superintendent,  was  one  of  a  few  reasons  for 
consideration  by  that  professional  education  administrator  offered  as  the  ground  for 
teacher  lay-off  to  the  subject  governing  board  for  its  decision  to  eliminate  particular 
kinds  of  services.  In  this  matter,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  a 

  

5 
In  Karbach,  the  governing  board  gave  notice  to  probationary  teachers  that  such  employees  would  not 
be  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  on  the  ground  of  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.  But,  at  the 
administrative  adjudication  hearing,  the  presiding  officer  allowed  the  board  to  present  evidence  justifying  the 
decision  to  eliminate  positions  of  the  affected  probationary  teachers  on  the  new  theory  of  reduction  in  particu- 
lar  services.  The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  governing  board  had  no  authority  to  terminate  the  teachers  for 
any  reason  not  specified  in  the  original  preliminary  notice  and  that  the  proposed  terminations  on  the  ground  of 
reduction  in  services  were  not  valid. 

@ 

-15. 

  

  
  

 

  

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or 

official  duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 
regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
District  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non 
reemployment  of  respondents. 

4, 

Judgments  entered  by  a  tribunal  on  the  stipulations  of  the  parties  have  the 

same  effect  as  acts  tried  on  the  merits.  John  Siebel  Associates  v.  Keele  (1986)  188 
Cal.App.3d  560,  566. 

The  District  stipulated  to  withdrawing  the  Accusation  against  the  teacher  named 

in  Factual  Finding  10.  The  stipulation  is  binding  on  the  parties. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  establishes  that  no 

certificated  employee  of  a  school  district  may  be  laid  off  if  another  employee  with  less 
seniority  is  retained  to  render a  service  that  the  noticed  employee  is  “certificated  and 
competent  to  render.” 

The  District  contends  that  its  seniority  list  showed  Respondent  Ignoffo  to  hold 
neither  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  nor  a  CLAD.  The  District  further  contends  that 
Respondent  Ignoffo  provided  the  District  on  too  late  a  date  authenticate  information  to 
correct  the  seniority  list  and  thereby  alter  the  preliminary  decision  to  give  Respondent 
Ignoffo  notice  that  part  of  her  teaching  services  would  not  be  retained  in  a  full  FTE 
position  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

, 

The  District  advances  that  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978) 

76  Cal.App.3d  796,  and  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  (2004)  116  Cal.  App.  4th 
1070,  support  the  proposition  that  the  District  cannot  not  be  held  responsible  for  not 
granting  respondent  seniority  status  for  information  regarding  certain  credentials.  The 
District  further  contends  that  Respondent  Ignoffo  did  not  emphatically  point  out  on  the 
seniority  list  that  circulated  before  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  notice.  The  District’s 
position  is  that,  even  though  copies  of  credentials  existed  in  the  personnel  file, 
Respondent  Ignoffo  did  not  explicitly  restate  in  writing  before  March  15,  2006,  that  she 
held  credentials  that  would  have  established  her  seniority  vis-a-vis  a  teacher  retained  by 
the  District. 

Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  does  establish  that  after- 

acquired  credentials,  which  are  filed  after  the  date  of  mailing  of  a  preliminary  lay-off 
notice,  need  not  be  considered  by  a  school  district  in  a  lay-off  action.  But  neither 
Campbell  Elementary  Teacher,  supra,  nor  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified,  supra,  support 
the  District’s  refusal  to  acknowledge  the  credentials  held  by  Respondent  Ignoffo. 

-12.

fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious  action.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Abbot,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

©@ 

The  Loma  Prieta  Joint  Union  School  District’s  Governing  Board’s  decision  to 

eliminate  six  (6.0)  F.T.E.  positions  for  the  2006-2007  school  (which  may  have  been 
based  in  some  measure  on a  projected  decline  in  enrollment  of  pupils  for  the  2005-2006 
school  year)  was  a  discretionary  decision  that  constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in 
particular  kinds  of  service  under  the  Education  Code. 

8. 

Except  as  otherwise  specified,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949 

and  44955  cause  exists  to  give  respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time 
equivalent  positions  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by 
reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  11  to  13  inclusive,  18  to  20  inclusive, 
23  through  25  inclusive,  and  41,  42  and  44. 

9. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by 

each  respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in 
Factual  Finding  43. 

ORDER 

I, 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondent  Debra  Shoemate,  by  reason 

o 

of  Legal  Conclusion  4. 

of  Legal  Conclusion  5. 

2. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondent  Michele  Ignoffo,  by  reason 

3. 

The  Accusation  served  Respondents  Anthony  Arias,  Lynell  Hanck,  Anna 

Kent,  Paddy  O’Regan,  Katherine  Ray  and  Karren  Zook  is  sustained. 

4. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Anthony  Arias,  Lynell  Hanck, 

Anna  Kent,  Paddy  O’Regan,  Katherine  Ray  and  Karren  Zook  that  their  respective 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

 

DATED:  May  5,  2006 

  PERRYXL.O.FOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  
  

-16. 

  

