BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE  LOS  NIETOS  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2006030887 

Teri  Applebaum 
Nicole  Chavez 
Charlyn  Fijan 
Rosa  Mercado 
Steven  Risser 
Christina  Olea 
Renee  Trimble 
Raelene  Felix 
Elsa  Avina 

    

Teachers  of  the  Los  Nietos  School  District 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Chris  Ruiz,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  17,  2006,  at  8324  S.  Westman  Avenue,  Whittier, 
California. 

Mark  Thompson,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Los  Nietos  School  District  (District) 

Carlos  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  the  teachers  with  the  exception  of 

Respondent  Avina'  who  did  not  request  a  hearing. 

The  District  served  a  Notice  of  Layoff’  on  each  of  the  teacher  Respondents.  Either 

before  or  at  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusation,  due  to  attrition,  as  to 
Respondents  Trimble,  Olea,  and  Felix. 

The  issue  in  this  case  is  clear.  Respondents’  sole  contention  is  that  the  District 

improperly  “skipped  over”  Respondent  Avina,  the  least  senior  of  all  Respondents. 

  

'  The  District  did  not  list  (in  Exhibit  11)  Respondent  Avina  as  an  employee  that  it  intended  to  lay  off. 
the  Accusation  as  to  Respondent  Avina  is  deemed  withdrawn  by  the  District. 
?  Respondents  Avina  and  Felix  received  Precautionary  Layoff  Notices.

Therefore, 

  

; 

  OLNGNV YD  VS 
supiwsy;  sABayspUyUEp Y  JO  PIO 
9002  LO  AV 

  
   

GHATHOWa 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Lillian  Maldonado  French,  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acting  in  her  official 

capacity,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served  upon 
Respondents  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955.  The 
parties,  by  and  through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

. 

2. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  Los  Nietos  School  District  as  permanent, 
probationary,  intern,  pre-intern,  emergency  permitted,  waiver,  and/or  temporary  certificated 
employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2006,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the 

Board  of  Education  of  the  Los  Nietos  School  District  was  given  written  notice  of  the 
recommendation  by  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that 
recommendation. 

Before  March  15,  2006,  Respondents  were  given  written  notice 
Education 

of  the 
4, 
recommendation 
Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

Respondents, 

pursuant 

notice 

given 

that 

be 

to 

5. 

It  was  established  that  cause  exists’,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  ~ 

sections  44949  and  44955,  for  not  reemploying  Respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 
The  District  proposes  the  following: 

The  following  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  District  will 
be 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2006-07  school 
year: 

K-8  Classroom  Teacher 

6  F.T.E. 

Special  Education  (Severely  Handicapped) 

1  F.T-E. 

  

TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  POSTIONS 

7  FAT.E. 

6. 

The  Board  of  Education  decided  that  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
permanent  certificated  employees  as a  result  of  the  reduction  in  services.  These  services  are 

  

*  Due  to  attrition,  the  District  has  reduced  its  layoff  request  to  five  K-8  teachers.

“particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  rather,  constituted  a  proper 
exercise  of  discretion. 

7. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related 

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
as  determined  by  the  Board. 

8. 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2006.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.  3d  627  at  636).  The  District  agreed  it  would  withdraw  layoff  notices  to 
the  most  senior  teachers  laid  off  as  additional  attrition  occurs. 

9. 

The  District  properly  created  its  seniority  list  by  determining  the  first  date  of 

paid  service  of  each  certificated  employee  and  also  properly  utilized  tie-breakers  when 
necessary. 

10. 

Here,  the  District  retained,  or  “skipped”,  certain  employees  with  more 

seniority  in  order  to  retain  a  teacher  (Respondent  Avina)  holding  a  Bilingual,  Cross-cultural, 
Language  and  Academic  Development  Certificate,  commonly  referred  to  by  its  acronym 
BCLAD. 

11.. 

The  District  demonstrated  a  specific  need  to  retain  BCLAD  teachers  for  the 

coming  school  year.  The  District  services  a  94  percent  Latino  population.  Thirty  percent  of 
the  District’s  students  are  classified  as  “English  learners.”  English  learner  students  are 
deemed  not  yet  proficient  in  using  the  English  language.  While  a  teacher  without  a  BCLAD 
certificate  can  teach  these  students,  such  a  teacher  would  require a  bilingual  instructional 
assistant;  whereas,  a  BCLAD  teacher  would  not.  The  Districts  considers  it  a  priority  to  hire 
BCLAD  teachers  in  order  to  facilitate  working  with  the  students  and  also  in  order  facilitate 
direct  communication  with  the  students’  parents,  rather  than  through  an  assistant  who  would 
act  as  an  interpreter. 

12. 

Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  states: 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate 

from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for 
either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 

teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the

certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary 
to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services, 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

There  is  thus  a  two  prong  test  under  subdivision  (d)(1)  for  skipping  a  junior 
employee:  (1)  a  district  must  demonstrate  a  specific  need  for  a  specific  course  or  course  of 
study;  and  (2)  the  junior  employee  has  the  special  training  to  teach  the  course  which  a  more 
senior  teacher  does  not.  The  District  sustained  its  burden  with  respect  to  showing  a  specific. 
need  to  retain  BCLAD  teachers. 

13. 

The  District  established  that  it  needs  BCLAD  teachers  to  fully  carry  out  its 
Elsa  Avina  has  a  BCLAD  certification,  along  with  a  multiple  subject  credential, 

mission. 
and  is  presently  assigned  to  a  bilingual  Structured  Immersion  Program  class.  She  possesses 
the  necessary  training  and  experience  required  under  Education  Code  Section  44955, 
subdivision  (d), 

to  be  properly  skipped 

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

1, 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections 

2. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Findings  5  and  6  is  a  particular  kind  of 

service  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and 
case  law. 

3. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither 

arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion.  At 
Respondents’  request,  the  ALJ  considered  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano 
Joint  Unified  School  Dist.  (1983)  139  Cal.  App.  3d  567.  That  case  is  not  on  point.  The 
teachers  who  were  skipped  were  not  formally  certified  and  some  were  not  teaching  bilingual 
classes.  The  skipped  employee  in  this  matter  is  BCLAD  certified  and  works  in  a  bilingual 
classroom. 

: 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  District's  teaching  positions  by  five  Full  Time 

Equivalents  and  to  give  notice  to  the  affected  teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section 
44955.  (Campbell  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977) 
67  Cal.App.3d  689).  Based  on  the  above  Findings,  including  the  preamble  to  this  Proposed 
Decision,  the  names  of  the  affected  teachers,  those  as  to  whom  final  notices  of  layoff  may  be 
given,  are  as  follows:

  

@ 

Teri  Applebaum 
Nicole  Chavez 
Charlyn  Fijan 
Rosa  Mercado 
Steven  Risser 

ORDER 

As  a  result  of  the  reductions  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  the  teachers 

identified  in  Legal  Conclusion  No. 4  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006- 
2007  school  year. 

Dated: April  >  2006 

—_— 

  

  

 

