BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ROUND  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

TARA  BACHMAN, 
CAMERON  STALLINGS,  and  ROBERT 
RUIZ 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2006040105 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

M.  Amanda  Behe,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  26,  2006,  at  the  offices  of  the  Willits  Unified 
School  District,  Willits,  California. 

Suzanne  K.  Reed,  Senior  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of 

California,  represented  the  Round  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents,  who  were  present  at  the 

hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  26,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Round  Valley  Unified  School  District  (hereinafter  “the  District”)  provides 

an  elementary/middle  school,  high  school,  continuation  school  and  community  day  school 
serving  approximately  400  students.  Joy  Muhleck  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

2. 

On  March  13,  2006,  the  Governing  Board  was  given  notice  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  4.0 
full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation.

    

3. 

Board  Resolution  No.  05-0313D,  adopted  on  March  13,  2006,  provided  for 

the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

eo 

1.0  FTE  Director  of  Special  Education  Services 

2.0  FTE  Elementary  Instructional  Services 

1.0  FTE  High  School  Services  to  include: 

2  periods  of  Physical  Education 
1  period  of  2  teachers  providing  Accelerated  Math  Support 
1  period  of  2  teachers  providing  Continuation  Services 
1  period  [1  semester]  of  Health 
1  period  [1  semester]  of  Drivers  Education 
1  period  of  Yearbook  Journalism 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2006,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  in 

the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  employee’s  last 
known  address,  the  District  served  affected  employees  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been 
recommended  that  notice  be  given  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  setting  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

The  notices  further  advised  the  employees  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  including  that 
such  a  request  must  be  delivered  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination, 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5, 

Respondents  Tara  Bachman,  Cameron  Stallings,  and  Robert  Ruiz  filed  timely 

Requests  for  Hearing. 

6. 

Superintendent  Muhleck  filed  Accusations  which  were  timely  served  on 

respondents  as  required  by  the  Education  Code,  and  the  information  that  a  Notice  of  Defense 
must  be  filed  within  five  days  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (c)(1). 

7, 

Respondents  Bachman,  Stallings,  and  Ruiz  filed  timely  Notices  of  Defense. 

8. 

Superintendent  Muhleck  described  that  Board  Resolution  No.  05-0313D  was 

required  by  the  District’s  fiscal  crisis  and  need  to  reduce  services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the 
welfare  of  students.  The  District’s  second  Interim  Financial  Report  projects  that  it  will  have 
overspent  available  funds  by  approximately  $400,000  at  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year. 

9. 

The  District  maintains  a  Roster  of  Certificated  Staff  that  identifies  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  credentials,  and  degrees.  As  provided  in 
Education  Code  section  44845,  seniority  generally  is  measured  from  the  first  date  on  which 
the  employee  rendered  service  as  a  probationary  employee. 

@

  

The  Roster  of  Certificated  Staff,  or  seniority  list,  was  posted  and  circulated  to 
certificated  staff  of  the  District.  None  of  the  respondents  identified  to  Superintendent 
Muhleck  that  the  information  was  incorrect  or  incomplete. 

10.‘ 

The  seniority  list  notes  that  respondent  Bachman  has a seniority  date  of 

August  22,  2005,  and  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  with  ELD  and  SDAIE 
certification.  Respondent  Stallings  also  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2005,  and  holds  a 
preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  with  CLAD  certification.  Respondent  Ruiz  has  a 
seniority  date  of  August  28,  1980,  and  holds a  life  special  education  Learning  Handicapped 
and  Severely  Handicapped  credential  with  SDAIE  certification. 

11. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted  criteria  for  determining  the  order  of  termination 

among  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided 
that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  in 
accordance  with  the  following: 

Credentials  and  experience  to  teach  or  serve  in  a 

A. 
particular  program  or  provide  a  particular  kind  of  service  of 
need  by  the  District  (e.g.  bilingual,  special  education, 
math/sciences). 

B. 
Years  of  experience  previous  to  current  employment  as  a 
full-time  credentialed  teacher  in  a  probationary/permanent  K-12 
teaching  situation  in  a  public  school. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

F, 

Credentials  that  permit  supplementary  authorization. 

Number  of  teaching  and/or  specialist  service  credentials. 

Earned  degrees  beyond  the  B.A.  or  B.S.  level  (e.g., 
masters,  doctorate). 

Multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  District  need  (e.g., 
Spanish). 

G. 

Preliminary  v.  Clear/Life  Credentials. 

H. 

National  Board  Certification. 

I. 

Good  Attendance  (not  more  than  5  days  absences  (sic)). 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  assigned  numerical  values  to  the  listed  factors,  and 

further  described  that  in  the  event  of  a  continuing  “tie”  a  lottery  would  be  used.   

  

12. 

Superintendent  Muhleck  used  the  seniority  list  to  determine  which  employees 
were  affected  by  Board  Resolution  No.  05-0313D,  and  whether  the  affected  individuals  were 
entitled  to  “bump”!  other  employees.  Because  of  the  resignation  of  a  certificated  employee 
at  the  high  school,  only  three  layoff  notices  were  sent.  Respondent  Ruiz  will  be  employed 
next  year  as a  full-time  classroom  teacher;  his  layoff  notice  addresses  only  his  current 
assignment  as  the  Director  of  Special  Education  Services. 

In  identifying  the  certificated  employees  affected  by  the  layoff  Superintendent 

Muhleck  was  required  to  use  the  criteria  to  resolve  ties  between  six  employees,  including 
respondent  Bachman  and  Stallings,  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  (August  22, 
2005). 

Ann  Marie  Bauer  holds  an  internship  credential  through  CalState  TEACH?  and  has  a 
bachelor’s  degree  in  mathematics,  and  is  bilingual  in  Spanish.  She  teaches  algebra,  advanced 
algebra,  calculus  and  trigonometry  in  the  departmentalized  program  at  the  high  school.  In 
determining  layoffs  skipped  her  because  of  her  special  training  and  experience  that  respon- 
dents  do  not  have. 
mathematics  and  science  as  a  long-term  substitute  in  the  District.  Neither  respondent  Bach- 
man  nor  respondent  Stallings  are  credentialed  to  teach  mathematics  at  the  high  school,  an 
area  of  need  for  the  District. 

She  was  assigned  credit  under  the  criteria  for  her  year  of  teaching 

William  Cull  has  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  clear  single  subject  Social 
Science  credential  as  well  as  a  master’s  degree  in  cultural  anthropology  and  prior  teaching 
experience.  He  is  bilingual  in  Spanish.  He  was  assigned  credit  for  those  factors  pursuant  to 
the  District  criteria  for  resolving  ties.  Neither  respondent  Bachman  nor  respondent  Stallings 
hold  comparable  credentials  or  have  comparable  teaching  experience. 

Krista  Sanders  holds  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  supplementary  authori- 

zation  in  English.  Neither  respondent  Bachman  nor  respondent  Stallings  hold  comparable 
credentials. 

Sandra  Wake  holds a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  with  ELD  and  SDAIE 

certifications,  and  is  bilingual  in  Spanish.  The  District  is  in  the  School  Assistance 
Intervention  Team,  and  has  the  funded  position  of  a  High  Point  Intervention  teacher  because 
it  is  underperforming  in  test  scores  for  the  fifth  year  in  a  row,  and  that  assistance  is  required 
by  the  State  Department  of  Education  and  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act.  Ms.  Wake 
completed  High  Point  Intervention  Training  presented  in  Fort  Bragg  by  Houghton-Mifflin, 
the  publisher  of  that  reading  program,  and  teaches  that  program  which  is  directed  at  students 

  

Generally  speaking,  a  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  a  position  held  by  a  junior 
teacher  if  the  senior  teacher  is  properly  credentialed.  That  displacement  of  a  junior  teacher  is  known  as  “bumping.” 
The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and  a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential/skill  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more 
senior  teacher  is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by  statute  (Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision 
(d)(1))  and  appellate  law  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Santa  Clara 
Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831). 
?  CalState  TEACH  is  the  university  intern  program  of  the  California  State University. 

4 

  

     

at  least  two  years  below  grade  level  in  math  and  language  arts.  Neither  respondent  Bachman 
nor  respondent  Stallings  have  experience  or  training  in  the  High  Point  Intervention  Program. 

13. 

Respondent  Stallings  is  presently  a  seventh  grade  teacher.  She  contends  that 
with  her  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  she  is  authorized  to  teach  departmentalized 
English  to  the  ninth  grade.  Respondent  Stallings  acknowledged  that  at  the  time  she  signed 
her  current  contract  with  the  District  she  “did  not  have  the  teacher  credentialing  piece  of 
paper  in  hand”  which  reflected  a  supplemental  authorization  in  English.  She  had  only  a  “C- 
19  letter”  which  indicated  that  she  fulfilled  the  requirements  for  the  supplementary 
authorization  and  that  she  referred  to  it  in  her  resume.  Neither  the  letter,  nor  her  resume,  nor 
mentioning  a  credential  in  an  interview,  constitute  a  credential  on  file  with  the  District.  The 
District  is  only  required  to  consider  credentials  an  employee  has  on  file  by  the  March  15 
notice  deadline.  (Degener  v.  Governing  Board  of  Wiseburn  School  District  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689). 

14. 

|  Respondent  Bachman  teaches  a  combination  first  and  second  grade  class.  She 

testified  that  no  one  from  the  District  reviewed  with  her  the  Governing  Board’s  criteria  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  among  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  on  the  same  date,  or  the  application  of  the  criteria  to  her.  Neither  the  Education  Code 
nor  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  requires  such  an  interview. 

15.  |  Respondent  Ruiz  is  presently  a  resource  specialist  and  Director  of  Special 

Education  Services.  He  has  been  a  District  employee  for  25  years,  and  is  chairman  of  the 
Round  Valley  Teacher’s  Association.  Respondent  Ruiz  testified  that  the  District’s  teachers 
are  paid  substantially  less  that  certificated  employees  of  local  district.  The  parties  are 
currently  in  negotiations.  Based  upon  unaudited  documents,  from  an  unknown  school  year, 
he  opined  that  when  at  the  conclusion  of  the  2004-05  fiscal  year  the  District  had  18.4%  of  its 
budget  in  reserves.  Respondents  appeared  to  argue  that  the  District  should  not  engage  in 
layoffs  when  having  a  reserve.  The  view  is  not  persuasive;  maintaining  a  reserve  for 
unanticipated  expenses  and  emergencies  is  a  prudent  exercise  of  the  Governing  Board’s 
discretion. 

16. 

The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  services  in  light 
of  its  current  overspending  does  address  the  welfare  of  students,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of 
its  discretion.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the  proposed  reductions  in  services  would 
violate  any  statutory  or  regulatory  requirement  governing  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l, 

Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (a),  provides  in  pertinent  part  that: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section

44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her 
designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent 
by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and 
stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907 
and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no 
probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position 
for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949, 
inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  ...  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year,  ...,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in 
the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of 
not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at 
the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less 
seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any 
employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance 
with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing 
board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to 
give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 

     

not  exist  without  such  a  requirement.  ... 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments 
in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any 
service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to 
render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not 
previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a 
teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major 
area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 
governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject 
matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may 
deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of 
seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance with 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the 
laws. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this  pro- 
The  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

3. 
ceeding. 
44944  and  44945  were  met. 

4. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction 
or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  expenditures 
of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

5. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  ren- 

der  a  service  which  such  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  Tara  Bachman,  Cameron  Stallings,  and  Robert 

Ruiz  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-07  School  Year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as  provided  in  Board  Resolution 
No.  05-0313D, 
   

oe 

   

Lz 

ZL. 
*M.  AMANDA  BEHE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

  

    

