BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
GRANT  JOINT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  N2006030590 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Layoff): 

PROPOSED  REDUCTION  OR 
DISCONTINUATION  OF  PARTICULAR 
KINDS  OF  SERVICES  BY  8.6  FULL  TIME 
EQUIVALENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES 

Respondents.    

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

On  April  26,  2006,  in  Sacramento, California,  Leonard  L.  Scott,  Administrative  Law 
Adam  J.  Fiss,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Grant  Joint  Union  High  School 
Jason  Rabinowitz,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  of  the  remaining  respondents. 
Evidence  was  received,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

District  (School  District). 

   

  

| 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  Particular  kinds  of  services  and  eliminate  8.6  full  time  equivalent 
(FTE)  certificated  Positions  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year.  The  Governing  Board. 
acted  due  to  the  needs  of  the  School  District. 
The  Resolution  Provided  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of the  following 

particular  kinds  of  services: 

3.8  FTE  Social  Sciences 

1.2  FTE  Business 

1.0  FTE  Customer  Service 

0.6  FTE  7th/8th  grade  reading 

1.0  FTE  Art 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

1.0  FTE  SDFSC/TUPE  Specialist 

Total 

8.6  FTE 

4, 

discontinuation  of particular  kinds  of  services.  The  notices  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation,  as  required  by  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 
Attached  to  the  notices  were  copies  of Resolution  7-06,  blank  Request  for Hearing 
forms,  and  relevant  sections  of  the  Education  Code. 
Respondents  timely  filed  Requests  for  Hearing  to  determine  whether  there  is 
cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44949,  subdivision (b). 

   

  

6. 

7. 

5. 

On  or  about  April  3,  2006,  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.7-06,  Superintendent 

Buchanan  made,  signed  and  had  timely  served  upon  respondents  an  Accusation. 
Superintendent  Buchanan  acted  in  his  official  capacity.  With  the  Accusation  was  a  cover 
letter,  which  explained  respondents’  appeal  rights,  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  a  Notice 
of  Hearing,  and  copies  of  relevant  Education  Code  and  Government  Code  sections. 

Respondents  timely  signed  and  served  Notices  of  Defense  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44949(c)(1)  and  Government  Code  section  11506. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  School  District. 

8. 

The  court  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  dealt  with  the  question  of  when  a  school  district  must  consider 
positively  assured  attrition  in  a  layoff,  and  when  it  need  not. 

At  page  635,  the  court  held  that  a  school  district  must  consider  positively  assured 

attrition  where  a  layoff  is  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA): 

Courts  have  previously  held  that  in  terminating  certificated  employees  because 
of  a  decline  in  ADA a district  must  consider  all  positively  assured  attrition. 
(Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze,  supra,  109  Cal.App.3d  648;  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689  [136  Cal.Rpir.  801];  Lewin  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977  [133  Cal.Rptr.  385];  Burgess  v. 
Board  of Education  (1974)  41  Cal.App.3d  571  [116  Cal.Rptr.  183].) 
"Positively  assured  attrition"  is  attrition  which  has  actually  occurred  and  is  to 
be  distinguished  from  "potential  attrition"  which  may  be  anticipated  but  is  still 
unknown. 

-  At  pages  635-636,  the  court  held  that  a  school  district  need  not  consider  positively 
assured  attrition  where  a  layoff  is  due  to  discontinuation  or  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  (PKS),  and  contrasted  it  with  a  layoff  due  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance 
(ADA): 

A  board's  decision  as  to  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  a  particular  kind  of 
service  is  not  tied  in  with  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  reduction  in  the 
number  of  students.  The  number  of  terminations  made  necessary  by  PKS 
reductions  depends  totally  upon  the  district's  decision  as  to  how  many  services 
to  reduce.  Put  another  way,  the  language  of  section  44955  that  the  governing 
board  of  a  school  district  "may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  said  district"  is  only 

applicable  to  ADA  terminations  based  upon  an  actual  reduction  in  attendance.  

  

Where  the  governing  board  determines  to  discontinue  or  reduce  a  particular 
kind  of  service,  there  is  no  way  to  calculate  a  "corresponding  percentage," 
hence  it  is  within  the  discretion  of  the  board  to  determine  the  amount  by  which 
it  will  reduce  a  particular  service. 

© 

Pursuant  to  San  Jose,  supra,  the  School  District  is  not  legally  required  to  consider  _ 

positively  assured  attrition  when  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services. 
Conversely,  positively  assured  attrition  must  be  considered  if  a  layoff  is  due  to  a  decline  in 
average  daily  attendance. 

Because  this  layoff  is  due  to  a  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services,  the  School  District  was  not  required  to  consider  positively  assured  attrition  before 
determining  which  teachers  would  be  laid  off.  However,  although  not  required  to  consider  it, 
the  School  District  considered  the  positively  assured  attrition  that  occurred  prior  to  the 
sending  of  the  March  15  notices. 

9. 

Tenure  is  the  relationship  between  a  teacher  and  the  School  District  which 

gives  the  teacher  greater  job  security. 

Seniority  is  the  relationship  between  the  teachers  within  a  School District,  Among  the 
teachers  credentialed  to  provide  a  given  service,  greater  seniority  in  the  School  District  gives 
a  greater  legal  entitlement  to  a  position.  (Ferner  v.  Harris  (1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  363.) 

The  School  District  maintains  a  list  of  employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid 

service),  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations.  The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to 
develop  the  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees. 

@ 

10. 

The  three  respondents  still  subject  to  the  layoff  are  George  Brown,  Jr.,  Kristen 

Swain  and  Lynn  Reed,  Jr. 

George  Brown,  Jr.,  seniority  date  August  19,  2004,  teaches  business  customer  service 

for  1.0  FTE.  He  has  a  designated  subject,  vocational  customer  service  credential.  He  is  a 
second  year  probationary  employee. 

Kristen  Swain,  seniority  date  November  3,  2005,  teaches  social  science  and  history 

for  1.0  FTE.  She  has  a  single  subject,  social  science  credential,  with  a  CLAD.  She  is a  first 
year  probationary  employee. 

Lynn  Reed,  Jr.,  hire  date  August  19,  2005,  teaches  business  computers  for  1.0  FTE. 

He  is  a  district  intern  working  toward  a  business  credential. 

   

  

 

  

11. 

|  Respondents  Brown  and  Swain  argued  that  the  provisions  of  Education  Code 

section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  in  conjunction  with  the  provisions  of  California  Code  of 
Regulations,  title  5,  section  80024.3.2,  require  the  School  District  to  bump  them  into  the 
position  teaching  special  education  now  occupied  by  Johnny  Guest  (Guest).  Guest,  hire  date 
August  19,  2004,  was  retained  to  teach  special  education,  and  does  so  under  an  intern  permit 
while  working  toward  a  special  education  credential.  Respondents  argued  that  the  School 
District  must  retain  them,  help  them  secure  emergency  permits,  and  assign  them  to  teach  the 
special  education  class. 

Neither  Brown,  nor  Swain,  nor  the  other  remaining  respondent  is  credentialed  or 
competent,  or  has  any  special  training  or  experience  to  make  them  competent,  to  teach  in  the 
special  education  program. 

As  the  legal  basis  for  their  argument,  respondents  cited  the  second  paragraph  of 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  which  requires  governing,  boards 
more  junior  certificated  employees  and  retain  more  senior  certificated  employees  to  provide 
any  service  they  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Subdivision  (c)  goes  on  to  state: 
“However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject 
which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the 
equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject.” 

to  bump 

Respondents  also  cited  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80024.3.2  as 

the  basis  for  the  emergency  permits  required  for  them  to  teach  special  education.  The 
authority  to  promulgate  section  80024.3.2,  and  other  relevant  regulation  sections,  was 
granted  to  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  by  Education  Code  sections  44225, 
subdivisions  (d),  (g)  and  (q),  44265  and  44300.  Those  Education  Code  sections  authorized 
the  Commission  to  create  limited  term  and  emergency  permits  and  authorized  it  to 
promulgate  regulations  governing  the  issuance  of  such  permits.  Pursuant  to  that  authority, 
the  Commission  promulgated  a  regulatory  scheme  governing  the  issuance  of  such  permits. 

As  part  of  a  larger  regulatory  scheme,  California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section 

80024.3.2  must  be  read  in  context  with  the  rest  of  the  scheme,  especially  sections  80023.2 
and  80026. 

a. 

Respondents  fail  to  meet  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (c),  because  they  failed  to  voluntarily  request  the  transfer  into  the  special 
education  position  and  failed  to  pass  a  special  education  competency  test  prior  to  the  March 
15  notice.  To  rule  otherwise  would  make  the  rest  of  the  layoff  process  futile  and 
meaningless,  since  there  would  be  no  way  to  determine  which  certificated  personnel  were 
subject  to  the  layoff  prior  to  the  required  March  15  notice. 

  

  

 

  

The  court  dealt  with  a  roughly  analogous  situation  in  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  of 
Wiseman  School  District (  1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  697-699.  Degener  was  subject  to  layoff 
because  at  the  time  of  the  March  15  layoff  notice  and  at  the  time  of  the  May  15  layoff 
decision  he  was  not  competent  and  credentialed  to  bump  a  more  junior  teacher,  who  was 
being  retained.  However,  after  the  May  15  decision,  Degener  received  a  credential  that 
would  have  allowed  him  to  teach  the  class  taught  by  the  less  senior  teacher,  and  thus  bump 
her.  The  court  noted  that  his  late  receipt  of  the  credential  meant  that  the  governing  board 
could  not  timely  give  the  more  junior  teacher  the  March  15  notice  and  lay  her  off. 

The  court  stated  that:  (1)  Degener  could  not  be  assured  of  the  new  credential  until  it 
was  issued;  (2)  there  is  no  showing  or  claim  that  the  Board  knew  that  he  had  made 
application  for  the  additional  certificate;  and  (3)  other  employees  may  also  have  unknown 
applications  with  the  state  board  (Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing)  and  school  district 
authorities  would  never  know  to  whom  to  give  notice.  The  court  further  stated  that:  “TA] 
school  board  can  only  authorize  a  teacher  to  teach  within  his  credential.  At  the  time  a  district 
must  prepare  its  lay-off  notices  it  must  analyze  carefully  the  number  of  people  to  be  laid-off, 
the  seniority  listing  of  employees,  and  the  credentials  and  qualifications  of  the  individuals.  If 
a  district  decides  it  must  lay-off  a  certain  number  of  employees,  it  must  give  those  employees 
proper  notice.  Once  March  15  passes  by  a  district  may  not  notify  additional  employees  that 
they  may  be  terminated...  .  A  district  does  not  have  the  right  to  add  to  the  lay-off  list.  [para.] 
.  ..  Respondent  [Board]  cannot  be  held  accountable  for  the  fact  that  Appellant  Degener 
received  his  credential  after  all  notices  were  sent,  a  hearing  held,  and  final  Board  adoption  of 
the  decision.”  The  court  ruled  against  Degener. 

Respondents  are  in  much  the  same  situation  as  Degener.  They  cannot  be  assured  of 
receiving  an  emergency  permit  until  it  is  issued.  Since  respondents  did  not  request  a  transfer 
into  special  education  and  seek  an  emergency  permit  prior  to  March  15,  there  was  no  way  the 
Governing  Board  could  know  that  respondents  would  now  make  this  claim.  Other 
certificated  employees  may  have  unknown  applications  or  unknown  interest  in  possibly 
seeking  an  emergency  permit  from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  and  School 
District  authorities  would  never  know  to  whom  to  give  the  March  15  layoff  notice. 

b. 

Prior  to  March  15,  none  of  the  respondents  made  any  effort  to  comply  with  the 
competency  requirement  of  Education  Code  section  44955 ,  subdivision  (c),  so  at  the  time  of 
the  March  15  notice,  none  of  them  was  qualified  to  bump  into  the  special  education  position. 
If  the  School  District  had  attempted  to  bump  any  of  the  remaining  respondents  into  the 
special  education  position  at  the  time  of  the  March  15  notice,  it  would  have  violated 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b). 

c. 

Subdivision  (b),  states  in  relevant  part:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of 

  

 

    

  

  

this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.” 

The  provisions  of  subdivisions  (c)  must  be  interpreted  in  conjunction  with  the 
provisions  of  subdivision  (b)  to  give  reasonable  meaning  to  the  whole  of  section  44955  and 
of  the  statutory  scheme.  The  only  way  to  give  meaning  to  the  provisions  of  both  subdivisions 
is  to  require  certificated  employees  to  have  taken  all  of  the  necessary  preliminary  steps  for 
reassignment  under  subdivision  (c),  including  passing  a  competency  test  and  applying  for  an 
emergency  permit  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the  March  15  notice.  To  interpret  subdivision  (c) 
otherwise  would  frustrate  any  attempt  by  any  school  district  to  layoff  unnecessary  certificated 
personnel,  and  thereby  make  meaningless  the  rest  of  Section  44955  and  all  of  Section  44949, 
in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  layoffs.  © 

Pursuant  to  subdivision  (b),  in  determining  which  credentialed  employees  were 

affected  by  the  layoff,  the  School  District  was  required  to  take  into  account  their  seniority, 
credentials,  and  the  competence  of  each  as  it  existed  when  the  determination  was  made. 
When  the  March  15  notice  was  sent,  none  of  the  three  remaining  respondents  was  certificated 
or  competent  or  possessed  an  emergency  permit  authorizing  service  in  special  education. 
Therefore,  under  subdivision  (b),  none  of  the  remaining  respondents  was  qualified  to  bump 
into  the  special  education  position  at  the  time  of  the  March  15  notice. 

d. 

Securing  an  emergency  permit  is  not  an  easy  process  nor  is  the  end  result  a 

foregone  conclusion.  An  applicant  for  an  emergency  permit,  or  any  other  permit,  must 
comply  with  a  number  of  criteria.  The  criteria  relevant  to  emergency  permits  are  found  in 
California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  sections  80023.2,  80024.3.2  and  80026. 

Section  80023.2  establishes  the  basic  requirements  for  the  issuance  of  an  emergency 

permit.  It  requires  that  applicants,  who  already  possess  a  California  teaching  credential,  must 
still  satisfy  a  number  of  additional  requirements,  including:  subdivision  (c)  applicant  must 
satisfy  the  relevant  permit  requirements  for  the  requested  permit  as  specified  in  Sections 
80024.1  through  80024.8;  subdivision  (d)  the  school  district  must  submit  a  Declaration  of 
Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  that  satisfies  the  provisions  of  Section  80026;  and  (f) 
applicant  must  submit  a  complete  application  packet,  including  a  completed  Application for 
Credential  Authorizing  Public  School  Service. 

— 

Section  80024.3.2  establishes  the  requirements  for  the  initial  issuance  of  an 
Emergency  Education  Specialist  Instruction  Permit  in  the  areas  of  Mild/Moderate 
Disabilities,  Moderate/Severe  Disabilities,  Deaf  and  Hard-of-Hearing,  Physical  and  Health 
Impairments,  Visual  Impairments,  and  Early  Childhood  Special  Education.  It  requires  that 
applicants,  who  already  possess  a  California  teaching  credential,  must  still  satisfy  a  number 

of  additional  requirements,  including:  subdivision  (a)(1)  applicant  and  the  school  district  

must  meet  the  general  requirements  specified  in  Section  80023.2;  and  subdivision  (a)(3) 
applicant  must  provide  a  written  affirmation  of  his  or  her  intent  to  complete  the  requirements 
set  forth  in  Section  80026.6  during  the  period  of  the  permit. 

Section  80026  requires  that  the  employing  agency  annually  submit  a  Declaration  of 
Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  as  a  prerequisite  to  the  issuance  of  any  emergency  permit 
to  certificated  employees  of  that  agency.  Subdivision  (a)  requires  that  the  declaration  must 
specify  the  number  of  each  type  of  emergency  permit  sought.  Subdivision  (b)  requires  a  brief 
description  of  efforts  that  the  employing  agency  has  undertaken  to  locate  and  recruit  . 
individuals  who  hold  the  needed  credentials.  Subdivision  (c)  requires  information  about 
efforts  to  train  people  to  fill  the  need,  such  as  by  co-sponsoring  internships  or  other 
certification  programs.  Subdivision  (d)  requires  the  employing  agency  to  certify  that  there 
are  an  insufficient  number  of  certificated  persons  who  meet  the  criteria  to  fill  the  positions. 
Subdivision  (e)  requires  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  to  adopt  the  Declaration  of 
Need. 

As  can  be  seen  from  the  above  criteria,  issuance  of  such  permits  is  not  automatic and 
there  is  no  assurance  that  one  will  be  issued.  Not  only  must  the  applicant  demonstrate 
compliance  with  the  criteria,  but  the  School  District  must  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need.  And 
even  if  the  Commission  were  to  issue  an  emergency  permit  to  teach  special  education,  it 
would  most  likely  be  issued  to  the  best  qualified  person,  Guest,  the  person  with  the  existing 
special  education  permit  and  training. 

e. 

March  15  and  their  claims  are  now  barred  by  laches. 

Respondents  failed  to  timely  request  transfer  into  special  education  prior  to 

Each  of  the  respondents  who  raised  this  issue  has  known  of  his  or  her  employment 
status,  credentials,  and  whether  he  or  she  possessed  an  emergency  credential  or  permit  which 
would  allow  teaching  in  the  special  education  program  since  well  before  the  commencement 
of  this  layoff.  If  any  of  them  wished  to  transfer  into  special  education,  they  should  have 
taken  the  necessary  action  well  before  March  15.  Instead,  they  failed  to  take  any  action, 
failed  to  appraise  the  School  District  of  any  interest  in  a  transfer,  and  failed  to  assert  their 
position  in  a  timely  manner.  Instead,  they  waited  until  this  proceeding  to  raise  the  claim. 
Respondents’  failure  to  act  prevented  the  School  District  from  taking  any  responsive  action 
prior  to  March  15,  Respondents  delay  thus  caused  prejudice  to  the  School  District  because 
the  School  District  was  required  by  law  to  determine  which  certificated  employees  were 
affected  by  the  layoff  and  give  them  the  March  15  notice. 

In  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d 
796,  814-815,  the  court  held  that  it  was  each  respondent’s  duty  to  timely  have  on  file  at  the 
School  District  office  all  credentials,  transcripts  and  any  other  qualification  documentation 
that  might  qualify  him  or  her  to  teach  additional  subjects,  such  as  special  education. 

   

In  Johnson  v. 

City  of Loma  Linda  (2000)  24  Cal.4th  61,  77,  the  California  Supreme 
Court  held:  “The  doctrine  of  laches  bars  a  cause  of  action  when  the  plaintiff  unreasonably 
delays  in  asserting  or  diligently  pursuing  the  cause  and  the  plaintiff  has  acquiesced  in  the  act 
about  which  the  plaintiff  complains,  or  the  delay  has  prejudiced  the  defendant.” 

In  this  case,  respondents  failed  to  timely  raise  the  issue  before  March  15,  and  their 

failure  prejudiced  the  School  District. 

In  a  situation  roughly  analogous  to  this  matter,  the  court  in  American  Federation  of 

Teachers  v.  Board  of Education  (1977)  77  Cal.App.3d  100,  held  that  where  a  temporary 
teacher  failed  to  make  a  claim  that  she  should  have  been  classified  as  probationary  until  after 
March  15,  the  point  in  time  when  a  school  district  was  required  to  issue  a  notice  of  non- 
reelection,  the  teacher  was  guilty  of  laches  and  was  estopped  from  impeaching  the  temporary 
nature  of  her  employment.  The  court  held  that  her  actions  foreclosed  the  school  district  from 
giving  her  the  dismissal  notice,  which  must  be  given  by  March  15,  and  thereby  caused 
prejudice  to  the  school  district. 

Pursuant  to  these  cases,  respondents  are  barred  by  laches  and  estoppel  from  now 
claiming  that  the  School  District  should  have  reassigned  them  to  teach  special  education. 

f. 

Further,  respondents  cannot  rely  on  the  ruling  in  California  Teachers 
Association  v.  Governing  Board  Of Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  369,  384-385,  where  the  court  stated  that  the  employing  school  district  had  an 
“obligation  to  apply  for  the  emergency  permit”  for  an  otherwise  uncredentialed  employee  in 
order  to  carry  out  its  duty  to  put  the  employee’s  contract  into  effect.  The  facts  in  Golden 
Valley  are  distinguishable  from  the  facts  herein.  In  Golden  Valley,  the  school  district  had 
entered  into  an  employment  contract  for  the  ensuing  school  year  with  a  teacher  holding  an 
emergency  permit.  Prior  to  the  start  of  school,  the  district  attempted  to  abrogate  the  terms  of 
the  employment  contract  by  claiming  that  “it  could  not  legitimately  provide  the  CTC 
[Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing]  with  a  declaration  of  need  to  justify  the  CTC  issuing 
_  an  emergency  permit  to  [the  teacher]  for  the  1999-2000  school  year  in  light  of  the  more  than 

25  applications  Golden  Valley  received  from  teachers  who  were  fully  credentialed  and 
qualified  to  teach.”  The  court  held  that  the  school  district  had  an  obligation  to  perform  a 
diligent  search  for  qualified  teachers  before  entering  into  a  contract  with  a  teacher  holding  an 
emergency  permit;  “Furthermore,  Golden  Valley’s  obligation  to  apply  for  the  emergency 
permit  is  imposed  by  implication  under  the  contract  because  such  an  obligation  is  necessary 
to  carry  the  contract  into  effect.”  Here,  in  contrast,  there  was  no  contractual  obligation 
between  the  School  District  and  respondents  that  compelled  the  School  District  to  seek  an 
emergency  credential  or  permit  for  respondents  to  teach  special  education,  especially  when 
respondents  failed  to  take  any  action  toward  doing  so  prior  to  issuance  of  the  March  15 
Notice. 

   

Therefore,  based  upon  the  above,  respondents’  arguments  under  the  provisions  of 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  in  conjunction  with  the  provisions  of 
California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80024.3.2  is  not  persuasive. 

12.  | No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is 

being  retained  to  perform  a  service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Those  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  being  retained  will  provide 
services  which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

13. 

The  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  will  not  cause  those  services  to 

fall  below  the  level  necessary  to  provide  such  services  to  the  students  nor  will  the  reduction 
violate  any  mandate  regarding  the  provision  of  such  services. 

14. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  can  be.  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and 
was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

15. 

The  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  for  the  welfare  of  the 

School  District  and  the  pupils.  The  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  is  the  sole  cause 
for  not  re-employing  respondents. 

1, 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the 
governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the 
employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or 
his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by 
the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been  recommended 
that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

    

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b)  or 
has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the  reasons  therefor 
shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any  person,  except  as  may  be 
necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties.  However,  the  violation  of  this 
requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be 
construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this 
section. 

  
  
  

10

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a  hearing  shall  be  in 
writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent  the  notice  pursuant  to 
subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in  that  subdivision,  which  shall 
not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon 
the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date 
specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of  his  or 
her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise 
the  employee  of  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be 
conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing 
with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code 
and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein, 
except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1)  The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five 
days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be 
notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government  Code 
shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days  after  service 
of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section  11505  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  so  indicate. 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who  shall 
prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as 
to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for 
the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of 
the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing 
board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and 
disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations 
contained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge 
shall  be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors 
committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall 
not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial 
errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing 
board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the 
proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of 
the  administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the 
district  funds. 

1 

   

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not 
inconsistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to  effectuate 
this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in 
person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the 
United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known 
address  of  the  employee. 

(e)  If  after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any  continuance  is 
granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government  Code,  the  dates 
prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after  the  date  of  granting  the 
continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which 
occurs  after  the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  shall  be  extended  for  a  period 
of  time  equal  to  the  continuance. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes 
other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to 
44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949, 
inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the 
schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shall  - 
have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two 
school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board  determines  that  attendance  in  a 
district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as  a  result  of  the  termination  of  an 
interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a 
particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state 
law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any 
of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the 
district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district, 
permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as 
otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a 

    

  
  
  

12

service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render, 

In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this  section 
for  a  newly  formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school  of  the  district 
shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  a  school  of  the  newly  formed  or  reorganized 
district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school  years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the 
same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely 
on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request 
of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing 
board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination 
and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the 
other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board 
provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of 
termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right 
or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of 
May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such 
employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were 
employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary 
employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in 
Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a 
manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning 
or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has 
not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee 
to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 

. 

13 

 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for 
a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44956(a)(1)  provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  Any  permanent  employee  whose  services  have  been  terminated  as  provided 
in  Section  44955  shall  have  the  following  rights: 

(1)  For  the  period  of  39  months  from  the  date  of  such  termination,  any 
employee  who  in  the  meantime  has  not  attained  the  age  of  65  years  shall  have 
the  preferred  right  to  reappointment,  in  the  order  of  original  employment  as 
determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44831 
to  44855,  inclusive,  if  the  number  of  employees  is  increased  or  the 
discontinued  service  is  reestablished,  with  no  requirements  that  were  not 
imposed  upon  other  employees  who  continued  in  service;  provided,  that  no 
probationary  or  other  employee  with  less  seniority  shall  be  employed  to  render 
a  service  which  said  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
However,  prior  to  reappointing  any  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or 
she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee 
to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

4, 

Education  Code  section  44225,  subdivisions  (d),  (g)  and  (q),  provide: 

Duties  of  commission 

The  commission  shall  do  all  of  the  following: 

(d)  Establish  standards  for  the  issuance  and  renewal  of  credentials,  certificates, 
and  permits.  In  setting  standards,  the  commission  shall  seek  to  ensure,  through 
its  credentialing  of  teachers,  that  public  school  teachers  satisfy  all  of  the 
following  criteria: 

(1)  Are  academically  talented. 

  

14

© 

  
  
  

(2)  Are  knowledgeable  of  the  subjects  to  be  taught  in  the  classroom. 

(3)  Are  creative  and  energetic. 

(4)  Have  the  human  skills  to  motivate  and  inspire  pupils  to  achieve  their  goals. 

(5)  Have  the  sensitivity  to  foster  self-esteem  in  pupils  through  recognition  that 
each  pupil  has  his  or  her  own  goals,  talents,  and  levels  of  development. 

(6)  Be  willing  to  relate  the  educational  process  and  their  instructional  strategies 
to  meet  pupils'  needs. 

(7)  Are  able  to  work  effectively  with  and  motivate  pupils  from  a  variety  of 
ethnic,  socioeconomic,  cultural,  academic,  and  linguistic  backgrounds. 

(8)  Have  an  understanding  of  principles  and  laws  related  to  educational  equity, 
and  the  equitable  practice  of  the  profession  of  education  among  all  pupils 
regardless  of  their  ethnicity,  race,  gender,  age,  religious  background,  primary 
language,  or  handicapping  condition. 

(g)  Establish  alternative  methods  for  entry  into  the  teaching  profession,  and 
into  other  certificated  roles  in  the  schools,  by  persons  in  varying 
circumstances,  including  persons  who  have  been  educated  outside  of 
California,  provided  that  each  applicant  satisfies  all  of  the  requirements 
established  by  the  commission.  One  alternative  method  shall  be  the  successful 
completion  of  at  least  two  years  of  classroom  instruction  under a  district  intern 
certificate,  pursuant  to  Article  7.5  (commencing  with  Section  44325).  In 
establishing  alternative  methods  for  entry  into  the  teaching  profession,  the 
commission  shall  develop  strategies  to  encourage  classroom  aides  to  become 
credentialed  teachers. 

(q)  Propose  appropriate  rules  and  regulations  to  implement  the  act  which 
enacts  this  section. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44265  provides: 

Credentials  for  teaching  specialties,  including,  but  not  limited  to, bilingual 
education,  early  childhood  education,  and  special  education,  shall  be  based 

15   

upon  a  baccalaureate  degree  from  an  accredited  institution,  completion  of  a 
program  of  professional  preparation,  and  any  other  standards  which  the 
commission  may  establish. 

In  adopting  the  necessary  rules  and  regulations  establishing  the  requirements 
for  the  preparation  of  special  education  specialties,  the  commission  shall 
ensure  that  teachers  have  sufficient  knowledge  of  subject  matter  that  is  the  core 
of  the  California  public  school  curriculum  and  experience  with  nonspecial 
education  pupils  to  the  extent  deemed  appropriate  by  the  commission. 

All  administrative  regulations  governing  special  education  specialists 
credentials  that  were  in  effect  on  December  31,  1989,  shall  continue  to  be 
operative  until  the  commission  amends  or  repeals  those  regulations  to 
implement  the  provisions  of  this  section. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44300  provides: 

(a)  Commencing  January  1,  1990,  the  commission  may  issue  or  renew 
emergency  teaching  or  specialist  permits  in  accordance  with  regulations 
adopted  by  the  commission  corresponding  to  the  credential  types  specified  in 
paragraphs  (1),  (2),  and  (3)  of  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44225,  provided  that 
all  of  the  following  conditions  are  met: 

(1)  The  applicant  possesses  a  baccalaureate  degree  conferred  by  a  regionally 
accredited  institution  of  higher  education  and  has  fulfilled  the  subject  matter 
requirements  of  Section  44301. 

(2)  The  applicant  passes  the  state  basic  skills  proficiency  test  as  provided  for 
in  Section  44252. 

(3)  The  commission  approves  the  justification  for  the  emergency  permit 
submitted  by  the  school  district  in  which  the  applicant  is  to  be  employed.  The 
justification  shall  include  all  of  the  following: 

(A)  Annual  documentation  that  the  district  has  implemented  in  policy  and 
practices  a  process  for  conducting  a  diligent  search  that  shall  include,  but  is 
not  limited  to,  distributing  job  announcements,  contacting  college  and 
university  placement  centers,  advertising  in  local  newspapers,  exploring  the 
incentives  included  in  the  Teaching  As  A  Priority  Block  Grant  established 
pursuant  to  Section  44735,  participating  in  the  state  and  regional  recruitment 
centers  established  pursuant  to  Sections  44751  and  90530,  and  participating  in 
job  fairs  in  this  state,  but  has  been  unable  to  recruit  a  sufficient  number  of 

16 

     

  

certificated  teachers,  including  teacher  candidates  pursuing  full  certification 
through  internship,  district  internship,  or  other  alternative  routes  established 
by  the  commission. 

(B)  A  declaration  of  need  for  fully  qualified  educators  based  on  the 
documentation  set  forth  in  subparagraph  (A)  and  made  in  the  form  of  a 
motion  adopted  by  the  governing  board  of  the  district  or  the  county  board  of 
education  at  a  regularly  scheduled  meeting  of  the  governing  board  or  the 
county  board  of  education.  The  motion  may  not  be  part  of  the  consent  agenda 
and  shall  be  entered  in  the  minutes  of  the  meeting. 

(b)  The  commission  may  deny  a  request  for  an  emergency  permit  that  does 
not  meet  the  justification  set  forth  in  subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph  (3)  of 
subdivision  (a). 

(c)  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Legislature  that  all  of  the  following  occur: 

(1)  The  commission  shall  issue  preintern  certificates  in  place  of  emergency 
teaching  permits  as  sufficient  resources  are  made  available  to  school  districts 
_  to  provide  services  pursuant  to  Article  5.6  (commencing  with  Section  44305) 
to  preinterns  pursuing  multiple  subject  or  single  subject  teaching  credentials. 

(2)  If  the  examination  of  the  Pre-Internship  Teaching  Program  required  by 
this  chapter  demonstrates  that  the  program  should  continue  because  it  has 
been  successful  in  better  preparing  and  retaining  preintern  teachers  than  the 
emergency  permit  system,  sufficient  resources  to  fully  fund  the  Pre-Internship 
Teaching  Program  shall  be  appropriated  by  July  2002.  For  purposes  of  this 
paragraph,  two  thousand  dollars  ($  2,000)  in  state  funding  per  preintern  shall 
be  deemed  to  be  sufficient  resources. 

(3)  The  commission  shall  continue  to  issue  emergency  teaching  permits  to 
individuals  employed  by  school  districts  defined  in  regulations  as  remote  from 
regionally  accredited  institutions  of  higher  education. 

(d)  Commencing  January  1,  1990,  the  commission  may  issue  and  reissue 
emergency  permits  corresponding  to  the  credential  types  specified  in 
paragraph  (4)  of  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44225.  The  commission  shal] 
establish  appropriate  standards  for  each  type  of  emergency  permit  specified  in 
paragraph  (4)  of  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44225. 

(e)  The  exclusive  representative  of  certificated  employees,  if  any,  as  provided 
under  Chapter  10.7  (commencing  with  Section  3540)  of  Division  4  of  Title  1 

17

of  the  Government  Code,  may  submit  a  written  statement  to  the  commission 
agreeing  or  disagreeing  with  the  justification  submitted  to  the  commission 
pursuant  to  paragraph  (3)  of  subdivision  (a). 

(f)  Commencing  January  1,  1990,  a  person  holding  an  emergency  teaching  or 
specialist  permit  shall  attend  an  orientation  to  the  curriculum  and  to 
techniques  of  instruction  and  classroom  management,  and  shall  teach  only 
with  the  assistance  and  guidance  of a  certificated  employee  of  the  district  who 
has  completed  at  least  three  years  of  full-time  teaching  experience,  or  the 
equivalent  thereof.  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Legislature  to  encourage  districts  to 
provide  directed  teaching  experience  to  new  emergency  permitholders  with  no 
prior  teaching  experience. 

(g)  The  holder  of  an  emergency  permit  shall  participate  in  ongoing  training, 
coursework,  or  seminars  designed  to  prepare  the  individual  to  become  a  fully 
credentialed  teacher  or  other  educator  in  the  subject  area  or  areas  in  which  he 
or  she  is  assigned  to  teach  or  serve.  The  employing  agency  shall  verify  that 
employees  applying  to  renew  their  emergency  permits  are  meeting  these 
ongoing  training  requirements. 

(h)  Emergency  permits  for  pupil  personnel  services  shall  not  be  valid  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  pupil  eligibility  for  placement  in  any  special 
education  class  or  program. 

(i)  This  section  shall  not  apply  to  the  issuance  of  an  emergency  substitute 
teaching  permit,  or  of  an  emergency  permit  to  a  teacher  who  has  consented  to 
teach  temporarily  outside  of  his  or  her  field  of  certification,  for  which  the 
commission  shall  establish  minimum  requirements. 

7. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80023.2  provides: 

The  following  requirements  apply  to  the  initial  issuance  of  all  emergency 
permits  specified  in  Section  80023. 

(a)  The  applicant  must  possess  a  baccalaureate  or  higher  degree  from  a 
regionally  accredited  college  or  university. 

(b)  The  applicant  must  verify  passage  of  the  California  Basic  Educational 
Skills  Test  (CBEST),  unless  exempt  by  statutes  or  regulations. 

18 

     

(c)  The  applicant  must  satisfy  the  requirements  for  the  permit  being  requested 
as  specified  in  Sections  80024.1  through  80024.8. 

(d)  The  employing  agency  must  submit  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully 
Qualified  Educators  that  satisfies  the  provisions  of  Section  80026. 

(e)  If  the  applicant  does  not  already  have  fingerprint  clearance  on  file  with  the 
Commission,  the  permit  application  must  include  two  fingerprint  cards  and  the 
completed  Application  for  Character  and  Identification  Clearance  (form  41- 
CIC,  rev  11-93),  and  fee(s).  No  permit  will  be  issued  until  the  clearance 
process  is  completed. 

(f)  Issuance  of  an  emergency  permit  also  requires  the  submission  of  a  complete 
application  packet,  including  a  completed  Application  for  Credential 
Authorizing  Public  School  Service  (form  41-4,  rev  11-94),  payment  of  the 
fee(s)  required  by  Section  80487,  and  other  documents  required  by  the 
Commission  to  verify  completion  of  all  requirements  for  the  emergency 
permit. 

8. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80024.3.2  provides: 

(a)  Requirements  for  the  initial  issuance  of  an  Emergency  Education  Specialist 
Instruction  Permit  in  the  areas  of  Mild/Moderate  Disabilities,  Moderate/Severe 
Disabilities,  Deaf  and  Hard-of-Hearing,  Physical  and  Health  Impairments, 
Visual  Impairments,  and  Early  Childhood  Special  Education  include  all  of  the: 
following: 

(1)  The  applicant  and  the  employing  agency  must  meet  the  general 
requirements  specified  in  Section  80023.2. 

(2)  In  addition,  the  applicant  must  meet  (A),  (B),  (C)  or  (D)  below: 

(A)  must  posses  a  valid  California  teaching  credential  requiring  a 
baccalaureate  degree  and  a  professional  preparation  program,  including  student 
teaching,  or 

(B)  must  posses  or  show  eligibility  for  an  out-of-state  credential  in  special 
education  requiring  a  baccalaureate  degree,  and  have  completed  a  program 
approved  by  the  responsible  state  licensing  agency  at  a  regionally  accredited 
institution,  or 

. 

19

  

(C)  must  verify  a  minimum  of  three  years  of  successful  full-time  classroom 
experience,  or  the  equivalent  in  part-time  experience,  working  with  special 
education  students  in  a  public  school  or  a  state  certified  nonpublic, 
nonsectarian  school  or  a  state  certified  nonpublic,  nonsectarian  agency  with 
students  in  the  age  range  of  the  authorization  being  requested,  or 

(D)  must  verify  a  minimum  of  nine  semester  units  of  coursework  in  special 
education  or  in  a  combination  of  special  education  and  regular  education  that 
are  appropriate  to  a  special  education  or  regular  education  teaching  credential. 

(3)  The  applicant  must  provide  a  written  affirmation  of  his  or  her  intent  to 
complete  the  requirements  set  forth  in  Section  80026.6  during  the  period  of  the 
permit. 

(b)  To  reissue  an  Emergency  Specialist  Instruction  Permit  in  the  areas  of 
Mild/Moderate  Disabilities,  Moderate/Severe  Disabilities,  Deaf  and  Hard-of- 
Hearing,  Physical  and  Health  Impairments,  Visual  Impairments,  and  Early 
Childhood  Special  Education,  the  applicant  and  the  employing  agency  must 
meet  the  requirements  for  reissuance  of  emergency  permits  specified  in 
80026.6. 

(1)  The  applicant  who  completed  a  professional  preparation  program  as 
described  in  Section  80048.3(b)(2)  must  complete  at  least  six  semester  units  of 
coursework  toward  completion  of  the  requirements  described  in  Section 
80048.3(b)(4)  through  (8)  in  lieu  of  the  requirements  described  in 
80026.6(a)(5)(A). 

(2)  The  applicant  who  has  not  completed  the  subject  matter  knowledge 
requirement  specified  in  Section  80413(a)(3)  may,  for  the  first  reissuance  only, 
take  all  components  of  the  appropriate  subject  matter  examination  as  described 
in  Section  80071  in  lieu  of  six  semester  units  of  coursework  from  a  regionally 
accredited  college  or  university. 

(c)  Authorization:  An  Emergency  Education  Specialist  Instruction  Permit 
authorizes  the  same  service  as  the  Education  Specialist  Instruction  Credential 
in  the  authorized  field(s)  listed  on  the  permit. 

9. 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80026  provides: 

Submission  of  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  by  the 
employing  agency  shall  be  a  prerequisite  to  the  issuance  of  any  emergency 
permit  and/or  limited  assignment  permit  for  that  agency.  Charter  schools  as 

       

  

20 

defined  in  Education  Code  Section  47600  shall  be  exempt  from  submitting  a 
Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators.  The  Declaration  of  Need 
for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  by  an  employing  agency  shall  be  valid  for  no 
more  than  twelve  months,  and  shall  expire  on  the  June  30  following  its 
submission  to  the  Commission,  unless  the  employing  agency  has  an  approved 
Plan  to  Develop  Fully  Qualified  Educators  which  specifies  a  period  of  validity 
longer  than  twelve  months.  The  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified 
Educators  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Commission  on  a  form  to  be  provided  by 
the  Commission,  and  shall  include  all  of  the  following  information: 

(a)  Estimated  Need:  This  shall  include  the  title(s)  and  number  of  each  type  of 
emergency  permit  and  limited  assignment  permit  which  the  employing  agency 
estimates,  based  on  previous  year  actual  needs  and  projections  of  enrollment,  it 
will  need  during  the  year  covered  by  the  Declaration.  In  addition,  it  shall 
include  each  subject  to  be  listed  on  Emergency  Single  Subject  and  Limited 
Assignment  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permits  and  the  target  language  on 
Emergency  Multiple  Subject  or  Single  Subject  Teaching  Permits  with  a 
Bilingual,  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD) 
Emphasis  or  on  Emergency  BCLAD  Permits.  The  Declaration  of  Need  for 
Fully  Qualified  Educators  shall  be  revised,  when  the  number  of  emergency 
permits  and  limited  assignment  permits  needed  exceeds  the  estimate  by  ten 
percent,  by  the  governing  board  or  superintendent/administrator  of  the 
employing  agency,  as  specified  in  subsection  (e)  below. 

(b)  Efforts  to  Recruit  Certified  Personnel.  This  shall  include a  brief  description 
of  efforts  that  the  employing  agency  has  undertaken  to  locate  and  recruit 
individuals  who  hold  the  needed  credentials,  such  as  dated  copies  of  written 
announcements  of  its  vacancy  or  vacancies  which  were  mailed  to  college  or 
university  placement  centers. 

(c)  Efforts  to  Establish  Alternative  Training  Options.  The  Declaration  shall: 

(1)  identify  the  names  of  institutions  of  higher  education  co-sponsoring 
internships  or  other  certification  programs  with  the  employing  agency  or,  if  no 
such  programs  exist,  briefly  explain  why; 

(2)  if  the  employing  agency  participates  in  pre-internship  or  internship 
programs,  estimate  the  number  which  the  employing  agency  reasonably 
expects  to  employ  during  the  year  covered  by  the  Declaration;  and 

(3)  indicate  whether  the  employing  agency  has  considered  developing  a  "Plan 
to  Develop  Fully  Qualified  Educators"  in  cooperation  with  other  education 

21

  

agencies  in  the  region  pursuant  to  Section  80026.4,  or  if  not,  briefly  explain 
why. 

(d)  Stipulation  of  Insufficiency  of  Suitable  Applicants.  The  employing  agency 
shall  certify  that  there  is  an  insufficient  number  of  certificated  persons  who 
meet  the  employing  agency's  specified  employment  criteria  to  fill  necessary 
positions. 

(e)  Adoption  of  the  Declaration.  The  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified 
Educators  shall  be  adopted  by  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district,  or  by 
the  superintendent  of  a  county  office  of  education  or  by  the  administrator  of  a 
state  school  or  nonpublic,  nonsectarian  school  or  agency. 

(1)  A  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  by  a  school  district 
shall  be  adopted  by  the  governing  board  in  a  regularly-scheduled,  public 
meeting  of  the  board.  The  entire  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified 
Educators  shall  be  included  in  the  board  agenda,  and  shall  not  be  adopted  by 
the  board  as  part  of  a  consent  calendar. 

(2)  A  superintendent  of  a  county  office  or  the  administrator  of  a  state  school  or 
nonpublic,  nonsectarian  school  or  agency  shall  publicly  announce  his  or  her 
intent  to  adopt  a  Declaration  of  Need  for  Fully  Qualified  Educators  at  least  72 
hours  prior  to  adopting  the  Statement.  The  adopted  Statement  shall  be  signed 
by  the  superintendent  or  administrator. 

10. 

|The  Governing  Board  may  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service 

and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another  manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1996)  49  Cal.Rptr.2d  289,  41  Cal.App.4th  1571,  [rehearing  denied,  review  denied] 
and  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of  Goleta  Union  School  District 
(1982)  182  Cal.Rptr.  754,  132  Cal.App.3d  32.) 

11. 

In  the  course  of  reducing  or  discontinuing  a  particular  kind  of  service,  the 

Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services 
which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Moreland  Teachers 
Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  167  Cal.Rptr.  343,  and  Lewin  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977,  133  Cal.Rptr  385.) 

12. 

A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  statute  either  by 

determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the 
number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

22 

  

       

13. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
_  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local 
2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d 
831.) 

14.  —  Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

15. 

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
and  of  8.6  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Therefore,  cause  exists  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2006-2007. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  three  remaining  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2006-2007,  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation 
of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  Lees  3  KOOE 

  

Lard  bec- 

LEONARD  L:  SCOTT  ” 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

23

  

