BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PARLIER  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

REYNA  AVELINO,  GEETA  CHANDRA, 
IVAN  GARIBAY,  NELDA  RODRIGUEZ, 

    

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2006040285 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Robert  Walker,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Parlier,  California,  on  April  27,  2006. 

Linda  Bacon,  Legal  Counsel,  Fresno  County  Office  of  Education,  represented  the 
complainant,  Fernando  Elizondo,  Ph.D.,  Interim  Superintendent,  Parlier  Unified  School  District. 

.  Daniel  T.  McCloskey,  Attorney  at  Law,’  represented  the  respondents,  Reyna  Avelino, 

Geeta  Chandra,  Ivan  Garibay,  and  Nelda  Rodriguez. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents  —  Reyna  Avelino,  Geeta  Chandra,  Ivan  Garibay,  and  Nelda 

Rodriguez  —  are  certificated  district  employees.  - 

2. 

Not  later  than  March  15,  2006,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,”  the  superintendent  of  the  school  district  caused  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  and  respondents  to  be  notified  in  writing  that  it  was  recommended  that  respondents  be 
notified  that  the  district  would  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  notice 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to  respondents’ 
competency. 

  

'  Daniel  T.  McCloskey,  Attorney  at  Law,  750  East  Bullard,  Suite  101,  Fresno,  California  93710-5445. 

?  All  references  to  the  Code  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified.

3, 

A  notice  was  delivered  to  each  respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by 
depositing  the  notice  in  the  United  States  mail,  registered,  postage  prepaid,  and  addressed  to 
respondent’s  last  known  address. 

® 

4, 

The  notice  advised  each  respondent  of  the  following:  He  or  she  had a right  to  a 

hearing.  In  order  to  obtain  a  hearing,  he  or  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to 
the  person  sending  the  notice.  The  request  had  to  be  delivered  by  March  27,  2006,  which  was 
not  less  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served.  And  the  failure  to  request  a 
hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

- 

5. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 
there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  accusation  was  timely 
served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All  prehearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

6. 

The  governing  board  of  the  district  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 

kinds  of  services.  Within  the  meaning  of  Code  section  44955,  the  services  are  “particular  kinds 
of  services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
these  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

7. 

The  governing  board  of  the  district  determined  that,  because  particular  kinds  of 
services  are  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued,  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 
employees  in  the  district. 

8. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

@ 

services  does  not  relate  to  the  welfare  of  the  district  and  its  students. 

9, 

The  district  has  a  $3,700,000  short  fall  in  its  budget  and  is  engaging  in  deficit 
spending.  The  County  Office  of  Education  has  lent  money  to  the  district,  and  the  district  has 
devised  a  financial  recovery  program  that  will  require  a  number  of  years  of  reduced  spending  in 
order  to  be  successful.  It  is  found  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  district  and  its  students.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  is 
necessary  in  order  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

10,‘ 

The  district  is  retaining  William  Cazares  as  a  science  teacher.  Ms.  Chandra  also 

is  a  science  teacher,  and  she  contends  that  she  has  more  seniority  than  Mr.  Cazares  has. 
contention  is  correct,  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  prohibits  the  district  from  terminating 
her  services. 

If  her 

11. 

The  evidence,  however,  supports  a  finding  that  Mr.  Cazares  and  Ms.  Chandra 

both  began  rendering  paid  service  to  the  district  on  August  11,  2004,  and  that  the  district 
appropriately  applied  tie-breaking  criteria  in  deciding  to  retain  Mr.  Cazares  and  terminate  Ms. 
Chandra. 

12. 

Ms.  Chandra  testified  that  she  did  not  recall  seeing  Mr.  Cazares  the  first  two  or 

three  weeks  of  school  in  August  of  2004  and  that  she  understood  that  he  began  teaching  in 

@ 

 

  

  

  

Parlier  after  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  because  he  was  finishing  a  contract  to  teach 
elsewhere. 

13. 

On  August  10,  2004,  the  district  conducted  a  voluntary  orientation  for  new 
teachers.  Teachers  were  not  paid  for  attending.  August  11,  2004,  was  the  first  day  of  paid 
service,  and  it  was  a  day  of  in-service  training.  Mr.  Cazares  testified  that,  because  of  a  prior 
commitment,  he  missed  the  one  day  of  orientation  but  that  he  attended  the  second  day,  the  day  of 
in-service  training.  And  Zulema  Cano,  who  is  in  charge  of  human  resources  for  the  district, 
testified  that,  if  Mr.  Cazares  had  not  begun  the  year  on  August  11,  2004,  there  should  have  been 
an  absence  report  in  the  payroll  records.  She  testified,  further,  that  there  was  no  absence  report. 

14. 

It is  found  that  Mr.  Cazares  and  Ms.  Chandra  both  began  rendering  paid  service  to 

the  district  on  August  11,  2004. 

15. 

The  district is  not  retaining  any  employee  with  less  seniority  than  respondents 

have  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notice 

and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Within  the  terms  of  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  district  has  cause  to 

3. 

ORDER 

services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  district  may  give  notice  to  the  respondents  that  the  district  will  not  require  their 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  to  give  notices  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare 
of  the  schools  and  the  pupils. 

Mr.  Cazares  and  Ms.  Chandra  both  began  rendering  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
August  11,  2004,  and  the  district  appropriately  applied  tie-breaking  criteria  in  deciding  to  retain 
Mr.  Cazares  and  terminate  Ms,  Chandra. 

  
    

ROBERT  WALKER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

Dated:  May  3,  2006 

  

