BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
FALLBROOK  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
SAN  DIEGO  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  for  Lay-Off 
of  Certificated  Employees  against: 

OAH  No.  L2006030673 

ALANA  DE  JONG,  DAVID  HILL,  AND 
DANIEL  LODER, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Greer  D.  Knopf,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Fallbrook,  California  on  May  1,  2006. 

William  Wood  Merrill,  Best,  Best  &  Krieger,  attorneys  at  law,  appeared  and 

represented  the  Fallbrook  Union  High  School  District. 

Fern  Steiner,  Tosdal,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax,  attorneys  at  law,  appeared  and 

represented  respondents  Alana  De  Jong,  David  Hill,  and  Daniel  Loder,  who  were also 
present  at  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  1,  2006. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Michael  Millerick  (“Millerick”),  Director  of  Human  Resources  of  the 

Fallbrook  Union  High  School  District,  made  and  filed  the  accusations  dated  March  30,  2006 
in  his  official  capacity  as  Director  of  Human  Resources  of  the  Fallbrook  Union  High  School 
District  (“the  District”).  The  accusations  were  filed  against  respondents  Alana  De  Jong, 
David  Hill,  and  Daniel  Loder. 

2. 

3. 

Respondents  Alana  De  Jong,  David  Hill,  and  Daniel  Loder  (“respondents”)  are 

all  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

On  February  13,  2006,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  Thomas  R.  Anthony,  Superintendent  of  the  District  (“the  Superintendent”)  notified 

1 

   

  

the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (“the  Board”)  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 
Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  Superintendent 
recommended  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  of  a  total  of  14.8  full  time 
equivalents  (“FTE”),  as  follows: 

@& 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

     

Career  Technical  Education 
English 
Math 
Physical  Education 
Science 
Social  Studies 
Visual  &  Performing  Arts 
World  Language 

2.2  FTE’s 
5.0FTE’s 
2.6  FTE’s 
1.2  FTE’s 
0.4  FTE’s 
1.8  FTE’s 
0.6  FTE’s 
1.0  FTE’s 

4. 

On  February  27,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  a  resolution  accepting  the 

Superintendent’s  recommendations  for  the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services 
provided  by  the  District  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  The  Board  directed  the 
Superintendent  to  determine  which  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2006- 
2007  school  year  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Board 

_  further  directed  the  Superintendent  to  take  all  steps  necessary  under  the  law  to  layoff  those 

certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

@ 

5, 

Prior  to  March  15,  2003,  a  written  notice  of  termination  (“written  notice”)  was 

delivered  to  each  respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by  depositing  the  notice  of 
termination  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the 
respondent’s  last  known  address.  The  written  notice  notified  respondents  that  his  or  her 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  2006-2007  school  year.  The  written  notice 
specifically  stated  that  each  of  the  respondents’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

Each  written  notice  advised  respondents  they  each  had a  right  to  a  hearing,  each 

respondent  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice 
of  termination  within  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served,  and  the  failure  to 
request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing.  Each  respondent 
timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not 
reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  ensuing  year. 

6. 

Subsequently,  on  March  30,  2006,  the  Superintendent  filed  and  timely  served 

on  behalf  of  the  District  the  accusation  herein  for  each  of  the  respondents.  Each  of  the 
respondents  herein  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  were  met. 

 

  

  

  
  

7. 

The  Board’s  February  27,  2006  resolution  to  reduce  services  for  the  ensuing 

school  year  reduced  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

  

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

  

Career  Technical  Education 
English 
Math 
Physical  Education 
Science 
Social  Studies 
Visual  &  Performing  Arts 
World  Language 

2.2  FTE’s 
5.0FTE’s 
2.6  FTE’s 
1.2  FTE’s 
0.4  FTE’s 
1.8  FTE’s 
0.6  FTE’s 
1.0  FTE’s 

The  reductions  adopted  by  the  Board’s  resolution  on  February  27,  2006  totaled  14.8  FTE 
positions. 

8. 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  and  reasonable  exercise  of  discretion.  The  Board’s  action  was  taken 
after  consideration  of  necessary  cuts  in  the  2006-2007  District  budget  for  the  ensuing  school 
year.  The  Board’s  action  to  reduce  services  is  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion  to  address 
the  need  for  budget  cuts  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees 
of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

10. 

Subsequent  to  the  action  the  Board  took  on  February  27,  2006  to  reduce 

services  by  14.8  FTE  positions,  the  District  continued  to  evaluate  personnel  needs  in  the 
District.  Since  the  Board’s  action,  after  taking  into  consideration  upcoming  attrition, 
resignations,  transfers,  and  retirements,  the  District  has  now  determined  it  can  meet  its  fiscal 
needs  by  reducing  services  by  a  total  of  3.0  FTE  positions  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  To 
accomplish  this  reduction  of  services,  the  District  needs  to  give  final  notices  of  termination 
to  the  three  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12. 

|  Two  other  employees  that  teach  world  languages  have  the  same  first  day  of 
paid  service  with  the  District  as  respondent  Daniel  Loder  and  they  are  being  retained  by  the 
District.  Between  these  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 
same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of the 
District  and  the  students.  The  specific  criteria  used  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  was 

3 

  

 

  

based  on  the  tie-breaking  criteria  adopted  by  the  Board  on  March  13,  2006.  The  criteria  were 
fairly  applied  to  rank  those  employees  hired  on  the  same  date.  Under  these  criteria,  the 
District  properly  retained  Carole  Vivona  and  Esther  Mireles  since  they  both  have  clear  single 
subject  credentials  in  language  whereas  respondent  only  holds  a  preliminary  single  subject 
credential.  The  criteria  were  fairly  applied  to  rank  these  employees  hired  on  the  same  date. 
Therefore,  under  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  respondent  Loder  was  properly  given  notice  that 
his  services  would  no  longer  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

| 

@ 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Fallbrook  Union  High  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the  accusations  herein.  Cause  exists  for  the  Board  to  give 
Respondents  notice  before  May  15,  2006,  that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the 
District  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  respondents  are  sustained  and  notice  shall  be  given  to 

respondents  Alana  De  Jong,  Daniel  Loder,  and  David  Hill  before  May  15,  2006  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

DATED:  4 _~  4-pL 

     R  D.  KNOPF 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  
 

  

  

  

