BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
OF  THE  | 
GUADALUPE  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

Sandra  L.  Rosas  and  Angela  Soares, 

IN  THE  MATTER  OF  THE  ACCUSATIONS _ ) 
) 
AGAINST: 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

Respondents. 

  

| 

OAH  NO.  L2006040022 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2006,  at  the  offices  of  the  Guadalupe 
Union  School  District,  Guadalupe,  California. 

Mary  Dowell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Guadalupe  Union  School  District. 

Alexis  Ridenour,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

SUMMARY 

The  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  of  the  Guadalupe  Union  School  District  (District) 

decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated 
personnel  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related 
to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  teachers  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be 
reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking  ties  between  employees  with 
the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code 
requirements. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Hugo  E.  Lara,  the  District  Superintendent  of  the  District,  filed  the  Accusations 

in  his  official  capacity. 

. 

 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

On  or  about  March  2,  2006,  Superintendent  Lara  recommended  that  the Board 

give  notice  of  non-reemployment  to  certain  certificated  employees.  Mr.  Lara  also 
recommended  that  the  Board  adopt a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  Specifically,  Mr.  Lara  recommended  the  reduction 
and/or  elimination  of  3  full-time-equivalency  (FTE)  certificated  employees  as  follows: 

Elementary  Classroom  Teaching  Services 

3.0  FTE 

4, 

On  March  9,  2006,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2005-2006-16,  to 

discontinue  or  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3.  The 
Board  further  determined  that  based  on  the  discontinuance  or  reduction  of  services,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present 
school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions.  The  Board  also 
directed  the  Interim  Superintendent  to  notify  the  employees  affected  by  the  Board’s 
resolution. 

5. 

On  March  10,  2006,  Mr.  Lara  notified  certificated  employees,  including 

Respondents,  in  writing  that  it  had  been  recommended  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  next  school  year.  The  mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification.  Respondents 
. 
made  timely  requests  for  hearing. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  Respondent. 

Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  filed  by  all  of  the  employees  who  appeared  for 

the  hearing.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in 

Factual  Finding  3,  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

9, 

The  Board  considered  attrition,  including  resignations,  retirements  and 

requests  for  leave,  in  determining  the  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  employees. 

10. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  current  assignments  and 
locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations. 

11. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12.  The  District  has  projected  a  $250,000  budget  deficit  for  the  ensuing  school  year 

based  on  declining  enrollment  and  reduction  in  certain  federal  funds.  As  a  result,  the  District 
plans  to  increase  class  sizes.  Despite  the  increased  class  sizes,  the  District  will  remain  in 
compliance  with  all  contracts,  and  state  and  federal  laws  and  regulations. 

  

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l, 

All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  were  met.  Therefore,  jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all 
Respondents. 

2. 

Cause  was  established  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce 

the  number  of  certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  identified  services  were 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decisions  relate  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s 
schools  and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 

3. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Sandra  L.  Rosas  and  Angela  Soares  that  their 

services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

Dated:  Meg  4, 

Jool 

A 

boke  Fle 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

