BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
SOUTH  WHITTIER  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

 
n
e
i
r
e
e
r
n
m
e
c
m
e
i
s
n
a
 
c
o
J

s
e

 s
s
r
e
e
s

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

JEAN  FOSTER,  MARK  FUENTES, 
KIMBERLY  ISRAELSON,  REBECCA 
MILLER,  LAURA  RIEGER,  KATHERYN 
RUSK,  SALVADOR  SARMIENTO, 
MARINA  SIMENTAL-GUTIERREZ, 
MARTHA  TOVAR,  LINDA  TRUONG, 
and  LINDSEY  WHITE, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  L2006030441 

* 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  21,  2006,  in Whittier. 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Rudd  &  Romo,  represented 

Complainant,  who  was  also  present. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Esq.,  Reich,  Adell,  Crost  &  Cvitan,  represented  Respondents,  except 
for  Salvador  Sarmiento.  Each  Respondent  was  present,  except  for  Mr.  Sarmiento  and  Laura 
Rieger. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  during  the  hearing.  The  record  was  left 

open  for  the  parties  to  make  their  closing  arguments  by  way  of  briefs,  which  were  timely 
received  and  marked  as  follows:  Complainant’s,  exhibit  28;  Respondents’  exhibit  C.  The 
record  was  closed  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  upon  receipt  of  the  closing  briefs. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  &  Jurisdiction 

1. 

Complainant  Lilia  B.  Dickson  is  the  Associate  Superintendent,  Administrative 
Services,  of  the  South  Whittier  School  District  (District),  and  she  signed  the  Accusations  in 
that  official  capacity  and  as  the  designee  of  the District’s  Superintendent,  Richard  L.  Graves 
(Superintendent). 

Respondents  were  at  all  times  mentioned  certificated  District  employees. 

2. 

  

  

3. 

On  March  7,  2006,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  05-06-09,  which  proposed  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  encompassing  10.00  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  by  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

4. 

By  no  later  than  March  15,  2006,  the  District’s  Superintendent  recommended 
to  the  Board  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the 
end  of  the  current  school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

5. 

By  no  later  than  March  15,  2006,  and  after  notification  to  the  Board, 

Respondents  were  given  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended,  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  next  school  year. 

6. 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

terminating  their  services  next  school  year,  except  for  Salvador  Sarmiento.  Each  Respondent 
was  thereafter  served  with  an  Accusation.  Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense, 
which  requested  the  instant  hearing,  except  for  Katheryn  Rusk  and  Mr.  Sarmiento.' 

After  adoption  of  Resolution  No.  05-06-09,  the  Board  considered  all  known 

7. 
assured  attrition. 

The  District’s  Layoff Decision 

8. 

Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-09  specifically  provides  for  the  reduction  or 

elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Service 

  

Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  Positions 

  

K-6  Classroom  Teaching  Services 
7/8  Grade  Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
7/8  Grade  English/Language  Arts  Teaching  Services 

8.0  FTE 
0.5  FTE 
1.5  FTE 

Total  FTE  Reduction 

10.0  FTE 

9, 

Pursuant  to  Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-09,  the  District  identified  the  specific 

need  to  hire  and  retain  only  those  elementary  and  middle  school  teachers  assigned  to  teach 
core  academic  subjects  who  are  rated  as  “highly  qualified”  within  the  meaning  of  the  No 
Child  Left  Behind  Act  of  2001,  and  on  that  basis,  the  District  would  deviate  from  the  usual 
order  of  terminating  certificated  employees  on  the  basis  of  seniority. 

  

Although  Ms.  Rusk  filed  her  Notice  of  Defense  three  days  late,  Complainant  did  not  object  to  her  participating  as 

' 
a  Respondent  at  the  hearing.  However,  by  failing  to  request  a  hearing  and/or  submit  a  notice  of  defense,  Mr.  Sar- 
miento  waived  his  right  to  a  hearing,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (b).

10. 

Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-10  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to  determine 
the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same 
date.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  used  in  this  matter  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  amongst 
certificated  personnel.  The  validity  or-application  of  the  tie-breaking  process  is  not  subject 
to  dispute  in  this  matter,  and  otherwise  was  proven  to  be  valid  and  fairly  applied. 

11. 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  10.0  FTE  positions  will  not  reduce  services 

below  mandated  levels. 

12. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  containing  employees’  seniority  dates, 

current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials  and  authorizations.  The  information  on  the 
Seniority  List  is  accurate. 

13. 

The  District  used  that  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 

"bumping"  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  other 
credentials  entitling  them  to  "bump"  other  employees  or  be  “skipped.”  In  determining  who 
would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  each  kind  of  particular  service  reduced,  the  District  counted 
the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on 
incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

14. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described  particular 

~  kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion. 

15. 

|  The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds 

of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

16.  | No  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  the  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

Respondent  Rusk 

17. 

Katheryn  Rusk  is  a  middle  school  teacher  for  the  District.  Her  seniority  date  is 

September  1,  2004,  and  she  is  a  probationary  employee.  She  performs  the  .50  FTE  position 
in  7/8  Grade  Social  Studies  that  is  subject  to  elimination/reduction  by  Board  Resolution  No. 
05-06-09.  As  a  probationary  employee,  Ms.  Rusk  is  subject  to  layoff  before  any  similarly 
competent  and  credentialed  permanent  employee,  and  she  is  the  least  senior  certificated 
employee  performing  this  assignment.”  She  is  therefore  properly  subject  to  layoff. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  ter- 
.  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 

.  while  any  probationary  employee . . 

  

2 
minated  . 
certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 

. 

 

Respondents  Fuentes,  Sarmiento,  Israelson  and  White 

18. 

In  order  for  the  District  to  receive  Title  I  funds  from  the  federal  government 

during  the  2006-2007  school  year,  all  teachers  of  core  academic  subjects  must  rate  as  “highly 
qualified”  within  the  meaning  of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  of  2001  (NCLB).  To  be  rated 
as  “highly  qualified,”  a  teacher  must  possess  a  bachelor’s  degree,  a  teaching  credential,  and 
demonstrate  subject  matter  competence  by  passing  an  examination. 

19. 

_  Anelementary  school  teacher  who  does  not  rate  as  “highly  qualified”  within 

the  meaning  of  the  NCLB  cannot  teach  an  elementary  school  class  at  the  District  next  school 
year.  Thus,  the  District  will  not  have  available  any  assignments  next  school  year  for 
-  elementary  school  teachers  who  do  not  rate  as  “highly  qualified”  under  the  NCLB. 

20. 

Beginning  at  least  in  September  2002,  and  continuing  thereafter,  the  District 

notified  its  certificated  personnel  of  the  requirement  for  them  to  become  rated  as  “highly 
qualified”  for  purposes  of  the  NCLB.  The  District  also  provided  information  on  how  to 
become  so  rated,  including  preparation  for  the  examinations  that  were  part  of  the  process. 

21. 

|  Respondent  Sarmiento.  Salvador  Sarmiento  is  an  elementary  school  teacher 

with  the  District.  He  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  12,  1994,  which  makes  him  more 
senior  than  others  who  are  being  retained  to  perform  K-6  Classroom  duties.  He  was 
designated  for  layoff  because  he  does  not  meet  the  District’s  specific  need  of  being  rated  as 
“highly  qualified”  under  the  NCLB.  The  less  senior  certificated  employees  being  retained 
are  so  rated.  He  is  properly  subject  to  layoff  for  that  reason.” 

22. 

Respondent  Fuentes.  Mark  Fuentes  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  the 
District.  He  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  9,  1996,  which  makes  him  more  senior  than 
others  who  are  being  retained  to  perform  K-6  Classroom  duties.  Mr.  Fuentes  was  also 
designated  for  layoff,  because  he  does  not  meet  the  District’s  specific  need  of  being  rated  as 
“highly  qualified”  under  the  NCLB.  The  less  senior  certificated  employees  being  retained 
are  so  rated.  He  is  properly  subject  to  layoff  for  that  reason." 

23. 

Mr.  Fuentes  is  not  rated  as  “highly  qualified”  because  he  has  not  yet 

demonstrated  subject  matter  competence,  in  that  he  has  only  passed  two  of  the  three 
subdivisions  of  the  California  Subject  Examinations  for  Teachers  (CSET).  He  has  failed  the 
third  subdivision  of  the  CSET  three  times.  Mr.  Fuentes  intends  to  take  the  third  subdivision 
of  the  CSET  examination  on  May  20,  2006.  The  scores  of  that  examination  will  be  reported 
June  19,  2006.  If  he  fails  the  third  subdivision  at  that  time,  he  intends  to  take  that 
examination  again  on  July  22,  2006.  The  scores  of  that  examination  will  be  reported  on 
August  21,  2006.  If  Mr.  Fuentes  passes  the  third  subdivision  of  the  CSET  examination,  he 
would  be  able  to  demonstrate  subject  matter  competence  and  thus  would  be  rated  as  “highly 

  

3 

See  Legal  Conclusion  5. 

“See  Legal  Conclusion  5.

  

qualified”  within  the  meaning  of  the  NCLB.  However,  his  scores  from  the  two  upcoming 
examinations  will  be  reported  well  after  the  May  15th  deadline  for  the  District  to  render  a 
final  decision  in  this  matter. 

_ 

24. 

Respondents  Israelson  and  White.  Kimberly  Israelson  and  Lindsey  White  are 
elementary  school  teachers  with  the  District,  who  are  both  rated  as  “highly  qualified”  within 
the  meaning  of  the  NCLB.  They  were  given  notice  of  layoff  as  a  matter  of  precaution,  in  that 
they  would  be  subject  to  layoff  only  if  Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento  were  retained  for 
the  next  school  year.  The  parties  agree  that  if  Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento  are 
terminated  from  employment  as a  result  of  this  proceeding,  Respondents  Israelson  and  White 
would  not  be  subject  to  layoff.  Therefore,  Respondents  Israelson  and  White  are  not  subject 
to  layoff.  ° 

Respondent  Tovar 

25. 

|  Martha  Tovar  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  for  the  District  and  is  rated  as 
“highly  qualified”  within  the  meaning  of  the  NCLB.  She  began  working  for  the  District  on 
September  8,  1997,  under  an  emergency  credential.  She  continued  working  for  the  District 
under  emergency  permits  and  a  pre-intern  certificate  through  the  2002-2003  school  year. 
She  entered  a  university  internship  program  during  the  2003-2004  school  year,  and  she 
worked  for  the  District  under  a  university  internship  credential  through  the  2004-2005  school 
year.  Ms.  Tovar  presented  her  professional  clear  credential  to  the  District  on  March  6,  2006. 
Ms.  Tovar is  currently  designated  by  the  District  as  a  probationary  employee,  a  status  of 
which  she  does  not  dispute. 

: 

26. 

Ms.  Tovar  performs  one  of  the  K-6  Classroom  positions  that  is  subject  to 

elimination  and/or  reduction  by  Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-09.  After  deciding  to  layoff 
Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento,  the  District  next  designated  Ms.  Tovar  for  layoff 
because  she is  a  probationary  employee.’  Ms.  Tovar  was  not  entitled  to  permanent 
classification  while  she  served  the  District  under  the  university  internship  credential.  Ms. 
Tovar  could  not  be  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  until  next  school  year,  at  the  earliest, 
because  she  is  required  to  serve  one  additional  complete  school  year  with  the  District  after 
completing  the  internship  program.®  Her  current  classification  as  a  probationary  employee  is 
correct  and  she  is  therefore  properly  subject  to  layoff. 

  

> 

See  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c). 

°  Respondent  Israelson  also  presented  evidence  and  legal  authority  supporting  her  argument  that  the  District’s  as- 
signed  seniority  date  for  her  of  September  4,  2002,  should  be  modified  to  September  4,  2001,  or  in  the  alternative,  to 
October  16,  2001.  In  light  of  the  fact  that  Ms.  Israelson is  not  subject  to  layoff in  this  matter  due  to  the  terminations 
of  Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento,  a  resolution  of  her  seniority  date  argument  is  unnecessary.  (See  Legal  Con- 
clusion  5C,) 

7 

8 

See  footnote  2  above. 

Education  Code  section  44466,

Respondents  Truong  and  Rieger 

27. 

Respondent  Truong.  Linda  Truong  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  for  the 

District.  Her  seniority  date  is  September  30,  2002.  After  deciding  to  terminate  Respondents 
Fuentes,  Sarmiento  and  Tovar,  for  the  reasons  explained  above,  Ms.  Truong  was  determined 
by  the  District  to  be  the  least  senior  certificated  permanent  employee  performing  the  K-6 
Classroom  duties  subject  to  elimination/reduction  by  Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-09.  Thus 
she  is  properly  subject  to  layoff. 

28. 

Respondent  Rieger.  Laura  Rieger  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  for  the 

District.  Her  seniority  date  is  September  4,  2002,  which  places  her  ina  tie  for  seniority  with 
various  other  Respondents.  After  applying  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  the  District  determined 
that  Ms.  Rieger  was  the  next  least  senior  certificated  permanent  employee  performing  the  K- 
6  Classroom  duties  subject  to  elimination/reduction  by  Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-09.  The 
application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  Ms.  Rieger  was  correct  and  she  is  properly  subject 
to  layoff. 

Respondents  Simental-Gutierrez,  Miller  and  Foster 

29. 

Respondent  Foster.  The  District  designated  Jean  Foster  as  having  a  seniority 
date  of  September  4,  2002,  which  was  the  date  she  was  first  assigned  by  the  District  to  be  a 
.  probationary  employee.  However,  Ms.  Foster  began  working  for  the  District  on  September 
12,  2001,  as  an  itinerate  substitute  teacher.  She  did  so  for  approximately  one  month.  On 
October  3,  2001,  and  through  the  remainder  of  the  2001-2002  school  year,  Ms.  Foster 
worked  as  a  full-time  temporary  employee  teaching  a  fourth  grade  class.  She  worked  as  a 
probationary  employee  during  the  2002-2003  and  2003-2004  school  years.  Although  Ms. 
Foster  was  issued a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  on  September  12,  2001,  it  was 
not  established  when  she  presented  that  credential  to  the  District.”  Ms.  Foster  was  later 
issued  a  multiple  subject  professional  clear  credential  on  October  7,  2002. 

30. 

|  Respondent  Miller.  The  District  designated  Rebecca  Miller  as  having  a 

seniority  date  of  September  4,  2002,  which  was  the  date  she  was  first  assigned  by  the  District 
to  be  a  probationary  employee.  However,  Ms.  Miller  began  working  for  the  District  during 
the  2000-2001  school  year  as  a  full-time  itinerate  substitute  teacher,  in  which  she  was  given 
many  different  short-term  assignments.  During  the  2001-2002  school  year,  she  was  still 
designated  as  a  full-time  itinerate  substitute  teacher,  although  she  was  assigned  to  teach  the 
same  sixth  grade  class  the  entire  school  year.  She  did  not  replace  a  teacher  that  year;  she  was 
given  the  assignment  to  teach  a  new  class  developed  for  the  sixth  grade  due  to  the  student 
enrollment  that  school  year.  Ms.  Foster  thereafter  worked  as  a  probationary  employee  during 

  

°  None  of  these  three  Respondents  testified  to  the  specific  date  that  they  presented  their  credentials  to  the  District. 
The  District’s  various  seniority  lists  and  charts  are  not  helpful  because  it  is  clear  that  the  dates  listed  on  those  reflect 
the  issuance  dates  of  the  credentials  (relevant  to  the  tie-breaking  criteria)  and  not  the  date  the  credentials  were  first 
presented  to  the  District.  For  example,  it  is  clear  that  Ms.  Tovar  worked  many  years  on  an  emergency  permit  and 
internship  certificate.  Yet  the  District’s  seniority  lists  and  charts  only  show  the  date  that  her  clear  credential  was 
later  issued  (May  10,  2005),  and  not  the  date  it  was  presented  to  the  District  (March  6,  2006). 

  

 

the  2002-2003  and  2003-2004  school  years.  Ms.  Miller  worked  during  the  2000-2001  and 
2001-2002  school  years  under  an  emergency  credential.  She  was  issued  a  multiple  subject 
professional  clear  credential  on  October  5,  2002. 

31. 

Respondent  Simental-Gutierrez.  The  District  designated  Marina  Simental- 

Gutierrez  as  having  a  seniority  date  of  September  4,  2002,  which  was  the  date  she  was  first 
assigned  by  the  District  to  be  a  probationary  employee.  However,  Ms.  Simental-Gutierrez 
began  working  for  the  District  on  September  4,  2001,  as  an  itinerate  substitute  teacher.  She 
replaced  an  elementary  school  teacher  who  was  out  on  a  leave  of  absence.  Ms.  Simental- 
Gutierrez  remained  in  that  classroom  until  February  of  2002,  when  the  other  teacher  came 
back  from  leave.  Ms.  Simental-Gutierrez  was  given  various  assignments  for  two  weeks,  but 
returned  to  the  elementary  classroom  where  she  started  the  school  year  when  the  other 
teacher  went  back  on  leave.  Ms.  Simental-Gutierrez  remained  in  that  classroom  for  the  rest 
of  the  school  year.  She  worked  as  a  probationary  employee  during  the  2002-2003  and  2003- 
2004  school  years.  Although  Ms.  Simental-Gutierrez  was  issued  a  preliminary  multiple 
subject  credential  on  August  16,  2001,  it  was  not  established  when  she  presented  that 
credential  to  the  District. 

32. 

By a letter  dated  December  16,  2005,  the  District  advised  Ms.  Miller,  Ms. 

Foster  and  Ms.  Simental-Gutierrez  that  it  had  taken  the  position  that  their  seniority  date  was 
September  4,  2002.  The  letter  requested  those  Respondents  to  respond  in  writing  whether 
they  agreed  or  disagreed.  These  three  Respondents  responded  to  the  District  in  writing  that 
they  agreed  with  the  stated  seniority  date.  Their  responses  to  the  letter  do  not  legally 
determine  or  control  those  Respondents’  seniority  dates.'° 

33. 

The  District  did  not  establish  a  factual  basis  for  the  Respondents  to  be 

estopped  from  asserting  a  different  seniority  date.'’  Respondents  were  not  told  in  the  letter 
that  this  information  would  be  used  in  an  upcoming  layoff  proceeding;  thus  they  were  not 
apprised  of  the  factual  context  under  which  they  were  agreeing  with  the  stated  seniority  date. 
It  was  not  established  that  Respondents  intended  their  responses  to  be  relied  upon  by  the 
District.  In  fact,  the  letter  strictly  defined  the  meaning  of  the  stated  seniority  date,  such  that 
the  Respondents  were  essentially  directed  to  arrive  at  a  particular  conclusion  regarding  their 
seniority  date.  The  District  was  not  ignorant  of  the  true  facts,  in  that  it  always  had  at  its 
disposal  the  same  information  as  testified  to  by  the  Respondents  at  the  hearing.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  record  to  suggest  that  the  District  relied  on  Respondents’  responses  to  the 
letter,  as  opposed  to  it  simply  making  a  legal  conclusion  of  their  seniority  date  regardless  of 

  

Statutory  provisions  regarding  employment  classifications  for  certificated  personnel  may  not  be  waived,  and  any 

1 
agreement,  express  or  implied,  made  by  an  employee  to  waive  them  is  null  and  void.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44924;  Fine  v. 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070.) 

Equitable  estoppel  applies  where  (1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  is  apprised  of  the  facts;  (2)  he  or  she  must  intend 
1! 
that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act  that  the  party  asserting  the  estoppel  has  the  right  to  believe  it  was 
so  intended;  (3)  the  other  party  must  be  ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  facts,  and  (4)  the  party  invoking  estoppel  must 
rely  on  the  conduct  to  its  injury.  (Crumpler  v.  Board  of Administration  (1973)  32  Cal.App.3d  567,  581.)

what  these  Respondents  would  have  otherwise  asserted.  Based  on  the  District’s 
precautionary  notices  sent  to  other  Respondents,  it  is  assumed  that  the  District  was  not 
relying  on  any  contrary  position  taken  by  any  Respondent  in  this  matter.  Moreover, 
Respondents  cannot  be  expected  to  know  all  the  nuances  of  the  complex  legal  and  factual 
issues  intertwined  with  the  issues  of  seniority,  status  as  temporary  employees,  and  the  legal 
significance  of  the  dates  in  which  their  credentials  were  issued,  registered  and  presented,” 

34. 

Respondents  Foster,  Simental-Gutierrez  and  Miller  are  not  entitled  to  an 
earlier seniority  date  than  that  assigned  by  the  District,  and  they  are  properly  subject  to 
layoff.' 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1-7.) 

2. 

The  party  asserting  a  claim  or  making  charges  in  an  administrative  hearing 
generally  has  the  burden  of  proof.  (Brown  v.  City  of Los  Angeles  (2002)  102  Cal.App.4th 
155.)  For  example,  in  administrative  hearings  dealing  with  personnel  matters,  the  burden  of 
proof  is  ordinarily  on  the  agency  prosecuting  the  charges.  (Parker  v.  City  of Fountain  Valley 
(1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113.)  In  personnel  matters  concerning  the  dismissal  of  a  teacher 
for  cause,  the  burden  of  proof  is  similarly  on  the  discharging  school  district.  (Gardner  v. 
Commission  on  Prof.  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035.)  As  no  other  law  or  statute 
requires  otherwise,  the  standard  of  proof  in  this  case  requires  proof  to  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence.  (Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  Thus,  in  this  case,  the  Complainant  has  the  burden  of 
establishing  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  cause  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  given  notice  of  this  proceeding. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  permits  a  school  district  to 

deviate  from  the  order  of  seniority  in  teacher  layoffs  when  “the  district  demonstrates  a 
.  and  that  the 
specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study  .. 
employee  [who  is  tetained]  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course 
or  course  of  study  ...  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  (See  also,  Poppers 
v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara 
Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School 
District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.). 

  

Yn  addition,  the  District’s  contention  is  not  persuasive  that  Respondents’  ability  to  challenge  their  seniority  date  is 

2 
precluded  by  an  unstated  statute  of  limitations.  The  District’s  other  contention  is  also  unpersuasive  that  Respon- 
dents’  responses  to  the  December  2005  letter  are  subject  to  laches  a  mere  five  months  later,  and  no  prejudice  was 
shown. 

8 

See  Legal  Conclusion  6.

4. 

A  school  district  is  not  required  to  account  for  circumstances  that  occur  after 

March  15th  when  implementing  layoff  decisions.  (Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  62 
Cal.App.3d  977,  982.)  For  example,  a  school  district  need  not  consider  credentials  obtained 
after  that  deadline  for  purposes  of  its  layoff  decisions.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers 
Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  815.) 

5A. 

Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento  are  properly  subject  to  layoff  because  the 

District  established  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  a  specific  need  for  personnel 
teaching  elementary  classes  to  be  rated  as  “highly  qualified”  within  the  meaning  of  the 
NCLB  and  these  two  Respondents  do  not  possess  the  training  and  experience  necessary  to 
teach  the  subject  courses.  Failure  to  abide  by  the  rules  and  requirements  of  the  NCLB  would 
result  in  the  District  losing  that  funding.  The  District  has  no  position  available  for  an 
elementary  school  teacher  who  is  not  “highly  qualified.”  The  less  senior  certificated 
employees  being  retained  are  rated  as  “highly  qualified.”  Thus,  the  District  properly  skipped 
over  less  senior  certificated  employees  and  designated  Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento 
for  layoff.  (Factual  Findings  1-23.) 

5B. 

The  fact  that  Mr.  Fuentes  may  pass  the  required  examination  to  become 
“highly  qualified”  under  the  NCLB  after  the  May  15th  deadline  for  the  finality  of  this 
process  is  of  no  consequence.  His  situation  is  similar  to  that  of  an  employee  who  has  been 
issued  a  credential  but  has  failed  to  file  it  with  his  employing  school  district  before  the  March 
15th  deadline.  The  case  of  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  clearly  holds  that  no 
change  in  circumstances  after-the-fact  need  be  considered.  Otherwise,  if  Mr.  Fuentes  fails  to 
pass  the  requisite  examination  and  become  rated  as  “highly  qualified”  before  next  school 
year,  the  District  would  be  in  the  untenable  position  of  having  to  retain  him,  though  he  could 
not  teach  an  elementary  school  class,  yet  be  forced  to  layoff  either  Ms.  White  or  Israelson, 
who  are  both  rated  as  “highly  qualified”  and  thus  would  be  able  to  teach  elementary  classes 
next  year.  This  is  exactly  the  type  of  situation  that  falls  within  the  “skipping”  provision  of 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1). 

5C. 

Because  Respondents  Fuentes  and  Sarmiento  are  properly  subject  to  layoff, 

the  precaution  of  noticing  Respondents  White  and  Israelson  no  longer  exists  and  the 
Accusations  against  them  should  be  dismissed.  (Factual  Findings  1-24.) 

6A. 

According  to  Education  Code  section  44917,  when  a  person  is  employed  for 
one  complete  school  year  as  a  temporary  employee,  and  reemployed  the  following  school 
year  as  a  probationary  employee,  “the  previous  year’s  employment  as  a  temporary  employee 
shall  be  deemed  one  year’s  employment  as  a  probationary  employee  for  purposes  of 
acquiring  permanent  status.”  Likewise,  according  to  Education  Code  section  44918,  ifa 
substitute  or  temporary  employee  serves  during  one  school  year  for  at  least  75%  of  the  total 
number  of  school  days  within  that  year,  that  employee  “shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a 
complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee 
for  the  following  school  year.”  The  fact  that  neither  of  these  two  Education  Code  sections 
refers  to  seniority  for  purposes  of  layoff  proceedings  does  not  mean  that  they  cannot  be 
applied  to  determining  a  teacher’s  seniority  for  such  purposes.  In  fact,  many,  if  not  most,  of

the  pertinent  Education  Code  provisions  regarding  employment  classification  are  silent  on 
their  applicability  to  the  layoff  provisions.  The  District’s  citation  to  Education  Code  section 
44914  does  not  appear  to  be  applicable.  That  provision  seems  to  apply  to  other  situations, 
e.g.  where  a  substitute  teacher  becomes  probationary  in  the  same  school  year.  In  any  event, 
the  use  of  the  word  “shall”  in  both  sections  44917  and  44918  suggest  the  operation  of  those 
statutes  is  mandatory,  as  opposed  to  the  discretionary  wording  of  section  44914. 

6B. 

However,  service  by  a  person  under  a  provisional  credential  shall  not  be 

included  in  computing  the  service  required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of  or  eligibility  to 
classification  as  a  permanent  employee.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44911.)  “Time  spent  teaching  under 
an  emergency  teaching  credential  may  not  be  counted  in  computing  an  employee’s  progress 
toward  permanent  status,  unless  the  employee  is  credentialed  in  another  state  and 
demonstrates  adequate  basic  skills  proficiency  pending  successful  completion  of  the... 
CBEST.”  (Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  95  Cal.App.4th  1026,  1028.) 
A  teacher  has  the  burden  of  recording  her  credentials  with  her  local  county  office  of 
It  is  the  date  that  she 
education  and  presenting  the  same  to  her  employing  school  district. 
files  her  credential  with  the  employing  school  district  that  controls  for  purposes  of  layoff 
decisions.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  814.) 
Moreover,  a  school  district’s  initial  classification  of  a  provisionally  credentialed  employee, 
i.e.  one  teaching  under  an  emergency  credential,  need  not  be  retroactively  changed  when  that 
teacher  later  obtains a  full  credential.  (Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (2004) 
116  Cal.App.4th  1070,  1078.) 

6C. 

In  this  case,  Respondents  Foster,  Miller  and  Simental-Gutierrez  should  not 

have  their  seniority  dates  modified  to  a  date  earlier  than  September  4,  2002.  Education  Code 
sections  44917  and  44918  might  have  applied  to  them,  in  that  they  were  substitute  employees 
who  worked  75%  or  more  of  the  2001-2002  school  year  and  became  probationary  employees 
the  following  school  year.  Their  assignments  in  the  2001-2002  school  year  were  relatively 
long-term  and  in  many  cases  turned  into  permanent  assignments.  However,  it  was  not 
established  that  they  worked  during  the  2001-2002  school  year  under  anything  other  than  a 
provisional  credential,  and  Ms.  Miller  testified  that  she  in  fact  worked  under  an  emergency 
permit  that  year.  These  Respondents  would  not  be  entitled  to  credit  toward  tenure  if  they 
worked  during  the  2001-2002  school  year  under  a  provisional  credential,  so  they  similarly 
would  not  be  entitled  to  the  additional  year  of  service  available  under  sections  44917  or 
44918.  Without  proof  that  the  District  had  received  these  Respondents’  full  credentials 
during  the  2001-2002  school  year,  it  was  not  established  that  the  District  had  erroneously 
classified  them  as  other  than  probationary  employees  in  the  2001-2002  school  year  or  that 
their  seniority  date  should  have  been  earlier  than  September  4,  2002.  These  Respondents  are 
subject  to  layoff.  (Factual  Findings  1-34.) 

Hf 

{if 

Mf 

  

10

7, 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  05-06-09  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Services  will  not  be  reduced  below 
mandated  levels.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  those  particular  services 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949,  (Factual  Findings  1-34.) 

8. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Factual  Findings  1-34.) 

9. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 
that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Factual  Findings  1-34.) 

ORDERS 

1. 

The  Accusations  against  Respondents  KIMBERLY  ISRAELSON  and 

LINDSEY  WHITE  are  dismissed.  Neither  Respondent  shall  be  given  notice  that  their 
services  are  not  required  for  the  next  school  year. 

2. 

The  Accusations  are  SUSTAINED  as  against  the  remaining  Respondents. 

Notice  SHALL  be  given  to  those  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2006-2007  school  year,  and  such  notice  SHALL  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  May  4,  2006 

Ce 

La 

ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

11

