BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PARADISE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  BUTTE,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  No.  N2007031012 

CYDNEY  DIXON,  AMY  KEENE, 
DERRICK  BOSLOW,  HEATHER  BUSK, 
CHRIS  JENSEN,  ROBIN  PATTERSON, 
JORDY  TOLLEFSON,  AMALIA  CONSOLI, 
MELISSA  MUSSO,  JOE  LODIGIANI, 
CARRIE  DAWES,  SIGNE  HANCOCK, 
MIKE  NEWTON,  VALERIE  ROLPH, 
KATHRYN  KENNEDY,  RYAN  LOGELIN, 
JUDIE  HALL,  DEBRA  DODSON,  MIKE 
STORY,  DONNY  KOEHLER,  RANDI 
SALADO,  DARREN  MASSA,  MIKE 
O’CONNOR,  SONJA  HUSS,  JEFF 
WROBEL,  KATHRYN  THOMAS,  TINA 
MALCOLM,  JORI  KRUDLER,  BARBARA 
MICHAEL, 

  

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Karen  J.  Brandt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  May  16,  2007,  in  Paradise,  California. 

Michelle  L.  Cannon,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Paradise  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

the  caption  (respondents). 

Joan  Maredyth,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  the  certificated  employees  listed  in 

At  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  and  withdrew  the  accusations 

against  the  respondents  listed  in  Stipulation  6,  below.  In  addition,  the  parties  stipulated  to 
the  factual  findings  and  legal  conclusions  set  forth  in  Stipulations  1  through  13,  below.

  

  

STIPULATIONS 

1. 

Stephen  A.  Jennings  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  He  made  and  filed 

the  accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  District  as  permanent  or  probationary 

certificated  employees  and  rendered  their  first  paid  service  to  the  District  in  a  probationary 
position  on  the  dates  indicated  on  the  seniority  list  attached  to  the  accusations. 

3. 

On  or  about  March  6,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing 
Board)  was  given  written  notice  of  Mr.  Jennings’s  recommendations  that  notice  be  given  to 
respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

4, 

On  or  about  March  13  and/or  15,  2007,  respondents  were  given  written  notice 
of  Mr.  Jennings’s  recommendations  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefor. 

5. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  respondents,  in  writing,  duly 

requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

6. 

At  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  layoff  notices  and  withdrew  the 

accusations  served  upon  respondents  Signe  Hancock,  Mike  O’Connor,  Tina  Malcolm,  Jori 
Krudler  and  Barbara  Michael. 

7. 

On  March  13,  2007,  Mr.  Jennings  notified  respondent  Joe  Lodigiani  that  Mr. 
Jennings  had  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  .8  FTE  of  Mr.  Lodigiani’s  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  At  hearing,  the  District  reduced  the  .8 
FTE  set  forth  in  the  March  13,  2007  notice  to  .2  FTE. 

8. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 

for  not  reemploying  respondents,  other  than  those  listed  in  Stipulation  6,  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  in  that  the  Governing  Board  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds 
of  services  of  the  District  beginning  not  later  than  the  commencement  of  the  2007-2008 
school  year  as  set  forth  in  Governing  Board  Resolution  No.  06/07-13,  attached  to  the 
accusations. 

9. 

In  the  opinion  of  the  Governing  Board,  it  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the 

number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  on  account  of  the  above  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  services.  As  a  consequence,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  the 
services  of  certificated  employees,  equal  in  number  to  those  employees  providing  services  to 

 

be  reduced  or  discontinued,  shall  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  2006-2007  school 
year. 

10. 

Respondents,  other  than  those  listed  in  Stipulation  6,  fit  within  one  of  the 

following  classifications: 

(a) 

(b) 

Respondents  are  and  have  been  employed  as  certificated  employees  of  the 
District  providing  one  or  more  of  the  particular  kinds  of  service  which  the 
Governing  Board  has  determined  that  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue, 
and  respondents’  positions  will  be  terminated  as  a  result  of  the  foregoing 
decisions. 

Respondents’  positions  will  be  taken  by  employees  whose  regular  positions 
will  be  eliminated  by  virtue  of  the  foregoing  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  service  and  who  (a)  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
perform  respondents’  duties  and  (b)  have  greater  District  seniority  than 
respondents. 

As  aresult  of  the  foregoing,  the  services  of  respondents,  other  than  those  listed  in 

Stipulation  6,  as  certificated  employees  will  be  terminated. 

11. 

Notices  were  sent  to  respondents  solely  on  the  basis  of  their  seniority  with  the 

District.  The  District  will  not  retain  any  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than 
respondents,  during  the  2007-2008  school  year,  to  render  services  which  respondents  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  perform.  The  Governing  Board  has  further  determined  that,  as 
between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  dates,  the 
Order  of  Termination  has  been  determined  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  to  the  District  and 
the  students  thereof. 

12. 

Cause  for  not  reemploying  respondents,  other  than  those  listed  in  Stipulation 
6,  is  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  school  and  the  pupils  thereof,  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

13. 

Respondents  and  the  District  agree  that  the  document  entitled  “May  2007 

Layoff  Agreement”  embodies  an  agreement  between  the  District  and  those  respondents  who 
sign  and  deliver  the  agreement  to  the  District  Office  on  or  before  the  close  of  business  on 
May  17,  2007.

  

  

ORDER 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Paradise  Unified  School  District  may  give  notice  to  respondents,  other  than  those  listed  in 
Stipulation  6,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  2007-2008. 

DATED:  MN 

2,  L007     

KAREN  J.  BRA 
Administrative  La\y 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

Judge 

  

