BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
OROVILLE  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

& 

OAH  No.  N2007031010 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations 
(Reduction  In  Force)  against: 

Keely  White,  Stephanie  Greco, 
Lindsay  Himmelspach  and  Kurt  Libby, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  11,  2007,  in  Oroville,  California. 

Christian  M.  Keiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Oroville  Union  High  School 

District  (District). 

Donald  A.  Selke,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  on  behalf  of  all of 
the  respondents.  Mr.  Selke,  appeared  on  behalf  of  respondents  Keely  White  and  Stephanie 
Greco  only. 

Lindsay  Himmelspach  and  Kurt  Libby  did  not  appear.  Ms.  Himmelspach  and  Mr. 

Libby  were  timely  served  with  a  notice  of  the  time,  date  and  place  of  hearing. ' 

The  matter  proceeded in  respect  to  respondents  Keely  White 

and  Stephanie  Greco, 

and  against  Lindsay  Himmelspach  and  Kurt  Libby  by  default.’ 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May  11,  2007.  The  parties 

agreed  to  extend  timeline  requirements  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

  

'  Mr.  Selke  advised  that  he  no  longer  represented  Lindsay  Himmelspach  and  Kurt  Libby  and  that  the  two  were 
aware of  this.  He  also  advised  that  Ms.  Himmelspach  and  Mr.  Libby  were  aware of the  time,  date  and  place  of 
hearing. 
*  Twelve  lay  off  notices  were  issued,  Accusations  were  initially  filed  against  ten  employees  who  received  lay  off 
notices  and  requested  a  hearing.  Prior  to  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  six  Accusations were  withdrawn,  due  to 
employee  withdrawal  of  a  notice  of  defense,  or  to  District  withdrawal  of  lay  off  notice.

  

  

The  parties  stipulated  to  extend  the  May  7,  2007  time  line  in  section  44949,  subdivision  (c) 
(3)  to  June  4,  2007.  Thus,  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Governing  Board 
of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  and  to  the  employees  on  or  before  June  4,  2007. 

. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

2. 

3. 

1, 

The  District  operates  five  high  schools,  including  three  alternative  education 

programs;  Prospect  High  School,  Community  Day  School  and  Challenge  Charter  School. 
The  District  has  approximately  150  certificated  employees. 

Wayne  Robinson  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions,  and  the 

actions  of  the  Governing  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

Before  March  15,  2007,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice 

that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the 
Governing  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  10.7  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4, 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 
District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

7, 

On  March  7,  2007,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  Board,  the  Governing  Board 

was  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  and  other 
employees  holding  10.7  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

8. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  14,  providing 

for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

 
>
e
O
D

Reduce  1.6  FTE  Special  Education  teachers  (8  sections). 
Reduce  2.0  FTE  Math  teachers  (10  sections). 
Reduce  0.4  FTE  Earth  Science  teachers  (2  sections). 
Reduce  1.8  FTE  Social  Science  teachers  (9  sections). 

 

  

  

 
m
o

 
Q
O

 
s
A
P

Reduce  2.2  FTE  English  teachers  (11  sections). 
Reduce  0.4  FTE  Health  teachers  (2  sections). 
Reduce  0.6  FTE  Physical  Education  teachers  (3  sections). 
‘Reduce  0.4  FTE  French  teachers  (2  sections). 
Reduce  0.4  FTE  Industrial  Technology  teachers  (2  sections). 
Reduce  0.6  FTE  Art  teachers  (3  sections). 
Reduce  0.10  FTE  Special  Education  Director/School  Psychologist. 
Reduce  0.20  FTE  Psychologist. 

Total 

10.7  FTE 

9. 

The  District is  experiencing  financial  difficulties.  Because  of  budgetary 

shortfalls  and  the  loss  of  funding,  the  Governing  Board  determined  that  it  needs  to  reduce  its 
2007-2008  operating  budget.  Thus,  after  consideration  of  all  positively  assured  attrition  that 
had  occurred  as  of  the  date  of  the  resolution,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce 
teaching  and  psychologist  services,  affecting  employment  of  10.7  FTE  positions.  The 
Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
made in  order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

: 

10. 

|  The  Governing  Board  also  resolved  that  “competency  for  the  purposes  of 

assignment  in  Alternative  Education  shall  mean  at  least  one  semester  actual  teaching 
experience  in  Alternative  Education  within  the  last  five  (5)  years...” 

11. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or  temporary,  and 
credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from 
the  District’s  records. 

12. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted tie-breaker  criteria  (Resolution  No.  13-06/07) 

for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  on  the  same  date.  - 

13. 

The  Superintendent  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 

implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to 
develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
services  being  reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees 
held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  “bump” other  employees.  In  determining 
who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  affected  service,  the  District  counted  the  number  of 
reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent 
staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected 
individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees.  The  District  then  looked  at - 
employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as  opposed  to  other  positions.  The  District 
determined  that  those  who  had  not  taught  in  Alternative  Education  for  at  least  one  semester 
in  the  preceding  five  years  were  per-se  incompetent  to  teach  in  the  District’s  Alternative 
Education  High  Schools.  The  District  did  not  consider  these  employees  eligible  to  compete 

  

 

  

for  positions  held  by  junior  or  same-seniority  employees  who  had  taught  in  Alternative 
Education  High  Schools. 

14. 

Lindsay  Himmelspach  has  a  seniority  date  of  October  19,  2006.  She  holds  a 

preliminary  credential  in  Physical  Education.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  .60  FTE 
Physical  Education  and  .20  Health  at  Las  Plumas  High  School.  Her  services  are  eliminated 
pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution.  Ms.  Himmelspach  did  not  present  evidence  or 
argument  in  defense  of  her  lay  off.  No  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Himmelspach  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  which  Ms.  Himmelspach  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

15. 

Kurt  Libby  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2005.  He  is  currently  assigned 
to  teach  1.00  FTE  in  Mathematics  at  Las  Plumas  High  School.  His  services  are  reduced  by 
.60  FTE  Mathematics,  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution.  Mr.  Libby  did  not 
present  evidence  or  argument  in  defense  of  his  reduction  in  services.  No  employee  junior  to 
Mr.  Libby  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  he  is  competent  and  certificated  to 
render. 

16. 

|  Keely  White  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  14,  2006.  She  holds  a  clear 

credential in  Social  Science.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  .80  FTE  in  Social  Science  | 
and  .20  FTE in  Health  at  Oroville  High  School.  Her  services  are  eliminated  pursuant  to  the 
Governing  Board’s  resolution.  Ms.  White  argues  that  a  teacher  with  the  same  seniority  date 
as  she  is  being  retained  to  perform  .80  Social  Science  services  which  she  is  competent  and 
certificated  to  render.  She  does  not  assert  that  junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  teach 
Health. 

Ms.  White  maintains  that  Kurt  Osterlund  is  being  retained  to  teach  .80  FTE,  .60  of 

which  is  in  Social  Science  at  Challenge  Charter  School.  No  tie  breaking  criteria  were 
applied  between  Mr.  Osterlund  and  Ms.  White  to  determine  which  of  the  two  should  be 
retained.  The  District  maintains  that  it  did  not  apply  the  tie  breaking  criteria  between  the  two 
because  Ms.  White  did  not  meet  the  competency  criteria  set  out  in  the  Resolution:  she  had 
never  taught  in  an  alternative  education  program. 

17. 

Stephanie  Greco  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  14,  2006.  She  holds  a 

preliminary  credential  in  English  and  a  Multiple  Subjects  credential.  The  multiple  subjects 
credential  is  not  applicable  here  as  it  authorizes  her  to  teach  in  elementary  schools.  Ms. 
Greco  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  1.00  FTE  in  English  at  Oroville  High  School.  Her 
services  are  reduced  .80  FTE  in  English  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution.  She 
retains  .20  FTE  in  English  instruction  at  Oroville  High  School.’  Ms.  Greco  argues  that 
Leslie  Graka  is  being  retained  to  teach  English  at  Prospect  High  School.  Ms.  Graka  and  Ms. 
Greco  have  the  same  seniority  date  and  no  tic  breaking  criteria  were  applied  between  the  two 

  

>  The  District  has  offered  Ms.  Greco a split  position  between  Oroville  High  School  and Las  Plumas  High  School. 
She  would  retain  .40  FTE  in  English  at  Oroville  High  School  and  an  additional  .20  in  English  at  Las  Plumas  High 
School.  The  District  continues  to  search  for  additional  sections  of  English  which  Ms.  Greco  can  be  assigned  to 
teach. 

   

to  determine  which  of  the  two  should  be  retained.  The  District  acknowledges  that  it  did  not 
apply  the  tie  breaking  criteria  between  the  two  because  Ms.  Greco  did  not  meet  the 
competency  criteria  set  out  in  the  Resolution:  she  had  never  taught  in  an  alternative 

-  education  program. 

18... 

Both  Ms.  Greco  and  Ms.  White  contend  that  they  are  certificated  and 

competent  to  teach  in  the  District’s  Alternative  Education  High  Schools.  There  is  no 
question  that  both  are  appropriately  credentialed  to  teach  their  single  subject  in  any  high 
school.  However,  the issue  is  whether  they  are  competent  to  teach in Alternative  Education 
Programs. 

19, 

Superintendent  Robinson  testified  that  the  students  in  the  District’s  Alternative 

Education  High  Schools  are  “100 percent at  risk  for  not  graduating.”  Many  have  been 
expelled  from  other  high  schools  and  many  “lead  or  partake  in  dysfunctional  lifestyles.”  As 
a  result  of  these  challenges,  the  District  is  “very  careful  who  we  hire  for  these  positions.” 
The  District  maintains  that  teachers  who  instruct  students  with  these  issues  require  training 
and  experience  in  alternative  programs.  As  a  result,  the  District  adopted  the  “competency 
requirement”  in  Resolution  No.  14,  requiring  at  least  one  semester  of  actual  teaching 
experience  in  an  alternative  education  school  within  the  last  five  (5)  years  for  reassignment 
of laid  off  teachers  into  District  alternative  education  high  schools.  The  Superintendent 
stated  that  this  time  period  was  chosen  because  it  would  be  long  enough  for  the  teacher  “to 
prove  fit  and  to  become  knowledgeable  in  dealing  with  the  students.” 

Neither  Ms.  Greco  nor  Ms.  White  have  taught  in  alternative  education 

programs.  They  argue  that  there  is  no  special  competency  necessary  to  teach  Social  Science 
or  English  in  alternative  education  environments.  They  established  that  some  of  the  teachers 
who  were  employed  at  the  District  Alternative  High  Schools  in  the  2006-2007  school  year, 
as  well  as  in  previous  years,  did  not  have  one  semester  of  teaching  experience  in  alternative 
high  schools  at  the  time  they  were  employed.’  The  point  of  this  argument  was  to  establish 
that  it  is  not  necessary  that  teachers  possess  this  experience  to  be  regarded  as  competent,  and 
that  the  requirement  the  Board  adopted  is  thus  arbitrary.  This  argument  was  persuasive. 

A  review  of  the  Challenge  Charter  High  School  Petition  (Petition)  supports 

respondents’  argument.  The  Governing  Board  regards  the  Challenge  Charter  High  School  as 
an  Alternative  Education  High  School.  The  Superintendent  included  this  school  with  the 
other  two  Alternative  Education  High  Schools in  the  District  when  he  described  the 
challenges  of  the  student  populations  and  the  need  for  teachers  with  special  training  or 
experience  in  handling  these  populations.  Yet,  the  Petition,  which is  the  document 
authorizing  and  describing  the  operation  of  the  Challenge  Charter  High  School,  does  not 

* 

  

"  For  instance,  Jeanean  Falletti  did  not  have  the  requisite  teaching  experience  when  she  was  employed  in  September 
2006  to  teach  at  the  Community  Day  School.  Further,  it  was  likely  thal  Kurt  Osterlund  and  Heide  Hostetter  had  no 
prior  experience  in  alternative  education  before  they  were  employed  in  2006  to  teach  in  the  District’s  Alternative 
Education  High  Schools. 

21. 

20. 

   
  

  

require  prior  alternative  education  experience  in  its  selection  criteria  for certificated 
employees.  Qualifications  for  teachers  refer  to: 

_..the  ability  to  motivate  students  who  have a  historical  lack  of motivation,  work  well 
with  a  close  knit  community  of  teachers,  staff,  students,  and  parents  and  be  innovative 
and  flexible  in  their  teaching  and  methodology.  As  Challenge  Charter  High  School  | 
runs  like.a  large  family,  all  charter  school  employees  must  be  ‘people-oriented’  and 
have  good  rapport  with  students  of  diverse  backgrounds...  ..Preference  will  be  given  to 
experienced  teachers  with  demonstrated  ability  in  specific  fields/disciplines  as  needed 
by  the  Charter  School... 

22. 

While  it  is  predictable  that  not  every  teacher  can  successfully  manage  and 

instruct  difficult  student  populations,  the  District  does  not  appear  to  have  had  a  clear  set  of 
standards  for  selecting  the  teachers  who  teach  in  its  Alternative  Education  High  Schools. 
The  District  Superintendent,  in  a  general  sense,  identified  the  problems  presented  by  the: 
population,  but  did  not  identify  the  specific  qualifications  necessary  to  teach  this  population, 
such  as  a  particular  training  program  or  particular  skills.  The  District  relied  heavily  upon  the 
fact  that  the  Governing  Board  established  these  “competency  criteria”  by  Resolution.  The 
District’s  reliance  on  the  Resolution  fails. 

23. 

In  part,  the  District’s  view  is  based  upon  an  Administrative  Law  Judge’s  (ALJ) 

proposed  decision  in  a  prior  reduction  in  force.’  This  proposed  decision  upheld  the  Board’s 
imposition  of  competency  criteria  which  required  that  teachers  have  taught  in  their 
certificated  subjects  at  least  one  semester  in  the  previous  five  years.°  At  the  time  the  Boards’ 
competency  criteria  resolution  was  adopted,  the  District  was  facing  layoffs  of  administrators 
and  others  who  held  teaching  credentials  but  who  had  not  taught  for  many  years,  in  some 
cases  for  decades.  The  ALJ  examined  the  teaching  experience  of  each  employee  who  was 
attempting  to  move  into  a  teaching  position  after  years  away  from  a  classroom.  The  ALJ 
found  that  under  the  circumstances  presented  in  each  case,  application  of  the  “competency 
criteria”  did  not  violate  the  District’s  duties  under  Education  Code  section  44955. 

The  proposed  decision  did  not  authorize  Governing  Boards  to  adopt  wholesale 
competency  criteria  which  circumvent  the  seniority  protections  of  the  Education  Code.  At 
most,  the  proposed  decision  established  that  a  District  could  examine  a  credentialed  teacher’s 
length  away  from  classroom  experience  to  determine  whether  the  teacher  remained 
competent  to  teach  a  particular  subject. 

24. 

In  contrast,  here  the  wholesale  application  of  the  Resolution  “competency 

criteria”  to  all  teachers  subject  to  lay  off  does  not  permit  evaluation  of  the  individual 

  

>  At  the  hearing  of  the  instant  matter,  the  ALJ’s  proposed  decision  was  not  admitted  in  evidence,  as  it  was  used  only 
to  refresh  the  memory  of  a  witness.  However,  after  the  matter  was  submitted,  this  ALJ,  sua  sponte,  reopened  the 
record  to  admit  the  proposed  decision  (Exhibit  J)  into  evidence,  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  the  Board’s  reliance 
upon  it  in  formulating  Resolution  No.  14. 
®  The  proposed  decisions  of  Administrative  Law  Judges  in  teacher  reduction  in  force  cases  are  not  precedential  or 
binding,  regardless  of  whether  the  Board  adopts  the  proposed  decision. 

/ 

’ 

 

competency  of  the  teacher  in  question  to  handle  the  student  population  in  the  District’s 
Alternative  Education  High  Schools,  The  criteria  conclusively  presume  that  a  teacher  is 
incompetent  to  teach  a  particular  group  of  students,  unless  that  teacher  has  taught  a  similar 
group  of  students  in  the  past.  For  instance,  a  teacher  may  have  a  strong  background  in 
psychology,  probation,  or  in  managing  difficult  persons  in  general,  but  has  not  taught  in  an 
alterative  school.  A  teacher  may  have  significant  training  in  alternative  education,  or  have. 
come  from  circumstances  similar  to  the  student  populations’  and  thus  might  be  able  to  handle 
the  particular  issues  these  students  present.  There  are  a  myriad  of  ways  in  which a  teacher 
may  demonstrate  competence  to  teach  difficult  students.  The  fact  that  one  has  taught  in  an: 
alternative  education  school  for  five  or  six  months  in  the  last  five  years  is  not  the  only 
avenue  to  competency  in  teaching  difficult  students.  Nor  does  the  mere  fact  that  one  has 
taught  in  an  alternative  education  school,  in  itself,  establish  competency  to  teach  difficult 
students.  Resolution  No.  14,  in  respect  to  its  “competency  criteria”  is  arbitrary  and  not  in  the 
best  interests  of  pupils. 

25. 

The  District  employees  receiving  notices  that  their  services  would  not  be 

required  next  year,  whether  temporary  or  certificated  employees,  have  all  rendered  valuable 
services  to  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

l. 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
| 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  were  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  14  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and  was.a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 

  

 

  

thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

See,  also,  Degener  v. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

6. 
4... 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be 
reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year, 
...or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum, 
and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become 
necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 
employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more 
than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district, 
permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as 
otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  ° 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said 
permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (emphasis  added) 

{.--4 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated  employees  face 

layoffs  due  to  economic  exigency,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to  reassign 
senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers,  if  the 
senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The  intent 
of  the  Legislation  is  clearly  to  prevent  Districts  from  laying  off  senior  teachers  while 
retaining  junior  teachers.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (c)  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which 
they  were  employed...  The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service 
which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render... 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions,  the  District  may 

not  circumvent  the  seniority  based  protections  of  the  Education  code  by  establishing  that 

8 

 

  

three  quarters  of  its  schools  are  “off  limits”  to  senior  teachers  who  have  not  taught  in 
alternative  education.  This  is  the  effect  of  the  “competency  criteria”  adopted  by  the  Board, 
although  it  certainly  may  not  be  an  intended  effect.  ‘The  Education  Code  requires  that  the 
District  establish  the  incompetency  of  a  senior  teacher  to  teach  a  designated  course  before  it 
may  refuse  to  assign  the  senior  teacher  to  a  position  held  by  a  junior  teacher.’  The  District 
has  failed  to  show  that  Ms.  White  is  not  competent  to  teach  Social  Sciences  in  the  Challenge 
Charter  High  School.  The  District  has  failed  to  show  that  Ms.  Greco  is  not  competent  to 

‘  teach  English  in  the  Prospect  High  School. 

9, 

Ms.  Greco  shares  a  seniority  date  with  Ms.  Graka  and  Ms.  White  shares  a 
seniority  date  with  and  Mr.  Osterland,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b), 
provides  in  pertinent  part: 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee 
whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in 
writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in 
accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each 
employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the 
governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining 
the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal 
right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

10. 

Although  the  District  had  adopted  tie  breaking  criteria,  it  did  not  apply  the 
criteria  to  White,  Osterland,  Greco  and  Graka,  on  the  assumption  that  the  Board  could  bar 
White  and  Greco  from  teaching  in  its  Alternative  High  Schools. 

11. 

Nor  did  the  District  establish  that  Osterland  or  Graka  occupied  positions  of 

such  a  specialized  nature,  and  they  had  such  specialized  skills,  that  it  was  necessary  to  retain 
them,  pursuant  to  section  44955,  subdivision  (d).’  They  were  retained  over  White  and  Greco 
merely  because  they  had  occupied  their  positions  more  than  a  semester. 

  

”  The  District  is  permitted  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic  layoff  in  situations  where  the 
District  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study...  and 
that  the  certificated  employee  (to  be  exempted  from  layoff)  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary 
to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do 
not  possess.”  (Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1)).  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is 
discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is 
filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers 
may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School 
District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116 
Cal.App.3d  831.) 

  

  

  
 

  

 

12. 

The  District  also  argues  that  it  cannot  place  White  in  Challenge  Charter  High 

School  because,  under  the  terms  of  the  Petition,  the  Board  cannot  appoint  a  teacher  to  the 
school  unless  a  hiring  committee  approves  the  teacher.  While  this  procedure  may  be  >
appropriate  for  hiring  teachers,  an  educational  program,  which  is  by  law  a  part  of  the  District 
school  system  and  employs  District  teachers,  cannot  exempt  itself  from  the  requirements  of 
the  California  Education  Code.  The  Education  Code  sets  forth  specific  requirements  the 
District  must  employ  in  the  event  of  a  layoff.  Efforts  to  bypass  certain  teachers  in  the  lay  off 
process  (skipping)  or  to  bar  certain  teachers  from  moving  into  (bumping)  positions  held  by — 
junior  teachers  seek  to  deviate  from  the  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Legislature 
recognized  that  there  would  be  instances  where  Districts  could  legitimately  deviate  from  a 
  strictly  seniority  based  lay  off,  but  these  circumstances  do  not  present  themselves  here. 
Persons  who  are  credentialed  and  experienced  teachers  are  not  per  se  incompetent  to  teach 
challenging  students,  just  because  they  have  not  completed  one  semester  of  teaching  in 
alternative  education.  Persons  who  do  teach  in  alternative  education  programs  do  not  by 
virtue  of  their  placement  possess  such  specialized  skills,  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  that  it  is  necessary  to  retain  them  over  junior  teachers. 

13. 

Finally,  respondents  assert  that,  after  considering  attrition,  the  scope  of  the 

layoff  was  too  broad  and  more  teachers  were  laid  off  than  authorized  in  the  Board’s 
Resolution.  This  argument  is  without  merit.  The  Board  considered  all  attrition  at  the  time  it 
authorized  layoff  of  10.7  FTE.  Subsequent  attrition  was  considered,  and  some  layoff  notices 
were  withdrawn.  Respondents’  calculations,  that  9  FTEs  were  recaptured  due  to  attrition, 
was  based  on  the  unsupported  premise  that  the  subsequent  attrition  was  in  the  subject  areas 
taught  by  the  affected  teachers.  There  was  no  evidence  that  subsequent  attritition  resulted  in 
vacancies  which  respondents  could  have  occupied. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Keely  White  as  to  .80  FTE  of  her  services  in  Social 

Sciences  is  Dismissed. 

The  Accusation  against  Keely  White  as  to  .20  FTE  of  her  services  in  Health  is 

The  Accusation  against  Stephanie  Greco  as  to  .80  FTE  of  her  services  in 

English  is  Dismissed. 

The  Accusation  against  Lindsay  Himmelspach  as  to  .80  FTE  of  her  services  in 

1, 

2. 

3, 

Affirmed. 

4, 
Affirmed. 

  

  

10   

 

    

'
5. 

The  Accusation  against  Kurt  Libby  as  to  .60  FTE  of  his  services  in  Affirmed. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Lindsay  Himmelspach,  Kurt  Libby,  and  Keely  White  (.20  FTE)  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  29,  2007 

AEN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

1]

