BEFORE  THE 
COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
SACRAMENTO  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 
COUNTY  OF  SACRAMENTO,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction 
In  Force)  Against: 

ROBERTO  GANTZ  and  JOHN  KETELHUT 

OAH  No.  N2007030680 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Sacramento,  California,  on  April  10,  2007. 

Michelle  L.  Cannon,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Kronick,  Moskovitz,  Tiedmann  &  Girard, 

represented  the  Sacramento  County  Office  of  Education. 

Michael  N.  McCallum,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  hearing  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April 

10,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  3,  2007,  David  W.  Gordon,  Superintendent,  Sacramento  County 

Office  of  Education  (SCOE),  State  of  California,  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his 
official  capacity. 

2. 

On  February  27,  2007,  the  Superintendent  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-D 

(Resolution).  The  Resolution  was  based  on  the  Superintendent’s  determination  that  it  was 
necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  regional  occupation  programs  (ROP)  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Accordingly,  he  determined  that  the  following 
particular  kinds  of  services  and  corresponding  number  of  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions  should  be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

 

  

Services 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

ROP  Instructor  Medical  Assistant 

ROP  Instructor  Careers  with  Children 

ROP  Instructor  Air  Conditioning/Heating 

1.5  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

3. 

The  Superintendent’s  decision  was  based  upon  the  effect  of  Assembly  Bill 
2448,'  effective  January  2007,  which  provides  for  alignment  of  state  ROP  programs  with 
federal  programs.  The  bill  provides  that  a  core  sequence  of  classes  should  be  offered  and 
must  lead  to a  certification  or  articulation  to  a  community  college.  The  most  important 
feature  of  the  bill,  to  SCOE,  is  that  it  provides  a  gradual  reduction  in  the  number  of  students 
18  years  and  older  permitted  to  enroll  in  the  ROP  classes.  By  the  year  2011,  only  10%  of  the 
students  in  an  ROP  class  can  be  adults.  In  the  2007-2008  school  year,  no  more  than  30%  of 
students  in  an  ROP  class  can  be  adults.  Approximately  73%  of  current  ROP  students  are 
adults.  Because  of  this  the  Superintendent  found  SCOE  was  “on  a  course  to  be  out  of 
compliance.” 

4. 

In  an  effort  to  become  compliant  with  Assembly  Bill  2448,  the  Superintendent 

determined  not  to  offer  ROP  classes  in  auto  body  and  repair,  estimating,  and  medical 
terminology  in  the  2007-2008  school  year.  It  was  unnecessary  to  reduce  FTEs  to  effectuate 
these  class  eliminations.  The  careers  with  children  class  was  eliminated  by  Resolution  and 
the  teacher  occupying  that  1.0  did  not  file  a  request  for  hearing. 

5. 

The  Superintendent  determined  that  the  heating  and  air  conditioning  program 

should  be  eliminated  because  it  served  primarily  adults,  it  struggled  with  enrollment  and  it 
was  duplicated  by  adult  programs  at  community  colleges.  Accordingly,  John  Ketelhut,  a 
certificated  employee  occupying  1.0  FTE  position  teaching  air  conditioning/heating,  received 
a  notice  that  his  services  and  position  would  be  eliminated  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

6. 

The  Superintendent  determined  that  medical  assistance  programs  should  be 

eliminated  because  these  classes  served  primarily  adults  and  there  are  many  private  entities 
offering  this  program.  Accordingly,  Linda  Glines,  who  occupied  .5  FTE  in  medical 
assistance  programming,  was  reassigned  as  a  school  nurse  in  special  education,  a  position  for 
which  she  is  credentialed.  Roberto  Gantz,  a  certificated  employee  occupying  1.0  FTE  in 
medical  assistance  programming,  received  a  notice  that  his  services  and  position  would  be 
eliminated  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

7. 

By  letter  dated  March  9,  2007,  the  Superintendent  provided  written  notice  to 

respondents  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  them,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 

'  This  Bill  was  passed  and  became  effective  January  2007. 

 

ensuing  year  (March  15  Notice). 
recommendation  was  attached  to  the  March  15  Notice. 

The  Resolution  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the 

8. 

Respondents  made  timely  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Accusation  was  timely 
served  on  respondents  and  respondents  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

9. 

Mr.  Ketelhut’s  seniority  date  is  August  22,  1994.  He  holds  a  credential  in 
Designated  Subject-Vocational  F/T  Subjects:  1727  Air  Conditioning/Refrigeration,  851 
Heating  and  99  0158  Designated  Subjects-Supervisor/Coordinator.  Mr.  Ketelhut  is  presently 
employed  as  a  full-time  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  teaching  heating  and  air 
conditioning  in  the  Sacramento  County  ROP  program.  He  teaches  the  only  such  program  in 
SCOE.  There  are  no  other  classes  offered  by,  SCOE  in  2007-2008  that  he  is  certificated  to 
teach. 

10. 

Mr.  Ketelhut  argues  that  his  class  is  being  cut  in  retaliation  for  his  filing  seven 
complaints  against  SCOE,  since  he  was  first  employed  until  a  few  years  ago.  He  argues  that 
there  is  a  vast  array  of  ROP  programs  which  could  be  cut,  and  his  was  chosen  out  of 
retaliatory  motivation.  However,  the  Superintendent’s  rationale  for  selecting  six  ROP 
programs  for  immediate  discontinuance  this  first  year  under  Assembly  Bill  2448  was 
credible  and  well  reasoned.  Mr.  Ketelhut  does  not  deny  that  his  course  enrollment  is 
declining,  but  he  attributes  the  decline  to  poor  signage  on  his  building  and  an  absence  of  staff 
to  sign  up  students,  even  though  his  course  has  been  listed  in  class  schedules.  He  does 
acknowledge  that  of  his  20  current  students,  only  one  is  under  18  years  old.  Mr.  Ketlehut 
may  have  been  a  “thorn  in  the  side”  of  SCOE  for  years,  as  his  attorney  contends.  However, 
that  fact  does  not  insulate  him  from  layoff  proceedings  prompted  by  legitimate  business 

reasons. 

11. 

Mr.  Gantz’s  seniority  date  is  March  10,  1997.  He  holds  a  credential  in 

Designated  Subject-Vocational  F/T  Subjects:  2664  Medical  Office  Occupations.  Mr.  Gantz 
is  presently  employed  as  a  .50  FTE  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  teaching  instruction 
medical  assistants  in  the  Sacramento  County  ROP  program. 

12. 

Mr.  Gantz  argues  that  he  too  has  been  retaliated  against  because  he  filed  a 

complaint  in  2006  alleging  harassment  and  discrimination  by  persons  in  the  ROP  program. 
The  evidence  is  that  the  Director  of  Human  Services  substantiated  his  complaint  in  several 
respects.  However,  the  analysis  of  the  evidence  set  forth  above  in  Factual  Finding  10  applies 
to  Mr.  Gantz  as  well.  Six  ROP  programs  were  discontinued,  several  ROP  teachers  were  laid 
off  and  the  only  other  teacher  teaching  medical  assistants,  Ms.  Glines,  lost  her  assignment  as 
well.  She,  however,  holds  additional  credentialing  and  was  reassigned.  Additionally,  the 
medical  office  occupations  class  was  discontinued  because  it  serves  primarily  adults  and 
there  are  30  to  40  medical  assistant  training  programs  in  the  community.  The  Superintendent 
testified  persuasively  that  additional  ROP  programs  were  being  considered  for 
discontinuation  next  year  and  that  SCOE  is  actively  seeking  to  move  ROP  programs  to  other 

  

 

  

venues.  He  acknowledged  that  there  were  several  ROP  programs  still  offered  which  had 
primarily  adult  students,  such  as  construction,  chiropractic  office  careers,  and  large  office 
occupational  programs.  However,  these  have  large  enrollments  and  long  waiting  lists.  These 
classes  are  not  being  immediately  discontinued.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  can  hardly  be 
maintained  that  Mr.  Gantz  was  targeted  for  layoff  because  of  his  successful  complaint. 

13. 

Mr.  Gantz  argues  that  he  can  “bump”  into  .5  FTE  of  another  course  currently 

begin  taught  by  a  teacher  with  less  seniority  than  he.  Patricia  Smith  holds  a  Designated 
Subject-Vocational  F/T  Subjects:  2655  Nursing  Services.  Ms.  Smith  has a  seniority  date  of 
January  18,  2005,  and  thus  is  junior  to  Mr.  Gantz.  Ms.  Smith  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  1 
FTE  of  the  ROP  hospital/community  health  class.  SCOE  intends  to  have  her  teach  this  class 
in  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Mr.  Gantz  argues  that  the  components  of  the 
hospital/community  health  class  are  similar  to  those  he  has  taught  in  medical  assisting.  He 
argues  that  he  has  the  knowledge  and  experience  to  teach  this  class.  He  maintains  that  his 
vocational  credential  permits  him  to  teach  this  class. 

14. 

Mr.  Gantz  may  be  correct  in  his  assertion  that  he  is  competent  and  certificated 

to  teach  the  ROP  hospital/community  health  class.  However,  there  is  no  need  to  reach  this 
issue.  The  law  is  settled  that  a  teacher  with  a  part-time  position  may  not  bump  into a  full 
time  position,  and  may  not  compel  the  school  district  to  subdivide  a  single  FTE  position. 
(Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  Office  of Education  (1989)  208  Cal-App.3d  456,  460.)  Mr. 
Gantz  is  a  .50  FTE  employee  and  the  position  he  wishes  to  bump  into  is  a  1  FTE.  While 
SCOE  may  choose  to  divide  the  1  FTE  hospital/community  health  class  into  two  .5  FTE 
sections,  it  cannot  be  compelled  to  do  so.  “The  District  is  not  required  to  create  a  part-time 
position  for  respondent,  and  respondent  may  not  “bump” a  full-time  employee  out  of  his  or 
her  position;  nor  is  respondent  entitled  to  a  full-time  position  with  the  District.  (Murray  v. 
Sonoma  County  Office  of Education,  supra  at  460.) 

15. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 
may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
decision  to  reduce  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise 
of  the  District’s  discretion. 

16. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Ketelhut  is  being  retained  to  provide 

services  that  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

17. 

A  permanent  certificated  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Gantz  is  being  retained  to 

perform  services  that  he  may  be  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  However,  Mr.  Gantz  is  a 
.5SFTE  employee  and  said  junior  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  1  FTE  services.  Mr. 
Gantz  may  not  bump  this  junior  employee  out  of  a  portion  of  her  position  and  he  is  not  entitled 
to  employment  rights  in  excess  of  his  .5  FTE. 

18. 

It  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  SCOE’s  ROP  services  by  3.5  FTE  with 

reduction  in  a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  of  SCOE,  as  determined  by  the 

 

Superintendent.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondent  John 
Ketelhut,  occupying  |  full-time  equivalent  position,  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2007-2008  school  year,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949. 

3. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  to  give  notice  to  respondent  Roberto 
Gantz,  occupying  .5  full  time  equivalent  position,  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2007-2008  school  year,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949, 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  Roberto  Gantz  and  John  Ketelhut  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  April  27,  2007 

A 
IZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  
 

