BEFORE  THE  STATE  ADMINISTRATOR 
VALLEJO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
60.80  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees 

OAH  No.  N2007030972 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Michael  C.  Cohn,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Vallejo,  California,  on  April  26,  2007. 

Lawrence  M.  Schoenke,  Attorney  at  Law,  Miller  Brown  &  Dannis,  71  Stevenson 

Street,  Nineteenth  Floor,  San  Francisco,  California  94105,  represented  the  Vallejo  City 
Unified  School  District. 

Sarah  Sandford-Smith  Batt  and  David  Weintraub,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Beeson,  Taylor 

&  Bodine,  1404  Franklin  Street,  Fifth  Floor,  Oakland,  California  94612,  represented 
respondents  Ronald  Beverly,  Mary  Carhidi-Wise,  James  Connelly,  Debra  deSchroderkat, 
Gena  Hamlin,  Deborah  Kreisman  and  Sandy  Shifs. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  any  other  respondents. 

The  matter  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  on  April  26,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  state  administrator  of  the  Vallejo  City  Unified  School 
District  adopted  Resolution  No.  2365,  in  which  the  state  administrator  resolved  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2007- 
2008  school  year  and  directed  his  designee  to  send  appropriate  notice  to  employees  whose 
positions  might  be  lost  by  virtue  of  this  action: 

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 

FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS 

7-12  Sciences 
7-12  PE 
7-12  Social  Science 
7-12  Electives:  Computers,  Business  Applications, 
Business  Academy,  Woodshop,  Leadership, 
Virtual  Enterprise 

5.00 
2.80 
3.00 

5.20

  

  

  

Categorically  Funded  Instructional  Associate 
Categorical  Funded  District  Teacher  Leader 
Categorical  Funded  Staff  Development  Teacher 
Categorical  Funded  District  ELA  Teacher  Leader 
Categorical  Funded  EL  Teacher  Leader 
Categorical  Funded  District  SAIT  Teacher  Leader 
Categorical  Funded  Teacher  Leader 
Elementary  Prep  Time  Teacher 
9-12  High  School  Counselor 

1.10 
1.80 
1.00 
3.40 
50 
60 
32.40: 
2.00 
2.00 

TOTAL 

60.80 

2. 

On  March  15,  2007,  Director  of  Human  Resources  Nona  Cohen-Bowman  gave 

written  notice  to  62  employees  that  recommendation  for  their  non-reemployment  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year  was  being  made  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 
Thirteen  employees,  the  respondents  in  this  proceeding,  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing:  the 
seven  respondents  listed  above  and  Loraine  Lee,  Letha  Little,  Tiffany  Jackson,  Kevin  Steele, 
Sandra  Nahal,  Miriam  Castorena,  and  Mark  Christian. 

3. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  state  administrator  adopted  Resolution  No.  2366, 

establishing  criteria  for  determining  seniority  for  those  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of 
paid  service.  In  those  tie-breaking  criteria,  employees  were  awarded  the  following  points  for 
specified  certification  types. 

CERTIFICATION  TYPE 

POINTS 

lL. 

2. 

Certificates:  BCLAD  or  CLAD 

Special  Education  Credential 
(Professional  Clear,  Life,  General,  Preliminary) 

3. 

Credentials: 

Standard  Elementary  or  Secondary, 
General  Elementary  or  Secondary, 
Single  Subject,  Multiple  Subjects, 
Mathematics,  English  Professional 
Clear,  Life,  General 

Preliminary 

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

4. 

Credentials  with  Supplemental  Authorizations 

(per  authorization) 

Any  ties  remaining  after  application  of  these  criteria  are  to  be  resolved  by 

lottery. 

 

  

4. 

The  district  is  experiencing  financial  difficulties  and  the  reductions  in  service 

are  purely  economic  in  nature.  None  of  the  reductions  will  prevent  the  district  from 
providing  mandated  services.  The  reductions  are  in  the  interest  of  the  schools  and  their 
students. 

5. 

Erica  Hightower  is  a  first  year  probationary  teacher  with  a  seniority  date  of 
September  19,  2006.  She  holds  a  multiple  subjects  credential.  Hightower  was  mistakenly 
not  provided  with  a  March  15  layoff  notice  even  though  she  is  junior  to  13  employees  who 
are  senior  to  her,  possess  the  same  credential  and  did  receive  layoff  notices.  Those  13 
employees,  all  of  whom  share a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2006,  include  respondents 
Carhidi-Wise,  Kreisman,  Shifs,  deSchroderkat,  and  Little.  Because  the  district  failed  to  send 
Hightower  a  March  15  notice,  she  must  be  retained  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 
Respondents  contend  that  the  district  must  therefore  retain  all  employees  senior  to  her  who 
are  similarly  credentialed  and  competent.  This  contention  cannot  be  sustained.  When  junior 
employees  are  incorrectly  retained,  the  district  is  not  required  to  retain  all  similarly  situated 
senior  employees,  but  only  “a  corresponding  number”  of  them.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567,  576.) 
Accordingly,  the  retention  of  Hightower  requires  the  district  to  retain  the  most  senior 
employee  who  is  similarly  credentialed  and  competent. 

It  is  impossible  to  determine  at  this  point  who  that  “most  senior”  employee  is. 

All  of  the  senior  employees  sharing  Hightower’s  credentials  and  competence  have  August 
21,  2006  seniority  dates.  The  district  has  not  yet  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in 
Finding  3  to  those  employees.  On  or  before  May  7,  2007,  the  district  must  apply  those 
criteria  to  all  affected  employees  in  order  to  determine  which  one  is  “most  senior.”  The 
employee  so  identified  must  be  retained  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

6. 

Resolution  No.  2365  called  for  the  reduction  of  2.80  FTE  positions  in  physical 

education.  However,  because  a  1.0  FTE  physical  education  teacher  resigned,  it  was 
necessary  to  layoff  only  two  individuals  to  achieve  this  reduction.  Receiving  March  15 
layoff  notices  were  respondent  Mark  Christian,  a  1.0  FTE  physical  education  teacher  with  a 
November  13,  2006  seniority  date,  and  respondent  Ronald  Beverly.  Beverly  is  a  1.0  FTE 
physical  education  teacher  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2006.  Mark  Thompson  is  also 
a  1.0  FTE  physical  education  teacher  with  an  August  21,  2006  seniority  date.  He  did  not 
receive  a  March  15  layoff  notice.  Although  the  district  did  not  apply  the  tie-breaking  criteria 
to  these  latter  two  employees,  it  determined  that  Beverly  would  receive  a  March  15  notice 
and  Thompson  would  not  because  Beverly  holds  only  a  provisional  intern  permit  while 
Thompson  holds a  preliminary  single  subject  physical  education  credential  with  an 
“embedded”  CLAD  certificate. 

Although  he  holds  only  a  provisional  intern  permit,  Beverly  is  entitled  to  the 
same  layoff  rights  as  the  fully-credentialed  Thompson.  (California  Teachers  Association  v. 
Vallejo  City  Unified  School  District  (2007)  2007  DIDAR  4251.)  Thus  it  was  improper  to 
“skip”  Thompson  while  laying  off  Beverly.  However,  no  prejudice  to  Beverly  resulted  from 
this.  Had  the  tie-breaking  criteria  been  applied,  Thompson  would  have  scored  more  points 

 

than  Beverly  and  would  have  been  considered  the  “more  senior”  employee.  Cohen-Bowman 
testified  that  Thompson  was  entitled  to  two  tie-breaker  points  —  one  for  his  preliminary 
credential  and  one  for  his  CLAD  certificate  —  while  Beverly  was  entitled  to  only  one  tie- 
breaker  point.  Cohen-Bowman  said  Beverly  was  entitled  to  that  point  because  of  his 
provisional  permit.  However,  the  tie-breaking  criteria  do  not  award  any  points  for  a 
provisional  permit.  Points  are  awarded  only  for  clear,  life,  general,  or  preliminary 
credentials.  The  seniority  list  shows  that  Beverly  holds  a  CLAD  certificate,  although  it 
appears  this  may  be  only  an  emergency  certificate,'  and  it  is  possible  Cohen-Bowman  felt 
Beverly  was  entitled  to  one  tie-breaking  point  for  that  certificate  since  the  criteria  do  not 
distinguish  between  clear  and  emergency  CLAD  certificates.  But  whether  Beverly  is  entitled 
to  a  point  for  his  CLAD  certificate  or  not  is  immaterial;  at  most,  he  is  entitled  to  one  tie- 
breaking  point  and  is  therefore  considered  “junior”  to  Thompson.  The  district  may  retain 
Thompson  while  laying  off  Beverly. 

However,  the  district  may  not  lay  off  Beverly  for  his  entire  1.0  FTE  position. 
The  resignation  of  one  employee  and  the  layoff  of junior  employee  Christian  account  for  2.0 
FTE  of  the  2.80  FTE  reduction.  Therefore,  Beverly  may  be  laid  off  for  only  0.8  FTE.  He 
must  be  retained  for  the  remaining  0.2  FTE. 

7. 

Respondents  assert  that  in  AB  1802,  the  state  created  a  fund  into  which 

districts  could  tap,  “with  no  questions  asked,”  to  receive  additional  funding  for  counseling. 
While  several  other  Solano  County  school  districts  have  applied  for  and  received  these  funds, 
the  district  has  not.  Because  the  district  has  failed  to  obtain  available  funds  for  its  counseling 
program,  respondents  assert  that  the  district  cannot  show  “necessity”  for  the  counseling 
reduction. 

AB  1802,  passed  in  2006,  was  enacted  as  Education  Code  section  52378, 

creating  the  Middle  and  High  School  Supplemental  Counseling  Program  to  provide 
additional  counseling  services  for  pupils  in  grades  7  to  12.  As  a  condition  of  receiving  funds 
under  the  program,  a  school  district  must  comply  with  numerous  requirements  specified  in 
the  statute;  it  is  not  simply  a  matter  of  applying  for  and  receiving  the  funds.  Regardless  of 
whether  or  not  they  are  easily  obtained,  the  district  has  not  applied  for  and  received  the 
additional  counseling  funds,  nor  is  it  required  to  do  so.  The  district’s  failure  to  seek  these 
funds  does  not  undercut  the  previously-made  finding  that  the  service  reductions  being  made 
are  in  the  interest  of  the  schools  and  their  students.  A  district  need  not  show a  specific  need 
to  reduce  a  specific  service.  It  is  sufficient  to  show  a  general  need  to  reduce  services.  Which 
services  are  then  reduced  is  within  the  district’s  discretion,  provided  that  all  mandated 
services  are  still  provided.  The  evidence  showed  that  even  with  the  counseling  reductions, 
the  district  will  continue  to  meet  the  mandated  pupil  personnel  services  requirements. 

  

' 

The  seniority  list  characterizes  the  term  of  Beverly’s  CLAD  certificate  as  “TCEM.”  No 

testimony  was  offered  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  designation.  In  their  hearing  brief,  respondents  refer  to 
Beverly’s  CLAD  certificate  as  “temporary.” 

 

  

  

8. 

Except  as  set  forth  above,  no  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  of  the 

respondents  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  for  which  any  of  the  respondents  are 
certificated  and  competent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  60.80  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  set  forth  below,  cause  further  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year. 
This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949. 

2. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  5,  the  district  must  apply  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  all 

employees  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2006,  who  have  the  same  credentials  and 
competence  as  Erica  Hightower,  and  must  retain  the  employee  who  ranks  first  following 
application  of  those  criteria. 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  6,  the  district  must  retain  respondent  Ronald  Beverly 

for  a  0.2  FTE  position. 

Except  as  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  2  and  3,  notice  may  be  given  respondents 

that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

ORDER 

DATED: 

3 

07 

MICHAEL  C.  COHN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

