BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ST.  HELENA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

RAMAH  COMMANDAY,  LINDA 
COOLEY,  LISA  DOXSEE,  MARGARET 
HILDEBRANDT,  and  SUSAN  WOOD- 
DeGUILIO, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N2007040003 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2007,  in  St.  Helena,  California. 

Lawrence  M.  Schoenke,  Esq.,  Miller,  Brown  &  Dannis,  71  Stevenson Street, 
Nineteenth  Floor,  San  Francisco,  California  94105  represented  the  St.  Helena  Unified  School 
District. 

David  Weintraub,  Esq.,  Beeson,  Tayer  &  Bodine,  1404  Franklin  Street,  Fifth  Floor, 

Oakland,  California  94612  represented  the  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  25,  2007,  after  receipt  of  faxed  case  citations  for 

counsel  for  District.  The  fax  was  marked  as  Exhibit  9  for  identification.  The  record  was 
reopened  on  April  27,  2007,  upon  receipt  of  two  letters  of  reference  that  been  inadvertently 
omitted  by  respondent’s  counsel  from  Exhibit  C.  The  letters  were  added  to  Exhibit  C  in 
evidence.  On  May  3,  2007,  faxed  case  citations  were  received  from  counsel  for  respondent 
and  marked  as  Exhibit E 
2007. 

for  identification.  This  case  was  deemed  submitted  on  May  3, 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Allen  E.  Gordon  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents  in  his 
official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  St.  Helena  Unified  School 
District  (District). 

2. 

Respondents  Ramah  Commanday,  Linda  Cooley,  Lisa  Doxsee,  Margaret 

Hildebrandt  and  Susan  Wood-DeGuilio  are  all  certificated  employees  of  District.

  

  

  

3. 

On  March  12,  2007,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board 
(Board)  of  District  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
for  the  2007-2008  school  year: 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

Director  of  Special  Education 
School  Psychologist 
Speech  and  Language  Therapy 
Special  Education:  Mild  to  Moderate 
School  Nursing 

1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.5  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
0.5  F.T.E. 

Total 

5.0  F.T.E.! 

4. 

On  March  12,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  06-11,  reducing  or 
discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  and  directing  the 
Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  affected  by  the 
reduction. 

5. 

On  March  13,  2007,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents 

Commanday,  Doxsee,  Hildebrandt  and  Wood-DeGuilio,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955,  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year.”  The  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

6. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  sent  respondent  Cooley a letter  stating, 

“It  is  with  regret  that  I  inform  you  that  your  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2007/2008 
school  year.” 

7. 

On  March  29,  2007,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondent 

Cooley,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  the  recommendation  that 
her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  written  notice  set  forth 
the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

8. 

Respondents  each  made  a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  However, 
respondent  Doxsee  failed  to  return  a  Notice  of  Defense.  District  refuses  to  waive  Doxsee’s 
failure  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  contends  she  has  forfeited  her  right  to  a  hearing. 

'  Robert  Haley,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  District,  testified  that  the  indicated  services  were 

being  reduced  because  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  four  school  districts  for  shared special 
education  resources  was  expiring  and  would  not  be  renewed.  All  of  the  reduced  services  were  “called  for 
under  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding.” 

>  Employee  David  Miller  was  also  served  with  a  notice  of  non-reemployment  but  did  not  request 

a  hearing  and  therefore  has  waived  his  right  to  a  hearing. 

 

District  provided  a  Statement  to  Respondent  to  each  respondent.  The  Statement  to 

Respondent  advised  that  if  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  was  not  delivered  or  mailed  to  the 
Governing  Board  within  five  days  of  personal  service  of  the  Accusation  on  the  respondent, 
“the  Governing  Board  may  proceed  upon  the  Accusation  without  a  hearing.”  The  Statement 
to  Respondent  further  advised  that  “failure  to  request  a  hearing  by  the  filing  of  a  Notice  of 
Defense  within  the  period  specified  above  will  constitute  a  waiver  of  your  right  to  a  hearing.” 
Doxsee  did  not  file  a  Notice  of  Defense.  No  explanation  was  provided  for  her  failure  to  do 
so.  However,  District  clearly  had  notice  Doxsee  wanted  a  hearing,  she  was  represented  by 
counsel  at  hearing  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  prejudice  to  District  by  her  failure  to  file 
the  Notice  of  Defense.  After  considering  all  of  the  evidence,  it  is  determined  that  equity 
requires  that  Doxsee  be  granted  a  hearing. 

7. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  with  respect  to 
respondents  Commanday,  Doxsee,  Hildebrandt  and  Wood-DeGuilio.  A  dispute  exists 
regarding  whether  all  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  with  respect  to  respondent 
Cooley. 

8. 

Respondent  Linda  Cooley  holds  a  School  Nurse  Services  Credential.  District 

currently  employs  Cooley  as  a  0.5  F.T.E.  nurse.?  District  has  assigned  Cooley a  seniority 
date  of  August  20,  2003.  Cooley  is  listed  as  a  temporary  employee  on  District’s seniority 
list.  Cooley  holds  the  0.5  F.T.E.  school  nursing  position  that  is  being  eliminated. 

9. 

On  March  8,  2007,  District  sent  Cooley  a  letter  advising  her  that  her  services 

would  not  be  needed  for  the  2007/2008  school  year.  District  believed  Cooley  to  be  a 
temporary  employee  when  it  sent  her  the  March 8 letter.  It  still  held  that  belief  when  it  sent 
out  its  initial  notices  of  non-reemployment  on  March  13,  2007.  Therefore,  it  did  not  notice 
Cooley.  However,  District  subsequently  learned  that  the  employment  contract  between 
District  and  Cooley  listed  Cooley  as  a  probationary  employee.  District  then  sent  Cooley  a 
non-reemployment  notice  on  March  29,  2007. 

Cooley  contends  District  may  not  lay  her  off  because  District  failed  to  notify  her, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  March  15,  2007,  of  the 
recommendation  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school year. 
District  contends  its  failure  to  send  the  notice  required  by  the  Education  Code  by  March  15 
was  a  non-substantive,  non-prejudicial  error  because  Cooley  was  given  notice  of  non- 
reemployment  pursuant  to  the  March  8,  2007,  letter. 

10. 

The  Education  Code  authorizes  a  school  district  to  reduce  its  certificated  staff 
if  the  school  board  decides  to  reduce  a  particular  kind  of  service.  The  Education  Code  also 
establishes  a  procedure  for  implementing  the  reduction.  Under  the  procedure,  the  school 
district  must,  no  later  than  March  15  of  the  school  year  preceding  dismissal,  give  a  notice 

  

>  At  hearing  Assistant  Superintendent  Robert  Haley  testified  that  he  believed  Cooley’s  contract 

currently  provides  for  0.39  F.T.E.  employment. 

  

 

  

(preliminary  notice)  to  each  certificated  employee  of  the  decision  recommending  that  the 
employee  not  be  reemployed  for  ensuing  school  year,  stating  the  reasons  therefore  and  the 
employee’s  entitlement  to  a  hearing.  The  preliminary  notice  must  be  personally  delivered  or 
deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  pre-paid  and  addressed  to  the  last 
known  address  of  the  employee.  A  hearing  then  takes  place  before  an  administrative  law 
judge,  who  prepares  a  proposed  decision  which  the  school  board  may  or  may  not  accept. 
The  board’s  final  decision  to  terminate  and  notice  to  the  employee  of  that  decision  must  be 
made  by  May  15.  Any  employee  not  given  the  preliminary  and  final  notices  is  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  following  school  year.  (Ed.  Code  §§  44955,  44949;  San  Jose  Teachers 
Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3"  627,  631-632;  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn., 
Inc.  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

e 

In  this  case  Cooley  was  notified  by  letter  on  March  8,  2007,  that  her  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  However,  the  letter  did  not  state  the  reason 
for  the  non-reemployment  or  advise  her  of  her  right  to  a  hearing.  Therefore,  the  March  8 
letter  failed  to  satisfy  the  statutory  criteria  for  a  preliminary  notice.  This  failure  was  not  a 
nonsubstantive  procedural  error.  Cooley  did  not  receive  proper  notice  until  March  29,  2007, 
well  after  the  March  15  jurisdictional  deadline  for  such  notices.  She  must  therefore  be 
deemed  reemployed  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  and  may  not  be  laid  off. 

11. 

Respondent  Susan  Wood-DeGuilio  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services: Basic, 
School  Psychology  Credential.  District  currently  employs  her  as  a  0.2  F.T.E.  psychologist. 
District  has  assigned  Wood-DeGuilio  a  seniority  date  of  August  30,  1990. 

Respondent  Margaret  Hildebrandt  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services:  School 
Counseling,  School  Psychology  Credential.  District  currently  employs  her  as  a  0.8  F.T.E. 
psychologist.  District  has  assigned  Hildebrandt  a  seniority  date  of  August  21,  2003. 

Respondent  Ramah  Commanday  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services: Counseling, 

School  Psychology  Credential.  District  currently  employs  her  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  special 
education  psychologist.  District  has  assigned  Commanday a seniority  date  of  August  16, 
2004. 

12. 

Both  Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  are  senior  to  Commanday.  District 
Proposes  to  lay  off  respondents  Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  and  retain  respondent 
Commanday.  District  does  not  allow  a  part-time  employee  to  bump a  full-time  employee.  It 
also  believes  that  a  full-time  psychologist  is  what  is  needed  for  program  continuity. 

Citing  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (c)  and  (d),  respondents  Wood- 
DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  contend  they  are  entitled  to  retain  their  positions.  Section  4495, 
subdivision  (c),  requires  that  the  services  of  employees  noticed  for  layoff  “be  terminated  in 
the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed”  and  that  the  governing  board  of  a 
school  district  “make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall 
be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to 
render.”  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  permits  a  school  district  to  deviate 

e 

@  

  

from  terminating a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  if  it  demonstrates  a  specific 
need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  and  that  the  certificated 
employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  the  course  or  course  of 
study,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  argue  that  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivisions  (c)  and  (d),  where  several  employees  are  qualified  to  hold a  position,  the 
employees  must  be  terminated  in  the  order  of  their  seniority  unless  the  criteria  set  forth  in 
Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  are  satisfied.  Wood-DeGuilio  and 
Hildebrandt  maintain  they  are  qualified  to  fill  the  position  held  by  Commanday  because  they 
both  hold  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credentials.  They  then  reason  since  they  are  senior  to 
Commanday,  and  are  qualified  to  hold  Commanday’s  position,  and  since  District  has  not 
made  a  showing  of  a  specific  need  for  Commanday’s  special  training  and  experience,  they 
must  be  retained  to  fill  the  remaining  1.0  F.T.E.  school  psychologist  position. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  not  persuasive.  Case  law  establishes  that  a  full  time 

employee  cannot  be  displaced  by  a  part-time  employee.  Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  Office  of 
Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456,  is  instructive  on  this  issue.  In  Murray  a  part-time 
school  district  nurse  was  laid  off  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  but,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44956,  retained  a  right  of  preferential  hire  if  the  discontinued  service 
was  reestablished.  A  full-time  nurse  was  later  hired  and  assigned  to  cover  the  duties  the  part- 
time  nurse  had  previously  performed.  The  part-time  nurse  sought  a  writ  of  mandate  to 
compel  her  rehire  as  a  part-time  school  nurse.  The  writ  was  denied.  In  reaching  its  decision 
the  court  noted  that  under  section  44956  an  employee  is  entitled  to  the  same  (not  more) 
employment  rights  that  she  would  have  had  if  no  layoff  had  occurred,  and  that  a  laid  off  part- 
time  employee  thus  was  not  entitled  to  be  rehired  into  a  full-time  position.  The  court  also 
noted  that  a  part-time  employee  did  not  have  the  right  to  force  the  Sonoma  County  Office  of 
Education  to  divide  a  full-time  position  to  accommodate  her  desire  for  a  part-time  position. 
And  it  also  found  that  the  “service”  that  was  discontinued  was  the  part-time  position  and  not 
a  particular  assignment.  (And  see  King  v.  Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  89 
Cal.App.3d  1016  [school  district  acted  within  its  discretion  in  hiring  an  employee  with  less 
seniority  than  another  employee  with  preferential  rehire  rights  where  the  senior  employee 
lacked  one  of  two  credentials  (i.e.,  a  teaching  credential)  necessary  for  a  50  percent 
counseling  and  fifty  percent  teaching  position.]) 

In  this  case  respondents  Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  are  entitled  to  the  same 

part-time  positions  they  would  have  held  had  no  reduction  in  service  occurred.  The  part-time 
positions  which  they  are  entitled  to  retain  by  virtue  of  seniority  and  qualifications  have  been 
discontinued.  Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  do  not  have  the  right  to  force  District  to 
divide  a  full-time  position  to  accommodate  their  desire  for  part-time  employment. 
Therefore,  District  may  lay  off  both  Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt. 

13. 

Commanday  contends  that  if  she  is  bumped  by  Wood-DeGuilio  and 

Hildebrandt,  that  she  should  be  permitted  to  bump  into  the  position  held  by  Theresa  O’Leary, 
who  has  a  2006  hire  date  and  is  less  senior  than  Commanday.  O’Leary  is  a  temporary  0.6 

 

  

  

  

F.T.E.  employee  serving  under  contract  in  a  categorically  funded  position  that  requires  a 
Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential.  This  contention  will  not  be  addressed  given  the 
conclusion  in  Factual  Finding  12  that  Wood-DeGuilio  and  Hildebrandt  may  be  laid  off  by 
District. 

14. 

Respondent  Doxsee  holds  a  Clinical  Rehabilitation  Services:  Language, 
Speech  and  Hearing  Credential.  District  currently  employs  her  as  a  0.5  F.T.E.  special 
education  speech  pathologist.  District  has  assigned  Doxsee  a  seniority  date  of  September  4, 
2003.  Doxsee  argues  she  must  be  retained  because  she  provides  speech  therapy,  which  is  a 
mandated  service  (e.g.,  speech  therapy  is  required  under  many  Individual  Education  Plans). 

District  anticipates  that  it  will  be  able  provide  the  necessary  speech  services  during 

the  upcoming  2007-2008  school  year.  If  District  finds  it  difficult  to  provide  mandatory 
services  next  year,  it  has  the  option  of  changing  the  manner  or  method  of  offering  the 
service.  (Campbell  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Gallup  v.  Loma  School  Dist.  (1996) 
41  Cal.App.4th  1571.) 

15. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the 

ensuing  school  year. 

16. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

17. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3  is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  v.  Abbot,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  for  termination  of  5.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  as  a  result  of 

the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Finding  10  notice  may  not  be  given  to 

respondent  Linda  Cooley. 

 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year,  except  that  notice  shall  not  be  given  to  respondent  Linda  Cooley. 

ORDER 

DATED:  May  4,  2007 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

 

  

