  

BEFORE,  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
IMPERIAL  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2007030797 

DONALD  W.  LOTTER, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Vallera  J.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  E]  Centro,  California  on  April  30,  and  May  1,  2007 
and  in  San  Diego,  California  on  May  3,  2007. 

Frank  A.  Oswalt,  III,  Esq.,  Oswalt  &  Associates,  represented  Imperial  Community 

College  District. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Esq.,  Tosdal,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  Respondent  Donald 

W.  Lotter,  Ph.D.  who  was  present  during  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  3,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Paul  Pai,  Ed.D.  (Complainant)  made  and  filed  the  Accusation,  dated  March  20, 

2007,  against  Donald  W.  Lotter,  Ph.D.  (Respondent),  in  his  official  capacity  as  the 
Superintendent/President  of  the  Imperial  Community  College  District  (District). 

2. 

Respondent  is  employed  by  the  District  as  a  certified  employee. 

3, 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  87740,  on  February  20,  2007, 
Complainant  gave  notice  to  the  Board  of  Trustees of the  District  (Board) of his 
recommendation  that  the  board  give  notice  to  Respondent  that  his  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  and  stated  the  reasons  for  this  recommendation. 

Prior  to  March  15,  2007,  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  Education 
Code  section  87610,  the  Board  served  Respondent  with  Notice  of  Initial  Decision  Not  to 

4. 

  

1

  

Reemploy  Respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2007  ~  2008  (Notice).  Attached  to  the 
Notice  were  the  supporting  documents  and  the  reasons  for  the  decision.  Respondent  had 
completed  his  second  contract  year,  and  the  ensuing  school  year  (2007  —  2008)  would  be  his 
third  contract. 

e 

5. 

On  March  5,  2007,  Respondent  appealed  the  Board’s  Decision  not  to  re- 

employ  him  as  a  contract  employee  of  the  District. 

6. 

The  District  hired  Respondent  as  an  Agriculture  instructor.  He  is  a 

probationary  faculty  member  (contract)  who  had a  tenure-track  contract  to  become  a  regular 
faculty  member  but  had  not  been  granted  tenure  by  the  District. 

7. 

Respondent  has  an  impressive  background  and  expertise,  particularly  relevant 

to  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  an  Agriculture  instructor. 

He  holds  a  Ph.D.,  master  of  science  degree  in  ecology,  master  of  professional  studies 
in  international  agricultural  studies  and  rural  development;  his  bachelor  of  science  degree  is 
in  agronomy  and  range  science.  Respondent  received  the  majority  of  his  education  at  the 
University  of  California,  Davis  (UC  Davis);  he  obtained  his  master  of  professional  studies 
from  Cornell  University  (Cornell).  Prior  to  being  employed  by  the  District,  Respondent’s 
experience  included  working  as  a freelance  journalist,  a  fellow  and  post-doctoral  researcher, 
all  in  the  field  of  agriculture. 

In  the  job  description,  entitled  “Career  Opportunity”  for  “Agriculture  Instructor”,  the 

e 

duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  position  include,  but  are  not  limited  to: 

e 

¢ 

e 

e 
e 

e 
¢ 

Provide  instruction  in  agriculture  courses  with  approved  Imperial  Valley 
College  (IVC)  curriculum  and  established  course  outlines. 
Participate  in  curriculum  development,  the  evaluation  and  revision  of  courses, 
course  materials,  instructional  methods,  self-study,  program  revision  and 
master  plan. 
Attend  and  participate  in  campus  division,  department  program,  and  review 
meetings  and  activities. 
Serve  on  college  committees  as  may  be  assigned. 
Maintain  an  active  Agriculture  Program  Advisory  Committee  (Ag  Advisory 
Committee). 
Provide  outreach  and  articulation  services  to  other  educational  organizations. 
Comply  with  published  college  policies  and  procedures. 

When  he  was  hired  by  the  District,  Respondent  had  limited  teaching  experience;  previously, 
he  taught  one  course  at  the  University  of  California,  Santa  Cruz  in  1981,  and  had  been  a 
teaching  assistant  at  Cornell. 

8. 

In  community  colleges,  there  are  divisions,  and  within  the  divisions  are 

e 

departments  that  are  discipline  specific. 

 

  

Agriculture  Science  (Ag  Sci)  is  an  applied  science.  Gonzolo  Huerta  (Huerta)  is  the 

Dean of  Instruction,  Applied  Sciences.  On  August  21,  2005,  he  notified  Respondent  that  the 
Agriculture  Department  had  been  transferred  from  the  Industrial  Technology  Division  to  the 
Science  Math  and  Engineering  Division  (SME),  the  consequences  thereof  and  Lianna  Zhao 
(Zhao)  would  be  his  Division  Chair,  i.e.,  his  supervisor. 

9. 

Applied  science  courses  are  distinguishable  from  academic  subjects.  Applied 

science  is  the  new  term  for  vocational  education  or  career  technical  education.  These 
courses  are  intended  to  prepare  students  for  entry  level  employment  after  achieving  a 
certificate  or  associates  of  arts  degree,  or  to  prepare  students  to  attend  a  four-year  college  or 
university.  By  contrast,  academic  subjects  are  the  general  education  that  supports  the  applied 
science  degree  and  are  part  of  transfer  programs  to  four-year  colleges  or  universities. 

10. 

In  order  to  achieve  the  goals  described  in  Finding  9,  each of  the  applied 

science  departments  has  a  program  advisory  committee.  The  majority  of  the  members  are 
from  business  and  industry  in  the  community.  The  function  of  the  advisory  committee  is  to 
provide  advice  to  the  teachers  to  assure  that  curriculum  prepares  students  to  be  competent  in 
the  field  upon  graduation.  Instructors  make  an  effort  to  alter  curriculum  to  reflect 
recommendations  from  advisory  committee  members.  Given  the  facts  in  Findings  9  and  10, 
the  interface  between  the  teacher  and  the  advisory  committee  is  essential  and  extremely 
important. 

Huerta’s  office  has  published  a  Program  Advisory  Committee  Handbook  (Handbook) 

intended  to  be  used  by  all  advisory  committees,  although  it  is  not  always  so  used.  It  is 
available  to  new  faculty  members  from  Huerta’s  office,  the  Division  chair  or  the  secretary  of 
the  Division.  Respondent  received  a  copy  of  the  Handbook  in  August  2006. 

Each  advisory  committee  is  chaired  by  a  member  from  business  and  industry;  the  full- 

time  professor  and  Division  Chair  serve  as  advisors  to  the  chair,  According  to  Huerta,  it  is 
easier  for  an  individual  from  business  and  industry  to  communicate  with  each  other; 
therefore,  the  dynamics  of  the  committee  are  more  effective;  in  addition,  there  is  a  certain 
level  of  conflict  if  the  instructor  runs  the  committee,  and  he/she  has  certain  things  that  he  or 
she  wants  to  do;  the  advisory  committee  may  go  in  a  direction  that  the  members  may  or  may 
not  believe  is  appropriate;  to  neutralize  the  foregoing,  the  business  and  industry  chair  and 
instructor  work  jointly  to  operate  the  advisory  committee;  it  is  a  matter  of  direction  of  the 
committee. 

The  Ag  Advisory  Committee  was  in  existence  prior  to  Respondent’s  arrival.  The 
members  were  Imperial  Valley  farmers  and  from  businesses  that  support  the  agricultural 
industry,  teachers  of  agriculture  in  the  high  schools,  and  any  individual  interested  in  working 
with  the  Agriculture  Department.  When  Respondent  was  hired,  Huerta  provided  him  with  a 
list  of  the  members  of  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee.

  

  

11. 

Faculty  members  in  the  Department  are  responsible  for  preparing,  updating 

and  modifying  course  outlines,  As  the  only  full-time  professor,  Respondent  had  this 
responsibility. 

The  course  outline  serves  several  purposes.  One  purpose  is  to  be  the  record  of  what  is 

being  taught  within  the  course.  A  second  purpose  is  to  provide  information  to  an  instructor 
hired  by  the  college  to  teach  the  course,  rather  than  have  each  teacher  independently  develop 
a  course  outline,  A  third  purpose  is  to  permit  evaluation  of  the  course  by  other  four-year 
colleges  or  universities  to  determine  whether  credits  will  be  transferable. 

12. 

Respondent  has  been  subject  to  tenure  review  probationary  faculty.  The 

District’s  procedures  for  tenure  review  of  probationary  faculty  are  set  forth  in  the  collective 
bargaining  agreement  between  the  District  and  its  employees.  The  provisions  relevant  to  this 
proceeding  are  as  follows. 

11.1.2  Evaluation  Criteria  describes  the  relationship  between  the  teacher  and  the 

students,  the  classroom  teaching  duties  and  professional  responsibilities. 

11.1.3  Individual  Tenure  Review  Committee 

A. 

The  Individual  Tenure  Review  Committee  shall  be  composed  of  three 
members: 

© 
e 
e 

one  member  selected  by  the  candidate  from  tenured  division  members, 
the  current  division  chairperson,  and 
the  Chief  Instructional  Officer  or  designee  .... 

F 

Individual  Tenure  Review  Committee  members’  duties  and  responsibilities 

are  .... 

3. 

4. 

To  take  care  to  base  the  evaluation  only  on  the  candidate’s  professional 
characteristics  and  ability  to  teach. 

To  recognize  that  the  candidate  may  have  a  different  philosophy  of 
education  and  teaching  style  than  theirs,  and  let  the  main  concern  be  the 
effectiveness  of  the  candidate  in  the  classroom... 

11.1.4  Evaluation  Process 

A. 

An  orientation  meeting  shall  be  held  for  all  newly  hired  full-time  probationary 
faculty  members  during  their  first  semester  of  employment.  Each 
probationary  faculty  member  shall  be  given  a  copy  of  the  job  description 
announcement  which  she  or  he  was  hired,  a  blank  copy  of  the  administrative 
and  peer  evaluation  form,  and  a  blank  copy  of  the  student  evaluation  form  for 
faculty.  It  is  partially  on  the  basis of the  criteria  that  have  been  incorporated 

 

into  these  forms  that  the  probationary  employee  is  to  be  evaluated.  The 
chairperson  of  the  Individual  Tenure  Review  Committee  shall  be  responsible 
for  ascertaining  that  the  probationary  employee  has  received  a  description  of, 
and  has  understood,  the  evaluation  process. 

The  evaluation  process  shall  include  the  following  general  steps: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

An  orientation  meeting  for  the  committee  members  called  by  the 
division  chairperson,  during  which  a  committee  chairperson  shall  be 
elected. 

An  orientation  meeting  with  the  candidate  in  which  the  committee 
explains  the  evaluation  criteria,  the  evaluation  process,  and  the  tenure 
review  procedures. 

A  formal  evaluation  of  the  candidate  in  accordance  with  the  tenure 
review  procedure. 

4, 

A  committee  meeting: 

to  consider  all  evaluation  input,  and 
to  decide  on  the  recommendation  for  the  candidate’s 
subsequent-year  status,  and 
to  design  a  plan  of  instructional  improvement  for  the  candidate, 
if  appropriate. 

5. 

A  committee  meeting  with  the  candidate: 

to  discuss  employment  recommendation,  and 
to  recommend a  plan  for  instructional  improvement,  if 
appropriate. 

6. 

The  submission  of  the  Individual  Tenure  Review  Committee’s 
recommendation  to  the  college  president. 

The  candidate  shall  be  evaluated  in  the  following  areas  and  in  the  following 
manner: 

1. 

An  evaluation  of  classroom  performance  by  the  Individual  Tenure 
Review  Committee  in  accordance  with  the  following: 

a. 

a  minimum  of  one  classroom  observation  per  committee 
member  will  be  conducted  during  the  second,  fourth  and 
seventh  semesters;  ....

a. 
b. 

c. 

a. 
b. 

  

 

2. 

3. 

An  evaluation  of  classroom  performance  by  students  using  a  student 
evaluation  form  or  SGID. 

An  evaluation  of  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  candidate  conducted 
by  the  division  chairperson  who  shal!  evaluate: 

a. 
b. 

the  candidate’s  adherence  to  assigned  responsibilities,  and 
the  candidate’s  performance  of  departmental  and  campus  duties, 
such  as  attending  meetings  and  serving  on  committees... 

E, 

The  candidate  has  the  right  to  respond  to  any  complaint,  any  concern,  or  any 
other  issue  regarding  this  tenure  review  process... 

11.1.6.  Duties  to  be  Performed  During  the  Candidate’s  Subsequent  Semesters  of 

Employment 

The  committee  shall  meet  to  review  all  the  pertinent  areas  of  the  evaluation 
and  evaluation  materials. 

Classroom  observations  shall  be  made  by  the  committee  members. 

The  candidate  shall  submit  a  self-assessment. 

The  Division  Chairperson  shall  conduct  the  duties  and  responsibilities 
evaluation. 

The  committee  shall  decide  upon  an  employment  recommendation  for  the 
candidate,  and  if  appropriate,  shall  establish  a  specific  course  of  action  for 
helping  the  candidate  improve  in  recognized  areas  of  weakness. 

The  committee  shall  meet  with  the  candidate  to  discuss  the  recommendation, 
and,  if  appropriate,  to  present  a  course  of  action  for  the  candidate  to  improve 
in  recognized  areas  of  weakness. 

The  committee  shall  submit  its  employment  recommendation,  along  with 
copies  of  appropriate  substantiating  documents,  to  the  college  president,  who 
shall,  in  turn,  present  the  recommendations  of  the  committee  and  the 
substantiating  documents  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  no  later  than  the  regular 
February  board  meeting. 

H. 

Items  11.1.5  4  and  11.1.6  1  through  7  shall  be  completed  by  the  end  of  the 
candidate’s  second,  fourth  and  seventh  semesters  of  employment. 

Respondent’s  tenure  review  committee  (Committee)  consisted  of: 

e 

e 
e 

Kendra  Jeffcoat,  Ph.D.  (Dr.  Jeffcoat),  Vice-President,  Academic 
Services,  also  known  as  Vice-President,  Instruction;  She  retired  June 
2006  and  was  replaced  by  her  interim  replacement,  Gary  Rodgers 
(Rodgers), 
Zhoa,  SME  Division  Chair,  and 
Barbara  Nilson  (Nilson),  a  Mathematics  teacher  at  IVC  and  member  of 
SME  Division;  her  family  has  been  involved  in  farming  for  49  years; 
she  was  the  facility  member  selected  by  Respondent  and  the  chair  of 
. 
the  committee. 

Prior  to  June  4,  2006, 

the  members  of  the  Committee  had  an  orientation  meeting; 
the  members  of  the  Committee  had  an  orientation  meeting  with 
Respondent  during  which  all  necessary  explanations  and  forms  were 
provided  to  him; 
the  members of  the  Committee  evaluated  Respondent  and  completed  the 
classroom  visitation  report; 
in  her  capacity  as  Division  Chair,  Zhao  completed  the  “Evaluation  of 
Duties  and  Responsibilities  Teaching  Faculty”  form; 
Respondent  completed  his  self-assessment; 
students  completed  evaluation  forms  of  Respondent’s  classes;  and 
in  addition  to  documentation  regarding  the  foregoing,  the  members  of  the 
Committee  reviewed the  job  description  for  the  position  of  Agriculture 
Instructor. 

15. 

The  members  of  the  Committee  held  meetings  on  June  4  and  6,  2006. 

After  review  of  Respondent’s  performance  during  his  first  year,  2006-2006,  the 

members  of  the  Committee  found  significant  deficiencies.  He  explained  that  he  had  spent 
his  time  performing  functions  (such  as  grant  writing)  other  than  those  the  Committee  had 
been  anticipating  of  the  Agriculture  Instructor.  In  an  effort  to  assist  him  in  prioritizing  his 
duties  and  tasks  in  line  with  his  job  functions,  the  Committee  established  a  specific  course  of 
action  for  helping  him  improve  in  recognized  areas  of  weakness  through  a  Remediation  Plan. 
Respondent  agreed  that  the  items  on  the  Remediation  Plan  were  obtainable  goals  with 
reasonable  deadlines  and  would  guide  him  in  some  of  the  necessary  duties  expected  in  his 
position  as  the  primary  instructor  in  Agriculture.  The  Remediation  Plan  was  signed  by  the 
members of  the  Committee  and  Respondent  on  June  7,  2006. 

16. 

The  Remediation  Plan  provides  as  follows. 

“Recommendations  from  Tenure  Review  Committee 

Steps  toward  improvement  to  be  reviewed  by  December  2006

  

  

e 
e 
e 
e 
e 
e 

e 
© 
e 

© 

e 

e 
e 

1. 

2. 

Conduct  Agriculture  Advisory  Committee  meetings  at  least  bimonthly  with 
agenda  and  minutes  to  be  turned  in  to  Division  Chair  and  Vice  President  of 
instruction. 

Conduct  regular  Ag  Club  meetings  (recommend  monthly)  to  plan  events  and 
community  involvements. 

Suggested: 

Involvement  of  Ag  club  officers  in  promotion  of  the  agriculture  program 
Participation  in  Cattle  Call  Parade 
Participation  in  Midwinter  Fair 
Participation  in  Farmer’s  Market 
Participation  in  4H  Barbeque 
Presentations  at  civic  organizations  such  as  Kiwanis’s  and  Rotary 

3. 

Revise  Ag.  Course  outlines 

Courses  that  have  been  taught  2005-2006 
Courses  that  will  be  taught  2006-2007 
Compare  the  curriculum  of  IVC  courses  with  those  of  other  Community 
Colleges  and  their  articulation  for  transfer 
Submit  those  updated  or  revised  Course  Outlines  and  C  and  J  forms  to  the 
Division  Chair  for  approval  in  October  Division  meeting 
Approved  revisions  presented  to  C  and  I  in  November  2006 

4. 

Document  all  participation  in  community  outreach  activities 

Visits  to  local  schools,  FFA  or  4H 
Develop a list  of  interested  students  for  future  contact  for  building  the  AG 
program  at  IVC 

The  Tenure  Review  Committee  will  meet  with  Dr.  Don  Lotter  by  the  end  of  Fal]  semester 
2006  to  review  steps  taken  toward  remediation  and  make  our  recommendations  to  the  Board 
of  Trustees  for  consideration  for  rehire  before  the  March  15,  2007  Board  meeting.” 

17. 

On  December  11,  2006,  the  Committee  met  with  Respondent  to  evaluate  the 

Remediation  Plan.  They  listened  to  his  explanation  of  the  steps  that  he  took  towards  meeting 
each  of  his  goals;  they  requested  his  responses  and  level  of  effort  in  each of  the  areas.  The 
following  is  a  summary  of  the  findings  of  the  Committee. 

A. 

The  Ag  Advisory  Committee  met  on  September  19,  October  26  and  December 

9,  2006. 

 

‘There  was  no  agenda  emailed  or  distributed  at  the  meeting  until  December. 
For  each  of  the  three  meetings  he  asked  a  Committee  member  to  take  notes. 
The  hand  taken  notes  were  never  reviewed,  corrected  or  approved  by  the 
members  at  any  of  meetings  thereafter. 
In  Fall  2005,  the  2005-2006  Ag  Advisory  Committee  members  from  the 
community  hosted  a  banquet  at  Walter  Britzschgi’s  (Britzschgi)  home  to 
welcome  Respondent.  Approximately  15  Ag  Advisory  Committee  members 
were  present  and  provided  lively  discussion  about  the  Agriculture  program. 
By  December  2006,  all  of  those  community  members  stopped  attending  the 
Ag  Advisory  Committee  meetings.  Only  IVC  affiliated  individuals 
(administrator,  division  chair,  faculty,  potential  consultant)  continued  to  attend 
the  meetings. 
Some of the  active  members  of  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee  were  not  notified 

of  the  meetings  beginning  Fall  2006.  When  a  member of  the  Ag  Advisory 

Committee  came  to  the  October  meeting,  in  response  to  questioning, 
Respondent  informed  him  that  he  was  intentionally  not  invited  nor  was  he 
welcomed  to  attend  the  meeting. 

B. 

Respondent  sent  notification  of  Ag  Club  meetings  and  activities  to  [VC  All 

Users,  Some  evidence  was  given  to  the  Committee  regarding  student  participation  in  these 
events: 

August  31,  2006  Ag  club  meeting  announcement  —  no  documented  evidence. 
September  6,  2006  guest  speaker,  Roberto  Gonzalez  Jr.  announcement  ~  no 
documented  evidence. 
IVC  student  representative  was  sponsored  by  USDA  to  attend  HACU 
Conference  in  October  2006  in  Texas. 
Club  to  sell  Expresso  in  September  2006  was  postponed,  and  no  documented 
evidence  to  indicate  completion. 
Cal  Poly  San  Luis  Obispo  trip  in  October  2006. 
Cattle  Call  Parade  —  distributed  carrot  cello-bags  and  fliers  on  nutrition. 

Cc. 

From  August  2005  to  May  2006,  there  were  numerous  meetings  and 

correspondence  regarding  Ag  course  outline  of  record  revisions  that  are  necessary  for  the 
accreditation  of  the  college.  Some  of  the  Ag  course  outlines of record  are  seriously  outdated. 
Included  in  the  Remediation  Plan,  the  Committee  and  Respondent  agreed  that  six  of  17  Ag 
course  outlines  of  record,  AG  120,  AG  140,  AG  170,  AG  220,  AG  230  and  AG  250  should 
be  updated  or  revised.  The  revised  course  outline  of  records  and  Curriculum  and  Instruction 
(C  and  I)  forms  were  due  in  October  2006. 

The  Division  office  provided  assistance  to  convert  the  printed  course  outlines 
into  electronic  form;  Respondent  failed  to  make  changes  and/or  updates  by  the 
deadline  indicated  in  his  Remediation  Plan. 
By  February  10,  2007,  none  of  the  six  course  outlines  and  forms  was  ready  for 
approval.

e 

Only  Ag  250  course  outline  and  forms  were  emailed  to  C  and  |  Co-Chair  and 
the  Division  Chair  on  February  5,  2007  and  returned  to  him  for  corrections. 

e 

D. 

No  documentation  was  presented  to  the  Committee  by  Respondent  regarding 

visits  to  local  schools,  FFA  or  4H,  or  a  developing  list  of  interested  students  for  future 
contact  for  building  the  Agriculture  program  at  IVC. 

Based  on  the  records  that  the  Committee  had  and  the  evidence  Respondent  provided, 

the  Committee  determined  that  insufficient  effort  was  made  on  Respondent’s  part  to  meet  the 
goals  of  remediation.  The  Committee  took  reasonable  steps  to  assist  Respondent  in 
performing  his  duties  at  IVC.  The  members  of  the  Committee  are  committed  to  ensuring  that 
the  goals  and  missions of  IVC  continue  to  foster  excellence  in  education  through  the 
maintenance  of  the  integrity  of  programs  while  at  the  same  time  being  responsive  to  the 
greater  community  through  gathering  input  from  our  advisory  committees. 

18. 

Insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  Respondent  and  the 

Agriculture  Department  of  IVC  were  banned  from  using  the  UC  Davis  facility  where  Ag 
Advisory  Committee  meetings  had  been  conducted. 

19. 

During  the  December  11,  2006  meeting,  Respondent  explained  to  the 

Committee  that  he  had  been  sick. 

20. 

Except  as  set  forth  in  Findings  18  and  19,  this  record  is  consistent  with  the 

e@ 

Committee’s  findings,  described  in  Finding  17. 

21. 

During  the  hearing,  Respondent  provided  evidence of his  efforts  to  fulfill  his 
duties  prior  to  June  2006  and  to  comply  with  the  District’s  Remediation  Plan,  dated  June  7, 
2006. 

e 

e 

e 

He  provided  documentation  of  minutes  of  Ag  Advisory  Committee 
meetings,  photographs  of  Ag  Club  and  outreach  activities  located  on  the 
Agriculture  Department’s  website. 
He  did  not  provide  the  course  outlines  in  a  timely  manner.  He  was 
overwhelmed  with  work  as  a  new  teacher.  He  was  on  the  District’s  layoff 
list  in  March  2006  and  spent  considerable  time  seeking  employment  until 
notified  that  he  would  be  retained.  Finally,  wife  suffered  from  breast 
cancer  in  2005,  and  he  visited  her  in  Canada.  Following  the  June  2006 
meeting  with  the  Committee,  he  participated  in  a  three-week  fellowship 
program  and  went  backpacking  in  the  Sierras  in  August  2006.  During  his 
vacation  in  the  Sierras,  he  contracted  dysentery.  Thereafter,  he  was 
extremely  fatigued,  though  he  was  able  to  attend  classes  and  Division 
meetings. 
Given  Huerta’s  direction  to  him  regarding  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee,  he 
believed  that  he  had a  right  to  exclude  Britschgi  from  the  Ag  Advisory 
Committee  meeting;  he  believed  that  Britschgi  was  involved  in  the  letters 

e@ 

10 

 

of  no  confidence  submitted  to  the  District  and  therefore  a  negative 
influence  and  that  he  did  not  have  the  best  interests  of  the  students  in  mind. 

22. 

Respondent  was  hired  because  both  the  District  and  community  recognized  the 
need  for  a  successful  Agriculture  Program  at  IVC.  He  was  the  sole  full-time  faculty  member 
in  the  Department  and  therefore  responsible  for  its  leadership  and  potential  success.  The 
criteria  developed  by  the  District  for  a  successful  Agriculture  Program  at  1VC  were 
reasonable. 

Respondent  appeared  to  be  the  individual  who  could  achieve  the  District’s  intended 

goals.  He  has  excellent  credentials  and  experience.  He  is  an  intelligent,  educated,  articulate 
man.  He  is  concerned  about  the  welfare  of  students  and  the  people  of  Imperial  Valley.  His 
classroom  evaluations  by  the  Committee  and  the  students  were  good. 

After  his  first  year  of  teaching,  the  members  of  the  Committee  determined  that 

Respondent  had  deficiencies  that  were  of  concern  to  them.  During  the  discussion  of  the 
foregoing,  the  Committee  members  developed  the  Remediation  Plan  to  provide  clear 
guidance  regarding  priorities.  In  Respondent’s  opinion,  he  needed  additional  funding  to 
further  develop  the  Agriculture  program.  As  early  as  June  2006,  Zhao  informed  Respondent 
to  cease  the  grant  writing  and  spend  his  time  teaching.  The  District  has  been  patient  and  has 
offered  Respondent  assistance  to  achieve  the  agreed  upon  goals,  set  forth  in  the  Remediation 
Plan.  Despite  that,  Respondent  pursued  and  continued  to  pursue  grant  writing  and  developed 
a  new  course  outline,  rather  than  complying  with  the  requirements  of  the  Remediation  Plan. 

23. 

 Respondent’s  management of his  relationship  with  the  agriculture  community 

has  discouraged  outside  participation  in  Ag  Advisory  Committee  activities.  The  District 
received  two  letters  of  “no  confidence”  from  some  members  of  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee. 
Following  the  exclusion  of  Britschgi,  members  outside  IVC  did  not  attend  the  meetings. 

Respondent  did  not  distribute  an  agenda  for  the  September  2006  and  October  2006 

meetings.  Minutes  taken  during  the  September,  October  and  December  2006  meetings  were 
not  reviewed,  corrected  or  approved  by  members. 

Prior  to  the  hearing,  Respondent  made  no  real  effort  to  effectively  communicate  or 

provide  documentation  of  Ag  Club  activities,  minutes  from  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee 
meetings  or  outreach  activities  to  the  Division  Chair  or  Vice-President  of  Instruction. 

Insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  Respondent’s  mishandling of  his 

relationship  with  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee  resulted  in  him  and  the  IVC  Agriculture 
Department  being  banned  from  the  use  of  University  of  California  —  Davis  Extension 
Facilities  as  a  meeting  site  for  the  Ag  Advisory  Committee. 

24. 

By  February  7,  2007,  Respondent  had  not  completed  the  course  outlines 

required  in  the  Remediation  Plan,  as  provided  in  the  Remediation  Plan. 

ll

  

Updated  course  outlines  are  required  to  be  presented  to  the  accreditation  team, 
scheduled  to  visit  the  college  in  March  2007.  Complainant  did  not  offer  sufficient  evidence 
to  establish  that  outdated  course  outlines  can  threaten  accreditation  of  the  college. 

25, 

|  Though  Respondent  provided  some  photographs  on  the  Agriculture 

Department’s  website,  Respondent  did  not  provide  the  documentation  of  outreach  required 
by  the  Remediation  Plan,  i.e.,  a  list  of  students  who  attended  the  event. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  section  87740.  All 

notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  this  section  were  satisfied. 

2. 

In  the  “Recommendation  Not  to  Reemploy  Contract  Faculty  Member”,  dated 

February  7,  2007,  submitted  by  Complainant  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  decision.  The 
evidence  established: 

A. 

Respondent  failed  to  maintain  a  successful  Ag  Advisory  Committee: 

¢ 
e 

e 

¢ 

e 

¢ 

Community  members  no  longer  attend  Ag  Advisory  Committee  meetings; 
Respondent  excluded  Britschgi,  President  of  the  Committee  from  the 
October  2006  meeting; 
The  college  has  received  two  letters  of  “no  confidence”  concerning 
Respondent  from  some  of  the  local  agricultural  community  members; 
Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the  Remediation  Plan  to  formalize  Ag 
Advisory  Committee  meeting  documents;  no  agenda  was  distributed  for 
September  and  October  2006  meetings;  minutes  taken  were  never 
reviewed,  corrected  or  approved  by  members. 

B. 

Course  Outlines  were  not  updated  as  agreed  in  the  June  2006  Remediation 

Plan: 

Respondent  failed  to  meet  agreed-upon  deadlines  to  update  six  course 
outlines 

Cc. 

No  documentation  of  student  community  outreach: 

Respondent  did  not  provide  the  documentation  of  community  outreach 
agreed  upon  in  the  Remediation  Plan. 

3. 

The  District  established  that  cause  exists  not  to  rehire  Respondent  Donald  W. 

Lotter  as  a  regular  tenured  academic  employee,  by  reason  of  Findings  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12, 
13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24  and  25  and  Legal  Conclusions  |  and  2. 

12 

 

4. 

Given  the  facts  set  forth  in  Findings  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17, 

18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24  and  25  and  Legal  Conclusions  1,  2  and  3,  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  section  87740,  the  evidence  established  that  cause  exists  not  to  rehire  Donald  W. 
Lotter,  Ph.D.;  this  is  related  to  the  welfare of  the  college  and  the  students  thereof. 

1. 

The  appeal  of  Donald  W.  Lotter,  Ph.D.  is  denied. 

ORDER 

2. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondent  Donald  W.  Lotter,  Ph.D.  is  affirmed. 

DATED:  May  7,  2007 

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

13

