BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PLACER  HILLS  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

JILL  KIRKLAND,  DAVID  LIEBERT, 
SARA  LIEBERT,  AND  TRACY  STOKES, 

OAH  No.  N2007030617 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Robert  Walker,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Meadow  Vista,  California,  on  April  24,  2007. 

Heather  Edwards,  Attorney  at  Law,'  represented  the  complainant,  Fred  H.  Adam, 

Superintendent,  Placer  Hills  Union  School  District. 

Andrea  Price,  Attorney  at  Law,’  represented  the  respondents,  Jill  Kirkland,  David 

Liebert,  Sara  Liebert,  and  Tracy  Stokes. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents  —  Jill  Kirkland,  David  Liebert,  Sara  Liebert,  and  Tracy  Stokes  — 

are  certificated  district  employees, 

2. 

Not  later  than  March  15,  2007,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,?  the  superintendent  of  the  school  district  caused  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  and  respondents  to  be  notified  in  writing  that  it  was  recommended  that  respondents 

'  Heather  Edwards,  Attorney  at  Law,  1121  L  Street,  Suite  510,  Sacramento,  California  95814. 

*  Andrea  Price,  Attorney  at  Law,  1371  Garden  Highway,  Suite  100,  Sacramento,  California  95833-9769. 

*  All  references  to  the  Code  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise specified, 

  

 

be  notified  that  the  district  would  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 
notice  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to 
respondents’  competency. 

3. 

A  notice  was  delivered  to  each  respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by 

depositing  the  notice  in  the  United  States  mail,  registered,  postage  prepaid,.and  addressed  to 
respondent’s  last  known  address. 

4. 

The  notice  advised  each  respondent of  the  following:  He  or  she  had  a  right  to.a 

hearing.  In  order  to  obtain  a  hearing,  he  or  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in 
writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice.  The  request  had  to  be  delivered  by  March  21,  2007, 
(which  was  not  less  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served.)  And  the 
failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  accusation 
was  timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All 
prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

6. 

The  recommendation  was  to  reduce  or  discontinue  “particular  kinds  of 

services.”  Within  the  meaning  of  Code  section  44955,  the  services  are  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
these  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

7. 

The  governing  board  of  the  district  determined  that,  because  particular  kinds 

of  services  are  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued,  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
permanent  employees  in  the  district. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  to  the 

welfare  of  the  district  and  its  students.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  is  necessary  in  order 
to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

9. 

Respondent  David  Liebert  and  a  certificated  English  teacher,  Suzanne  Scotten, 
both  began  rendering  paid  service  to  the  district  on  August  18,  2006.  The  district  is  retaining 
Ms.  Scotten  as  an  English  teacher.  Mr.  Liebert  contends  that  he  should  have  been  retained 
because  he  has  a  supplemental  credential  that  qualifies  him  to  teach  English.  The  district 
retained  Ms.  Scotten  rather  than  Mr.  Liebert  because,  within  the  terms  of  the  federal  “No 
Child  Left  Behind”  program,  Ms.  Scotten  is  a  “highly  qualified”  English  teacher.  If  the 
district  were  to  employ  an  English  teacher  who  has  not  demonstrated  that  he  or  she  is  “highly 
qualified,”  the  district  would  subject  itself  to  the  risk  of  compliance  monitoring.  Mr.  Liebert 
has  not  demonstrated  that  he  is  a  “highly  qualified”  English  teacher.  (He  is  a  “highly 
qualified”  history  teacher.)  Mr.  Liebert  further  contends  that  the  district  did  not  take 
appropriate  steps  to  determine  whether  he,  too,  might  satisfy  the  requirements  to  be 
designated  a  “highly  qualified”  English  teacher.  But  it  is  Mr.  Liebert’s  responsibility  to 
demonstrate  that  he  is  a  “highly  qualified”  English  teacher,  and  he  has  not  done  that.  At  the

  

hearing  in  this  matter,  he  testified,  without  specificity,  that  he  graduated  from  college  and  has 
taken  some  courses  related  to  English.  It  is  found  that  the  district  had  good  cause  to  retain 
Ms.  Scotten  rather  than  Mr.  Liebert. 

10. 

The  district  is  not  retaining  any  employee  who  has  less  seniority  than 

respondents  have  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  All 

notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Within  the  terms  of  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  district  has  cause  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  to  give  notices  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils. 

3. 

Respondent  David  Liebert  and  Ms.  Scotten,  both  began  rendering  paid  service 
to  the  district  on  August  18,  2006.  The  district  appropriately  chose  to  retain  Ms.  Scotten  and 
terminate  Mr.  Liebert. 

ORDER 

The  district  may  give  notice  to  the  respondents  that  the  district  will  not  require  their 

services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Dated:  April  30,  2007 

ROBERT  WALKER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

