BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
LA  CANADA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against:  | OAH  No.  L2007040052 

JENNIFER  BITUIN,  MARIE  EVELYN, 
JENNY  KEENS,  NICOLE  NEUMANN, 
ERIN  O’REILLY,  and  MICKEY 
REARDON, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Timothy  S.  Thomas,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  24,  2007,  at  the  La  Canada  Unified  School 
District  Board  Room,  La  Canada,  California. 

Martin  Fine,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  La  Canada  Unified  School  District 

(LCUSD  or  the  district). 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  respondents.  Respondents 

Neumann,  O’Reilly  and  Reardon  were  also  present. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Governing  Board  of  LCUSD  determined  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 
services  provided  by  teachers  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the 
competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or 
eliminated. 

2. 

LCUSD  operates  three  elementary  schools,  a  high  school  and  one  special 

education-only  facility.  Due  to  changing  demographics,  reduced  enrollment  and  reduced 
funding,  the  district  determined  to  reduce  the  number  of  teaching  positions  at  the  elementary 
school  level.  Acting  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  of  Schools,  the

  

Governing  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  16-06-07,  “Reduction  of  Particular  Kinds  of  Service 
for  the  2007-2008  School  Year,”  on  March  6,  2007,  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to 
eliminate  5.67  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  elementary  school  teaching  positions. 

3. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  2  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  may 

be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
reduction  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  LCUSD  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become 
necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  employees  by  5.67  FTE  positions.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and 
pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949.  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Fiscal 
Services  and  Human  Resources  William  V.  Loose  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using 
a  selection  process  involving  review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking 
ties  between  employees  with  the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  is  not 
challenged  by  respondents  and  was  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  Education  Code 
section  44955,  The  need  to  reduce  elementary  school  teaching  staff  by  5.67  FTE  positions 
takes  into  account  anticipated  attrition  before  the  start  of  the  next  school  year. 

4. 

LCUSD  maintains  a  seniority  list  that  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials, 
and  authorizations.  Credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  records  of  the 
Los  Angeles  County  Office  of  Education,  where  certificated  teachers  must  register  such 
documents.  To  assure  the  accuracy  of  seniority  dates  and  other  data,  affected  employees 
were  notified  by  mail  of  the  district’s  records  of  their  first  dates  of  paid  service  and 
credentials.  LCUSD  made  the  seniority  list  available  to  respondents.  The  letter  included  a 
form  allowing  individuals  to  challenge  that  information.  No  respondent  returned  the  form 
challenging  the  information  utilized  to  identify  candidates  for  layoff.  Mr.  Loose  thereafter 
used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  employees  currently  assigned  as 
elementary  school  teachers.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off,  he  first  identified  the 
least  senior  elementary  school  teachers.  In  comparing  teachers  with  the  same  dates  of  hire, 
Mr.  Loose  considered  the  following  criteria,  in  order  of  importance:  1)  The  credential  held 
by  the  teacher;  2)  Supplementary  authorizations  held;  3)  Educational  degrees  held.  Other 
criteria  were  available  should  the  first  three  not  break  ties,  but  were  not  required  to  be 
considered  in  these  instances.  Utilizing  these  criteria,  the  order  of  termination  is  based  on 
the  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof. 

5. 

Each  respondent  teacher  is  classified  on  the  seniority  list  as  a  temporary 

employee,  and  each  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential.  Respondents  Neumann 
and  Reardon  have  dates  of  first  paid  service  of  August  29,  2006,  and  the  remaining 
respondents  were  hired  on  August  23,  2005.  Respondents  challenge  the  district’s  layoff  and 
skipping  analysis  determination  only  with  respect  to  two  teachers  with  temporary  statuses 
who  are  to  be  retained,  Andrea  Coates  and  Mary  Ellen  Walker,  who  were  also  hired  on 
August  29,  2006.  Ms.  Walker  and  Ms.  Coates  both  hold  single-subject  credentials  in  Spanish 
and  are  in  teaching  assignments  that  require  such  a  credential.  Based  on  their  credentials, 
therefore,  these  teachers  were  “skipped”  and  retained.  Tie-breaking  criteria  were  also 
applied  to  retain  two  teachers  hired  on  August  23,  2005.  Gregory  Hardash  holds  a  clear

  

credential  (as  opposed  to  preliminary)  and  Amy  Sweetnam  has  a  masters  degree,  whereas  the 
respondents  with  the  same  hire  date  hold  bachelors  degrees. 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2005,  LCUSD  served  on  each  employee  identified  for 

layoff  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  him  or  her 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  Respondents  do  not  dispute  the  adequacy  or  timeliness  of 
the  notices.  The  notices  stated  that  the  reason  for  the  recommendation  was  that  the  services 
enumerated  in  Resolution  No.  16-06-07,  a  copy  of  which  was  enclosed  to  each  respondent, 
were  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2007/2008  school  year. 
The  notices  further  represented  that  “no  employee  with  less  seniority  than  you  will  be 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  you  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 

7. 

All  respondents  timely  filed  requests  for  hearings.  Accusations  were  filed  by 

LCUSD  and  respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  16-06-07  are  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

A  school  district  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

4. 

A  reduction  of  elementary  school  classes  and  the  number  of  elementary  school 

teachers  is  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44955.  (California  Teachers  Association  y.  Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.) 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  LCUSD  due  to 

the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  district  identified  the 
certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be 
reduced  or  discontinued. 

  

 

6. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local 
2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d 
831.)  By  virtue  of  Factual  Findings  4  and  5,  was  established  that  the  junior  employees  or 
employees  with  identical  dates  of  hire  who  are  being  retained  have  been  given  priority 
consistent  with  these  authorities  and  tie-breaking  criteria  developed  by  the  district. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  occupying  5.67  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED:  May  3,  2007 

TIMOTHY  S.  THOMAS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

