BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OF  THE 
GOLDEN  PLAINS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
FRESNO  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  (Reduction 
or  Discontinuance  of  Certain  Kinds  of 
Services)  against: 

OAH  No.  N2007030962 

Leticia  Torres 
Jason  Locke 
Holly  Bundy 
Parice  Dunigan 
Randy  Jarrett 
Kathleen  Henderson 
Meredith  Sicard 
Carolyn  Lozano 
Adelene  Kezirian 
Frank  Hidalgo 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Joaquin,  California,  on  May  3,  2007. 

Stephen  A.  Mendyk,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Lozano  Smith,  represented  the  Golden 

Plains  Unified  School  District. 

James  McBreaty,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents,  with  the  exception  of 

Holly  Bundy,  who  represented  herself. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  hearing  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May 

3,  2007.

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  March  7,  2007,  Joann  E.S.  Evans,  Superintendent  (Superintendent), 

Golden  Plains  Unified  School  District  (District),  State  of  California,  made  and  filed  the 
Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  District  Board  of  Education  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  FY07-01(Resolution),  The  Resolution  was  based  on  the  Superintendent’s 
determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for 
the  2007-2008  school  year.  Accordingly,  the  Board  determined  that  the  following  particular 
kinds  of  services  and  corresponding  number  of  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  should 
be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

Services 

Music  Teacher 

Home  Economics  Teacher 

Business  Teacher 

Social  Science  Teacher 

Reading  Teacher 

English  Teachers 

Counselors 

1.00 

25 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

2.00 

2.00 

14.00 

22.25 

Elementary  School  Teachers 

Total  Full  Time  Equivalent  Reduction  = 

3. 

On  or  about  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  gave  the  Board  of  Trustees  of 
the  District  (Board)  written  notice  of  her  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4, 

By  letter  dated  March  13,  2007,  the  Superintendent  provided  written  notice  to 
twenty-seven  certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  that  it  had  been  recommended 
that  notice  be  given  to  them,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that

  

their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year.  The  Resolution  setting  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation  was  attached  to  the  notice.’ 

5. 

Respondents  made  timely  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Accusation  was  timely 
served  on  respondents  and  respondents  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Board’s  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955. 

7. 

No  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondents  are  being  retained  to  provide 

services  that  they  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

8. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  their  services  is 
arbitrary  and  capricious,  and  not  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion.  They  contend 
that  the  decrease  of  the  District’s  services  by  22.25  FTE,  with  a  reduction  in  a  corresponding 
number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  is  not  necessary  and  is  not  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

9. 

Specifically,  respondents  contend  that  a  lay  off  of  22.25  FTEs  is 

approximately  a  quarter  of  the  teaching  staff.  They  do  not  believe  that  a  lay  off  of  this 
magnitude  is  necessary  or  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  pupils.  They  believe  that  the 
District  will  not  be  adequately  staffed  to  provide  mandated  services  or  to  meet  class  size 
reduction  standards. 

10. 

The  evidence  was  persuasive  that  the  District  has  been  experiencing  severe 

financial  difficulties,  which  became  apparent  in  2006.  The  County  Office  of  Education, 
through  its  financial  department  (County),  worked  with  the  Superintendent  to  determine 
where  cutbacks  could  be  made  in  purchasing  and  other  areas.  Funds  were  so  limited  that  the 
District  had  difficulty  making  payroll  expenditures  in  June.  The  Superintendent,  with  the 
assistance  of  the  County,  retained  The  Fiscal  Crisis  and  Management  Assistance  Team 
(FCMAT)  to  perform  a  management  review.?  The  FCMAT  management  review  prepared  a 
multi-year  financial  forecast  of  the  District’s  general  fund  and  provided  recommendations  for 
improvements.  The  FCMAT  report  concluded  that  based  upon  the  District’s  current 
spending  pattern  and  multiyear  budget  assumptions,  the  District  will  not  meet  the  legal 

‘Prior  to  and  during  the  hearing,  various  agreements  were  made  between  the  District  and  several 
employees  affected  by  the  lay  off.  The  District  withdrew  some  notices  of  lay  off,  several  employees 
conceded  that  they  had  not  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense,  and  some  employees  withdrew  their 
Notices  of  Defense.  As  a  result,  only  those  employees  identified  in  the  caption  as  respondents 
remained  in  the  action  at  the  time  of  hearing. 
?  FCMAT  was  created  by  legislation  in  1992,  in  accordance  with  Assembly  Bill  1200,  to  assist  local 
educational  agencies  in  complying  with  fiscal  accountability  standards. 

  

 

requirement  that  it  have  3  percent  of  its  general  fund  in  reserves  in  2006  through  2008, 
without  a  detailed  plan  to  reduce  expenditures  and  cease  deficit  spending.  The  FCMAT 
report  concluded  that  “The  board,  administration  and  community  will  need  to  continue  the 
process  of  identifying  potential  areas  of  reduction  to  eliminate  deficit  spending  and  sustain 
fiscal  solvency.  Otherwise,  the  district  may  require  outside  financial  assistance  and  may  face 
the  loss  of  local  governance  and  decision-making  authority.” 

11. 

The  evidence  established  that,  after  attrition  and  the  District’s  withdrawal  of 

several  notices  of  lay  off,  the  lay  off  affected  approximately  19  percent  of  the  teacher 
population.  The  evidence  also  established  that  employee  reductions  were  made  “across  the 
board”  with  cuts  in  administrative  positions  as  well  as  certificated  teacher  positions.  The 
evidence  further  established  that  the  District  has  planned  to  meet  all  mandated  course 
requirements  and  class  size  requirements.  In  the  event  that  the  District  experiences  an 
increased  average  daily  attendance  in  the  ensuing  year(s)  the  District  is  required  to  and  plans 
to  reinstate  laid  off  certificated  employees  as  prescribed  in  the  Education  Code.’ 

12. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District  did  not  consider  the  needs  of  students  in 

making  the  decision  which  services  should  be  reduced.  For  instance,  respondents  contend 
that  home  economics  is  a  necessary  course  and  that  the  District  should  have  reviewed  the 
Individual  Educational  Plan  of  each  special  education  student  in  the  District  and  considered 
how  the  reduction  of  classes,  like  home  economics,  would  affect  those  that  had  life  skill 
courses  in  their  plans.  These  contentions  lack  merit.  The  Board  has  the  discretion  and 
authority  to  decide  which  services  to  reduce.  Respondents  may  not  second  guess  the  Board 
with  their  views  of  which  classes  are  necessary  to  student  populations.  Additionally,  the 
evidence  is  persuasive  that  the  Superintendent  spent  long  periods  of  time  with  each  principal 
to  identify  the  classes  which  could  feasibly  be  reduced.  The  Superintendent  and  Board 
exercised  their  authority  and  discretion  in  a  well  reasoned  and  thoughtful  manner. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  years,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual 
Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

*  California  Education  Code  section  44956.

  

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  discontinued 

for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

Dated:  May  4,  2007 

    
ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

