BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OXNARD  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  VENTURA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

MARITZA  AVILA  and  Other 
Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Oxnard  School  District, 

Respondents. 

OAH  Case  No.:  L2007040053 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  24,  2007,  in  Oxnard,  California. 

Nitasha  K.  Sawhney  and  Darren  C.  Kameya,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Sean 

Goldman  (Goldman),  Assistant  Superintendent  of  the  Oxnard  School  District  (District). 

Robert  Bartosh  and  Alexis  Ridenour,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

District  has  decided  to  reduce  certain  educational  services  and  has  given  respondents 
notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Respondents  requested 
a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007- 
2008  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  presented  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Goldman  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

 

  

3. 

On  February  21, 

Miller,  Ph.D. 
(Superintendent)  recommended  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  the 
reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4. 

2007,  District  Superintendent  Richard  L. 

4. 

On  February  21,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  approved  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  adopted  Resolution  number  06-04,  reducing  the  following  services  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year: 

Service 

Full-Time-Equivalent  Positions 

K-6  Classroom  Teaching 
Math 
Physical  Education 
Social  Studies 
Language  Arts 

Total 

41 
2 
2 
3 
4 

52 

a. 

5. 

On  March  12,  2007,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board 
and  provided  written  notice,  via  certified  mail  sent  to  the  last  known  address,  to  52  certificated 
employees  of  the  District,  including  those  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  6,  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

b. 

Respondent  Julie  Gould,  formerly  known  as  Julie  Sakamoto,  testified  that 
she  first  learned  about  the  proposed  reduction  in  force  at  a  meeting  with  representatives  of  her 
union.  She  admitted  receiving  the  letter  from  the  District,  and  a  postal  receipt  confirms  receipt 
on  April  6,  2007. 

c. 

No  evidence  was  presented  that  respondent  Michelle  Burd  had  actually 

received  the  March  12,  2007  notice. 

6. 

The  following  respondents  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year:  Maritza  Avila;  Michelle  Bennett;  Gregg 
Brisbane;  Kristin  Brown;  Jesus  Cahue;  Kristin  Chacon;  Julia  Cirincione;  Kristen  Davis; 
Maribel  DeLoa;  Raquel  Dominguez;  Sandra  Garcia;  Julie  Gould;  Stephanie  Kates;  Melissa 
LeMay;  Susan  Mares;  Summer  McMeekin;  Carol  Miller;  Maria  Ortiz;  Samuel  Reveles; 
Brandee  Scoggin;  Christine  Simonson;  Dennis  Smathers;  Brad  Tiemeyer;  and  Sylvia  Valencia. 
All  hearing  requests  were  timely  made  or  deemed  by  the  District  to  have  been  timely  made. 
Although  not  actually  receiving  a  hearing  request  from  respondent  Michelle  Burd,  the  District 

treated  her  as  having  requested  a  hearing.  

7. 

The  District  filed  the  Accusation  on  April  2,  2007,  and  on  April  6,  2007,  all 

respondents  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  6,  by  counsel,  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

9. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955." 

10.  |  The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  4  based  on  an  analysis  of  enrollment  projections  and  loss  of  categorical 
program  funding.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is 
rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

11. 

is  related  to  the 
The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

12. 

In  Resolution  06-34,  the  Governing  Board  declared  its  specific  needs  in  special 
education,  administrative  services,  sciences,  and  bilingual  education,  and  expressed  its  desire  to 
retain  employees  with  special  training  and  experience  in  those  areas.  As  pertinent  to  this 
proceeding,  the  resolution  provides:  “The  District  shall  retain  certificated  employees,  regardless 
of  their  seniority  (unless  the  employee  is  bumped  by  a  more  senior  and  competent  employee), 
to  the  extent  one  or  more  of  their  assignments  meet  any  of  the  following  criteria:  [§]  . 
.  [{]  4. 
Employees  who  possess  a  Bilingual  Cross-Cultural  Language  and  Development  certificate,  are 
teaching  one  or  more  bilingual  classes  for  the  District  in  the  2006-2007  school  year,  and  are 
expected  to  teach  one  or  more  bilingual  classes  for  the  District  in  the  2007-2008  school  year.” 
The  resolution  also  contains  the  following  unnumbered  paragraph,  which  applies  to  all  areas  of 
specific  need,  not  just  bilingual  education:  “Employees  who  meet  any  of  the  foregoing  criteria 
to  that  portion  of  their 
for  some  but  not  all 
assignment(s)  in  2006-2007  that  meets  the  foregoing  criteria.” 

of  their  assignment(s)  shall 

be  retained  as 

. 

13. 

Respondent  Jesus  Cahue  is  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District  with  a  seniority 
date  of  August  18,  2004.  He  holds  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  Bilingual 
Cross-Cultural  Language  and  Development  (BCLAD)  certificate.  He  currently  teaches  five 
periods  of  reading  and  social  studies.  Three  of  those  periods  involve  bilingual  instruction  to 
students  learning  the  English  language  and  RESPONDENT  Jesus  Cahue  is  required  a  BCLAD 
certificate  to  teach  the  classes. 

"  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

Respondent  Jesus  Cahue  should  be  skipped  from  the  reduction  in  force,  as  he  teaches  in 
an  area  exempted  from  layoff  by  the  District’s  specific  need  and  he  possesses  the  required 
credential  and  experience.  In  addition,  at  least  on  employee  junior  to  respondent  Jesus  Cahue, 
R.Q.,  was  skipped  and  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondent  Jesus  Cahue  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

District  argues  that  respondent  Jesus  Cahue  should  only  be  retained  to  teach  a  part-time 
assignment  consistent  with  his  present  bilingual  teaching  assignment.  As  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  12,  only  that  portion  of  the  teacher’s  present  covered  assignment  is  skipped. 
However,  by  virtue  of  his  seniority,  certification  and  competency,  respondent  Jesus  Cahue  can 
bump  R.Q.  for  two  periods  to  achieve a  full-time-equivalent  position. 

14. 

Respondent  Susan  Mares  is 

a  probationary  employee  teaching  a  bilingual 
Kindergarten  class.  Her  seniority  date  is  November  19,  2004.  She  holds  a  preliminary  multiple 
subject  teaching  credential  and  an  emergency  BCLAD  certificate.  The  BCLAD  certificate  is 
valid  from  August  29,  2006  to  September  1,  2007.  She  is  making  progress  toward  obtaining  a 
clear  BCLAD  certificate  and  expects  to  complete  the  required  work  by  the  end  of  the  year.  She 
also  has  more  seniority  than  R.Q.  Respondent  Susan  Mares  is  thus  teaching  in  an  area  of  special 
District  need  and  is  presently  competent  and  certificated  to  teach  in  the  area.  However,  she  has 
not  established  her  certification  for  the  requisite  period,  namely  the  2007-2008  school  year,  as 
her  qualifying  credential,  the  BCLAD,  expires  September  1,  2007;  her  certificate’s  renewal  is 
is  subject  to  conditions,  such  as  completion  of  class  work,  passage  of 
uncertain  because  it 
exams,  and  District  certification.  Respondent  Susan  Mares,  therefore,  has  not  established  that 
she  is  certificated  to  teach  a  bilingual  class  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

15. 

With  the  exception  of  respondent  Jesus  Cahue,  no  certificated  employee  junior  to 
any  respondent  was  retained  to  render  a  service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  8. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  4  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  4 
and  9. 

Initials  have  been  used  to  protect  the  privacy  of  certificated  employees  not  involved 

in  this  proceeding.

  

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4,  which  cause  relates  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through 
15. 

y.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  808: 

Respondents  argue  that  the  District  failed  to  establish  the  necessity  for  the  reduction  of 
the  particular  kings  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4.  In  addressing  a  similar 
challenge  to  a  reduction  in  force,  the  court  provided  the  following  guiding  rule  in  Campbell 
Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc. 
‘In 
determining  whether  the  decision  of  a  school  board  is  reasonable  as  distinguished  from 
fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious,  its  action  is  measured  by  the  standard  set  by  reason  and 
reasonable  people,  bearing  in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may  permit  a  difference  of  opinion  on 
the  same  subject.’  (Arthur  v.  Oceanside-Carlsbad  Junior  College  Dist.  (1963)  216  Cal.App.2d 
656,  663.’  ”  With  respect  to  the  specific  facts  before  it,  the  court  noted  that  while  the  district 
faced  many  financial 
wanted  to 
uncertainties.  The  district  also  desired  to  maintain  maximum  flexibility  in  determining  staffing 
for  the  ensuing  school  year  in  light  of  available  resources  and  educational  needs.  The  governing 
board  met  and  consulted  with  its  business  manager  regarding  the  district’s  financial  position.  In 
these  circumstances,  the  court  concluded,  the  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

as  many  certificated  employees  as 

possible, 

keep 

it 

“ 

In  CSEA  v.  Pasadena  USD  (1977)  71  Cal.App.3d  318,  322,  involving  a  related  exercise 
of  discretion  in  the  operation  of  a  school  district,  the  court  held  that  the  governing  board’s 
determination  as  to  the  amount  of  general  reserves  “could  not  be  set  aside  by  the  court  unless  it 
was  ‘fraudulent  or  so  palpably  unreasonable  and  arbitrary  as  to  indicate  an  abuse  of  discretion 
as  a  matter  of  law.’  ” 

In  the  instant  case,  as  in  Campbell  and  Pasadena  USD,  the  District  provided  sufficient 
evidence  to  establish  it  had  not  abused  its  discretion,  which  evidence  was  not  contradicted.  Its 
concern  about  future  enrollment  and  availability  of  resources  to  fulfill  its  educational  mandate 
is  reasonable.  In  these  circumstances,  the  District’s  decision  to  discontinue  the  particular  kinds 
of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 4 is  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

4. 

Section  44949,  subdivision  (d),  provides  that  “Any  notice  or  request  shall  be 
deemed  sufficient  when  it 
is  directed,  or 
is  delivered  in  person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it 
when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the 
last  known  address  of  the  employee.”  This  statutory  requirement  was  deemed  satisfied  where 
the  District  mailed  the  letter  to  the  respondent’s  old  address  on  March  9  and  the  post  office 
forwarded  the  letter,  on  March  15,  to  the  correct  address.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.)

  

  

In  this  case,  as  set  forth  in  factuat  finding  number  5,  the  District-deposited  the  layoff 
notice  in  the  mail,  postage  prepaid,  addressed  to  respondent  Michelle  Burd’s  last  known 
address,  in  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  section  44949,  subdivision  (d).  Despite  not 
having  received  confirmation  of  receipt  from  respondent  Michelle  Burd  or  a  request  for  hearing 
from  her,  the  District  treated  her  as  having  requested  a  hearing.  Although  she  did  not  appear  at 
the  hearing,  respondent  Michelle  Burd  was  represented  at  the  hearing  and  the  legal  issue 
regarding  receipt  of  the  notice  was  presented. 
The  District,  therefore,  served  on  respondent 
Michelle  Burd  the  required  layoff  notice. 

in 

5. 

part: 

pertinent 

provides, 

“[t]he  governing  board 

Section  44955  directs  that  certificated  permanent  and  probationary  employees 
are  to  be  laid  off  by  seniority,  consistent  with  their  qualifications  and  status.  Thus,  subsection 
shall  make  assignments  and 
(c) 
reassignments  in  such  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.” 
The  statute,  in  subsection  (b),  gives 
preference  to  permanent  employees:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of 
no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  Districts  are  permitted 
to  disregard  seniority  as  set  forth  in  subdivision  (d):  “Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school 
district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of 
the  following  reasons:  (1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential 
with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  of  study 
or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. .  .  .” 

6. 

In  order  to  retain  her  position,  respondent  Susan  Mares  must  show  that  she  is 
“certificated  and  competent”  to  teach  an  assignment  that  a  more  junior  employee  has  been 
retained  to  teach,  as  required  by  section  44955.  As  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  14, 
respondent  Susan  Mares  has  more  seniority  than  a  retained  employee,  R.Q.  Respondent  Mares 
is  competent  to  teach  in  a  bilingual  elementary  classroom,  in  accordance  with  the  District’s 
competency  criteria  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  12,  because  she  has  taught  in  such  a 
classroom,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  14. 

The  requirement  of  certification  was  addressed  by  the  court  in  Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App3d  796.  The  court  held  that  the  district 
was  not  required  to  recognize  a  certificate  unless  it  had  been  recorded  with  the  county  board  of 
education  prior  to  March  15th,  the  date  the  district  had  to  issue  preliminary  layoff  notices.  In 
this  case,  respondent  Susan  Mares  has  not  established  that,  prior  to  March  15,  2007,  she  held  a 
credential,  permit  or  authorization  that  would  enable  her  to  teach  in 
a  bilingual  classroom 
during  the  2007-2008  school  year,  as  her  provisional  BCLAD  expires  September  1,  2007. 

 

7. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondents  Maritza  Avila,  Michelle 
Bennett,  Gregg  Brisbane,  Kristin  Brown,  Michelle  Burd,  Kristin  Chacon,  Julia  Cirincione, 
Kristen  Davis,  Maribel  DeLoa,  Raquel  Dominguez,  Sandra  Garcia,  Julie  Gould,  Stephanie 
Kates,  Melissa  LeMay,  Susan  Mares,  Summer  McMeekin,  Carol  Miller,  Maria  Ortiz,  Samuel 
Reveles,  Brandee  Scoggin,  Christine  Simonson,  Dennis  Smathers,  Brad  Tiemeyer,  and  Sylvia 
Valencia  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by 
reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  12,  14,  and  15,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  1 
through  6. 

8. 

Respondent  Jesus  Cahue  teaches  in  an  area  of  the  District’s  special  need, 
bilingual  education.  He  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  in  a  bilingual  classroom  during 
the  2007-2008  school  year.  He  is  thus  subject  to  retention  in  accordance  with  the  District’s 
skipping  criteria.  In  any  event,  he  is  senior  to  an  employee,  R.Q.,  retained  to  provide  a  service 
that  respondent  Jesus  Cahue  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Therefore,  cause  does  not 
exist  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondent  Jesus  Cahue,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers 
12  and  13. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained,  in  part,  and  the  District  may  notify  respondents 
Maritza  Avila,  Michelle  Bennett,  Gregg  Brisbane,  Kristin  Brown,  Michelle  Burd,  Kristin 
Chacon,  Julia  Cirincione,  Kristen  Davis,  Maribel  DeLoa,  Raquel  Dominguez,  Sandra  Garcia, 
Julie  Gould,  Stephanie  Kates,  Melissa  LeMay,  Susan  Mares,  Summer  McMeekin,  Carol  Miller, 
Maria  Ortiz,  Samuel  Reveles,  Brandee  Scoggin,  Christine  Simonson,  Dennis  Smathers,  Brad 
Tiemeyer,  and  Sylvia  Valencia  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2007-2008 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

The  Accusation  against  respondent  Jesus  Cahue  is  not  sustained  and  the  District 
may  not  terminate  his  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

      

