BEFORE  THE  SPECIAL  TRUSTEE 
OF  THE 
COMPTON  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  or 
Discontinuance  of  Particular  Kinds  of 
Academic  Services  in  the  Compton 
Community  College  District. 

OAH  No.  L2007030258 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  hearing  in  the  above-captioned  matter  was  held  on  April  19,  2007,  at  Compton, 

California,  before  Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings. 

Complainant  was  represented  by  Warren  S.  Kinsler  and  Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  from 

the  law  firm  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  and  Romo.  Respondents  were  represented 
by  Mr.  Lawrence  Rosenzweig,  Attorney  at  Law. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  case  argued,  and  the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  the 

hearing  date. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  factual  findings,  legal 

conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Rachelle  Sasser  (complainant),  filed  the  Accusation  in  the  above-captioned  matter 
in  her  official  capacity  as  Acting  Provost/CEO  of  the  Compton  Community  College  District 
(District)  in  her  official  capacity.  After  filing  the  Accusation,  Ms.  Sasser  has  since  been 
appointed  Acting  Dean  of  Human  Resources. 

2.  Respondents  are  academic  employees  of  the  Compton  Community  College  District 

or  may  assert  such  status.  Respondents  are  identified  in  Attachment  |  of  this  Proposed 
Decision,  which  is  incorporated  by  reference. 

3. 

(A)  On  or  about  June  30,  2006,  Governor  Arnold  Shwarzenegger  signed  as 

urgency  legislation,  Assembly  Bill  318  (AB  318)  I  order  to  address  the  District’s  loss  of 
accreditation,  to  assure  the  ability  of  the  students  in  the  District  to  obtain  their  education 
from  an  accredited  institution,  and  to  continue  to  address  the  District’s  financial  difficulties. 

  

  

 

(B)  Pursuant  to  AB  318,  the  legislature  vested  the  Chancellor  of  the  California 

Community  Colleges  with  the  authority  to  extend  the  suspension  of  the  District’s  governing 
board.  Education  Code  section  71093,  subdivision  (d),  provides  in  part  that  “the  Chancellor 
is  authorized  to  assume  and  to  delegate  to  the  special  trustee,  those  powers  that  he  Chancellor 
determines  are  necessary  for  the  management  of  the  District  ..  .  The  Board  of  Trustees  may 
not  exercise  any  of  the  powers  assumed  by  the  Chancellor.” 

(C)  Pursuant  to  Resolution  2006-01,  the  Board  of  Governors  authorized  the 

Chancellor  to  “delegate  to  the  Special  Trustee,  all  of  the  rights,  duties  and  powers  . 
.  of  the 
Governing  Board  of  the  Compton  Community  College  District.”  The  Chancellor  exercised 
his  authority  by  issuing  Executive  Order  2006-01,  wherein  the  Chancellor  continued  the 
suspension  of  the  authority  of  the  Board  of  Trustees,  appointed  a  Special  Trustee,  and 
authorized  him  to  assume  the  rights,  duties  and  powers  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the 
District. 

. 

4.  The  loss  of  accreditation  presents  a  severe  burden  for  the  students  of  the  District  in 
that  other  institutions  of  higher  learning  will  not  recognize  coursework  from  an  unaccredited 
community  college.  Further,  students  from  must  attend  an  accredited  community  college  in 
order  to  participate  in  federal  financial  assistance  programs. 

5.  Pursuant  to  AB  318,  the  Special  Trustee  on  behalf  of  the  District  has  entered  into  a 

Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the  E]  Camino  Community  College  whereby  the  El 
Camino  provides  an  accredited  educational  program  at  Compton  Community  College. 
Under  the  MOU,  Compton  Community  College  is  an  educational  center  of  the  El  Camino 
Community  College  District. 

6.  Despite  the  loss  of  accreditation  and  the  provision  of  academic  services  by  El 
Camino,  the  District  remains  the  employer  of  the  academic  employees  providing  educational 
services  at  Compton  Community  College  (Ed.  Code  §  74293,  subd.  (a)(1).). 

7.  Employees  of  the  District  providing  services  pursuant  to  the  MOU  with  the  El 

Camino  Community  College  District,  must  meet  not  only  the  minimum  qualifications 
established  by  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  California  Community  Colleges  but  also  such 
other  job-related  qualifications  for  service  that  have  been  established  by  the  El  Camino 
Community  College  District  (Ed.  Code  §  74293,  subd.  (a)(2).). 

8.  On  February  27,  2007,  the  Special  Trustee  of  the  Compton  Community  College 

District  adopted  Resolution  No.  06/07-022707C  to  reduce  and/or  discontinue  particular  kinds 
of  academic  services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2007/2008  school  year  by a  total  of 
37  Full-Time-Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  as  follows: 

1.  Discontinue  Architecture  and  Computer  Aided  Drafting  and  Design  (CADD) 

Instruction  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

2.  Reduce  Auto  Technology  Instructional  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

  

 

3.  Reduce  Child  Development  Instructional  Program  Services  (including  7.0  FTE 

unassigned  faculty)  —  9.0  FTE 

4.  Reduce  Dance  Instructional  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

5.  Discontinue  Digital  Art/Digital  Photography  Instructional  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

6.  Discontinue  Disabled  Student  Program  and  Services  Specialist  —  37  FTE 

7.  Reduce  Learning  Resource  Center  Services  -  .2634  FTE 

8.  Discontinue  Educational  Development  Services  -  .3666  FTE 

9.  Discontinue  Electronics  Instructional  Program  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

10.  Reduce  English  Instruction  —  1.0  FTE 

11.  Discontinue  Film  and  Video  Instructional  Services  Program  —  1.0  FTE 

12.  Reduce  History  Instructional  Services  (including  .6  FTE  unassigned  faculty)  1.0 

FTE 

faculty)  —  2.0  FTE 

faculty)  —  4.0  FTE 

13.  Reduce  Ethnic  Studies  Instructional  Services  (including  2.0  FTE  unassigned 

14.  Reduce  Mathematics  Instructional  Services  (including  1.0  FTE  unassigned 

15.  Reduce  Nutrition  and  Foods  Instructional  Services  —  1.0  FTE 

16.  Reduce  Physics  and  Astronomy  Instructional  Services  (including  1.0  FTE 

unassigned  facility)  —  1.0  FTE 

17.  Reduce  Political  Science  Instructional  Services  (including  1.0  FTE  unassigned 

faculty)  —  2.0  FTE 

18.  Reduce  Welcome  Center  Services  —  2.5  FTE 

19.  Reduce  Professional  Education  Service  -  .5  FTE 

20.  Reduce  Spanish  Instructional  Services  (including  1.  FTE  unassigned  faculty)  —  1.0 

FTE

  

21,  Reduce  Speech  Instructional  Services  (including  1.0  FTE  unassigned  faculty)  — 

22.  Reduce  Music  Instructional  Services  (including  1.0  FTE  unassigned  faculty)  —  1.0 

1.0  FTE 

FTE 

23.  Reduce  English  as  a  Second  Language  Instructional  Services  (including  2.0  FTE 

unassigned  faculty)  —  2.0  FTE 

24,  Reduce  Business  Instructional  Services  -  .5  FTE 

25,  Reduce  Computer  Information  Systems  Instructional  Services  -  .5  FTE 

The  Special  Trustee  further  determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  by  reason  of  said 

reductions  or  discontinuances  to  decrease  the  number  of  academic  employees  at  the  close  of 
the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions,  and 
directed  the  undersigned  to  proceed  accordingly  by  notifying  the  appropriate  employees  to 
implement  the  Special  Trustee’s  determination. 

4.  On  or  about  March  3,  2006,  Superintendent  Moore  gave  the  Board  written  notice 

of  her  recommendation  that  each  of  the  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  were  not 
going  to  be  required  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  The  reason  for  the  recommendation  was 
that  there  would  be  a  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  a  particular  kind  of  service. 

5.  On  or  about  April  26,  2006,  the  District  made  a  Resolution  to  Reduce  or 
Discontinue  Particular  Types  of  Services.  That  Resolution  was  ostensibly  a  Board 
resolution,  although  only  one  Board  member  took  action  on  the  matter.  However,  Thomas 
Henry,  the  Trustee  appointed  by  the  Chancellor,  approved  the  action.  By  the  Resolution, 
some  73  types  of  services  were  to  be  discontinued.  These  included  every  type  of  course, 
from  Allied  Health  and  Anatomy  to  Welding  and  Women’s  Studies.  Further,  all  services 
provided  by  the  educational  administrators  were  to  be  discontinued  as  well.  The  reasons 
stated  for  the  termination  of  services  included  loss  of  state  and  federal  funding,  the  loss  of 
the  College’s  accreditation,  and  impending  closure  of  the  District. 

H 

6.  Superintendent  Moore  gave  written  notice  to  each  of  the  employees  that  she  had 

made  her  recommendation  to  the  Board,  as  required  by  section  87743  of  the  Education 
Code.’  This  notice  also  informed  the  employees  that  they  had  the  right  to  request  a  hearing 
so  as  to  determine  if  cause  existed  not  to  reemploy  the  employee  receiving  the  notices. 

"  All  statutory  citations  are  to  the  California  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.

  

7.  One  hundred  and  forty  seven  employees  requested  a  hearing,  and  the  Accusation 
was  served  upon  them.  One  hundred  forty  five  persons  filed  a  notice  of  defense.  It  should 
be  noted  that  in  some  instances  a  person  filed  a  notice  of  defense  when  that  person  had  not 
filed  a  request  for  hearing;  in  other  instances  persons  who  had  requested  a  hearing  did  not 
file  a  notice  of  defense;  it  is  inferred  that  all  employees  were  served  with  the  Accusation. 

8.  The  District  is  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  in  that  it  is  eliminating  all 
educational  services  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  This  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
services  is  being  taken  because  the  College  has  lost  its  accreditation  and  is  in  financial 
distress.  The  District  has  appealed  from  the  decision  whereby  its  accreditation  removed,  but 
there  can  be  no  certainty  of  the  outcome  of  that  proceeding,  which  may  not  be  resolved  until 
the  end  of  June,  2006.  Prudence  requires  the  District  to  take  the  action  to  lay  off  employees 
given  the  loss  of  accreditation  and  financial  problems  facing  the  District. 

9.  Respondents  point  to  pending  legislation  that  may  help  to  revive  the  College.  That 

legislation,  AB  318,  would  allow  the  College  to  “partner”  with  another  community  college 
which  is  fully  accredited.  In  this  situation  the  College  would  become  an  “educational  center’ 
under  the  aegis  of  the  partnering  institution.  The  District  would  be  authorized  by  law  to 
assign  current  employees,  or  to  re-employ  former  personnel,  to  provide  educational  services 
or  supports  to  students.  However,  under  the  proposed  bill,  the  District  would  have  no 
obligation  to  assign  or  re-employ  its  former  administrative  or  supervisory  personnel.  The 
partner  district  would  have  the  primary  right  to  direct  activities  under  any  partner  contract. 

”» 

10.  The  bill  in  question,  Assembly  Bill  318,  has  not  been  adopted  by  the  Legislature 
nor  approved  by  the  Governor  as  of  the  date  of  the  hearing  in  this  matter.  Nor  had  the  ALJ 
received  any  notice  from  the  parties  that  Assembly  Bill  318  had  been  adopted  as  of  the  date 
when  this  proposed  decision  issued.  It  would  be  speculative  to  find  that  the  bill  will  be 
enacted  into  law. 

11. 

In  all  the  circumstances,  it  must  be  found  that  particular  kinds  of  services  are 

being  eliminated,  to  the  extent  of  all  services,  and  that  the  District  may  proceed  to  reduce  its 
teaching  force  and  other  positions  as  a  result.  The  cause  for  not  reemploying  the  employees 
and  respondents  herein  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  district  and  the  students. 

12.  The  District’s  decision  to  discontinue  services  or  to  reduce  them  is  not  arbitrary 

or  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion,  given  all  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  the  case. 

13.  No  seniority  list  was  generated  in  this  case,  in  that  the  decision  not  to  reemploy 

staff  is  a  decision  to  eliminate  all  positions.  In  light  of  the  intent  to  terminate  all  staff,  no 
tenured  employee  is  being  terminated  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  employee  with 
less  seniority  is  retained. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS

  

1.  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed  in  this  matter  pursuant  to  sections  87740 

and  87743,  based  on  Factual  Findings  |  through  8. 

2.  Cause  exists  to  terminate  all  employees  of  the  District,  due  to  a  reduction  in 

services,  pursuant  to  sections  87740  and  87743,  based  on  Factual  Findings  1  through  13. 
In  this  process,  no  probationary  employees  will  be  retained  in  favor  of  tenured  employees, 
and  no  junior  employees  will  be  retained  in  favor  of  those  with  more  seniority. 

3. 

(A)  Respondents  object  that  the  Board  has  not  acted  and  will  not  act,  and  that 
Board  action  is  a  statutory  requirement  set  forth  in  section  87740.  They  go  on  to  assert  that 
the  Trustee  is  the  person  taking  the  steps  normally  required  of  the  Board  under  sections 
87740  and  87743,  a  violation  of  the  statutory  scheme  laid  out  for  the  reduction  in  force  in  the 
community  colleges. 

(B)  Section  71093  is  more  than  a statute  of  general  application;  it  specifically 

wrested  control  of  the  District  from  the  Board  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Chancellor 
and  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  California  Community  Colleges.  Section  71093, 
subdivision  (c),  specifically  authorized  the  appointment  of  a  special  trustee  to  manage  the 
District,  and  the  Chancellor  was  authorized  to  delegate  all  of  the  powers  held  by  the  Board  to 
the  special  trustee,  and  to  thereby  fully  divest  the  Board  of  its  authority. 

(C)  As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3(A)  and  (B),  the  law  has  divested  the 

Board  of  its  authority,  and  that  authority  has  been  vested  in  the  Trustee.  It  can  not  be 
maintained  that  in  light  of  the  Chancellor’s  Executive  Order  number  2005-01  that  the  Board 
any  longer  has  authority  to  act  in  these  manners.  Likewise,  for  purposes  of  statutory 
construction,  in  the  case  of  the  District,  all  references  in  sections  87740  and  87743  must  be 
read  so  as  to  effectively  substitute  the  term  “special  trustee”  for  “governing  board.”  Asa 
matter  of  law,  at  this  time  the  Trustee  effectively  is  the  Board,  and  he  may  proceed  to  take 
the  steps  to  lay  off  credentialed  and  educational  personnel. 

4. 

(A)  Respondent  Fisher  asserts  that  the  notices  given  to  the  Respondents, 

including  Ms.  Fisher,  did  not  specify  what  services  are  going  to  be  eliminated,  and  that  the 
notice  is  therefore  defective. 

(B)  However,  the  cases  interpreting  the  statutes  have  made  clear  that  such 

specificity  is  not  necessary;  it  is  enough  that  the  notice  states  that  there  is  going  to  be  a 

reduction  in  services.  (See  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981) 
116  Cal.App.3d  831,  841.)  Therefore,  the  objection  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  notices  must  be 
overruled,  and  motion  to  dismiss  must  be  denied. 

5. 

The  District  may  lay  off  all  of  its  certificated  and  academic  educational 

employees.

  

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusation  is  sustained  as  against  all  253  employees  listed  on  Exhibit  1 

hereto.  The  District  may  notify  the  employees  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  in  the 
2006-2007  school  year  due  to  the  discontinuance  of  services. 

June  12,  2006 

  

Chancellor  of  the  California  Community  Colleges,  Marshall  E.  Drummond.  issued  Executive 
Order  number  2005-01  (Executive  Order).  By  the  Executive  Order,  the  Chancellor 
suspended  the  authority  of  the  District's  Board  of  Trustees  (Board),  and  the  Chancellor 
appointed  a  Special  Trustee  (Trustee),  who  was  authorized  to  assume  the  rights,  duties,  and 
powers  of  the  Board,  “to  the  full  extent  necessary”  to  govern  the  Compton  Community 
4.)  The  Trustee  was  further  authorized  to  use  the  Board  as  an 
College.  (Ex.  16.  p.  3. 
advisory  body,  at  the  Trustee’s  sole  discretion,  and  the  Board  was  deprived  of  the  authority 
to  call  meetings  without  the  Trustee’s  approval. 

(B)  The  stated  purpose  of  the  Executive  Order  was  to  establish  the  fiscal 

integrity  of  the  District  and  its  college.  The  Executive  Order  was  authorized  by  Education 
Code  section  71093,  a  statue  enacted  as  urgency  legislation  and  made  effective  in  July  2004. 
In  enacting  the  statute  the  legislature  found  and  declared  that  the  District  “has  failed  to 
maintain  fiscal  integrity  and  warrants  a  conclusion  that  the  district  is  unable  to  manage  its 
own  recovery.”  (Stats.  2004,  Ch.  139.  §1,  subd.(a).)  The  legislature  further  declared  that 
section  71093  must  become  effective  immediately  so  as  to  preserve  the  fiscal  integrity  of  the 

  
District.  which  was  deemed  “in  immediate  jeopardy.”  (/d..  at  §  5.)  

