BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
PLUMAS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  PLUMAS,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  of  Particular 
Kinds  of  Services  Affecting: 

OAH  No.  2007030679 

Persons  Occupying 
46.50  Full  Time  Equivalent 
Programs  and  Services. 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  18,  2007,  in  Quincy,  California. 

Michelle  L.  Cannon,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Kronick,  Moskovitz,  Tiedman  &  Girard, 

represented  the  Plumas  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Thomas  Smith,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Wells,  Small  &  Selke,  appeared  on  behalf  of 

respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  was  closed  on  April  18,  2007. 

PROCEDURAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Fifty-three  certificated  employees  received  notice  that  their  services  would  not 

be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  and  requested  a  hearing.  Of  these,  thirty-three 
entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  with  the  District  prior  to  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  and 
waived  their  right  to  a  hearing,  agreeing  that  there  was  cause  for  dismissal.  Six  others 

withdrew  their  requests  for  hearing.  

  

2. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  fourteen  certificated  employees 

remained  in  this  action.'  However,  none  of  these  employees  appeared  at  the  hearing,  despite 
proper  notice.  Mr.  Smith,  made  himself  available  at  hearing  to  represent  these  fourteen 
employees,  but  he  had  not  been  authorized  to  represent  them. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Michael  Chelotti,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  Bruce  Williams  is 

Assistant  Superintendent  and  Director  of  Personnel  for  the  District.  Their  actions  and  the 
actions  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  were  taken  in  their  official 
capacities. 

2. 

On  March  9,  2007,  the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice  that 

it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year. 
Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board 
had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  which  reduced 
the  certificated  staff  by  46.50  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions.  Fifty-three 
certificated  employees  were  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be  reduced  or  eliminated 
in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

3. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the  Accusations. 

6. 
District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

7. 

On  March  8,  2007,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  Governing  Board,  the 

Governing  Board  was  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that 
certificated  employees  holding  46.50  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that 
recommendation. 

'  The  remaining  employees  are  Devin  Bradley,  Rex  Coffman,  Shannon  Coombs,  Elaine  Elliott,  Leonel  Flores, 
Jeremy  Grace,  James  Griffin,  Kathy  Morris,  Mike  Nesbit,  Norman  Oilar,  Kathy  Taylor,  Nathan  Walker,  Karen 
Worley  and  Kate  Zachman.

  

8. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  1124, 

providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  totaling  46.50 
FTE  in  instruction  and  administration. 

9. 

The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all 

schools  of  the  District  had  decreased  by  3300  students  during  the  last  two  school  years. 
Additionally,  the  Forest  Reserve  Bill,  which  has  provided  funding  to  the  District,  has 
expired,  depriving  the  District  of  over  2  million  dollars  in  funding.  Thus,  the  Governing 
Board  resolved  to  reduce  and  eliminate  teaching  services  affecting  employment  of  46.50 
FTE  certificated  positions.  The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce 
teaching  services  was  made  solely  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

10. 

Supervisor  Michael  Chelotti,  and  Assistant  Supervisor  Bruce  Williams,  and 

other  District  employees  were  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of 
the  layoff.  The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains 
employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  (tenured,  probationary  or 
temporary)  and  credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data 
were  obtained  from  the  District’s  records. 

11. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District 
then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and 
were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each 
kind  of  affected  service,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by 
known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether 
they  could  “bump”  other  employees.  The  District  then  looked  at  employee  competence 
for  certain  positions  as  opposed  to  other  positions. 

12. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  leaves  of  absence,  resignations, 

retirements  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff 
notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

13. 

As  between  certificated  teachers  with  the  same  dates  of  seniority,  the  District 

employed  “tie  breaking”  criteria  adopted  by  the  District  and  the  Plumas  County  Teacher’s 
Association. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 

 

  

Jose  Teachers  Assn  vy.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

@ 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  1124,  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

No  certificated  employees  with  seniority  dates  junior  to  respondents  are  being 

retained  to  teach  classes  for  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide 

notice  to  respondents  that  46.50  FTE  in  instruction  and  service  will  not  be  required  in  the 
ensuing  school  year.  Such  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  the  pupils 
thereof.

6. 

7. 

  

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  occupying  46.50  FTE  of  instructions  and 
services  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  because  of the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  April  26,  2007 

4, cd, 

ANYELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

