BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
SUTTER  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  or  Elimination 
of  Particular  Kinds  of  Services  and  the 
Employment  Status  of: 

    

HERBERT  COOLEY, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  N2007030785 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stephen  J.  Smith,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 
of  California,  heard  this  matter  at  the  Sutter  Union  High  School  District,  Sutter,  California  on 
April  9,  2007. 

Jon  A.  Hudak,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Sutter  Union  High  School  District. 
Ryan  Robison,  Superintendent  and  Principal,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Sutter  Union  High 
School  District. 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Langenkamp  and  Curtis,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

represented  the  single  respondent  Herbert  Cooley. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  9,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Ryan  Robison  (the  Superintendent)  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his 

official  capacity  as  Superintendent,  Sutter  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

2. 

Respondent  Herbert  Cooley  is  and  at  all  times  relevant  to  this  Decision  was  a 

certificated  employee  of  the  District.  Mr.  Cooley  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in 
Agricultural  Engineering  from  California  Polytechnic  University,  Sal  Luis  Obispo.  He  has 
completed  the  required  post-graduate  course  work  for  a  Master’s  Degree  in  Agricultural

  

Education.  He  has  not  yet  completed  his  oral  examinations  for  the  issuance  of  the  post- 
graduate  degree. 

3. 

Mr.  Cooley  was  issued  a  Professional  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching 

Credential  in  Agriculture  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC), 
valid  July  15,  2003  through  August  1;  2008.  The  credential  authorizes  Mr.  Cooley  to  teach 
Agriculture  in  grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes  organized 
primarily  for  adults. 

4, 

On or just  before  March  13,  2003,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section 

44949  and  44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  (“the 
Board”)  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  certain  particular  kinds  of 
services  would  have  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The 
Superintendent’s  notice  specified  the  particular  kinds of  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated, 
as  set  forth  below.  The  Superintendent  also  notified  the  Board  that  a  corresponding  number 
of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  would  have  to  be  laid  off  to  effectuate  the  reduction 
or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds of  services.  The  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  that 
Mr.  Cooley  was  identified  as  a  person  to  whom  notice  should  be  given  that  his  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  recommendation  that  Mr.  Cooley’s 
services  for  the  District  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  was  not  related 
to  his  skills,  abilities  or  competence  as  a  teacher.  In  fact,  the  Superintendent  took  the 
opportunity  twice  in  his  testimony  to  praise  Mr.  Cooley’s  teaching,  both  in  Agriculture  and 
in  the  mathematics  and  physics  classes  he  has  taught  for  the  District. 

5. 

The  Board  adopted  its  Resolution  2006/2007-008  on  March  13,  2007.  The 

Board  resolved  to  follow  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to  reduce  0.50  full  time 
equivalent  (“FTE”)  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  wit,  Classroom  Teaching  in  Agriculture, 
Grades  9-12.  The  Resolution  authorized  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  give  notice  to  an 
equivalent  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  in  order  to  effectuate  the  reduction. 

6. 

It  was  stipulated  and  agreed  by  the  parties  that  Mr.  Cooley  timely  received  the 

pre-March  15  written  notice  (“the  preliminary  notice”)  from  the  Superintendent of  the 
recommendation  that  his  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The 
preliminary  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

7. 

Mr.  Cooley  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  for  the  ensuing  year. 

8. 

The  District  timely  served  an  Accusation  on  Mr.  Cooley  following  receipt  of 
his  Request  for  a  Hearing.  Mr.  Cooley  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 
All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met.  On or  just  after  March  23,  2007,  at  the 
time  respondent,  through  counsel,  filed  his  Notice  of  Defense,  respondent’s  counsel  also 
served  on  counsel  for  the  District  a  Request  for  Discovery.  Item  Two  of  the  Request  for 
Discovery  sought  disclosure  in  writing  of  the  Board’s  tie-breaker  criteria  to  be  applied  in  the

  

event  employees  subject  to  layoff  have  the  same  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District,  and  a 
statement  regarding  the  manner  in  which  those  criteria  were  applied  in  this  matter.  Counsel 
for  the  District  responded  to  the  Request  on  March  2,  2007.  The  response  disclosed  that  the 
District  has  not  adopted  criteria  and  had  no  information  in  writing  regarding  the  application 
of  such  criteria.  The  response  elaborated  on  the  manner  in  which  the  Superintendent 
determined  which  of  three  employees  with  the  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  should 
be  given  a  preliminary  notice  of  layoff. 

9. 

The  Superintendent  also  served  Ms.  Cooley  with  a  Notice  of  Nonreelection, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44929.2.  The  Notice  of  Nonreelection  addressed  the  two 
periods  of  Pre-Algebra  and  one  period  of  Physics  Mr.  Cooley  had  been  teaching  to  fill  out  a 
full  1.0  FTE  in  each  of  the  last  two  school  years.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  ruled  that 
there  exists no  jurisdiction  in  these  proceedings  to  review  the  propriety  of  this  Notice  of 
Nonreelection. 

10. 

The  0.5  FTE  of  “Classroom  Teaching  in  Agriculture”  the  District  sought  to 

eliminate  through  Resolution  2006/2007-008  is  composed  of  three  periods.  Two  of  the 
periods  are  Metal  Fabrication-Regional  Occupational  Program  (ROP),  and  one  is  a  “Project 
Period.”  A  Project  Period  is  an  additional  preparation  period  specific  for  teachers  teaching 
Agriculture  classes.  No  students  are  assigned  to  the  teacher  during  the  Project  Period,  and 
the  teacher  is  free  to  use  the  time  in  any  fashion  the  teacher  deems  appropriate.  Many 
teachers  use  the  time  to  assist  students  with  agricultural  fair  project  entries  or  other  projects 
being  completed  to  complete  other  agricultural  course  requirements.  Teachers  often  visit  the 
students  at  their  homes  during  this  period  to  help  them  with  their  projects,  especially  if  the 
projects  involve  animal  husbandry,  but  there  is  no  requirement  that  they  do  so.  Use  of  the 
time  is  entirely  discretionary  with  the  teacher. 

11. 

The  two  Metal  Fabrication-ROP  classes  slated  for  reduction  are  partially 

externally  funded.  The  State  reimburses  the  District  for  a  portion  of  a  ROP  teacher’s  salary. 
Students  in  the  two  ROP  classes  Mr.  Cooley  taught  learn  to  fabricate  metal  projects  and 
welding.  There  was  no  dispute  that  the  two  Metal  Shop-ROP  classes  are  not  actually  being 
reduced  or  eliminated.  These  two  classes  will  be  offered  again  in  the  upcoming  school  year, 
assuming  sufficient  enrollment,  which  is  not  a  given.  As  of  the  time  of  the  hearing,  the 
District  has  received  only  nine  enrollments  for  one  of  the  two  classes.  The  District  plans  to 
combine  the  two  classes  Mr.  Cooley  has  been  teaching  with  existing  classes  taught  by  one  or 
two  of  the  more  senior  Agriculture  instructors  in  the  District.  The  combinations  will  result  in 
increased  class  sizes,  but  none  of  the  remaining  Metal  Fabrication-ROP  classes  is  expected  to 
exceed  30  students. 

12. 

The  District’s  classification  of  the  two  Metal  Fabrication-ROP  classes  as 

within  the  ambit  of  Agriculture  is  broad.  The  District  treats  completion  of  the  class  subject 
to  this  action  as  satisfaction  of  an  Agriculture  course  or  of  a  general  education/vocational 
education  elective  for  the  successful  student.  The  Superintendent’s  testimony  revealed  the 
class  is  actually  dually  classified;  what  he  called  “cross-over”  classification.  The  two  classes 
at  issue  here  do  not  need  to  be  taught  by  a  teacher  certificated  in  Agriculture.  Each  class  can 

  

 

be  taught  by  a  ROP  teacher  who  does  not  need  to  be  credentialed  at  all,  or  can  be  possessed 
of  a  more  general  vocational  education  credential. 

13. 

The  Superintendent  testified  that  the  District  is  facing  a  gradual  decline  in 

enrollment  which  he  attributed  to  the  encroachment  of  subdivisions  into  the  District’s 
primarily  agricultural  territory.  He  noted  that  the  demands  for  discretionary  educational 
offerings  by  the  District  are  changing,  due  to  changing  student  demand.  Another  change 
stems  from  the  need  to  respond  to  State  mandated  testing  requirements.  There  is  an 
increasing  emphasis  upon  “core”  courses,  and  particularly  upon  English  and  Mathematics. 
There  is  a  decreasing  demand  for  “traditional”  vocational  education  courses,  including 
agriculture  and  shops,  and  an  increasing  demand  for vocational  education  courses  such  as 
computer  skills,  animation  and  graphics. 

The  Superintendent  testified  the  District  operates  on  a  six  periods  plus  a  prep  period 
day.  There  were  only  eleven  classes  of  Agriculture  offered  in  this  most  recent  school  year; 
less  than  2.0  FTE.  There  are  two  teachers  certificated  in  Agriculture  more  senior  to  Mr. 
Cooley  employed  by  the  District.  He  observed  that  having  Mr.  Cooley  teach  the  two  courses 
he  did  in  this  current  school  year,  which  are  a  stretch  to  characterize  as  Agriculture,  was  an 
accommodation  and  an  effort  to  keep  offering  as  much  Agriculture  as  possible,  as  long  as 
fiscally  feasible.  He  commented  in  his  testimony  that  the  contraction  in  the  Agriculture 
program  sought  in  this  action  is  a  year  overdue  already. 

14, 

There  is  no  anticipated  revenue  shortfall  for  the  upcoming  school  year  and 

there  exists  no  District  fiscal  crisis.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  District  anticipates 
having  to  operate  at  a  deficit  in  the  upcoming  school  year if  the  proposed  reduction  in 
services  is  not  effectuated.  None  of  the  services  proposed  to  be  eliminated  are  State  or 
federally  mandated.  The  District  is  fully  in  compliance  with  all  federal  and  State  mandates, 
and  there  was  no  evidence  that  elimination  of  the  proposed  services  would  adversely  affect 
this  compliance.  The  Superintendent’s  recommendation  for  this  reduction  in  services  reflects 
a  thoughtful  and  prudent  effort  to  conserve  scarce  District  resources  before  a  fiscal  problem 
develops,  and  to  retain  maximum  flexibility  to  offer  discretionary  classes  in  response  to 
student  needs  and  desires. 

15. 

The  Superintendent,  on  behalf  of  the  District,  considered  all  known  attrition, 

resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of 
necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees.  Mr.  Cooley  was  the  only  District 
employee  receiving  a  preliminary  notice  of  lay-off. 

16. 

|  Mr.  Cooley’s  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  August  9,  2004. 

There  are  two  other  District  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District, 
and  five  with  less  seniority,  all  of  whom  are  being  retained.  The  District’s  Seniority  List  is 
not  complete  and  exists  only  in  “Draft”  form,  effective  March  26,  2007.  It  cannot  be 
ascertained  from  the  Seniority  List  what  credentials  the  other  employees  junior  to  Mr. 
Cooley  possess.  The  Superintendent  candidly  acknowledged  that  the  District’s  Seniority  List 
is  not  complete,  is  in  “Draft”  form,  and  lacks  required  information,  and  that  the  District  has

  

  

not  adopted  any  “tie-breaker”  criteria  for  determining  which  employee  to  retain  in  the  event 
more  than  one  has  the  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 

17. 

The  Superintendent  attempted  to  fill  the  void  created  by  the  District’s  failure 

to  adopt  tie-breaking  criteria.  He  explained  these  efforts  in  his  testimony.  The  District 
implicitly  contended  by  so  doing  that  adoption  of  the  tie-breaker  criteria  was  unnecessary 
because  the  Superintendent  evaluated  the  credentials  and  competence  of  each  of  the  three 
employees  with  first  dates  of  hire  of  August  9,  2004,  and  determined  that  Mr.  Cooley  could 
not  teach  any  of  the  other  two  employees’  assignments.  The  Superintendent  made  the  same 
sort  of  evaluation  for  the  five  District  employees  junior  to  Mr,  Cooley  who  are  being 
“skipped.” 

18. 

The  other  two  employees  with  August  9,  2004,  first  day  of  paid  service  dates 

are  Ms.  Burrow  and  Ms.  Finitzer. 

Ms.  Burrow  has  “completed  an  intern  credential.”  She  is  teaching  three  periods  of 

World  Studies,  one  period  of  Government,  a  period  of  “Decision  Making/Driver’s 
Education,”  and  a  period  of  Independent  Study.  The  Superintendent  testified  that  “Decision 
Making”  is  considered  Health  Education  and  Social  Studies  and  Driver’s  Education  is  a 
Physical  Education  class  in  the  District.  He  acknowledged  that  he  was  not  aware  of  any 
State  standards  or  specific  credential  requirements  for  teaching  Health. 

Ms.  Finitzer  is  not  credentialed  in  California.  The  Superintendent  testified  that  he  has 
the  understanding  that  Ms.  Finitzer  has  a  credential  issued  by  the  State  of  Washington,  and  is 
“in  the  process”  of  having  her  credential  “converted”  to  California.  He  did  not  know  the 
present  status  of  the  conversion.  Ms.  Finitzer  is  teaching  six  periods  of  English.  There  was 
no  evidence  of  the  status  of  Ms.  Finitzer’s  Washington  credential,  or  what  the  present  status 
is  of  Ms.  Finitzer’s  “conversion.” 

19. 

Mr.  Helmer  is  a  year  junior  to  Mr.  Cooley.  He  has  a  Resource  Specialist 

intern  credential  from  National  University.  He  is  teaching  four  periods  as  a  resource 
specialist  in  the  current  school  year,  and  two  periods  of  “Consumer  Studies.”  The 
Superintendent  testified  that  Consumer  Studies  is  a  life  skills  class  where  students  learn  skills 
such  as  how  to  obtain  insurance,  financial  decision  making,  balancing  a  checkbook,  credit 
anid  its  use,  and  other  practical  skills. 
Superintendent  testified  that  he  considers  the  Consumer  Studies  class  a  Social  Science  class. 
He  also  testified  he  believed  Mr.  Helmer  was  “working  toward”  a  Social  Sciences  credential, 
but  he  acknowledged  that  he  did  not  check  Mr.  Helmer’s  credentials  and  Mr.  Helmer  did  not 
show  him  any  evidence  of  the  status  of  his  credentialing. 

It  requires  “low  level  mathematics  skills”. 

The 

20. 

Mr.  Tuttle  is  two  years  junior  to  Mr.  Cooley.  He  has  a  degree  in  English  and 

an  intern  credential  issued  through  Chapman  University.  Mr.  Tuttle  teaches  three  periods  of 
English  and  a  period  of  Theater  Arts/Drama.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  teaches  a  full  1.0 
FTE. 

 

  

21. 

Ms.  Wiggins  is  another  intern  with  the  District.  She  taught  six  periods  of 

Algebra  I  in  this  school  year.  She  was  non-reelected  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

22. 

Mr.  Nelson  is  two years junior  to  Mr.  Cooley.  He  teaches  one  half  of a  FTE  in 

Biology.  The  evidence  was  unclear  regarding  his  credential  status. 

23. 

Mr.  Bowers  is  also  two years  junior  to  Mr.  Cooley.  He  graduated  with  a 
double  major  in  Biology  and  Chemistry.  The  evidence  was  also  not  clear  regarding  the 
status  of  Mr.  Bowers’  credentials.  Mr.  Bowers  is  teaching  one  half  a  FTE  in  this  school  year, 
composed  of  a  period  of  Advanced  Placement  Biology  and  two  periods  of  Chemistry. 

24. 

Independent  study  will  be  retained  and  offered  in  the  upcoming  school  year 
“for  the  good  of  the  students  of  the  District.”  The  number  of  students  to  be  served  and  the 
number  of  certificated  personnel  required  to  teach  the  students  is  not  yet  unknown.  The 
Superintendent  testified  the  program  starts  small  and  grows  each  year.  He  confirmed  that  it 
was  his  opinion  that  no  specific  credentialing  is  required  to  teach  Independent  Studies. 
However,  he  and  Ms.  Whitman,  a  credentials  specialist  from  the  County  Office  of  Education 
who  testified,  confirmed  that  California’s  one  year  waiver  from  the  full  requirements  of  the 
No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  (NCLBA)  expires  June  30,  2007.  Regulations  are  expected  to  be 
drafted  guiding  compliance  with  the  NCLBA.  The  Superintendent  expects  the  regulations 
will  require  any  certificated  person  teaching  Independent  Studies  to  qualify  as  a  “highly 
qualified  instructor.”  He  expressed  his  opinion  that  he  did  not  believe  Mr.  Cooley  would 
meet  those  criteria,  but  he  did  not  identify  the  criteria  or  why  Mr.  Cooley  would  not  meet 
them.  He  did  mention  in  his  testimony  that  there  is  a  two  year  program  any  certificated 
employee  can  take  that  will  lead  to  certification  as  “highly  qualified,”  and  evidently  allows 
the  participant  to  provisionally  qualify  while  participating.  It  did  not  appear  that  Mr.  Cooley 
is  currently  enrolled  in  such  a  program,  or  whether  he  intends  to  so  enroll.  It  was  not  clear 
who  offers  the  program.  The  Superintendent  and  the  credentials  specialist  both  confirmed 
that  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  and  speculation  surrounding  the  actual  requirements  of 
the  regulations  and  when  and  in  what  form  they  will  be  adopted  and  effective. 

25. 

Ms.  Whitaker  confirmed  in  her  testimony  a  fact  not  previously  known;  that 

Mr.  Cooley  did  follow  the  Superintendent’s  direction  to  contact  the  County  Office  and  make 
application  through  the  County  Office  to  obtain  the  additional  authorizations  required  for 
him  to  continue  to  teach  mathematics  and  physics.  The  status  of  these  efforts  is  unclear.  Mr. 
Cooley  surprised  everyone  associated  with  this  matter  when  he  announced  in  his  testimony 
that  had  taken  the  California  Subject  Matter  Examination  for  Teachers  (CSET)  examinations 
and  subtests  for  Algebra  and  Geometry  on  March  17,  2007,  and  that  he  was  waiting  results. 
He-has  not  yet  taken  the  CSET  physics  subtest,  but  intends  to  do  so  soon.  The 
Superintendent  testified  that  if  Mr.  Cooley  passed  the  examinations,  he  would  be  retained  to 
teach  a  full  1.0  FTE  of  mathematics  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

26. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  Mr.  Cooley  is  not  certificated  and  competent  to 

teach  “Consumer  Studies”  or  Independent  Studies.  The  District’s  classification  of  Consumer 
Studies  as  Health  Education  or  Social  Studies  does  not  govern  what  credentials  and

competence  are  required  to  teach  that  course.  There  was  no  evidence  that  a  single  subject 
credential  in  social  studies  or  health  education  is  required  to  teach  Consumer  Studies  as  the 
District  has  arranged  the  curriculum  for  that  course.  Independent  Studies  requires  no 
particular  credential.  There  was  no  evidence  that  Driver’s  Education  requires  any  specific 
credential,  regardless  of  the  District’s  classification  of  the  course  as  Physical  Education. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 
The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  proposed 
reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff 
served  on  respondent  is  factually  and  legally  appropriate.’ 

2. 

Respondent  makes  three  interrelated  contentions  in  this  matter.  First, 

respondent  contends  the  proposed  reduction  or  elimination  of  services  is  an  illusion,  because 
the  Superintendent  confirmed  the  same  classes  were  to  be  offered  in  the  upcoming  school 
year.”  The  District  counters  that  settled  law  has  approved  the  combination  of  classes  and 
increases  in  student  populations  in  those  classes  as  an  appropriate  reduction  in  services. 
Second,  respondent  contends  the  failure  of  the  District  to  have  a  completed  and  legally 
sufficient  Seniority  List  and  to  adopt  the  required  tie-breaker  criteria  requires  the  layoff  to 
fail,  and  unfairly  prejudiced  respondent’s  ability  to  assess  his  ability  to  bump  one  of  the  other 
two  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District.  The  District  counters 
that  the  Superintendent  evaluated  the  credentials  and  competencies  of  each  of  the  three 
certificated  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  and  determined 
that  Mr.  Cooley  was  not  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  anything  the  other  two  are 
teaching.  Third,  respondent  contends  employees  with  the  same  seniority  or  less  are  being 
retained  to  teach  classes  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  in  the  upcoming  school 
year.  The  District  counters  that  this  contention  is  factually  inaccurate. 

3. 

Respondent’s  contention  that  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular 

kinds  of  services  in  this  particular  instance  is  an  illusion  lacks  merit.  The  contention  that  the 
District  is  not  eliminating  the  services  at  all,  but  rather just  the  teacher  who  provides  them  is 
not  accurate.  Unlike  what  occurred  in  the  Santa  Clara  case,  however,  the  District  is  not 
simply  replacing  certificated  nurses  with  other  employees.  The  District  here  is  eliminating 
the  two  classes  Mr.  Cooley  is  presently  teaching  where  students  are  assigned  and  combining 
those  classes  and  projected  enrollment  in  them  with  other  existing  classes  taught  by  two 
more  senior  Agriculture  credentialed  instructors.  The  result  will  be  making  some  class  sizes 
larger  and  the  number  of  periods  the  subject  is  offered  smaller.  The,Project  Period  has  no 
students  assigned  and  may  be  terminated  at  the  District’s  discretion.  The  approach  taken  by 

'  Education  Code  section  44944, 
*  Sania  Clara  Federation  of Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.  App.  3d  831,  843-844;  Campbell 
Elementary  Teacher's  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.  App.  34  796.

the  District  to  reduce  services  in  the  matter  proposed  here,  by  combining  classes  and 
allowing  enrollment/class  sizes  to  grow,  has  been  specifically  approved.  A  school  board 
may  reduce  services  by  determining  that  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer 
employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved,  or  that  the  services  will  be 
provided  in  a  different  manner  than  they  were  in  the  preceding year? 

e@ 

4. 

Therefore,  the  services  the  District  seeks  to  eliminate  in  this  matter  are 

“particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  demonstrated  to  be  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion.  No  services  required  by  State  or  federal  mandates 
are  being  reduced  or  eliminated  as  a  result  of  the  District’s  action. 

5. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  is  not  presently  in  a  deficit  situation  or  a 
fiscal  predicament.  Nevertheless,  there  is  an  economic  component  to  this  action,  as  set  forth 
in  Factual  Finding  14.  The  District’s  enrollment  is  gradually  declining,  but  more  important, 
the  District  is  seeing  a  gradual  shift  in  discretionary  academic  activities  selected  by  students 
away  from  traditional  Agriculture  and  shop  classes  and  toward  information  technology  based 
vocational  education.  In  one  of  the  few  areas  where  the  District  has  some  discretion 
regarding  its  spending  for  elective  course  offerings,  the  Superintendent  has  decided  to  be 
prudently  proactive.  No  authority  was  found  that  requires  the  District  to  be  perched  on  a 
fiscal  precipice  before  obtaining  the  legal  authority  to  reduce  or  eliminate  discretionary 
services. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44955  requires  layoffs  to  take  place  in  inverse  order  of 

seniority,  with  some  notable  exceptions. 

e 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs of  the 
district  ad  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any 
employee  whose  order  of termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of the  hearing  held  in  accordance 
with  section  44949,  a  statement  of the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the:order  of termination  and  the  application  of the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing 
board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to 

3  Zalae  v.  Governing  Board  of  the  Ferndale  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.  App.  4"  838,  854,  citing 
Rutherford v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.  App.3d  167,  178-179.

  

give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 
not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

“Thus,  the  statute  provides  that  seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals,  and  that 

as  between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is 
determined  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.  Senior  employees  are 
given  "bumping"  rights  in  that  they  will  not  be  terminated  if  there  are  junior  employees 
retained  who  are  rendering  services  which  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.  Conversely,  as  in  this  case,  a  district  may  move  upward  from  the  bottom  of  the 
seniority  list,  "skipping"  over  and  retaining  junior  employees  who  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render  services  which  more  senior  employees  are  not.”° 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  8,  respondent,  through  counsel,  sought  as  early 

as  March  27,  2007,  more  than  five  days  before  the  evidentiary  hearing,  disclosure  of  the  tie 
breaking  criteria  mandated  by  the  quoted  portion  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision  (b).  Those  tie-breaking  criteria  could  not  be  produced  because  they  still  do  not 
exist. 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  the  last  sentence of  the  portion  of  section  45955,  subdivision  (b) 

quoted  above,  failure  to  produce  the  criteria  in  response  to  the  request  does  not,  in  and  of 
itself,  create  a  right  in  a  certificated  employee  subject  to  layoff  where  one  does  not  otherwise 
exist. 
In  this  instance,  however,  Mr.  Cooley  has  been  prejudiced  by  the  lack  of  existence  of 
the  tie  breaking  criteria,  the  incomplete  and  inadequate  “Draft”  seniority  list,  and  the  manner 
in  which  the  Superintendent  determined  which  of  the  tied  three  employees  received  the 
preliminary  notice.  The  Superintendent’s  reasoning  with  respect  to  which  employee(s)  were 
to  receive  preliminary  notice  of  lay  off,  although  thoughtful  and  well  articulated, 
nevertheless  required  the  substitution  of  his  individual  judgment  for  that  of  the  Board.  There 
is  no  statutory  authority  for  the  Superintendent  to  unilaterally  determine  the  criteria  for 
breaking  ties.  The  Code  vests  that  authority  and  discretion  exclusively  in  the  Board  of 
Trustees. 

9. 

Whether  a certificated  employee  facing  layoff  can  retain  his  or  her  position  by 

bumping  a  junior  employee  is  based  upon  seniority,  credentials  and  competencies.  The 
decisions  that  construe  section  44949  and  have  created  “bumping”  rights  assume  the 
existence  of a  District  wide  seniority  list  that  contains  sufficient  data  about  all  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  that  the  affected  employee  may  determine  whether  and  to  what 
extent  those  rights  exist.  Without  a  factually  sufficient  District  wide  seniority  list,  the 
displaced  certificated  employee  is  required  to  guess  regarding  the  certifications  and 
competencies  of  employees  tied  with  or junior  to  him  or  herself  that  are  to  be  retained. 

4  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  in  pertinent  part.  (Italics  added) 
*  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Unified  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.  App.  3d  567,  571-2, 
Moreland  Teacher's  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  655.

  

  

10. 

The  District  candidly  acknowledged  the  deficiency  of  its  seniority  list  and  the 
In  addition,  the  testimony  of  the  Superintendent  revealed  that  the 

paucity  of  data  on  it. 
supporting  information  regarding  the  credentials  and  competencies  of  several  of  the 
certificated  employees  ties  with  or  junior  to  Mr.  Cooley  who  are  being  retained  ranges  from 
quite  vague  to  materially  deficient. 
credentials  of  Ms.  Finitzer  from  Washington  or  Mr.  Helmer’s  credentials  are  valid.  His 
testimony  regarding  their  competencies  was  rather  vague.  A  complete  and  final  seniority  list 
will  not  only  include  the  employee’s  seniority  date  (first  day  of  paid  service)  but  also  a 
complete  list of  the  credentials  the  employee  has  filed  with  the  District  and  verified  by  the 
County  Office  of  Education. 

For  example,  the  Superintendent  had  no  idea  whether  the 

11. 

The  lack  of  a  final  and  complete  District  seniority  list  and  the  absence  of  tie 

breaking  criteria  made  it  very  difficult  for  Mr.  Cooley  to  fully  ascertain  how  he  might 
exercise  his  seniority  to  bump  either  an  employee  with  the  same  first  day  of  paid  service,  or 
an  employee  junior  to  him.  In  this  matter,  the  vagueness  and  ambiguity  of  the  credential 
status  of  one  employee  with  the  same  hire  date  as  Mr.  Cooley,  Ms.  Finitzer,  and  those  of 
several  junior  to  him  made  it  all  but  impossible  to  determine  whether  any  of  these  other 
employees  were  fully  and  lawfully  credentialed  and  able  to  teach  some  of  their  proposed 
assignments  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

12. 

The  District  also  contends  Mr.  Cooley  is  not  certificated  and  competent  to 
bump  into  portions  of  assignments  held  by  others  equal  to  or  having  less  seniority  to  him. 
The  District  contends  that  bumping  cannot  be  exercised  piecemeal,  displacing  another 
employee  or  employees  class  by  class.  No  authority  was  cited  for  that  contention. 
Presumably  the  District  relies  on  Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  of  Education  (1989)  208  Cal. 
App.  3d  456,  460,  which  held  that  a  part-time  employee  is  not  entitled  to  bump  into  a  full- 
time  position,  and  that  a  District  is  not  required  to  create  a  part-time  position  to  enable  a  part- 
time  employee  to  bump.  Murray  is  inapposite  here.  The  employees  Mr.  Cooley  has 
challenged  are  already  teaching  split  FTE  assignments,  such  as  Mr.  Helmer  and  Ms.  Burrow. 
Mr.  Cooley  does  not  seek  to  bump  into a  full-time  slot,  nor  does  he  seek  to  force  the  District 
to  create  a  part-time  position  for  him  to  bump  into  where  one  does  not  already  exist.  He 
seeks  to  move  into  portions  of  a  FTE  that  already  exist,  where  he  is  as  competent  as  the 
junior  employee  being  retained  to  teach  the  assignment  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

13. 

The  District’s  contention  that  Mr.  Cooley  lacks  subject  matter  certification  and 

competence  to  teach  assignments  currently  held  by  employees  with  equal  or  less  seniority 
also  lacks  merit.  It  was  not  proved  that  a  Social  Sciences  single  subject  credential  is  required 
to  teach  Consumer  Studies,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  the  District  categorizes  the  class  as 
Social  Science.  Similarly,  there  was  no  evidence  a  Health,  Sociat  Sciences  or  Physical 
Education  single  subject  credential  is  required  to  teach  Driver’s  Education/Decision  Making. 
Finally,  the  District’s  reasoning  for  precluding  Mr.  Cooley  from  taking  an  Independent 
Studies  assignment  is  based  upon  speculation  regarding  what  may  come  of  regulations  not 
yet  drafted  or  adopted. 

 

  

e 

California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80005  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  as 

follows: 

e 

(5)  Health:  child  development,  family  life,  human  sexuality, 
nutrition,  sexually  transmitted  disease  education,  and  substance 
abuse; 

(a)  The  holder  of  a  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  may  be 
assigned  to  teach  the  subjects  which  fall  within  the  broad 
subject  area  listed  on  their  document  as  found  in  |  through  16.  If 
a  subject  is  listed  below,  it  may  only  be  taught  by  the  holder  of a 
Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  with  the  broad  subject  area 
listed  on  their  document.  The  holder  of  a  Single  Subject 
Teaching  Credential  may  be  assigned  to  teach  a  subject  not 
listed  below  if  the  employing  agency  has  determined  its  subject- 
matter  content  is  directly  related  to  the  broad  subject  area. 

(1)  Agriculture:  agricultural  management,  agricultural 
mechanics,  agricultural  science,  animal  science,  forestry, 
horticulture,  landscaping,  and  plant  science; 

().--(9] 

(---[] 

(W---f9) 

(11)  Physical  Education:  aquatics,  dance,  fundamental  and 
creative  movement,  gymnastics,  interscholastic  sports,  motor 
development  or  learning,  physical  conditioning,  sports,  and 
weightlifting; 

(16)  Social  Science:  American  government,  anthropology, 
contemporary  issues,  current  events,  cultural  studies, 
economics,  ethnic  studies,  geography,  government,  history, 
humanities,  international  government,  law,  politics,  psychology, 
sociology,  United  States  history,  and  world  history. 

(b)  The  holder  of  a  teaching  credential  based  on  a  baccalaureate 
degree  and  a  teacher  preparation  program,  including  student 
teaching  or  the  equivalent,  may  be  assigned,  with  his  or  her 
consent,  to  teach  subject-matter  classes  which  do  not  fall  within 
or  are  not  directly  related  to  the  broad  subject  areas  listed  in  (a) 
if  the  employing  agency  has  determined  the  teacher  has  the 
requisite  knowledge  and  skills.  Verification  of  this  decision 

1]

  

@ 

  

must  be  kept  on  file  in  the  office  of  the  employing  agency  for 
purposes  of  the  monitoring  of  certificated  assignments  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  Section  44258.9(b).  Such  courses  may 
include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  life  skills,  conflict  management, 
study  skills,  leadership,  teen  skills,  and  study  hall.  Service  in 
such  assignments  is  limited  to  the  grade  level  authorized  by  the 
teaching  credential. 

14. 

The  problem  with  only  a  draft  seniority  list  and  no  adopted  tie  breaker  criteria 
guidance  from  the  Board  becomes  evident  when  assignments  into  which  Mr.  Cooley  appears 
to  be  eligible  to  bump  are  examined.  It  appears  that  Mr.  Cooley  is  as  qualified  and 
competent  to  teach  Consumer  Studies  and  Driver’s  Education  as  are  Ms.  Borrow  (tied  with 
him  in  seniority)  and  Mr.  Helmer  (junior  to  him).  The  regulation  quoted  above  makes  clear 
that  no  specific  credential  is  required  to  take  these  assignments.  In  addition,  Independent 
Studies  will  be  retained  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  any  of  the  employees  equal  to  or 
junior  to  Mr.  Cooley  were  “highly  qualified,”  or  any  more  qualified,  credentialed  or 
competent  to  teach  Independent  Studies  than  is  Mr.  Cooley. 

15. 

Mr.  Cooley  contends  the  layoff  fails  because  the  weight of  the  evidence 

16. 

17. 

reveals  he  is  being  laid  off  while  the  District  is  intending  to  retain  at  least  two  junior  and  one 
employee  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  to  teach  assignments-he  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  teach.  The  contention  has  merit.  Mr.  Cooley  must  be  retained. 

The  fact  that  Mr.  Cooley  must  be  retained  as  a  District  employee  for  the 

Legal  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  for 

upcoming  school  year  does  not  effect  the  District’s  discretion  to  assign  him  to  teach  where 
the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  are  best  served,  nor  does  it  give  him  rights  to  teach 
more  than  the  0.5  FTE  he  is  losing  as  a  result  of  this  action.  The  fact  that  Mr.  Cooley  is  able 
to  potentially  serve  in  a  variety  of  assignments  where  he  is  either  certificated,  as  in 
Agriculture,  or  competent,  as  in  assignments  where  no  particular  single  subject  credential  is 
required,  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  provides  the  District  flexibility  and  the  discretion  to 
assign  him  as  best  serves  the  needs  of  the  District. 

give  Mr.  Cooley  final  notice  that  his  services  are  longer  be  required  by  the  District.   

the  Sutter  Union  High  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  0.5  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of 
services,  as  set  forth  in  the  Resolution  2006/2007-008.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof. 

against  Mr.  Cooley.  Mr.  Cooley  is  retained  for  the  upcoming  school  year  and  must  be 
reemployed  to  the  extent  of  the  0.5  FTE  that  is  the  subject  of  this  action.  The  Board  may  not 

However,  legal  cause  does  not  exist  to  sustain  the  charges  in  the  Accusation 

18. 

@ 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  SUSTAINED  IN  PART  AND  DISMISSED  IN  PART. 

The  Sutter  Union  High  School  District  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  0.50  FTE  of 

particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  is  AFFIRMED,  and  to  this  extent, 
the  Accusation  is  SUSTAINED. 

The  Accusation  and  its  lay-off  against  Mr.  Cooley  is  DISMISSED.  Mr.  Cooley  is 

retained  and  must  be  reemployed  for  a  minimum  of  0.50  FTE  for  the  upcoming  2007-2008 
school  year. 

Dated: 

Apu  23  26  fe 

STEP! 
iS 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

H 

  

13

