BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  SANTA  BARBARA  SCHOOL  DISTRICTS 

In  the  Matter of the  Layoffs  of: 

OAH  Case  No.:  L2007030814 

   
    

MARISSA  ALLINGHAM,  and  other 
Certificated  Employees  of  the  Santa  Barbara 
School  Districts, 

      

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  hearing  in  the  above-captioned  matter  was  held  on  May  1,  2007,  at  Santa 
Barbara,  California.  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  presided.  Complainant  was  represented  by  Mary  L.  Dowell 
and  Michael  C.  Blacher,  Liebert,  Cassidy,  Whitmore.  Respondents  were  represented  by 
Robert  Bartosh  and  Alexis  Ridenour,  Hathaway,  Perrett,  Webster,  Powers,  Chrisman  & 
Guitierrez. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing,  the  case  was  argued,  and 
the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  the  hearing  date.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby 
makes  his  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follow. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Complainant  J.  Brian  Sarvis  filed  the  accusations!  in  this  proceeding  in  his  official 

capacity  as  Superintendent  of  the  Santa  Barbara  School  Districts  (District). 

'  The  term  “accusation”  refers  to  a  type  of  pleading  utilized  under  the  Administrative 
Procedure  Act,  Government  Code  sections  11500  and  11503.  As  noted  during  the  hearing,  it 
should  be  made  clear  that  the  Respondents  are  not  “accused”  in  the  every-day  sense  of  that 
word;  they  have  done  nothing  wrong.  Instead,  it  might  be  said  they  are  accused  of  not 
having  enough  seniority  to  retain  their  positions  with  the  District  in  the  face  of  a  resolution  to 
reduce  positions. 

?  The  Districts  are  technically  two  school  districts,  an  elementary  district  and  a  high 

school  district.  They  are  operated  under  a  joint  administration  and  board.

  

2.  The  following  persons  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  and  are  hereafter 

referred  to  as  Respondents: 

Marissa  Allingham,  Elaine  Araujo,  Kelly  Ary,  Jeffrey  Ashton,  Suzanne  Bagg, 
John  Baily,  Danielle  Bean,  Anais  Burke,  Patty  Jo  Carmean,  Clanci  Carney, 
Amy  Christensen,  James  Claffey,  Ashley  Cornelius,  Suzanne  Cowden, 
Marcelo  Cruz,  Claire  De,  Heeckeren  D’ Anthes,  Erin  Decker,  Vicky  Derscheid, 
Russell  Doty,  Patrick  Estes,  Krista  Finlay,  Beth  Fuste,  Hozby  Galindo, 
Michael  Gerken,  Allyson  Giampietro,  Patricia  Hague,  Sara  Harbision, 
Nellie  Hill,  Veronica  Johnson,  Brian  Kettler,  Emily  La  Brecque  (Cuttrell), 
Elizabeth  Lane,  Rebecca  Lane,  Valerie  Lent,  Mark  Leonas,  Mary  Lindenstein, 
Dana  Liss,  Bruce  Lofthus,  Lucy  Lombardi,  Heather  Marshall,  Robert  G. 
Martin,  Veronica  Martinez,  Victoria  McAlevey,  Adrienne  McClurg,  Nicole 
McKee,  Christine  McLain,  Katherine  McLean,  Tamra  Merritt,  Madeline 
Mikhail,  Evan  Moore,  Matt  Moran,  Marian  Musmecci,  Christine  Nelson,  Luke 
Ohrn,  Valerie  Palmer,  Susan  Petty,  Jennifer  Hewitt,  Genevieve  Quinn,  Jessica 
Rapp,  Biha  Raygoza,  Kristen  Sanft,  Kurt  Schultz,  Pavel  Shabunin,  Alexander 
Sheldon,  Jennifer  Slump,  William  Sunkel,  Jeremy  Vaa,  Matt  Whitney,  Richard 
Wigle,  William  Woodard,  Lindsay  Woodard,  Joseph  Zamora. 

3. 

(A)  On  March  13,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted 

resolution  number  06/07-25,  entitled  “Resolution  to  Decrease  the  Number  of  Certificated 
Employees  Due  to  a  Reduction in  Particular  Kinds  of  Services”  (Reduction  Resolution).  The 
purpose  of  the  Reduction  Resolution  was  to  reduce  and  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
certificated  services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Specifically, 
the  resolution  requires  the  reductions  of  89.0  “FTE”—Full  Time  Equivalents—by  reducing 
classroom  teaching  in  the  elementary  school  grades  and  the  junior  high  school  and  high 
school  grades. 

(B)  The  FTE’s  that  the  Board  determined  to  reduce  are  described  in  the 

Reduction  Resolution,  as  follows: 

Social  Studies,  10  FTE 
Math,  20  FTE 
English,  27  FTE 
Elementary,  9  FTE 

Art,  3  FTE 
Foreign  Language,  4  FTE 
Health,  1  FTE 
PE,  3  FTE 

Science,  9  FTE 
CORE,  |  FTE 
ELD,  2  FTE 

(C)  Since  the  Reduction  Resolution  was  adopted,  the  Board  determined  that  it 

would  not  have  to  layoff  teachers  to  meet  the  reduced  FTE  for  elementary  grades,  because 
attrition  and  other  factors  had  reduced  staff  in  the  elementary  schools  by  9  FTE.  The 
reduction  in  force  will  instead  fall  only  in  the  middle  and  high  schools  managed  by  the 
District,  and  will  amount  to  80  FTE. 

4.  On  March  13,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  resolution  number  06/07-26,  entitled 
“Resolution  to  Approve  Competency  Criteria  and  Tie  Breaker  Criteria”  (Tie-breaking

  

  

Resolution).  The  tie  breaking  criteria  were  based  on  criteria  used  in  many  prior  years.  The 
competency  criteria  were  also  based  on  criteria  used  by  the  District  in  prior  years,  but  it  was 
modified  to  take  into  account  requirements  that  will  be  imposed  on  the  District  by  the  No 
Child  Left  Behind  law.  The  District  did  not  abuse  its  discretion  in  the  adoption  of  the  tie 
breaking  and  competency  criteria. 

5,  On  March  13,  2006,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  recommended  to  the  Board 

that  the  District  give  Respondents,  and  each  of  them,  notice  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955°  that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
following  school  year  (2007-2008).  Between  March  14  and  March  15,  2007,  each 
Respondent  was  given  such  written  notice  that  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955,  their 
services  would  not  be  required  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

6. 

(A)  Sixty-six  of  the  Respondents  identified  in  Factual  Finding  2  requested  a 

hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007-2008  school 
year.  Those  requests  for  hearing  were  timely  filed,  or  the  Board  waived  objection  to  any  late 
filing  of  a  request  for  hearing.  Between  March  13  and  April  9,  2007,  the  Board  rescinded 
layoff  notices  to  six  teachers:  Marcelo  Cruz,  Beth  Fuste,  Veronica  Johnson,  Elizabeth  Lane, 
Valerie  Lent,  and  Tamra  Merritt. 

(B)  The  following  persons  requested  a  hearing  and  their  layoff  notice  was  not 

rescinded  prior  to  the  service  of  an  Accusation. 

Marissa  Allingham,  Elaine  Araujo,  Kelly  Ary,  Suzanne  Bagg, 
John  Baily,  Danielle  Bean,  Anais  Burke,  Patty  Jo  Carmean,  Clanci  Carney, 
Amy  Christensen,  James  Claffey,  Suzanne  Cowden,  Claire  De, 
Heeckeren  D’Anthes,  Vicky  Derscheid,  Russell  Doty,  Patrick  Estes,  Krista 
Finlay,  Hozby  Galindo,  Michael  Gerken,  Allyson  Giampietro,  Patricia  Hague, 

_  Sara  Harbision,  Nellie  Hill,  Brian  Kettler,  Emily  La  Brecque  (Cuttrell), 

Rebecca  Lane,  Mark  Leonas,  Mary  Lindenstein,  Dana  Liss,  Bruce  Lofthus, 
Lucy  Lombardi,  Heather  Marshall,  Robert  G.  Martin,  Veronica  Martinez, 
Victoria  McAlevey,  Adrienne  McClurg,  Nicole  McKee,  Christine  McLain, 
Katherine  McLean,  Madeline  Mikhail,  Evan  Moore,  Matt  Moran,  Marian 
Musmecci,  Christine  Nelson,  Luke  Ohrn,  Susan  Petty,  Jennifer  Hewitt, 
Genevieve  Quinn,  Jessica  Rapp,  Biha  Raygoza,  Kristen  Sanft,  Kurt  Schultz, 
Pavel  Shabunin,  Alexander  Sheldon,  Jennifer  Slump,  William  Sunkel,  Jeremy 
Vaa,  Matt  Whitney,  Richard  Wigle,  William  Woodard,  Lindsay  Woodard, 
Joseph  Zamora. 

7.  Thereafter,  on  April  9,  2007,  an  Accusation  was  served  upon  each  of  the 
Respondents  who  had  requested  a  hearing,  i.e.,  those  persons  identified  in  Factual  Finding 
6(B),  above.  The  Accusation  was  accompanied  by a letter  notice  which  stated  that  failure  to 

>  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted.

  

deliver  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Board  within  five  days  of  service  of  the  Accusation  would 
constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing,  and  that  the  Board  might  then  proceed  against 
the  Respondents  without  a  hearing. 

8. 

(A)  The  majority  of  those  who  requested  a  hearing  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense, 

although  the  District  deems  some  of  the  notices  to  be  untimely.  A  number  of  Respondents 
who  did  not  file  Notices  of  Defense  were  persons  as  to  whom  the  reduction  in  force  was 
rescinded,  such  as  Marcelo  Cruz,  identified  in  Factual  Finding  6. 

(B)  Complainant  has  asserted  that  the  Notices  of  Defense  were  due  by  April 

13,  2007,  a  Friday.  As  discussed  in  the  Legal  Conclusions,  below,  that  is  not  accurate. 
However,  the  majority  of  Respondents  delivered  their  Notices  of  Defense  by  April  13,  2007. 
Twenty  of  the  Respondents  submitted  their  Notices  of  Defense  after  April  13,  2007. 

(C)  As  set  forth  below,  the  Notices  of  Defense  were  actually  due  by  April  16, 

2007,  and  those  Respondents  who  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  by  that  date  will  be  deemed  to 
have  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  However,  the  following  Respondents  filed  a  Notice  of 
Defense  after  April  16,  2007,  and  will  be  deemed  to  have  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing: 

Elaine  Araujo,  John  Baily,  Patty  Jo  Carmean,  Russell  Doty,  Allyson 
Giampietro,  Patricia  Hague,  Robert  G.  Martin,  Adrienne  McClurg, 
Nicole  McKee,  Madeline  Mikhail,  Genevieve  Quinn,  Bilha  Raygoza, 
Kristen  Sanft,  Alexander  Sheldon,  William  Sunkel,  Matt  Whitney. 

9.  On  the  day  of  the  hearing,  the  Complainant  dismissed  the  Accusations  against  the 

following  Respondents,  due  to  lower  class  size  ratios  for  ninth  grade  math  and  English 
classes: 

Marisa  Allingham,  Kelly  Ary,  Jeff  Ashton,  Vicky  Derscheid,  Mike  Gerken, 
Nellie  Hill,  Mary  Lindenstein,  Bruce  Lofthus,  Victoria  McAlevey,  Katherine 
McClean,  Maggie  Mikhail,  Susan  Petty,  Jenn  Slemp,  and  Bill  Sunkel. 

10.  Prior  to  March  13,  2007,  the  District  entered  into  a  new  collective  bargaining 

agreement  with  the  union  that  represents  its  teachers.  As  part  of  that  agreement,  class  size 
ratios  were  changed.  For  example,  in  the  high  schools,  the  ratio  shall  shift  from  32  students 
per  class,  and  per  teacher,  to  35  students  per  class.  The  change  in  class  size  ratio  will  cut  the 
number  of  classes,  and  therefore  cut  down  the  number  of  teachers  needed. 

11.  Additionally,  the  District  has  experienced a  slight  decline  in  enrollment,  and  is 
cognizant  of  the  fact  that  its  feeder  elementary  schools  have  seen  a  decline  in  enrollment  in 
recent  years.  For  the  upcoming  year,  the  decline  in  enrollment  is  projected  at  1  percent  loss 
in  students,  or  approximately  100  fewer  students. 

12.  The  services  which  the  District  seeks  to  discontinue  or  reduce  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.

  

13.  The  decision  by  the  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  but  rather  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion  given  the  decline 
in  enrollment,  the  change  in  class  size,  financial  and  other  factors  considered  by  the  Board, 
and  the  manner  in  which  the  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  reached.  The 
record  establishes  that  District  management  attempted  to  estimate  the  future  staffing  needs  in 
the  manner  it  had  used  in  recent  years,  and  in  a  reasoned  manner. 

14.  The  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

15. 

In  the  course  of  the  reduction  in  force  process,  the  District  created  a  seniority  list. 
That  seniority  list  took  into  account  a  number  of  factors,  including  first  date  of  paid  service, 
credential  types,  and  various  tie-breaking  criteria  that  were  developed  by  the  District  and 
adopted  by  it  on  March  13,  2007.  (See  Factual  Finding  4.)  As  to  tie-breaking,  in  many  cases 
the  District  was  obligated  to  resort  to  the  last  criteria,  a  lottery,  which  was  conducted  under 
the  eyes  of  teacher  union  representatives,  and  with  their  assistance  in  the  drawing  of  names 
or  numbers  at  random.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  appropriately  applied  to  the  teachers 
listed  on  the  final  seniority  list. 

16. 

(A)  The  District  reviewed  its  records  and  the  seniority  list  to  determine  which 
employees  might  “bump”  other  employees,  because  they  held  credentials  in  another  area  and 
were  entitled  to  displace  a  more  junior  employee.  No  employees  were  found  eligible  to 
bump  another  employee. 

(B)  The  District  determined  that  certain  junior  teachers  possessed  superior 

skills,  training,  or  capabilities  which  more  senior  teachers  did  not  possess,  which  would 
allow  the  more  junior  teachers  to  be  retained  or  “skipped.”  Those  teachers  were  identified  on 
a  list  and  they  were  not  made  Respondents  in  this  case. 

(C)  During  the  hearing,  no  Respondents  were  able  to  show  that  they  could 

bump  or  skip  another  teacher. 

17.  An  issue  was  raised  as  to  the  proper  seniority  date  for  Respondent  Luke  Orhn, 

who  is  shown  as  having  a  date  of  August  22,  2005.  That  teacher  has  worked  for  the  District 
prior  to  August  2005,  but  had  been  on  a  limited  term  contract.  He  was  made a  probationary 
teacher  in  2006,  and  so  was  credited  with  a  prior  year  of  service  as  a  temporary  teacher,  as 
the  Code  allows. 

18.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  by  the  District  to 

render  a  service  for  which  a  Respondent  was  certificated  and  qualified  to  render. 

  

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  based  on  Factual  Findings  |  through  8. 

2. 

(A)  A  District  may  reduce a  particular  kind  of  services  (PKS)  within  the 
meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of 
service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce 
services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer 
employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 
The  Court  of  Appeal  has  made  clear  that  a 
PKS  reduction  does  not  have  to  lead  to  less  classrooms  or  classes;  laying  off  some  teachers 
amounts  to  a  proper  reduction.  (Zalec  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist. 
(2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  853-854.  See  also  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  631,  637  [Reduction  of  classroom  teaching  can  be  a  reduction  of  a  PKS;  as 
long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching  or  in  a  particular  kind  of  service  in 
teaching a  particular  subject  any  amount  in  excess  of  the  statutory  minimum  may  be 
reduced];  California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32.) 

(B)  The  services  to  be  discontinued  are  particular  kinds  of  services  within  the 

meaning  of  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified 
services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 
Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949.  This 
Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  3  through  5  and  10  through  14,  and  the  foregoing 
authorities. 

3. 

(A)  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to 
In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee 

a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  to  fill. 
may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond 
Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  At  the  same  time,  junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers—may  “skip”  that  senior  employee—if  the  junior 
teacher  possesses  superior  skills  or  capabilities  not  possessed  by  their  more  senior 
colleagues.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399; 
Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Santa  Clara  Unified 
School  Dist.  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

(B)  No  Respondent  established  that  they  had  the  right  to  bump a junior 

employee  or  to  skip  a  senior  employee,  based  on  the  foregoing  rules,  and  Factual  Findings 
16(A)  through  (C). 

4.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  based  on  Factual 
Finding  18. 

  

 

5. 

(A)  While  not  critical  to  the  outcome  of  the  proceeding,  it  should  be  noted 
that  the  District  improperly  calculated  the  date  that  Respondents’  Notices  of  Defense  were 
due.  Here  the  Accusations  were  served  on  April  9,  2007.  The  District  deemed  April  13  to  be 
the  due  date,  in  light  of  the  provision  of  section  44949,  subdivision  (c)(1),  which  provides 
that  a  respondent  “shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five  days  days  after 
.  .” 
service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation,  . 

(B)  The  Code  also  provides,  at  section  9,  that  “the  time  in  which  any  act 

provided  by  this  code  is  to  be  done  is  computed  by  excluding  the  first  day,  and  including  the 
last,  unless  the  last  day  is  a  holiday,  and  then  it  is  also  excluded.” 

(C)  Here  the  first  day  to  do  the  act—to  respond  to  the  accusation  with  a  notice 

of  defense—was  April  9,  the  day  the  accusation  was  served.  That  day  being  excluded,  the 
Respondents  had  until  April  14,  2007,  to  file  a  response.  However,  notice  must  be  taken  of 
the  fact  that  April  14,  2007,  was  a  Saturday,  and  hence  the  last  day  to  file  a  notice  of  defense 
carried  over  until  Monday,  April  16,  2007.  Therefore,  only  some  of  the  parties  deemed  late 
with  their  notices  of  defense  had  in  fact  defaulted;  those  actually  waiving  their  right  to  a 
hearing  are  identified  in  Factual  Finding  8(C). 

6. 

(A)  As  to  the  issue  raised  by  Respondent  Orhn  regarding  his  proper  seniority 
date‘,  such  claims  are  controlled  by  section  44845,  which  states  that  “Every  probationary  or 
permanent  employee  employed  after  June  30,  1947,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed 
on  the  date  upon  which  he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.” 

(B)  Mr.  Orhn  moved  into  the  probationary  class  in  August  2006,  but  was 

afforded  one  extra  year  of  probationary  status  by  the  fact  that  he  had  continually  taught  in  a 
temporary  status  for  the  year  prior  to  August  2006.  He  was  entitled  to  tack  or  add  that  one 
year  of  temporary  duty  to  his  probationary  status,  based  on  Section  44917,  third  paragraph, 
but  he  was  not  entitled  to  more  than  the  one  year  of  credit.  This  Conclusion  is  based  on 
Factual  Finding  17. 

7.  Based  on  all  the  foregoing,  the  District  may  reduce  its  services  by  80  FTE,  and 

may  give  notice  to  Respondents  occupying  such  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

*  Respondent  Russell  Doty  also  raised  an  objection  to  his  seniority  date,  but  he  has 

waived  his  right  to  a  hearing.  See  Factual  Finding  8(C),  and  Legal  Conclusion  5.

  

Ml 

1.  The  Accusations  are  sustained. 

ORDER 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  80  full-time  equivalent  certificated 

positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  persons  who  may  receive 
such  notices  are  identified  in  Factual  Finding  2,  with  the  exception  of  those  persons 
identified  in  Factual  Findings  6(A)  and  9. 

3.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority  based  on  the 

final  seniority  list  established  by  the  District  in  this  proceeding,  attached  hereto  as 
Attachment  number  1. 

May  7,  2007 

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

