BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
MAXWELL  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  COLUSA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  or  Elimination 
of  Particular  Kinds  of  Services  and  the 
Employment  Status  of: 

SARAH  RICHTER, 
LISA  BECKER,  and 
ERIC  LEAL 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N2007030808 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stephen  J.  Smith,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  at  the  Maxwell  Unified  Schoo!  District  Office,  Maxwell, 
California  on  April  19,  2007. 

Emily  LaMoe,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Maxwell  Unified  School  District 

(District)  Ronald  Turner,  Superintendent,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  19,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Ronald  Turner  (the  Superintendent)  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his 

official  capacity  as  Superintendent,  Maxwell  Unified  School  District. 

Respondents  are  and  at  all  times  relevant  to  this  Decision  were  certificated 

employee of  the  District.  Ms.  Becker  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a  CLAD 
certification.  Ms.  Richter  holds  a  preliminary  Multiple  Subject  Credential  with  a  CLAD 
certification.  Mr.  Leal  has  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Credential  in  Social  Science  with  a 
BCLAD  certification  with  an  emphasis  in  Spanish,  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Credential  with 
a  BCLAD  certification  with  an  emphasis  in  Spanish  and  a  Clear  Reading  Certification.

  

3. 

On or just  before  March  8,  2007,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  section 

e@ 

44949  and  44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (the 
Board)  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  certain  particular  kinds  of 
services  would  have  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The 
Superintendent’s  notice  specified  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated, 
as  set  forth  below.  The  Superintendent  also  notified  the  Board  that  a  corresponding  number 
of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  would  have  to  be  laid  off  to  effectuate  the  reduction 
or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  that 
respondents  had  been  identified  as  persons  to  whom  notice  should  be  given  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  recommendation  that  respondents’ 
services  for  the  District  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  was  not  related 
to  their  skills,  abilities  or  competencies  as  teachers. 

4. 

The  Board  adopted  its  Resolution  06-07-014  on  March  8,  2007.  The  Board 

resolved  to  follow  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to  reduce  3.00  full  time  equivalent 
(“FTE”)  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Resolution  authorized  and  directed  the 
Superintendent  to  give  notice  to  an  equivalent  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the 
District  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  in  order  to 
effectuate  the  reduction.  The  Resolution  authorized  the  elimination  of  the  following  services 
now  offered  in  the  District: 

Grades  K-5  Self-Contained  Classroom  Teacher 
Grades  6-8  English  Teacher 
Title  1  Teacher 

1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 

e@ 

5. 

The  Superintendent  caused  each  of  the  respondents  to  be  served  with  a  written 

Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  (the  preliminary  notice)  on  March  14,  2007.  The  written 
preliminary  notices  advised  respondents  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to  the 
Board  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The 
preliminary  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

6. 

Respondents  each  timely  filed  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  year. 

7. 

The  District  timely  served  Accusations  on  each  respondent  following  receipt 

of  their  Requests  for  a  Hearing.  Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the 
Accusation.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8. 

Ms.  Richter  is  a  probationary  teacher  in  the  District.  Her  first  day  of  paid 

service  was  January  3,  2006.  She  is  tied  for  the  least  senior  teacher  in  the  District,  other  than 
atemporary  employee.  The  employee  with  whom  she  is  tied  holds  a  single  subject  credential 
in  mathematics  and  is  teaching  mathematics  in  the  District  high  school.  According  to  the 
Superintendent’s  testimony,  Ms.  Richter  has  been  teaching  “out  of  her  credential.”  It  was 
not  clear  what  she  taught. 

@

  

9. 

Ms.  Becker  is  the  least  senior  permanent  (tenured)  employee  in  the  District. 
Her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  was  August  18,  2004.  It  was  not  entirely  clear 
what  she  has  been  teaching  in  the  past  or  present  school  years.  The  District’s  contention  that 
there  is  no  one  being  retained  by  the  District  that  she  can  “bump”  was  not  contested. 

10. 

Mr.  Leal  is  the  District’s  Title  I  teacher.  He  has  served  in  that  capacity  for  the 

past  six  school  years.  It  was  not  disputed  that  the  Title  I  teacher  position  Mr.  Leal  holds  is 
and  has  always  been  categorically  funded.  Mr.  Leal  is  bilingual  in  Spanish.  His  first  two 
years  with  the  District  were  spent  as  a  Miller-Unruh  reading  specialist,  a  categorically  funded 
program.  Since  that  time,  he  has  provided  pull-out  support  and  testing  for  the  District’s 
significant  number  of  English  language  Learner  (ELL)  students,  primarily  at  the  elementary 
level.  These  students  are  tested  by  Mr.  Leal  using  the  California  English  Language 
Development  Test  (CELDT.)  Students  showing  poor  proficiency  in  English  such  that  they 
struggle  with  a  core  curriculum  delivered  in  English  receive  Mr.  Leal’s  services.  There  are 
54  students  who  received  some  level  of  language  support  from  Mr.  Leal  in  this  school  year. 

11. 

It  was  not  disputed  that  the  District  is  required  by  the  State  to  provide  ELL 

services  to  any  students  who  demonstrate  need  for  such  assistance  on  the  CELDT.  The 
District  has  adopted  a  Master  Plan  for  English  Language  Learners  (Master  Plan)  for  the 
provision  of  these  services  and  to  demonstrate  compliance  with  the  ELL  requirements  to  the 
State.  Mr.  Leal  has  been  the  primary  person  in  the  District  to  deliver  these  services  in  the 
past  several  years,  and  he  was  a  primary  contributor  to  the  drafting  of  the  Master  Plan.  He 
also  wrote  a  description  of  the  numerous  services  he  provides  to  the  District  to  assist  the 
District’s  ELL  students. 

12. 

Counsel  for  Mr.  Leal  introduced  a  considerable  amount  of  factual  and  legal 
information  regarding  funding  for  ELL  programs  from  the  State  and  U.S.  Departments  of 
Education.  This  material  included  requirements  for  the  programs  and  administration  of 
funding  received.  One  of  the  documents  from  the  State  revealed  that  the  District  has  20.4 
percent  of  students  in  need  of ELL  services,  which  is  considerably  less  than  the  remainder  of 
schools  in  Colusa  County  and  in  the  State  generally.  This  is  not  to  say  that  Mr.  Leal’s 
services  are  not  valuable  to  the  District  and  the  students  who  receive  those  services,  or  that 
having  him  present  made  the  delivery  of  ELL  services  easier  for  the  District.  But  there  was 
nothing  in  this  considerable  documentation  that  demonstrated  that  the  District’s  proposed 
reorganization  of  its  ELL  program  for  the  upcoming  school  year,  eliminating  Mr.  Leal’s 
contributions,  will  violate  the  District’s  ELL  Master  Plan  or  any  State  or  federal  mandate. 

13. 

Mr.  Leal’s  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  is  August  21,  1998.  Mr. 

Leal  has  not  taught  any  classes  in  a  traditional  classroom  setting,  except  a  Spanish  class  in  a 
Gate  program  several  years  ago.  He  has  been  employed  by  the  District  under-a  series  of 
temporary  employment  contracts  to  fill  the  categorically  funded  Title  I  position,  as  he  is 
doing  in  the  current  school  year.  The  District’s  contention  that  Mr.  Leal  has  not  acquired  any 
credit  toward  permanent  status  was  not  disputed.

14. 

The  District  is  facing  multi-faceted  financial  pressure  that  has  put  the  District 

into  a  projected  significant  operating  deficit  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  An  increase  in 
class  sizes  and  reductions  in  services  are  the  proposed  remedies  to  respond  to  this  projection. 
The  District  has  experienced  a  decline  in  enrollment,  particularly  at  the  K-5  elementary  level, 
and  some  at  the  middle  school  level  as  well.  The  District  is  unfortunately  operating  under 
several  other  financial  pressures  as  well.  The  District  is  losing  its  Title  I  funding,  losing 
some  categorical  Title  III  funding  and  some  forest  revenue.  It  carries  a  “huge”  debt  due  to  an 
adverse  judgment  in  a  lawsuit. 

e@ 

15. 

The  Superintendent,  on  behalf-of  the  District,  considered  all  known  attrition, 

resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of 
necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

16. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  District  proposes  to  eliminate  any  services  that 

are  State  or  federally  mandated.  Mr.  Leal  contended  that  the  service  he  provides  to  the 
District  is  essential  to  its  compliance  with  State  ELL  mandates  and  the  federal  No  Child  Left 
Behind  Act  (NCLB).  The  District  did  not  dispute  Mr.  Leal’s  contention  that  he  provides  a 
very  important  service  to  the  District,  and  his  efforts  have  been  responsible  for  the  District 
being  in  compliance  with  these  mandates.  However,  the  District  will  provide  the  services 
Mr.  Leal  provided  in  a  redesigned  program  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  with  the  exception 
of  the  pull-out  instruction.  That  instruction  will  not  be  provided  in  the  upcoming  school 
year.  The  District  employs  one  certificated  teacher  at  the  elementary  level  and  two  aides,  all 
of  whom  are  bilingual.  These  bilingual  employees  will  furnish  language  assistance  to  ELL 
students  to  supplement  an  English  immersion  program.  Students  with  poor  proficiency  in 
English  will  pair  with  students  who  have  better  proficiency,  with  the  assistance,  when 
needed,  of  the  three  employees  with  bilingual  proficiency.  The  Superintendent  made  it  clear 
Mr.  Leal’s  services  were  valued  by  the  District,  but  the  loss  of  Title  I  funding  for  the  position 
and  the  District’s  poor  financial  position  made  retention  fiscally  unfeasible.  The  District is 
in  need  of  a  high  school  English  teacher  for  the  upcoming  school  year,  but  Mr.  Leal  is  not 
credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  that  subject  at  that  grade  level. 

e 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 
The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  proposed 
reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services and  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff 
served  on  respondent is  factually  and  legally  appropriate. 

2. 

The  services  the  District  seeks  to  eliminate  in  this  matter  are  “particular  kinds 

"  Education  Code  section  44944.

of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 

  

@ 

section  44955,  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  demonstrated  to  be  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise 
of  discretion. 

3. 

Mr.  Leal  contends  that  the  District  is  legally  obligated  to  provide  the 

compensatory  educational  program  for  ELL  students  in  the  District  as  set  forth  in  its  Master 
Plan.  Ms.  Leal,  in  the  execution  of  his  regular  duties  in  the  District,  is  the  District  employee 
responsible  for  and  has  been  carrying  out  those  mandates.  Mr.  Leal  acknowledges  that  the 
District  is  afforded  some  flexibility  in  carrying  out  the  Master  Plan,  but  that  since  he  is  the 
District  employee  who  has  been  carrying  out  the  Master  Plan’s  requirements,  he  must  be 
retained  to  provide  those  services  again  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  He  contends  the 
District  may  not  fail  to  meet  the  compensatory  education  obligations  addressed  by  the  Plan  in 
the  name  of  fiscal  exigency. 

4. 

The  District  does  not  dispute  that  it  is  obligated  to  provide  the  compensatory 

services  outlined  in  the  Master  Plan.  The  District’s  contention  that  it  has  discretion 
regarding  how  those  services  are  to  be  furnished  and  by  whom  they  are  to  be  furnished  has 
merit.  It  was  not  demonstrated  that  the  District  will  violate  any  State  or  federal  mandate  or 
requirement  by  redesigning  the  manner  in  which  its  ELL  compensatory  education  services 
are  delivered  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

5. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  is  facing  a  significant  projected  deficit 
related  to  the  loss  of  both  enrollment  and  several  previous  sources  of  funding.  The  reduction 
in  particular  kinds  of  services  proposed  is  necessary  to  avert  the  District  operating  in  a  deficit 
in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44955  requires  layoffs  to  take  place  in  inverse  order  of 

seniority,  with  some  notable  exceptions.  “Thus,  the  statute  provides  that  seniority 
determines  the  order  of  dismissals,  and  that  as  between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of 
paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district 
and  its  students.  Senior  employees  are  given  "bumping"  rights  in  that  they  will  not  be 
terminated  if  there  are  junior  employees  retained  who  are  rendering  services  which  the  senior 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Conversely,  as  in  this  case,  a  district  may 
move  upward  from  the  bottom  of  the  seniority  list,  "skipping"  over  and  retaining  junior 
employees  who  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  which  more  senior 
employees  are  not.””  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  certificated  employee  of  the  District  is 
being  retained  to  provide  a  service  any  of  the  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  One  junior  employee  is  being  skipped,  but  none  of  the  respondents  is  certificated  to 
teach  mathematics  at  the  high  school  level,  where  that  employee  is  being  retained. 

Alexander  v.  Board of Trustees of  the  Delano Unified  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.  App.  3d  567,  571-2; 

Moreland  Teacher's  Association  v,  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  655.

  

7. 

Legal  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955  for 

the  Maxwell  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  3.0  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of 
services,  as  set  forth  in  the  District’s  Resolution  #06-07-014.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof.  Legal  cause  therefore  exists  to  sustain  the  Accusation.  The  Board  may 
give  respondents  final  notices  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  by  the  District  in  the 
upcoming  school  year,  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  SUSTAINED. 

The  Maxwell  Unified  School  District  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  3.0  FTE  of 

particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  is  AFFIRMED. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  by  the  District  that  their  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: 

Mh 

2004 

Administrativé  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

