BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BIGGS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

OAH  No.  N2007030618 

PATTY  JONES,  SUZANNE  FRANCIS, 
LANE  BLEDSOE,  GERALDINE 
CLAYTON,  JOHN  F.  WORTMAN, 
SANDRA  MOORE,  ANGELA  SENOR, 
KATRINA  STEARNS,  SARAH  ANGLE, 
and  TIMOTHY  HULL, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Trevor  Skarda,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  13,  2007,  in  Biggs,  California. 

Roman  J.  Mujioz,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Kronick  Moskovitz  Tiedemann  &  Girard, 

represented  the  Biggs  Unified  School  District. 

Lesley  Beth  Curtis,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Langenkamp  &  Curtis,  represented  all  of  the 

respondents  to  the  extent  that  their  interests  did  not  conflict.  All  respondents  represented 
themselves  to  the  extent  that  their  interests  conflicted. 

The  matter  proceeded  in  respect  to  the  Lay  Off  Notices  issued  to  Patty  Jones,  Suzanne 

Francis,  Lane  Bledsoe,  Geraldine  Clayton,  John  F.  Wortman,  Sandra  Moore,  Angela  Senor, 
Katrina  Stearns,  Sarah  Angle  and  Timothy  Hull,  as  these  employees  had  filed  Requests  For 
Hearing,  been  issued  Accusations,  and  had  filed  through  Langenkamp  &  Curtis  Notices  of 
Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  13,  2007.

  

  

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Biggs  Unified  School  District  (District)  operates  two  elementary  schools, 
one  middle  school,  one  high  school,  and  two  Community  Day  Schools.  The  District  serves 
approximately  628  non-charter  school  students.  There  is  one  charter  school  in  the  District, 
Oak  Hills  Academy,  which  serves  approximately  108  students.  The  charter  school  teachers 
are  not  District  employees. 

2. 

Rick  Light  is  the  interim  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions,  and  the 

actions  of  the  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

Before  March  15,  2004,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and 
noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  14  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

4. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

5. 

The  interim  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  served  on  those  employees.  The  notices  of 
hearing,  however,  were  not  served  in  a  timely  manner  pursuant  to  Government  Code, 
section  11509,  and  respondents  moved  to  dismiss  the  Accusations.  Respondents  stipulated 
that  they  were  not  prejudiced  by  the  District’s  untimely  service.  Because  respondents  were 
not  prejudiced  by  the  untimely  service  of  the  notices  of  hearing,  the  motion  was  denied. 
(Ed.  Code,  §  44949,  subd.  (c)(3).) 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 

7. 

employees  of  the  District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

8...  On  March  7,  2007,  at  a  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  14  FTE 
positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

 

9. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2006/07  #9,  providing 

for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  to  decrease 
a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District,  as  follows: 

A.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  high  school  vice  principal. 
B.  Reduce  3.0  FTE  K-8  multiple  subject  teachers,  District-wide. 
C.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  6-8  Mathematics,  Science,  and  Physical 

Education  teacher,  District-wide. 

D.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  6-8  Mathematics,  Science,  English,  Social 

Science,  and  Electives  teacher,  District-wide. 

E.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  6-8  English  and  Social  Science  teacher, 

District-wide. 

F,  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  9-12  Spanish  teacher,  District-wide. 
G.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  K-12  Music  teacher,  District-wide. 
H.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  9-12  Home  Economics  teacher  (Career  Skills, 

 
T
o

Arts/Crafis,  Home  Arts,  Electives),  District-wide. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  9-12  Social  Science  teacher,  District-wide. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  6-8  English,  Social  Science,  and  Physical 
Education  teacher,  District-wide. 

K.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  9-12  Education  Specialist  (RSP)  teacher, 

District-wide. 

L 

.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  grades  K-8  Education  Specialist  teacher,  District-wide. 

10. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  2006/07  #10,  in 

which  the  Governing  Board  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 
seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The 
criteria  include  credentialing,  experience,  education,  performance,  certificates,  District 
service,  and  No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB)  highly-qualified  status. 

11. 

The  District  is  in  a  state  of  financial  crisis  caused  by  litigation,  declining 

enrollment  and  lawsuit  settlements.  Regarding  enrollment,  the  District  has  experienced  a 
precipitous  drop  in  non-charter  school  enrollment  over  the  past  several  years.  The  non- 
charter  school  enrollment  as  measured  by  the  average  daily  attendance  (ADA)  was  816.98 
students  during  the  2001-2002  school  year.  The  estimated  non-charter  school  ADA  for  the 
current  (2006-2007)  school  year  is  628  students.  The  non-charter  school  ADA  is  expected 
to  decline  further  during  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Because  the  non-charter  school  ADA 
determines  the  amount  of  funding  the  district  receives,  the  decline  in  non-charter  school 
ADA  must  be  followed  by  a  corresponding  cut  in  expenditures.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board 
resolved  to  reduce  teaching  services,  affecting  employment  of  14  FTE  teaching  positions 
and  a  total  of  13  employees.’  The  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  teaching 
services  was  made  in  order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

"  One of the  employees  who  received  a  layoff  notice  was  both  a  vice  principal  and  a  high  schoo!  Spanish 

teacher  and  represented  2.0  FTE .

  

12. 

Superintendent  Light  and  other  District  employees,  in  particular 

administrative  assistant  and  personnel  specialist  Judy  Jennings,  were  responsible  for 
implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  Mr.  Light  testified  that  he  relied 
heavily  on  Judy  Jennings  because  he  is  new  to  the  District. 

13. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains 

employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or 
temporary,  and  credentials,  authorizations  and  No  Child  Left  Behind  “highly  qualified” 
status.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the  District’s  records. 
The  District  circulated  a  seniority  list  in  anticipation  of  issuing  layoff  notices. 

14. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The 
District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area 
and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees  and  developed  a  “bumping  chart.”  In 
determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  affected  service,  the  District  determined 
the  impact  on  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  checked  the  credentials  of 
affected  individuals  to  determine  whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees  who  were 
junior  to  them.  The  District  then  looked  at  employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as 
opposed  to  other  positions. 

15. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees.  The  parties  stipulated  that  Lindsey  Roffey,  a  high  school  special 
education  teacher,  had  resigned  on  or  about  April  9,  2007.  Because  of  Ms.  Roffey’s 
resignation,  the  District  withdrew  its  Accusation  against  Angela  Senor. 

16. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  respondents  Sarah  Angle  and  Katrina  Stearns  are 

probationary  employees. 

MAY  THE  DISTRICT  LAY  OFF  SENIOR  TEACHERS  GERALDINE  CLAYTON, 

LANE  BLEDSOE,  PATTY  JONES  AND  SUZANNE  FRANCIS,  WHILE  RETAINING  LESS 
SENIOR  TEACHERS  WHO  TEACH  AT  THE  DISTRICT'S  COMMUNITY  DAY  SCHOOLS? 

17. 

Scott  Gates  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  Community  Day  School  (CDS).  He 
has  taught  CDS  continuously  since  2004.  The  District  did  not  serve  Mr.  Gates  with  a  layoff 
notice  and  seeks  to  retain  (“skip”)  Mr.  Gates.  Mr.  Gates’  first  day  of  service  was  May  1, 
2002.  He  holds  Clear  Multiple  Subject  and  CLAD  credentials. 

18. 

Vince  Sormano  is  currently  assigned  as  a  secondary  Community  Day  School 
teacher.  Mr.  Sormano’s  first  day  of  service  is  October  17,  2001.  The  District  did  not  serve 
Mr.  Sermano  with  a  layoff  notice  and  seeks  to  skip  him.  Mr.  Sormano  possesses  clear 
single  Social  Science  and  CLAD  credentials  Single  Subject  Social  Science,  and  has  been 
working  at  CDS  for  several  years.

19. 

Respondents  Geraldine  Clayton,  Lane  Bledsoe,  Patty  Jones  and  Suzanne 

Francis  are  senior  to  Mr.  Gates  and  Mr.  Sermano.  They  maintain  that  they  can  bump  Mr. 
Gates  and/or  Mr.  Sermano.  The  District  maintains  that  no  employee,  except  Mr.  Gates  and 
Mr.  Sormano,  is  qualified  and  competent  to  teach  CDS  and  that  the  District  has  a  specific 
need  to  retain  Mr.  Gates  and  Mr.  Sermano. 

20. 

CDS  classrooms  are self  contained  with  a  class  size  of  less  than  10  students 

covering  grades  4  through  12,  CDS  was  established  to  provide  classroom  instruction  to 
students  with  behavioral  problems  who  have  been  expelled,  who  are  about  to  be  expelled,  or 
who  cannot  otherwise  function  in  the  regular  classroom. 

21. 

Superintendent  Light  testified  persuasively  that  a  CDS  teacher  requires 

specialized  training  and  experience.  CDS  teachers  must  possess  a  special  set  of  skills  and 
knowledge  not  usually  provided  in  the  credentialing  process..  CDS  teachers  must  have  a 
background  in  psychology  or  sociology.  They  require  experience  and  training  working  with 
students  with  extreme  behavioral  problems,  including  behavioral  modification  techniques 
and  crisis  intervention.  The  CDS  teacher  also  requires  training  and  experience  working 
with  persons  with  behavioral  problems  which  stem  from  disabilities. 

22. 

Board  Resolution  No.  2006/07  #9,  states,  in  relevant  part,  that  with  respect  to 

that  resolution,  “competency”  means  “at  least  one  semester  actual  teaching  experience  in 
alternative  education  within  the  last  five  years.” 

23. 

Vincent  Sormano  and  Scott  Gates  possess  the  special  training  and  experience 

necessary  to  teach  at  CDS.  The  District  has  a  specific  need  to  retain  their  services. 

24.  —  There  was  no  evidence  that  Geraldine  Clayton  possesses  the  special  training 

and  experience  necessary  to  teach  at  CDS. 

25. 

Lane  Bledsoe  lacks  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach 
CDS.  Mr.  Bledsoe  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential,  with  supplemental 
authorizations  in  Introductory  English  and  Introductory  Social  Science.  While  he  taught  at 
CDS  for  one  semester  12  years  ago,  and  before  that,  he  worked  with  at-risk  students  for  a 
brief  period,  he  has  no  recent  experience  teaching  in  alternative  education.  He  has  no  recent 
coursework  in  sociology  and/or  psychology,  although  he  obtained  some  units  in  his 
credentialing  program.  Mr.  Bledsoe  has  had  minimal  crisis  intervention  and  anger 
management  training. 

26. 

Patty  Jones  lacks  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  at 

CDS.  She  has  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential  and  a  Crosscultural,  Language  & 
Academic  Development  (CLAD)  certificate.  Ms.  Jones  has  no  experience  teaching  in 
alternative  education.  While  she  has  been  the  lead  disciplinarian  at  Richvale  Elementary  for 
the  past  four  years,  she  has  very  limited  training  regarding  crisis  intervention  and/or 
working  with  troubled  youth.

  

  

27. 

Suzanne  Francis  lacks  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach 
at  CDS.  She  has  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential  and  a  CLAD  certificate.  Ms.  Francis 
has  no  experience  teaching  in  alternative  education,  no  experience  working  with  troubled 
youth,  minimal  training  regarding  anger  management  and  minimal  crisis  intervention 
training. 

28. 

There  is  no  respondent  who  possesses  the  unique  qualifications  and 

competency  to  teach  at  CDS. 

APPLICATION  OF  THE  TIE  BREAKER  CRITERIA  FOR  TEACHERS  WHO  FIRST 

SERVED  THE  DISTRICT  ON  AUGUST  27,  2001 

29. 

The  District  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  for  employees  whose  first  date  of 

services  was  August  27,  2001.  After  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  the  District 
determined  that  seniority  of  those  teachers  was  as  follows:  (1)  Timothy  Hull,  (2)  Angela 
Senor,  (3)  Katrina  Stearns,  (4)  Sarah  Angle,  and  (5)  Amanda  Ramirez. 

30. 

|  There  was  no  persuasive  evidence  that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied 

inappropriately  as  to  the  above-listed  individuals. 

APPLICATION  OF  THE  TIE  BREAKER  CRITERIA  FOR  TEACHERS  WHO  FIRST 

SERVED  THE  DISTRICT  ON AUGUST  26,  1998 

31. 

The  District  failed  to  apply  the  tie-breaking  criteria  for  Lane  Bledsoe  and 

Vera  Withrow  until  the  due  process  hearing.  Their  seniority  date  is  August  26,  1998.  Ms. 
Withrow  was  not  issued  a  layoff  notice. 

32. 

Superintendent  Light  applied  the  tie-breaker  criteria  at  the  hearing.  His 

testimony  established  that  Ms.  Withrow  is  senior  to  Mr.  Bledsoe,  primarily  because  Ms. 
Withrow  has  Clear  Multi  Subject  credential  and  a  CLAD  certificate.  She  is  therefore  more 
versatile  than  Mr.  Bledsoe,  who  has  a  single  subject  credential. 

33. 

There  was  no  persuasive  evidence  that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied 

inappropriately  as  to  the  above-listed  individuals. 

34. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  respondent  Bledsoe  requested  that  the  District 

provide  him  with  a  written  statement  of  how  the  tie-breaker  criteria  had  been  applied  with 
regard  to  respondent  Bledsoe  and  Ms.  Withrow. 

 

ELIMINATION  OF  1.0  FTE  OF  MUSIC  TEACHER  DISTRICT-WIDE  AND  OF  1.0 

FTE  OF  HOME  ECONOMICS  TEACHER  DISTRICT-WIDE 

35. 

Respondent  John  Wortman  is  the  only  music  teacher  in  the  District.  He 

teaches  music  to  all  students,  grades  K-12.  Geraldine  Clayton  teaches,  in  pertinent  part, 
Home  Economics  to  high  school  students. 

36. 

|  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  of  music  and  home  economics  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

37. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  of  music  and  home  economics  will  cause  it  to  reduce  its 
offerings  in  code  mandated  courses  below  the  level  required  by  law. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

All  notice and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation of receiving  less  money.  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  vy,  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction of particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  were  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  2006/07  #9  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning of section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  vy.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

  

  

 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838;  see,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

6. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

8. 

The  District  may  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of 

seniority,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d).?  The  District  must 
prove  that  it  has  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  and  that  certificated 
employees  it  seeks  to  retain  have  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  of  study,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  The  District  has  met  this 
burden;  no  respondent  possesses  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  at  the 
Community  Day  Schools.  The  District  has  a  specific  need  to  retain  Scott  Gates  and  Vince 
Sermano  because  they  possess  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  at  the 
Community  Day  Schools. 

9. 

Services  reduced  below  the  level  mandated  by  law  are  not  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  So  long  as  a  school  district  does  not  reduce 
its  offerings  in  a  code  mandated  course  below  the  level  required  by  law,  that  reduction 

?  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)  states: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating 
a  certificated  employee  in  order of seniority  for  either of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 
(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection of  the  laws.

  

should  be  considered  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

10. 

Applied  arts  and  visual  and  performing  arts  are  two  of  several  mandated 

subject  areas  which  must  be  provided  to  high  school  students  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  $1220,  subdivisions  (g)  and  (h).  Music  is  a  performing  art.  Home  economics 
(homemaking  education)  is  an  applied  art. 

1]. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  will  reduce  its  course  offerings  below 

mandated  levels  by  reducing  1.0  FTE  of  music  District-wide  and  1.0  FTE  of  home 
economics  District-wide. 

12. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  states,  in  relevant  part,  as” 

follows: 

As  between  employees who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shal]  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any 
employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance 
with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing 
board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to 
give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 
not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

The  District’s  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  as  to  all  affected 

13. 

  
respondents  was  appropriate.  

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  13  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the 
following  respondents:  Patty  Jones,  Suzanne  Francis,  Lane  Bledsoe,  Geraldine  Clayton,  John 
F.  Wortman,  Sandra  Moore,  Katrina  Stearns,  Sarah  Angle  and  Timothy  Hull 

2. 

The  Accusation  against  Angela  Senor  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  3,  2007 

purer  Shanda 

TREVOR  SKARDA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

