BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SCOTIA  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

LISA  STOCKWELL, 
CARRIE  BRAZIL, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  N2007030988 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  19,  2007,  in  Eureka,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the  Humboldt 

County  Office  of  Education  at  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California, 
heard  this  matter. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of 
California,  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California  95501-1219,  represented  Superintendent 
Jaenelle  L.  Lampp. 

Paul  Hagan,  Attorney  at  Law  of  Bragg,  Perlman,  Russ,  Stunich,  Rudolph  &  Eads 

LLP,  434  Seventh  Street,  P.  O.  Box  1248,  Eureka,  California  95502-1248,  represented 
respondents  Carrie  Brazil  and  Lisa  Stockwell. 

On  April  19,  2007,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  6,  2007,  in  her  official  capacity,  Jaenelle  L.  Lampp,  Superintendent, 

Scotia  Union  School  District  (the  District),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  regarding 
Respondents  Carrie  Brazil  and  Lisa  Stockwell  (respondents). 

2. 

Respondents  are  fully  credentialed  and  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

The  District  extends  designation  to  each  respondent  as  a  permanent  teacher. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s  Governing 

Board  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of  services 

  

-l-

  

(PKS),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  (2007-2008). 

e 

4. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  2006-2007/001,  although  one  board  member  was  absent. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  eliminate,  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of  3.2  full 
time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

3.0 
0.2 

FTE 
FTE 

Elementary  Classroom  teaching  positions; 
English  Language  Learner  part-time  teaching  position. 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  9,  2007,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate 
the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to 
the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  service  now  rendered  to 
the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named 
individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked  over  the  past  school  year. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  9,  2007,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s  resolution 
and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no  certificated  employee 
of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective  respondent  would  be  retained  for 
the  2007-2008  school  year  to  render a  service  that  each  respondent  was  credentialed  and 
competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency  criteria. 

e 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  Respondents  from  the  Superintendent  and 
the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s  Board’s 
intent  to  eliminate  the  courses  as  taught  by  respondents. 

7. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

8. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the  Accusation, 

dated  April  3,  2007,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely  notices  of 
defense. 

9. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

10. 

Jaenelle  L.  Lampp,  in  her  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (the  Superintendent), 

appeared  at  the  hearing.  She  provided  credible  and  persuasive  evidence.

  

The  Superintendent  established  that  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds 

of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in 
money  for  the  District’s  budget.  Also,  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of 
service  is  due  to  the  declining  pupil  census  for  the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Regarding  decreasing  financial  resources,  the  Superintendent  described  that  in 
the  school  year  2003/04  the  District  had  293  enrolled  students,  but  for  the  current  year 
(2006/07)  there  were  230  students  enrolled.  Forecasts  for  the  ensuing  year  project  a  smaller 
number  than  this  year.  The  District’s  past  annual  budget  was  about  $1.8  million;  however, 
for  the  ensuing  year,  the  District  must  reduce  expenditures  to  operate  within  a  budget  of 
$1,555,789,  which  is  a  reduction  of  $196,000  in  revenue  for  the  current  year. 

Furthermore,  the  District  has  established  a  curriculum  that  revolves  around  a 

seven-period  school  day  departmental  setting  not  only  for  seventh  grade  and  eight  grade 
classes,  but  also  for  fifth  and  sixth  grade  classes.  (There  are  currently  two  seventh  grade 
classes  and  two  eighth  grade  classes,  which  have  low  enrollment  respectively  at  11  pupils, 
11  pupils,  17  pupils,  and  18  pupils.)  In  order  to  assure  the  best  delivery  of  instruction 
to  those  junior  high  pupils,  the  District  has  formulated  a  departmental  setting  that  will 
boost  curriculum  for  the  fifth  grade  and  six  grade  classes  to be  joined  in  the  multiple 
period  departmental  setting  for  school  day  instruction.  In  order  to  implement  the  new 
departmental  setting  for  grade  five  through  grade  eight,  the  Superintendent  analyzed 
the  records  of  teachers  for  credentials,  training  certifications  (for  evidence  of  inclusion  of, 
at  least,  12  units  of  relevant  college-level  instruction  in  critical  subject  areas),  and  actual 
teaching  experience  so  that  the  Governing  Board  may  approve  the  new  teaching  model 
for  instruction  through  departmental  settings.  For  the  coming  school  year,  the  District 
will  only  maintain  six  self-contained-classroom-instruction  settings  that  will  be  limited  to 
kindergarten  through  grade  four  classes,  but  none  of  those  six  classrooms  will  be  taught 
by  teachers  who  are  junior  on  the  seniority  list  to  respondents. 

In  order  to  partially  aid  the  Governing  Board  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the 

ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s  Superintendent  recommended  that  certain  certificated 
positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of  teachers’  work  within  District 
schools. 

11. 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  Governing 

Board  was  required  to  initiate  layoff  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  her  staff,  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers. 

The  Superintendent  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teachers  who 
were  properly  designated  as  District  teachers.  She  studied  and  set  forth  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  each  teacher 
of  the  District. 

3- 

 

  

The  Superintendent  noted  that  respondents  were  the  teachers  with  the  least 
experience  in  teaching  under  the  departmental  model  for  instruction.  Neither  respondent 
has  experience  in  teaching  in  any  departmental  setting.  Even  though  under  the  mandate 
of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  federal  law,  which  entails  funding  components  to  districts, 
both  respondents  may  soon  acquire  designation  of  being  “highly  qualified”  as  elementary 
teachers  in  only  self-contained  classroom  settings.  However,  neither  respondent  has 
gained  Board  approval  of  their  respective  abilities  or  eligibility  to  teach  in  departmental 
instructional  settings. 

12. 

The  Superintendent  identified  that  for  the  ensuing  year  District  will  retain 

two  teachers,  who  are  junior  on  the  seniority  list  to  respondents,  but  who  have  certain 
experience  and  qualifications  that  are  essential  for  the  District’s  new  model  that  has  been 
devised  for  instruction  during  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  teachers,  junior  to  respondents 
who  will  be  retained,  are  Mr.  Shawn  Barsanti  and  Mr.  Saul  Lewis. 

Mr.  Saul  Lewis  holds  a  multiple-subject  credential.  However,  he  is  in  the  process  to 
soon  be  designated  a  “highly  qualified”  teacher  in  elementary  and  middle  school  instruction 
under  the  HOUSSE!  process.  Mr.  Lewis  has  also  been  a  basketball  coach  for  four  years. 
Due  to  his  record  reflecting  13  units  of  instruction  at  the  college  level  in  physical  education, 
Mr.  Lewis  is  eligible  to  teach  in  that  specialized  area  of  physical  education.  Mr.  Lewis  is  a 

'  “HOUSSE”  signifies:  “High  Objective  Uniform  State  Standard  of  Evaluation”  under  the 

guidelines  of  the  California  Department  of  Education,  Professional  Development  and  Curriculum 
Support  Division,  through  a  booklet  titled,  NCLB  (No  Child  Left  Behind)  Teacher  Requirements 
Resource  Guide. 

In  part  the  booklet  points  out  that: 

The  HOUSSE  option  is  . 
‘Not  New’  to  the  profession  to  demonstrate  subject  matter  competency. .  . 

.  the  method  set  by  the  State  for  all  teachers  who  are 

. 

. 

The  HOUSSE  consists  of  two  parts.  Part  one  allows  teachers  to  demonstrate 
subject  matter  competency  through a  point  system  that  is  based  on  the  following: 

Years  of  experience  teaching  in  the  grade  span  or  subject  (no  more  than 

(i) 
one-half  of  the  total  necessary  points  can  be  based  on  years  of  experience); 
Core  academic  coursework  in  the  assigned  grade  span  or  subject; 
(ii) 
(iii)  In-depth  standards  aligned  professional  development;  and 
(iv)  Service  to  the  profession  in  the  relevant  core  academic  subject  area. 

The  second  part  of  the  HOUSSE  consists  of  direct  observation  or  portfolio 
assessment  in  the  grade  span  or  subject  taught  and  is  only  conducted  if  part  one 
does  not  identify  sufficient  experience,  coursework,  professional  development, 
or  service  to  demonstrate  subject  matter  competence.  Finally,  if  the  teacher 
does  not  yet  meet  the  requirements,  then  subject  matter  competency  can  be 
demonstrated  through  completion  of  an  individualized  professional  development 
. 
plan  or  completion  of  the  Peer  Assistance  and  Review  Program  for  Teachers. . 

. 

-4- 

 

  

school-wide  curriculum  coach  for  science,  which  will  allow  him  to  earn  “points”  under  the 
leadership  criteria  of  the  HOUSSE  process. 

Mr.  Shawn  Barsanti  holds  a  multiple-subject  credential.  However,  he  has  been 
determined  to  soon  hold  a  designation  so  as  to  acquire  “highly  qualified  teacher”  status  for 
elementary  and  middle  school  instruction  of  history  and  government  courses.  Mr.  Barsanti 
teaches  mathematics  at  the  District’s  elementary  school  level.  Also,  Mr.  Barsanti  teaches 
two  periods  of  physical  education  and  he  is  pursuing  a  designation  of  “highly  qualified”  for 
physical  education  under  the  HOUSSE  process.  Mr.  Barsanti  is  the  athletic  director  and  the 
basketball  coach  for  his  school.  Also,  during  the  past  school  year,  he  was  the  social  studies 
curriculum  coach  for  the  entire  school;  hence,  he  acquired  “points”  under  the  leadership 
criteria  of  the  HOUSSE  process. 

Although  Mr.  Barsanti  and  Mr.  Lewis  are  junior  on  the  seniority  list  to  respondents, 

the  two  junior  teachers  have  each  four  years  or  five  years  of  experience  teaching  in 
departmental  settings. 

13.  _  The  Superintendent  determined  that  neither  Respondent  Stockwell  nor 

Respondent  Brazil  has  the  training,  experience  or  credential  to  teach  during  the  ensuing 
year  to  perform  in  teaching  positions  under  the  District’s  revised  departmentalized 
instructional  model  for  fifth  grade  and  sixth  grade  pupils  when  they  are  measured  against 
two  teachers,  who  are  junior  on  the  seniority  list,  but  who  will  be  retained  to  teach  during 
the  coming  school  year. 

14. 

On  March  9,  2007,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  delivered  to  teachers, 

who  were  affected  by  the  Board’s  resolution,  notices  to  affected  permanent  and probationary 
teachers  that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 

Respondents’  Contentions  and  Arguments 

15. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective  and 

improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does  not 
fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of junior, 
credentialed  employees  who  are  being  retained  to  teach  subjects  under  a  new  instructional 
model  where  the  teachers  who  are  to  be  retained  have  nearly  identical  credentials  as 
respondents.  Respondents  argue  that  the  Superintendent  did  not  afford  them  opportunities 
to  become  “highly  qualified  teacher”  status  under  the  HOUSSE  process  so  as  to  enable 
them  to  secure  the  qualifications  for  them  to  be  retained  as  opposed  to  the  District  retaining 
teachers  who  are  junior  to  respondents  relative  to  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Respondents 
argue  that  an  inference  may  be  drawn  that  the  District’s  layoff  proceeding  that  adversely 
affects  their  respective  future  with  the  District  is  contrary  to  the  California Department 
of  Education  policy  “that  nothing  in  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  requires  that  teachers 
who  have  not  yet  demonstrated  that  they  meet  NCLB  teacher  requirements  be  fired.” 
Respondents  contend  that  the  Board  did  not  make  a  decision  until  March  8,  2007,  to 

  

 

  

departmentalize  instruction  to  fifth  grade  and  sixth  grade  pupils  and  that  date  was  too  late 
to  afford  them  notice  of  a  basis  to  meet  the  District’s  needs  for  teacher  services  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

Respondents’  contentions  and  arguments  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected  as  bases 

to  dismiss  any  aspect  of  the  accusations. 

Individual  Respondents 

Lisa  Stockwell 

16. 

|  Respondent  Lisa  Stockwell  (Respondent  Stockwell)  has  a  first  date  of  paid 

service  with  the  District  as  a  probationary-one  teacher  as  of  August  23,  1995.  (She  has 
devoted  12  years  to  the  District  out  of  her  entire  13-year  long  career  as  a  teacher.) 
Respondent  Stockwell  now  holds  a  clear,  multiple-subject  credential  with  a  CLAD 
certification. 

Respondent  Stockwell  teaches  fourth  grade  pupils  in  a  self-contained  classroom  at 
school  known  as  the  “Upper  Complex,”  which  is  a  facility  for  public  school  instruction  to 
pupils  in  kindergarten  through  sixth  grade.  Respondent  Stockwell  has  instructed  pupils  in 
the  fourth  grade  level  over  the  past  two  school  years.  While  employed  by  the  District,  she 
has  always  taught  at  the  kindergarten  through  fifth  grade  levels. 

Respondent  Stockwell  acknowledges  that  she  does  not  have  experience  or  college- 

level  coursework  that  has  made  her  eligible  to  acquire  highly  qualified  teacher  status. 

Respondent  Stockwell  believes  that  she  has  specialized  training  that  enables  her  to 
teach  in  a  departmental  setting.  She  has  taught  at  six  different  grade  levels  (kindergarten 
to  grade  five)  over  a  tenure  that  has  seen  her  make  rapid  changes  in  teaching  duties. 

Only  on  March  9,  2007,  which  was  one  day  after  the  Board’s  decision  to 

departmentalize  instruction  at  the  fifth  grade  and  sixth  grade  levels,  did  Respondent 
Stockwell  learn  that  her  teacher’s  position  might  be  adversely  affected  by  the  Board’s 
new  policy.  However,  she  acknowledged  that  the  Superintendent  dispatched  circulars 
called  “Monday  Memo”  that  informed  teachers  of  a  June  30  deadline  to  acquire  from 
the  District  “highly  qualified  teacher  status.” 

Respondent  Stockwell  has  11.5  units  of  college  level  coursework  in  physical 
education.  But,  that  total  number  of  units  do  not  render  her  eligible  to  teach  physical 
education. 

Respondent  Stockwell  has  14  units  of  college  level  coursework  in  science.  She  has 

taught  science  at  grade  levels  kindergarten  through  fifth  grade. 

-6- 

 

She  has  94  units  of  coursework  in  social  studies,  which  includes  only  nine  units  of 

history  coursework.  The  District  has  not  determined  Respondent  Stockwell  to  be  viewed  as 
a  highly  qualified  teacher  for  either  science  or  history.  She  has  taught  history  at  the  fifth 
grade  level. 

Respondent  Stockwell  asserts  her  belief  that  the  District  has  not  “reached  out  to  her” 

for  the  purpose  of  aiding  her  to  become  eligible  to  gain  the  highly  qualified  teacher  status. 

However,  Respondent  Stockwell  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 

has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Stockwell  possesses  a  credential 
and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Stockwell  establish  that  the 
Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that 
adversely  affects  her  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

Carrie  Brazil 

17. 

Respondent  Carrie  Brazil  (Respondent  Brazil)  has a  first  date  of  paid  service 

as  a  probationary-one  teacher  as  of  August  23,  2000.  She  holds  a  clear,  multiple-subject 
credential  with  a  CLAD  emphasis  and  a  supplementary  authorization  in  English. 

Respondent  Brazil  teaches  sixth  grade  pupils  in  a  self-contained  classroom  at  “upper 

school  complex,”  which  houses  pupils  in  the  fourth  grade  through  six  grade. 

Respondent  Brazil  has  four  units  of  college  level  coursework  in  physical  education. 

And,  Respondent  Brazil  has  20  units  of  college  level  coursework  in  science,  and  34  units  of 
coursework  in  social  studies. 

Respondent  Brazil  met  with  the  Superintendent  regarding  the  District’s  plan  to  use 
a  departmental  model  for  instruction  for  fifth  grade  and  sixth  grade  pupils  next  year.  She 
believes  that  her  experience  at  teaching  science  qualifies  her  for  other  assignments  in  the 
departmental  structure.  She  has  taught  in  the  District  over  three  years  at  the  fifth  grade 
level  as  well  as  four  years  at  the  sixth  grade  level.  Hence,  she  argues  that  she  has  ample 
experience  with  the  two  grades  that  are  to  be  included  in  the  new  departmental  model  of 
instruction. 

Respondent  Brazil  believes  that  she  qualifies  under  California  Department  of 

Education  standards  to  acquire  “highly  qualified  teacher”  status. 

However,  Respondent  Brazil  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 
has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Brazil  possesses  a  credential  and 
is  currently  competent  to  teach  according  to  the  District’s  revised  departmentalized 
instruction  model  for  the  coming  school  year.  Nor  did  Respondent  Brazil  establish  that 
the  Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action 
that  adversely  affects  her  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

-7- 

 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

18. 

The  Superintendent  demonstrated  that  she  exerted  reasonable  and  equitable 

steps  to  disseminate  information,  through  her  “Monday  Memo”  circulars,  and  other 
informal  communication,  as  sent  to  all  teachers,  regarding  the  deadline  or  suspense-date 
for  teachers  to  obtain  with  the  District’s  approval  HQT  (highly  qualified  teacher)  status  so 
that  such  credentialed  employees  might  gain  proficiency  to  be  oriented  into  teaching  in 
departmental  instruction  settings.  The  Superintendent  met  with  respondents,  separately, 
to  review  records  in  their  respective  quests  to  become  eligible  to  gain  highly  qualified 
teacher  status.  The  Superintendent  received  transcripts  from  each  respondent  during 
respective  meetings;  however,  the  records  for  respondents  did  not  meet  the  requisite 
demands  to  secure  the  HQT  status  before  the  date  the  Superintendent  was  required  to 
present  respondents  with  the  preliminary  notice  of  the  layoff  action. 

19. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the 

District  faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State 
of  California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of  teacher 
and  administrator  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District 
must  prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 
including  the  positions  held  by  respondents. 

20. 

|  No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the 

proposed  elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents, 
the  District  will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services  for 
which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE 
positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

21. 

|  The  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision  to 

eliminate  or  discontinue a  total  of  3.2  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions  held  by 
each  respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

22. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

23. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

  

-8-

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set 
forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or 

official  duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 
regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
District  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non- 
reemployment  of  respondents. 

4. 

Respondents  were  not  persuasive  that  the  law  that  pertains  to  teacher  layoff 

proceedings  dictates  that  the  District  may  assign  them  as  teachers,  with  their  consent,  to 
teach  at  a  grade  level  for  which  such  teacher  does  not  specifically  hold  a  valid  credential 
based  upon  the  college-level  coursework  completed  respectively  by  the  teacher.  By 
exerting  such  reassignment  for  respondents,  each  respondent  would  be  retained  to  teach 
classes  in  the  District’s  new  departmentalized  model  for  which  two  junior  teachers  have 
been  assigned  to  teach.  But  the  underpinning  of  Education  Code  44256,  subdivision  (b),” 
turns  on  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the  subject  school  district  to  designate  a  teacher  to 
fill  a  position  for  which  the  teacher  does  not  hold  a  credential.  In  this  matter,  respondents 
offered  no  legal  basis  to  require  the  District  to  view  their  college  level  coursework  as 

  

?  Education  Code  section  44256,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  part: 

The  holder  of  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  or  a  standard  elementary 
credential  who  has  completed  20  semester  hours  of  coursework  or  10  semester 
hours  of  upper  division  or  graduate  coursework  approved  by  the  commission  at 
an  accredited  institution  in  any  subject  commonly  taught  in  grades  9  and  below 
shall  be  eligible  to  have  that  subject  appear  on  the  credential  as  authorization 
to  teach  the  subject  in  departmentalized  classes  in  grades  9  and  below.  The 
governing  board  of a  school  district  by  resolution  may  authorize  the  holder  of 
a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  or  a  standard  elementary  credential  to 
teach  any  subject  in  departmentalized  classes  to  a  given  class  or  group  of 
students  below  grade  9,  provided  that  the  teacher  has  completed  at  least  12 
semester  units,  or  six  upper  division  or  graduate  units,  of coursework  at  an 
accredited  institution  in  each  subject  to  be  taught. 
with  the  teacher's  consent.  However,  the  commission,  by  regulation,  may 
provide  that  evidence  of  additional  competence  is  necessary  for  instruction 
in  particular  subjects,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  foreign  languages.  The 
commission  may  establish  and  implement  alternative  requirements  for 
additional  authorizations  to  the  multiple  subject  credential  on  the  basis  of 
specialized  needs.  (Emphasis  added.) 

The  authorization  shall  be 

-9- 

 

  

meeting  such  standards  as  to  warrant  their  retention  to  teach  in  a  departmentalized  setting 
in  place  of  two  teachers,  with  less  seniority  with  the  District,  but  who  have  taught  in  the 
departmentalized  format  for  four  or  five  years. 

e 

5. 

Board  Resolution  2006-2007/001,  as  adopted  on  March  8,  2007,  stated  that 

it  was  the  Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular 
kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  A  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  was 
not  cited  as  a  basis  for  eliminating  3.20  full  time  equivalent  certificated  positions  in  the 
District’s  corps  of  teacher  positions. 

The  preliminary  layoff  notice,  dated  March  8,  2007,  stated  that  the  reason  for  the 

notice  was  due  to  a  decision  “to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  District  beginning 
not  later  than  at  the  commencement  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
Governing  Board,  it  therefore  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees  in  the  District.”  The  preliminary  notice  did  not 
mention  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  authorizes  a  district’s  governing 

board  to  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  employees 
whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  for  all  schools  in  the  first  six 
months  has  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  school  year 
or  whenever a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year. 

e@ 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a)  requires  that  no  later  than  March  15 

and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by  the 
superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be  given  to 
employees  and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation. 

The  preliminary  notice  is  intended  to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed 

of  the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be 
reemployed.  The  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
(Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355.) 

A  notice  that  specifies  both  grounds,  that  is  PKS  reduction/elimination  and  declining 

average  daily  attendance,  is  suspect.  (See  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.3d  648.)  And,  where  a  notice  specifies  one  of  the  two  statutory  reasons  for  a 

-10-   

teacher  layoff,  a  governing  board  may  not  later  attempt  to  justify  dismissal  on  the  other 
ground.  (Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education,  supra,  39  Cal.App.3d  355.°) 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services 

need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number 
of  students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number  of  terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within  the 
Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a  particular 
service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

The  District’s  Governing  Board  did  not  propose  layoffs  for  any  reason  not  specified 

in  the  preliminary  notice  as  sent  to  certificated  employees.  The  projection  of  declining 
pupil  attendance  or  enrollment,  as  offered  in  evidence  by  the  superintendent,  was  one  of  a 
few  reasons  for  consideration  by  that  professional  education  administrator  offered  as  the 
ground  for  teacher  layoff  to  the  subject  governing  board  for  its  decision  to  eliminate 
particular  kinds  of  services.  In  this  matter,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
was  not  a  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious  action.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn. 
v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

The  Scotia  Union  School  District  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  3.2  FTE 

positions  for  the  2007-2008  school  (which  may  have  been  based  in  some  measure  on  a 
projected  decline  in  enrollment  of  pupils  for  the  2006-2007  school  year)  was  a  discretionary 
decision  that  constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  service  under  the 
Education  Code. 

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to 
give  respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in 
Factual  Findings  10  to  14  inclusive,  18  to  21  inclusive  and  23. 

7. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by 

each  respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in  Factual 
Finding  22. 

> 

In  Karbach,  the  governing  board  gave  notice  to  probationary  teachers  that  such 

employees  would  not  be  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  on  the  ground of  a  decline  in 
average  daily  attendance.  But,  at  the  administrative  adjudication  hearing,  the  presiding  officer 
allowed  the  board  to  present  evidence  justifying  the  decision  to  eliminate  positions  of  the  affected 
probationary  teachers  on  the  new  theory  of  reduction  in  particular  services.  The  Court  of  Appeal 
held  that  the  governing  board  had  no  authority  to  terminate  the  teachers  for  any  reason  not  specified 
in  the  original  preliminary  notice  and  that  the  proposed  terminations  on  the  ground  of  reduction  in 
services  were  not  valid. 

-ll- 

 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained. 

1. 

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Lisa  Stockwell  and  Carrie  Brazil 

that  their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of 
the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  3,  2006 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

-12- 

 

