BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
DURHAM  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  BUTTE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction 
or  Discontinuance  of  Certain  Kinds  of 
Services)  against: 

Wesley  Daniel  Bill 
Veronica  Masuda 
William  E.  Stevens  Jr. 

OAH  No.  N2007030960 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Durham,  California,  on  April  24,  2007. 

Elizabeth  B.  Mori,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of 

California,  represented  the  Durham  Unified  School  District. 

Joan  Marie  Maredyth,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

Evidence  was  received,  the  hearing  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April 

24,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

On  March  30,  2007,  Penny  Chennell  Carter,  Ed.D.,  Superintendent 

(Superintendent),  Durham  Unified  School  District  (District),  State  of  California,  made  and 
filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  Board of  Trustees  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 
Resolution  No.  06-22  (Resolution).  The  Resolution  was  based  on  the  Superintendent’s 
determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for 
the  2007-2008  school  year.  Accordingly,  the  Board  determined  that  the  following  particular

  

    

kinds of services  and  corresponding  number  of  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  should 
be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

Services 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

Durham  Elementary  School 

Elementary  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  (K-5) 

Physical  Education 
VAPA 

Total 

Durham  Intermediate  School 

Elementary  Multiple  Subject  Teaching  (K-5) 
Exploratory  Agriculture 
Physical  Education 

Total 

Durham  High  School 

US.  History 
Algebra 
Welding 
CADD  I/II 

Total 

Total  Reduction 

. 

1.40 

.20 
20 

1.80  FTE 

1.34  FTE 

1.0 
7 
17 

.20 
.20 
.20 
.20 

.80  FTE 

3.94  FTE 

3. 

On  or  before  March  13,  2007,  the  Superintendent  gave  the  Board  written 

notice  of  her  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

4. 

By  letter  dated  March  9,  2007,  the  Superintendent  provided  written  notice  to 

respondents  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  them,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year.  The  Resolution  setting  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  was  attached 
to  the  notice. 

 
  

5. 

Respondents  made  timely  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Accusation  was  timely 
served  on  respondents  and  respondents  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Board’s  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a 
proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

7. 

The  decrease  of  the  District’s  services  by  3.94  FTE,  with  a  reduction  in  a 

corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  is  necessary.  The  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

8. 

Wesley  Daniel  Bill  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  20,  1998.  He  holds  a 

Designated  Subject  Vocational  Education  Credential  with  an  Authorization  in  Welding  and 
Auto  Mechanics.  Mr.  Bill  is  presently  employed  as  a  full-time  certificated  employee  of  the 
District,  teaching  in  the  high  school.  His  services  are  being  reduced  by  .20  in  welding.  No 
certificated  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Bill  is  being  retained  to  provide  services  that  he  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9. 

Veronica  Masuda  has a  seniority  date  of  August  19,  2004.  She  holds  a 

Multiple  Subjects  Credential  with  a  CLAD  certification.  Ms.  Masuda  is  presently  employed 
as  a  full  time  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  teaching  K-5  instruction.  Her  services  are 
being  reduced  by  1.0  FTE.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Masuda  is  being  retained 
to  provide  services  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10. 

William  E.  Stevens  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  23,  1985.  He  holds  a 

Credential  in  Designated  Subjects/Vocational  Education,  with  Authorization  in  Agricultural 
Production.  Additionally,  he  is  certified  in  Ed/SB  395.  Mr.  Stevens  is  presently  employed 
.80  FTE,  teaching  .60  in  agriculture  in  the  high  school,  and  .20  agricultural  exploratory  in  the 
intermediate  school.  His  services  are  being  reduced  by  .20  in  agricultural  exploratory  in  the 
intermediate  school. 

11. 

Mr,  Stevens  maintains  that  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  leadership 

classes  currently  being  taught  by a  certificated  employee,  Jeff  Flores,  with  a  seniority  date 
junior  to  him.  Jeff  Flores  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  1989.  He  holds  a  Single  Subject 
Credential  Authorization  in  Physical  Education,  with  Supplementary  in  Biology/Intro.Life 
Sciences.  Additionally,  he  is  certified  in  Ed/SB  395.  He  is  a  full  time  employee,  currently 
assigned  to  teach  leadership  classes.  The  District  anticipates  that  Mr.  Stevens  will  continue  to 
teach  leadership  classes  in  the  ensuring  school  year.  Mr.  Stevens  maintains  that  he  can 
“bump”  into  .20  of  the  leadership  classes  Mr.  Flores  is  scheduled  to  teach  in  the  2007-208 
school  year.

    

e 

e 

12. 

The  District  maintains  that  even  though  Mr.  Stevens  is  senior  to  Mr.  Flores, 

Mr.  Stevens  does  not  hold  the  appropriate  credential  to  teach  leadership,  and  thus  cannot 
bump  into  .20  of  Mr.  Flores’s  2007-2008  leadership  assignment.  The  District’s  leadership 
classes  are  general  education  classes,  taught  by  teachers  who  hold  “regular  credentials,”  that  is 
Single  or  Multiple  Subject  Credentials  rather  than  Vocational  Credentials.  The  issue 
presented  is  whether  the  holder  of  a  Designated  Subjects/Vocational  Education  in Agricultural 
Production  is  credentialed  to  teach  general  leadership  classes. 

13. 

Ina  prior  year,  the  District  reduced  Mr.  Stevens’s  position  by  .20  FTE  in 

exploratory  agriculture.  In  2006,  when  the  District  instituted  leadership  classes,  it  sought  to 
reinstate  Mr.  Stevens  and  looked  into  his  ability  to  teach  leadership..  Mr.  Stevens  had  taught  a 
leadership  component  in  his  agriculture  classes  and  the  District  believed  he  was  competent  to 
teach  leadership.  The  Butte  County  Office  of  Education  advised  District  personnel  that  a 
person  holding  a  vocational  credential  in  agriculture  is  qualified  to  teach  agricultural 
leadership,  but  not  general  leadership  classes.  The  District  was  advised  that  a  person with 
only  a  vocational  credential  is  not  certificated  to  teach  in  a  regular  education  program, 
primarily  because  that  teacher  did  not  receive  credentialing  based  upon  a  teacher  preparation 
program.  The  District  concluded  that  it  would  be  a  mis-assignment  to  assign  a-teacher  with  a 
Designated/Vocational  Credential  in  Agriculture  to  teach  leadership  other  than  within 
agricultural  classes. 

14. 

Mr.  Stevens  holds  a  Bachelor’s  of  Science  (BS)  in  Animal  Science.  He 

received  a  Clear  Designated  Subjects  Vocational  Education  Teaching  Credential  (Full  Time), 
based  upon  his  BS  and  his  experience  in  the  field.  He  has  obtained  a  designation  as  a 
“highly  qualified  teacher”  under  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act,  in  Designated  Subjects, 
Vocational  Education.  He  has  completed  some  student  teacher  training.  He  has  never 
completed  a  teacher  credentialing  program.  He  has  taught  for  twenty  eight  years,  and  at 
times  he  has  taught  life  sciences  classes  as  well  as  agricultural  classes. 

15. 

Mr.  Steven’s  teaching  credential  states  on  its  face  “This  credential  authorizes 

the  holder  to  teach  the  subject  or  subjects  named  above  [Agricultural  Production]  in  technical 
trade,  or  vocational  courses  that  are  part  of  a  vocational  education  program  in  grades  twelve 
and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes  organized  primarily  for  adults.”  Mr.  Steven’s 
teaching  credential  clearly  authorized  him  to  teach  only  agricultural  production  in  technical 
trade  and  vocational  classes.  The  leadership  classes  are  presented  as  electives  to  the  general 
student  population,  not  as  part  of  the  vocational  education  or  technical  programs. 

16. 

Additionally,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  vocational/designated  subject  credential 

available  in  leadership.  Leadership  is  not  included  on  the  lengthy  list  of  subjects  available 
for  vocational  credentialing  through  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

17. 

There  is  no  credential  specifically  authorizing  instruction  in  leadership  classes. 
California  Code  of  Regulations,  title  5,  section  80005,  subdivision  (b),  provides  in pertinent 
part  that  leadership  classes  may  be  taught  by  “the  holder  of  a  teaching  credential  based  upon

  

e@ 

  

a  baccalaureate  degree  and  a  teacher  preparation  program,  including  student  teaching  or  the 
equivalent,”  provided  the  teacher  has  the  requisite  knowledge  and  skills  to  teach  the  subject 
(emphasis  added).  Even  though  Mr.  Stevens  holds  a  Baccalaureate  degree  and  he  has  done 
some  student  teaching,  his  credential  is  not  based  upon  a  bachelor’s  degree  and  a  teacher 
preparation  program  which  includes  student  teaching.  His  credential  is  based  upon  his 
fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  a  vocational/designated  subjects  credential.  These 
requirements  include  five  years  of  work  experience  directly  related  to  the  subject  listed  on 
the  credential  and  possession of  a  high  school  diploma  or  equivalent.  It  is  clear  that  even 
though  Mr.  Stevens  holds  a  college  degree  and  has  some  student  teaching  experience,  his 

-  credential  does  not  qualify  him  to  teach  general  education  classes,  such  as  leadership. 

Additionally,  the  fact  that  he  may  have  taught  a  class  he  was  not  credentialed  to  teach  in  the 
past  (life  sciences)  does  not  confer  upon  him  the  right  to  again  teach  a  class  he  is  not 
qualified  to  teach. 

18. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Stevens  is  being  retained  to  provide 

services  that  he  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual 
Findings.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  discontinued 

for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

Dated:  May  3,  2007 

IN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

