BEFORE  THE 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  THE 
PLUMAS  COUNTY  OFFICE  OF  EDUCATION 
COUNTY  OF  PLUMAS,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  of  Particular 
Kinds  of  Services  Affecting: 

OAH  No.  N2007040084 

Persons  Occupying 
5.33  Full  Time  Equivalent 
Teaching  Services. 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  18,  2007,  in  Quincy,  California. 

Michelle  L.  Cannon,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Kronick,  Moskovitz,  Tiedman  &  Girard, 

represented  the  Superintendent  of  the  Plumas  County  Office  of  Education  (Superintendent). 

Thomas  Smith,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Wells,  Small  &  Selke,  appeared  on  behalf  of 

respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  was  closed  on  April  18,  2007. 

PROCEDURAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Eight  certificated  employees  received  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be 

required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  and  requested  a  hearing.  Of  these,  three  entered  into 
a  settlement  agreement  with  the  Superintendent  prior  to  the  hearing  of  this  matter,  and 
waived  their  right  to  a  hearing,  agreeing  that  there  was  cause  for  dismissal.  Three  others 
withdrew  their  requests  for  hearing. 

2. 

At  the  commencement of the  hearing,  two  certificated  employees  remained  in 

this  action.’  However,  neither  of  these  employees  appeared  at  the  hearing,  despite  proper 

'  The  remaining  employees  are  Kimber  Azevedo  and  Teresa  Redkey. 

   

  

  

notice.  Mr.  Smith,  made  himself  available  at  hearing  to  represent  these  two  employees,  but 
he  had  not  been  authorized  to  represent  them. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Michael  Chelotti  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Plumas  County  Office  of 

Education.  Bruce  Williams  is  Assistant  Superintendent  and  Director  of  Personnel  for  the 
County  Office  of  Education.  Their  actions  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2. 

On  March  9,  2007,  the  Superintendent  served  on  each  respondent  a  written 

notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted 
that  the  Superintendent  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of 
services  which  reduced  the  certificated  staff  by  5.33  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated 
positions.  Eight  certificated  employees  were  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

3. 

Respondents  timely  requested,  in  writing,  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

5. 

4, 

7. 

6. 
District. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the  Accusations. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  adopted  Resolution  No.  0607-09, 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  certificated  employees  of  the 

who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and 
blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  timely  served  on  those  employees. 

providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  totaling  5.33  FTE  in 
instruction. 

District  and  County  employees  were  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  

of  the  District  and  County  Office  of  Education  had  decreased  by  3300  students  during  the 
last  two  school  years.  Additionally,  the  Forest  Reserve  Bill,  which  has  provided  funding  to 
the  District  and  County  Office  of  Education,  has  expired,  depriving  the  County  of  $450,000. 
Thus,  the  Superintendent  resolved  to  reduce  and  eliminate  teaching  services  affecting 
employment  of  5.33  FTE certificated  positions.  The  Superintendent’s  resolution  to  eliminate 
and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  solely  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

The  Superintendent  determined  that  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  schools 

Supervisor  Michael  Chelotti,  Assistant  Supervisor  Bruce  Williams,  and  other 

8. 

9. 

of  the  layoff.  The  District  and  County  maintain  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains 
employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  (tenured,  probationary  or 
temporary)  and  credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  were 
obtained  from  the  District’s  and  County’s  records. 

10. 

The  County  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 
senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  County  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of 
affected  service,  the  County  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  known 
vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The 
County  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump” 
other  employees.  The  County  then  looked  at  employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as. 
opposed  to  other  positions. 

11. 

The  County  considered  all  known  attrition,  leaves  of  absence,  resignations, 
retirements  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff 
notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

12. 

As  between  certificated  teachers  with  the  same  dates  of  seniority,  the  County 

employed  “tie  breaking”  criteria  adopted  by  the  District,  County  and  the  Plumas  County 
Teacher’s  Association. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction of particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  County  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings  are 
necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  0607-09,  are  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious  and  was a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce 
the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  County  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation

    

of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  County’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4, 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Superintendent’s  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe 
particular  kinds  of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also, 
Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

6. 

No  certificated  employees  with  seniority dates  junior  to  respondents  are  being 

retained  to  teach  classes  for  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

7. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  provide 

notice  to  respondents  that  5.33  FTE  in  instruction  will  not  be  required  in  the  ensuing  school 
year.  Such  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  County  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  occupying  5.33  FTE  of  instruction  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  April  27,  2007 

4 

. 

ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

