BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ARCATA  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

WENDY  BRANCA,  CHRISTINE  GOODIN, 
JASON  PAYTAS,  AMY  HUBBARD, 

OAH  No.  N2007030985 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  19,  2007,  in  Eureka,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the  Humboldt 

County  Office  of  Education  at  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of 
California,  heard  this  matter. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Attorney  at  Law  of  School  and  College  Legal  Services 

of  California,  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California  95501-1219,  represented 
Superintendent  Douglas  White. 

Paul  Hagan,  Attorney  at  Law  of  Bragg,  Perlman,  Russ,  Stunich,  Rudolph  &  Eads 

LLP,  434  Seventh  Street,  P.  O.  Box  1248,  Eureka,  California  95502-1248,  represented 
respondents  Wendy  Branca,  Christine  Goodin,  Jason  Paytas,  and  Amy  Hubbard. 

On  April  19,  2007,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  6,  2007,  in  his  official  capacity,  Douglas  White,  Superintendent 

(the  Superintendent),  Arcata  School  District  (the  District),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation 
regarding  Respondents  Wendy  Branca,  Christine  Goodin,  Jason  Paytas,  and  Amy  Hubbard 
(respondents). 

2. 

Respondents  are  fully  credentialed  and  certificated  employees  of  the 

District.  The  District  extends  designation  to  each  respondent  as  a  permanent  teacher. 

-1- 

 

3. 

On  February  12,  2007,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s 

Board  of  Trustees  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds 
of  services  (PKS),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the 
District  for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2007-2008). 

@ 

4. 

On  February  12,  2007,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously 

adopted  Resolution  No.  06/07-7. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  eliminate,  no  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form 
of  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

4.0 

FTE 

Certificated  Teacher  positions. 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  8,  2007,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate 
the  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence, 
due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  service  now 
rendered  to  the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy 
the  named  individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked  in  over  the  past 
school  year. 

e@ 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  8,  2007,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s 

resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective 
respondent  would  be  retained  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  to  render  a  service  that 
each  respondent  was  credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the 
District’s  competency  criteria. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  Respondents  from  the  Superintendent 
and  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s 
Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  respondents. 

7. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

8. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the  Accusation, 

dated  April  6,  2007,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely  notices  of 
defense. 

9. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

@ 

  

 

-2- 

  

10. 

Douglas  White,  in  his  capacity  as  the  Superintendent,  appeared  at  the 

hearing.  He  provided  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008 

school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s 
budget.  Also,  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the 
declining  pupil  census  for  the  District  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  (The  declining 
enrollment  is  reflected  in  a  drop  of  over  100  pupils  in  the  District  over  the  past  year.) 
In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school 
year,  the  District’s  Superintendent  recommended  that  certain  certificated  positions  be 
eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of  teachers’  work  within  District  schools. 
However,  none  of  the  eliminated  positions  involve  teachers  who  offer  mandated 
services. 

11. 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District 

was  required  to  initiate  layoff  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  his  staff,  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers. 

The  Superintendent  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teachers  who 
were  properly  designated  as  District  teachers.  He  studied  and  set  forth  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  each 
teacher  of  the  District. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  delivered  to  teachers,  who 

were  affected  by  the  Board’s  resolution,  notices  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary 
teachers  that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 

12. 

The  Superintendent  identified  that  for  the  ensuing  year  District  will  retain 

Ms.  Gahm  as a  speech  therapist,  although  she  is  the  most  junior  certificated  employee 
with  the  District  and  is  now  in  a  probation-one  status  because  of  her  first  day  of  paid 
service  is  August  29,  2006.  The  District  has  a  need  for  the  services  of  a  speech  therapist, 
and  none  of  the  respondents  possess  the  education,  training  or  credential  to  provide 
speech  therapist  services.  Ms.  Gahm  has  a  credential  that  is  characterized  as  “Language, 
Speech  and  Hearing.”  The  Superintendent  notes  that  Ms.  Gahm  came  to  the  District 
with  past  experience  through  work  at  senior  resource  facilities  in  language  skills. 

13. 

The  Superintendent  noted  that  Ms.  Howatt,  who  occupies  the  penultimate 

position  on  the  District’s  seniority  list,  has  resigned  her  certificated  position  with  the 
District.  Ms.  Howatt  was  a  half-time  physical  education  teacher,  who  held  a  single 
subject  credential  in  physical  education.  The  District  has  an  intention  to  hire  a 
credentialed  employee  to  hold  a  half-time  physical  education  teacher  position  for  the 

3-

next  school  year.  However,  none  of  the  respondents  in  this  matter  have  a  physical 
education  credential. 

 ) 

Superintendent's  Position  Regarding  Respondent  Hubbard 

14. 

The  Superintendent  noted  that  Respondent  Hubbard  for  the  current 

school  year  has  assignments  of  teaching:  eighth  grade  algebra;  one  period  of  seventh 
grade  advanced  pre-algebra;  geometry;  and,  one  period  of  Spanish.  Also  she  teaches 
the  eighth  grade  algebra  lab  that  pertains  to  aiding  student  who  have  difficulty  with 
mathematics.  Respondent  coaches  and  teaches  a  team  of  students  who  participate  in 
the  “Math  Counts”  state-wide  competition  held  at  the  University  of  California,  Davis 
campus. 

The  Superintendent  noted  that  in  August  2003  the  District  disseminated  a  job 

announcement  to  fill  a  vacant  teacher  position  described  as  full-time  “Math  Teacher/8™ 
Grade.”  The  specified  qualifications  involved  candidates  for  the  position  to  have  a 
single  subject  math  teaching  credential.  The  District  hired  Respondent  Hubbard  to 
fill  the  position.  Ms,  Hubbard  has a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  being 
September  2,  2003. 

The  Superintendent  seeks  to  retain  Respondent  Hubbard  to  teach  mathematics 

as  a  District  certificated  employee  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  and  to  dismiss  the 
accusation  against  her. 

e@ 

None  of  the  other  respondents  have  a  single  subject  credential  in  mathematics. 

Nor  do  any  of  the  other  respondents  have  the  level  of  experience  in  teaching  mathematics 
as  does  Respondent  Hubbard. 

Respondents’  Contentions  and  Arguments 

15. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective  and 
improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does 
not  fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of 
credentialed  employees  who  are  being  retained  to  teach  subjects  that  are  “outside  the 
credentials”  of  those  other  teachers  who  will  be  retained  by  the  District.  Respondent 
Paytas  proclaimed  that  seventh  grade  mathematics  classes  at  Sunny  Brae  Middle 
School  are  being  taught  by  two  teachers'  who  do  not  hold  a  single-subject  credential 
in  mathematics.  Respondents  advance  that  the  District  hold  as  sacrosanct  the  seniority 

'  The  two  teachers  are:  Greg  Ennes  (who  has  a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as 

August  29,  1985,  and  who  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential,  a  Life  Science  credential  and  a  CLAD. 
He  is  a  science  teacher)  and  David  Labolle  (who  has  a 
August  29,  1985,  and  who  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential,  a  Life  Science  credential  and  a  CLAD. 
Like  Mr.  Ennes,  Mr.  Labolle  is  a  science  teacher.) 

first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as 

  

-4.

@ 

system  so  as  to  retain  them  notwithstanding  an  articulated  need  to  retain  a  junior  teacher 
who  has a  single  subject  credential  in  mathematics. 

Respondents’  contentions  and  arguments  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected  as 

bases  to  dismiss  any  aspect  of  the  accusations. 

Individual  Respondents 

Jason  Paytas 

16. 

Respondent  Jason  Paytas  (Respondent  Paytas)  has a  first  date  of  paid 

service  with  the  District  as  a  teacher  as  of  October  2,  1995.  He  now  holds a  clear, 
multiple  subject  credential  with  a  supplemental  credential  in  English  as  well  as  a  CLAD 
certificate. 

Respondent  Paytas  teaches  District  pupils  in  the  fourth  grade.  He  has  had  that 

assignment  for  two  consecutive  school  years.  In  the  past,  Respondent  has  taught  a 
combination  first  and  second  grade  class  over  a  span  of  ten  years. 

Respondent  Paytas  has  held a  role  of  “teacher  in-charge,”  which  is  a  quasi- 
administrator’s  position  that  entails  supervisory  functions  when  the  designated  principal 
was  absent  from  the  school  site. 

Respondent  Paytas  asserted  that  as  a  multiple  subject  credential  holder  he  has  had 
experience  in  teaching  all  subjects  at  the  elementary  school  level  including  mathematics. 
He  believes  that  as  an  experienced,  skilled  teacher  he  can  create  curricula  for  an  array 
of  settings,  including  mathematics.  He  has  not  found  an  area  that  he  can  not  teach  at 
elementary  school  levels.  And  because  he  has  taught  mathematics  to  pupils  his  entire 
career,  he  views  himself  as  being  capable  to  teach  the  classes  now  taught  by  Messrs.  Ennes 
and  Labolle,  who  do  not  hold  single-subject  credentials  in  mathematics. 

Respondent  Paytas  claimed  that  while  he  was  a  student  at  Humboldt  State 

University  he  taught  during  two  or  three  college  years  (1993  to  1995)  various 
mathematics  courses  to  candidates  for  the  math  portions  of  the  CBest  examination. 
While  in  college  he  was  at  one  time  a  mathematics  major  and  he  has  a  comfort  with 
algebra,  trigonometry,  calculus  and  pre-algebra  subjects.  He  believes  that  he  has  about 
15  semester  units  in  mathematics  from  his  undergraduate  college  coursework.  He 
represents  that  he  has  about  six  hours  of  coursework  in  mathematics  at  the  graduate 
school  level. 

On  cross-examination,  Respondent  Paytas  acknowledged  that  he  has  never  taught 

mathematics  at  the  seventh  grade  or  eighth  grade  levels.  Nor  has  he  taught  algebra  as  a 
separate  class.  He  did  not  graduate  from  college  with  a  major  in  mathematics.  And 
he  offered  no  documentary  proof  that  he  holds  a  certificate  of  proficiency  or  other

  

document  that  attests  to  his  experience  in  teaching  mathematics  at  the  middle  school 
level. 

Respondent  Paytas  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Paytas  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Paytas  establish  that  the  Superintendent 
committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that  adversely  affects 
his  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

Wendy  Branca 

17. 

Respondent  Wendy  Branca  (Respondent  Branca)  has a  first  date  of  paid 

service  with  the  District  as  a  teacher  as  of  August  22,  1996.  She  holds  a  clear,  multiple- 
subject  credential  and  a  CLAD  credential. 

Respondent  Branca  teaches  at  the  Arcata  Elementary  School,  where  she  instructs 
pupils  in  the  second  grade.  She  has  taught  at  the  second  grade  level  for  nine  consecutive 
years.  Before  beginning  her  eleven-year  employment  history  as  a  certificated  teacher 
with  the  District,  for  five  years  Respondent  Branca  was  a  substitute  teacher  for  the 
District  as  well  as  for  the  McKinleyville  Union  School  District,  the  Blue  Lake  School 
District  and  Eureka  School  District,  which  are  all  located  in  Humboldt  County. 

Respondent  Branca  has  a  Liberal  Arts  degree.  She  has  a  college  record  that 

reflects,  at  least,  twelve  semester  units  in  mathematics. 

However,  Respondent  Branca  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 

has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Branca  possesses  a  credential 
and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Branca  establish  that  the 
Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that 
adversely  affects  her  teaching  position  with  the  District. 

Christine  Goodin 

18. 

Respondent  Christine  Goodin  (Respondent  Goodin)  has a  first  date  of  paid 
service  with  the  District  as  a  teacher  as  of  August  21,  1997.  She  holds a  clear,  multiple- 
subject  credential  and  a  CLAD  credential. 

Currently  Respondent  Goodin  teaches  pupils  at  the  sixth  grade  level  at  the  Sunny 

Brae  School.  She  has  taught  over  the  past  ten  years  at  the  kindergarten  through  sixth 
grade  levels. 

While  she  was  an  undergraduate  college  student  Respondent  Goodin  took  the 

requisite  number  of  mathematics  courses  that  are  required  of  a  candidate  for  the  teaching 
profession. 

-6- 

 

Respondent  Goodin  added  that  she  is  aware  that  there  are  teachers  who  provide 
teaching  services  at  the  middle  school  in  social  studies  and  “lower-level”  mathematics 
although  such  teachers  do  not  hold  specific  credentials  to  teach  in  those  areas. 

However,  Respondent  Goodin  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 

has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Goodin  possesses  a  credential 
and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Goodin  establish  that  the 
Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that 
adversely  affects  her  teaching  position  with  the  District. 

Respondent  Amy  Hubbard 

19. 

Respondent  Amy  Hubbard  (Respondent  Hubbard)  has a first  date  of  paid 

service  with  the  District  as  a  teacher  as  of  September  2,  2003.  She  holds  a  single-subject 
credential  in  mathematics  and  a  CLAD  emphasis  certificate. 

Respondent  teaches  three  eighth  grade  mathematics  classes,  one  seventh  grade 

mathematics,  and  a  geometry  class  in  high  school.  Respondent  Hubbard  teaches  an 
algebra  lab  for  eighth  grade  students  who  have  difficulty  in  mathematics.  She  also 
teaches  a  Spanish  class. 

Respondent  Hubbard  has  an  undergraduate  major  in  mathematics.  As  a  student 
teacher  she  taught  geometry,  Algebra  One,  and  Algebra  Two.  And  while  in  college  she 
was  a  mathematics  tutor. 

Respondent  Hubbard  spends  after-school  time  to  coach  students  for  participation 

in  the  “Math  Counts”  competition  which  is  a  state-wide  contest.  Respondent  Hubbard 
is  the  District’s  athletic  director  and  she  coaches  soccer  and  basketball.  Also  she  has 
charge  of  the  Dance  Committee. 

20. 

Respondent  Hubbard  advanced  that  at  the  Sunny  Brae  School  two 

teachers,  who  are  science  teachers,  serve  as  pre-algebra  teachers.  She  questions  whether 
those  teachers  can  be  viewed  as  being  Highly  Qualified  Teachers  under  the  No  Child 
Left  Behind  law  because  they  spend  only  twenty-five  percent  of  their  teaching  time  in 
the  provision  of  instructing  pupils  in  mathematics.  Moreover,  she  has  concerns  that  the 
two  teachers  do  not  have  a  single  subject  credential  to  teach  mathematics. 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

21. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the 

District  faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State 
of  California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of

  

teacher  and  administrator  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that 
the  District  must  prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  of  particular  kinds 
of  services,  including  the  positions  held  by  respondents,  except  for  Respondent  Hubbard. 

@ 

Three  years  ago,  the  District  placed  a  notice  that  sought  the  hiring  of  a  teacher 

with  a  mathematics  credential.  The  District  hired  Respondent  Hubbard  to  fill  the 
position  as  of  September  2,  2003.  Respondent  Hubbard  has  demonstrated  dedication, 
skill  and  highly  commendable  additional  services  to  the  District  and  its  students.  The 
Superintendent  declared  the  District’s  need  to  retain  Respondent  Hubbard  because  of 
her  education,  experience,  training  and  skill  as  a  mathematics  teacher  and  to  “skip”  her 
over  teachers  who  have  a  higher  placement  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

22. 

No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of 

the  proposed  elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by 
respondents,  the  District  will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform 
services  for  which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach 
in  such  FTE  positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

23. 

The  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision  to 

eliminate  or  discontinue  a  total  of  4.0  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions  held  by 
each  respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the 
District’s  discretion. 

e@ 

24. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 

positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  Respondent  Paytas,  Respondent 
Branca  and  Respondent  Goodin,  for  the  ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare 
of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population.  Similarly,  the  District’s  exercise  of 
discretion  to  “skip”  Respondent  Hubbard  so  as  to  retain  her  services  as  a  mathematics 
teacher  for  the  ensuing  school  year  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall 
student  population. 

25. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of 
the  next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents 
of  the  elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent,  except  for 
Respondent  Hubbard. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

  

-8-

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or 

official  duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 
regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
District  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non- 
reemployment  of  respondents. 

4. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  District  is  retaining  for  the  ensuing  school  year 

other  teachers  who  provide  instruction  in  departmentalized  seventh  grade  and  eighth 
grade  who  are  teaching  “outside”  credentials  held  by  them.  However,  respondents’ 
contentions  are  not  persuasive  so  as  to  lead  to  dismissal  of  the  accusations.  Education 
Code  section  44256”  permits  a  school  district  to  allow  teachers  to  offer  instruction  to  a 

  

*  Education  Code  section  44256  establishes: 

Authorization  for  teaching  credentials  shall  be  of  four  basic  kinds,  as  defined 
below: 

(a)  “Single  subject  instruction”  means  the  practice  of  assignment  of  teachers 
and  students  to  specified  subject  matter  courses,  as  is  commonly  practiced  in 
California  high  schools  and  most California  junior  high  schools,  The  holder 
of  a  single  subject  teaching  credential  or  a  standard  secondary  credential  or 
a  special  secondary  teaching  credential,  as  defined  in  this  subdivision,  who 
has  completed  20  semester  hours  of  coursework  or  10  semester  hours  of 
upper  division  or  graduate  coursework  approved  by  the  commission  at  an 
accredited  institution  in  any  subject  commonly  taught  in  grades  7  to  12, 
inclusive,  other  than  the  subject  for  which  he  or  she  is  already  certificated 
to  teach,  shall  be  eligible  to  have  this  subject  appear  on  the  credential  as  an 
authorization  to  teach  this  subject.  The  commission,  by  regulation,  may 
require  that  evidence  of  additional  competence  is  a  condition  for  instruction 
in  particular  subjects,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  foreign  languages.  The 
commission  may  establish  and  implement  alternative  requirements  for 
additional  authorizations  to  the  single  subject  credential  on  the  basis  of 
specialized  needs.  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a  special  secondary 
teaching  credential  means  a  special  secondary  teaching  credential  issued  on 
the  basis  of  at  least  a  baccalaureate  degree,  a  student  teaching  requirement, 
and  24  semester  units  of  coursework  in  the  subject  specialty  of  the  credential. 

(b)  “Multiple  subject  instruction”  means  the  practice  of  assignment  of 
teachers  and  students  for  multiple  subject  matter  instruction,  as  is  commonly 
practiced  in  California  elementary  schools  and  as  is  commonly  practiced  in 
early  childhood  education. 

The  holder  of  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  or  a  standard  elementary 
credential  who  has  completed  20  semester  hours  of  coursework  or  10 

-9- 

 

  

school  district’s  pupils  even  though  such  teachers  do  not  possess  precise  credentials  to 
teach  certain  subjects  that  are  being  taught.  And,  Education  Code  section  44258.2° 
provides  that  single  subject  credentialed  teacher  may  offer  instruction  outside  a 
credential  at  pre-high  school  levels.  The  statutory  provisions  contemplate  the  exercise 
of  discretion  by  a  school  district  to  assign  a  teacher.  And  the  law  allows  the  District’s 
utilization  and  assignment  of  a  teacher,  with  the  consent  of  the  affected  teacher,  to 
provide  instruction  beyond  the  confines  of  a  credential  so  long  as  the  teacher  has,  at 
least,  twelve  semester  units  at  the  undergraduate  level  or  six  units,  at  least,  at  the 
graduate  level  in  the  subject  area  that  is  to  be  taught  by  the  teacher. 

In  this  matter,  respondents  are  seeking  to  require  or  to  force  the  District  to  take 

action  that  contemplates  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  to  instruct  in  an  area  where  the 

  

semester  hours  of  upper  division  or  graduate  coursework  approved  by  the 
commission  at  an  accredited  institution  in  any  subject  commonly  taught 
in  grades  9  and  below  shall  be  eligible  to  have  that  subject  appear  on  the 
credential  as  authorization  to  teach  the  subject  in  departmentalized  classes  in 
grades  9  and  below.  The  governing  board  of  a  school  district  by  resolution 
may  authorize  the  holder  of a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  or  a 
standard  elementary  credential  to  teach  any  subject  in  departmentalized 
classes  to  a  given  class  or  group  of  students  below  grade  9,  provided  that 
the  teacher  has  completed  at  least  12  semester  units,  or  six  upper  division  or 
graduate  units,  of  coursework  at  an  accredited  institution  in  each  subject  to 
be  taught.  The  authorization  shall  be  with  the  teacher's  consent.  However, 
the  commission,  by  regulation,  may  provide  that  evidence  of  additional 
competence  is  necessary  for  instruction  in  particular  subjects,  including, 
but  not  limited  to,  foreign  languages.  The  commission  may  establish  and 
implement  alternative  requirements  for  additional  authorizations  to  the 
multiple  subject  credential  on  the  basis  of  specialized  needs. 

(c)  “Specialist  instruction”  means  any  specialty  requiring  advanced 
preparation  or  special  competence  including,  but  not  limited  to,  reading 
specialist,  mathematics  specialist,  specialist  in  special  education,  or  early 
childhood  education,  and  such  other  specialties  as  the  commission  may 
determine. 

(d)  “Designated  subjects”  means  the  practice  of  assignment  of  teachers  and 
students  to  designated  technical,  trade,  or  vocational  courses  which  courses 
may  be  part  of  a  program  of  trade,  technical,  or  vocational  education. 

>  Education  Code  section  44258.2  establishes: 

The  holder  of  a  single  subject  teaching  credential  or  a  standard  secondary 
teaching  credential  may,  with  his  or  her  consent,  be  assigned  by  action 
of the  governing  board  to  teach  classes  in  grades  5 to  8,  inclusive,  in  a 
middle  school,  if  he  or  she  has  a  minimum  of  12  semester  units,  or  six 
upper  division  or  graduate  units,  of  coursework  at  an  accredited  institution 
in  the  subject  to  which  he  or  she  is  assigned. 

-10- 

e@ 

e 

@ 

 

  

teacher,  who  is  subject  to  layoff,  may  have  twelve  or  more  semester  units  in  place  of  a 
credentialed  teacher,  such  as  Respondent  Hubbard,  who  has  a  specialized  degree  in  the 
subject  area  that  the  District  seeks  to  attract  a  competent  teacher  to  instruct  in  that 
particularized  subject  area,  such  as  mathematics. 

The  position  of  respondents  regarding  the  District’s  use  of  two  senior  teachers 
to  provide  services  “outside”  of  the  respective  credential  brings  into  play  the  situation 
described  in  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  Dist.  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555.  The 
Duax  court  said  “what  [the  affected  teacher]  proposes  is  the  reassignment  of  a  senior 
employee,  employee  A,  to  a  position  held  by  a  junior  employee,  employee  B,  to  open 
up  a  position  for  [the  affected  teacher].  Clearly  [the  affected  teacher]  could  ‘bump’ 
employee B  and  just  as  clearly  cannot  ‘bump’  employee  A.  [The  affected  teacher’s] 
proposal  is  known  as  ‘inverse  bumping.’  [The  affected  teacher]  cites  no  authority  to 
support  his  argument  that  he  has  any  inverse  bumping  rights.  We  conclude  that  [the 
controlling  statutory  provision]  does  not  contemplate  ‘inverse  bumping  rights.”  Such 
‘rights’  would  allow  a  junior  employee  to  affect  the  employment  of  senior  employees, 
‘bumping’  them  out  of  their  classroom  positions  and  compelling  their  transfers  to  other 
classrooms  or  other  types  of  assignments.  Respondent’s  obligation  to  make  assignments 
and  reassignments  as  provided  in  section  [the  controlling  statutory  provision]  is  limited 
to  attempting  to  place  an  employee  who  would  otherwise  be  terminated  in  a  position 
being  held  by  another  employee  with  less  seniority.”  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College 
Dist.,  supra,  196  Cal.App.3d  at  pp.  568-569.)  The  argument  by  respondents  is  not 
binding  on  the  District. 

5. 

Board  Resolution  06/07-7,  as  adopted  on  February  12,  2007,  stated  that  it 

was  the  Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular 
kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  A  decline  in  average  daily  attendance 
was  not  cited  as  a  basis  for  eliminating  4.0  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  in 
the  District’s  corps  of  teacher  positions. 

The  preliminary  layoff  notice,  dated  March  8,  2007,  stated  that  the  reason  for 
the  notice  was  due  to  a  decision  “to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  District 
beginning  not  later  than  at  the  commencement  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  In  the 
opinion  of  the  Governing  Board,  it  therefore  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number 
of  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees  in  the  District.”  The  preliminary 
notice  did  not  mention  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  authorizes  a  district’s  governing 

board  to  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  employees 
whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  for  all  schools  in  the  first  six 
months  has  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  school  year 
or  whenever a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year. 

-ll- 

 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a)  requires  that  no  later  than  March  15 

and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by  the 
superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be  given  to 
employees  and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation. 

The  preliminary  notice  is  intended  to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed 

of  the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be 
reemployed.  The  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
(Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355.) 

A  notice  that  specifies  both  grounds,  that  is  PKS  reduction/elimination  and 
declining  average  daily  attendance,  is  suspect.  (See  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze 
(1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648.)  And,  where  a  notice  specifies  one  of  the  two  statutory 
reasons  for  a  teacher  layoff,  a  governing  board  may  not  later  attempt  to  justify  dismissal 
on  the  other  ground.  (Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education,  supra,  39  Cal.App.3d  355.") 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services 

need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number 
of  students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number  of  terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within 
‘the  Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a 
particular  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

The  District’s  Governing  Board  did  not  propose  layoffs  for  any  reason  not 
specified  in  the  preliminary  notice  as  sent  to  certificated  employees.  The  projection  of 
declining  pupil  attendance  or  enrollment,  as  offered  in  evidence  by  the  Superintendent, 
was  one  of  a  few  reasons  for  consideration  by  that  professional  education  administrator 
offered  as  the  ground  for  teacher  layoff  to  the  subject  governing  board  for  its  decision  to 
eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services.  In  this  matter,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  a  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious  action.  (Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

The  Arcata  School  District  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  4.0  FTE 

positions  for  the  2007-2008  school  (which  may  have  been  based  in  some  measure 

* 

In  Karbach,  the  governing  board  gave  notice  to  probationary  teachers  that  such  employees 

would  not  be  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  on  the  ground  of  a  decline  in  average  daily 
attendance.  But,  at  the  administrative  adjudication  hearing,  the  presiding  officer  allowed  the  board 
to  present  evidence  justifying  the  decision  to  eliminate  positions  of  the  affected  probationary 
teachers  on  the  new  theory  of  reduction  in  particular  services.  The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the 
governing  board  had  no  authority  to  terminate  the  teachers  for  any  reason  not  specified  in  the 
original  preliminary  notice  and  that  the  proposed  terminations  on  the  ground  of  reduction  in  services 
were  not  valid. 

-12- 

 

on  a  projected  decline  in  enrollment  of  pupils  for  the  2006-2007  school  year)  was  a 
discretionary  decision  that  constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
service  under  the  Education  Code. 

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists 
to  give  Respondents  Wendy  Branca,  Christine  Goodin,  Jason  Paytas  notice  of  the 
discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
rendered  by  those  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  10 
to  14  inclusive,  19,  21  to  23  inclusive,  and  25. 

7. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  give  Respondent  Amy  Hubbard  notice  of  the 
position  held  by  her  in  the  provision  of  particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  to  the 
District  and  its  students,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  14,  19 
and  24. 

8. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided 
by  Respondents  Wendy  Branca,  Christine  Goodin,  Jason  Paytas,  and  the  skipping  of 
Respondent  Hubbard  so  that  she  is  retained  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  relate  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in  Factual  Finding  24. 

ORDER 

The  accusation  against  Respondent  Amy  Hubbard  is  dismissed. 

1. 

2. 

The  accusations  served  on  Respondents  Wendy  Branca,  Christine  Goodin, 

and  Jason  Paytas  are  sustained. 

3. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Wendy  Branca,  Christine 

Goodin,  and  Jason  Paytas  that  their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007- 
2008  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  3,  2006      Y  O  AOHNSON 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

-13-

