BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
KLAMATH-TRINITY  JOINT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

DENNIS  DOIRON,  SHERRI  HICKS, 

OAH  No.  N  2007030990 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  20,  2007,  in  Eureka,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the  Humboldt  County 

Office  of  Education  at  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California, 
heard  this  matter. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of 
California,  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California  95501-1219,  represented  Superintendent 
Douglas  Oliveira. 

Paul  Hagan,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Bragg,  Perlman,  Russ,  Stunich,  Rudolph  &  Eads 

LLP,  434  Seventh  Street,  P.O.  Box  1248,  Eureka,  CA  95502-1248,  represented  respondents 
Sherri  Hicks  and  Dennis  Doiron. 

On  April  20,  2007,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  6,  2007,  in  his  official  capacity,  Douglas  Oliveira,  Superintendent  (the 

Superintendent),  Klamath-Trinity  Joint  Unified  School  District  (the  District),  made  and  filed 
the  Accusation  regarding  Respondents  Sherri  Hicks  and  Dennis  Doiron  (respondents). 

2. 

Respondents  are  fully  credentialed  and  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

The  District  extends  designation  to  each  respondent  as  a  permanent  teacher. 

3. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s  Board  of 
Trustees  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of  services 
(PKS),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  (2007-2008). 

4. 

On  March  7,  2007,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  2007-02.

  

  

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  it 

has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  eliminate,  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of  9.79  full 
time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

3.0 
14 
0.2 
0.2 
0.5 
0.7 
0.34 
0.34 
0.17 
0.17 
0.17 
1.0 
0.5 
1.0 
0.55 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

Kindergarten  to  5"  Grade  Elementary  Teaching  positions; 
Continuation  High  School  Teacher 
School  Nurse 
K-8  Music  Teacher 
Reading  Specialist  Teacher 
Junior  High  Elective  Wheel 
Fine  Arts 
Keyboarding 
Spanish 
Leadership 
Athletic  Director 
Elementary  School  Principal 
Continuation  High  School  Principal 
Elementary  School  Assistant  Principal 
High  School  Assistant  Principal 

5. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  8,  2007,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate  the 
particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice.  Hence,  due  to  the 
prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service  now  rendered  to  the 
District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not  reemploy  the  named 
individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked  over  the  past  school  year. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  8,  2007,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s  resolution 

and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  that  no  certificated  employee  of 
the  District  having  less  seniority  than  each  respective  respondent  would  be  retained  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  each  respondent  was  credentialed  and 
competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency  criteria. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  Respondents  from  the  Superintendent  and 
the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the  District’s  Board’s 
intent  to  eliminate  the  course  as  taught  by  respondents. 

7. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

8. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  each  respondent  the  Accusation,  dated 

April  6,  2007,  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense. 

-2-

  

9. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

10. 

Douglas  Oliveira,  in  his  capacity  as  the  Superintendent,  appeared  at  the 

hearing.  He  provided  credible  and  persuasive  evidence. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school 

year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s  budget.  Also,  the 
prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the  declining  pupil  census  for 
the  district  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  And,  the  District  has  found  low  enrollment  of  pupils 
in  certain  elective  classes  that  were  prescribed  for  reduction.  Furthermore,  the  District  lost  a 
funding  source  from  the  Secure  Rural  Schools  and  Communities  Act  in  an  approximate 
amount  of  $539,000.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for 
the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s  Superintendent  recommended  that  certain  certificated 
positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of  teachers’  work  within  District 
schools. 

11. 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District  was 

required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  his  staff,  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers. 

The  Superintendent  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teachers  who 
were  properly  designated  as  District  teachers.  He  studied  and  set  forth  on  the  District’s 
seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  each  teacher  of 
the  District. 

The  Superintendent  noted  the  teacher  position  held  by  Respondent  Doiron  would  be 

adversely  affected  as  follows:  0.2  FTE  elimination  of  K-8  Music  teacher  position;  part  of  the 
0.7  elimination  of  Junior  High  School  Elective  Wheel  teaching  position;  part  of  the  0.34 
elimination  of  Fine  Arts  teacher  position;  and  part  of  the  0.34  elimination  of  Keyboarding 
teacher  position.  The  aggregate  FTE  eliminations  that  impact  Respondent  Doiron  amount  to 
time  equal  to  0.7  FTE  of  a  teacher’s  position  with  the  District. 

The  Superintendent  noted  the  teacher  position  held  by  Ms.  Hicks  would  be  adversely 

affected  as  follows:  part  of  the  0.34  elimination  of  Fine  Arts  teacher  position;  part  of  the 
0.17  elimination  of  Leadership  teacher  position;  and  part  of  the  0.7  elimination  of  Junior 
High  Elective  Wheel  teacher  position.  The  aggregate  FTE  eliminations  that  impact 
Respondent  Hicks  amount  to  time  equal  to  0.5  FTE  of  a  teacher’s  position  with  the  District. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  delivered  to  teachers,  who  were 
affected  by  the  Board’s  resolution,  notices  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary  teachers 
that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year.

  

12. 

The  Superintendent  identified  that  for  the  ensuing  year  District  will  retain 

Mike  Wright  to  teach  Health  and  Driver  Education  classes.  Mr.  Wright  has  a  credential  that 
includes  a  supplemental  authorization  of  Health.  Mr.  Wright  has  a  date  of  hire  of  August  31, 
1995.  For  the  current  year,  Mr.  Wright  holds  an  assistant  principal  administrator  position 
with  the  District.  As  to  seniority,  he  is  junior  on  the  seniority  list  to  Respondent  Doiron; 
however,  Mr.  Wright  has  a  health  credential  to  teach  the  courses  that  the  District  will  retain 
him  to  hold. 

Respondents’  Contentions  and  Arguments 

13. 

Respondents  contend  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective  and 

improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employees  does  not 
fully  account  for  seniority  of  those  persons  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of  credentialed 
employees  who  are  being  retained  to  teach  subjects  that  are  “outside  the  credentials”  of  those 
other  teachers.  Respondent  Doiron  proclaimed  that  even  though  he  is  a  credentialed  music 
teacher  he  could  competently  teach  health  classes,  drivers’  training  classes,  computer 
keyboarding  and  computer  classes  at  the  District  high  schools,  which  will  be  offered  by  the 
District  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  Respondent  Doiron  understood  the  principal  of  the  high 
school,  where  he  teaches,  to  indicate  that  Respondent  Doiron  would  be  considered  for  the 
positions  that  other  credentialed  employees  are  to  teach  next  year,  even  though  they  do  not 
hold  credentials  in  the  subject  areas  to  which  they  are  to  be  retained  to  teach.  Respondent 
Hicks  heard  the  principal  of  the  high  school,  where  she  teaches,  to  suggest  that  Respondent 
Hicks  might  be  retained  to  teach  subjects  that  fall  outside  her  English  credential  because 
probationary,  less  senior  teaches  are  now  assigned  to  teach  those  subjects,  such  as  health  and 
drivers’  education.  Also,  she  believes  that  a  new  class  called  Independent  Studies  may  be 
created.  And,  Respondent  Hicks  noted  that  a  colleague  named  Ms.  Vicki  Kurtz,  (who  holds 
a  higher  position  on  the  seniority  list  than  Ms.  Hicks)  may  be  assigned  to  teach  a  Physical 
Education  class  and  hence  will  “free  up”  part  of  an  English  FTE  so  as  to  permit  Respondent 
Hicks  to  hold  onto  a  full  teacher’s  position  with  the  District. 

Respondents  further  argue  that  the  process  that  led  to  the  lay-off  proceedings  could 
have  been  communicated  to  the  affected  teachers  in  a  manner  that  would  have  caused  less 
stress  and  diminished  anxiety  to  be  sustained  by  respondents. 

Respondents’  contentions  and  arguments  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected  as  bases 

to  dismiss  any  aspect  of  the  accusations. 

  

 

Individual  Respondents 

Dennis  Doiron 

14. 

Respondent  Dennis  Doiron  (Respondent  Doiron)  has  a first  date  of  paid 

service  with  the  District  as  a  probationary-one  teacher  as  of  August  30,  1990.  He  now  holds 
a  clear,  single  subject  credential  in  music. 

Respondent  Doiron  teaches  at  Hoopla  Valley  High  School,  where  he  instructs  pupils 
during  three-periods  of  keyboarding  and  a  period  of  computer  applications.  He  teaches  the 
music  portion  of  the  7/8"  grade  Junior  High  School  Elective  Wheel.  Also  he  teaches  band 
and  drama  classes.  In  the  past,  Respondent  Doiron  has  taught  choir  classes. 

Respondent  Doiron  is  affected  by  the  District’s  prospective  reduction  of  services  by 

the  loss  of  0.7  FTE  time,  and  commensurate  salary,  as  a  music  teacher. 

Respondent  Doiron  has  17  years  of  teaching  experience  at  the  high  school  to  which  he 

has  been  assigned  as  a  music  teacher.  Only  two  other  teachers  have  longer  tenures  at  the 
subject  high  school  than  Respondent  Doiron. 

Respondent  has  been  a  teacher  of  drama.  However,  the  District  has  not  afforded  him 

the  opportunity  to  become  a  “highly  qualified”  drama  teacher  within  the  scope  of  the  No 
Child  Left  Behind  statute. 

However,  Respondent  Doiron  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Doiron  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Doiron  establish  that  the  Superintendent 
committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  lay-off  action  that  adversely  affects  his 
teacher  position  with  the  District. 

Sherri  Hicks 

15. 

Respondent  Sherri  Hicks  (Respondent  Hicks)  has a  first  date  of  paid  service 

with  the  District  as  a  probationary-one  teacher  as  of  August  27,  2003.  She  holds  a  clear, 
single-subject  credential  in  English  and  a  CLAD  credential.  (She  understands  that  during  the 
coming  summer  she  will  earn  a  Reading  Certificate  credential). 

Respondent  Hicks  teaches  at  the  high  school,  where  she  instructs  pupils  on  subjects 

identified  as:  World  Literature  for  eleventh  and  twelfth  grade  students;  English  One  for  ninth 
grade  students;  and  English  Two  for  tenth  grade  students.  In  past  school  years,  Respondent 
Hicks  has  taught  Composition  classes,  Journalism  classes,  and  Reading  Literacy  classes. 

Respondent  Hicks  is  affected  by  the  District’s  prospective  reduction  of  services  by  the 

loss  of  0.5  FTE  time,  and  commensurate  salary,  as  an  English  teacher

  

However,  Respondent  Hicks  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Hicks  possesses  a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Hicks  establish  that  the  Superintendent  committed  a 
procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  lay-off  action  that  adversely  affects  her  teacher 
position  with  the  District. 

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

16. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the  District 

faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State  of  California 
may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board  has  determined 
that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of  teacher  and 
administrator  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including 
the  positions  held  by  respondents. 

17. 

No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed 
elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  the  District 
will  retain  any  teacher  who  is  junior  to  respondents  to  perform  services  for  which 
respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE  positions 
for  the  next  school  year. 

18. 

The  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s  decision  to 

eliminate  or  discontinue a  total  of  9.79  FTE  positions,  including  the  positions  held  by  each 
respondent,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

19. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 
positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  respondents,  for  the  ensuing  school 
year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

20. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 

particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of  the 
next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of  the 
elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth 

in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  inclusive.  

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or  official 

duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been  regularly 
performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the  District  has 
properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non-reemployment  of 
respondents. 

4, 

Respondent  Hicks  alludes  to  the  concept  of  “inverse  bumping”  when  she 

argued  that  the  District  may  assign  her  fellow  credentialed  English  teacher-Vicki  Kurtz-  to 
teach  a  Physical  Education  class  so  as  to  shift  part  of  an  English  teaching  position  to 
Respondent  Hicks.  To  refute  Respondent  Hicks,  the  superintendent  cites  Duax  v.  Kern 
Community  College  Dist.,  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555  .  The  Duax  court  said  “what  [the 
affected  teacher]  proposes  is  the  reassignment  of  a  senior  employee,  employee  A,  to  a 
position  held  by  a  junior  employee,  employee  B,  to  open  up  a  position  for  [the  affected 
teacher].  Clearly  [the  affected  teacher]  could  “bump”  employee  B and  just  as  clearly  cannot 
“bump”  employee  A.  [The  affected  teacher  's]  proposal  is  known  as  "inverse  bumping." 
[The  affected  teacher]  cites  no  authority  to  support  his  argument  that  he  has  any  inverse 
bumping  rights.  We  conclude  that  [the  controlling  statutory  provision]  does  not  contemplate 
“inverse  bumping  rights.”  Such  “rights”  would  allow  a  junior  employee  to  affect  the 
employment  of  senior  employees,  “bumping”  them  out  of  their  classroom  positions  and 
compelling  their  transfers  to  other  classrooms  or  other  types  of  assignments.  Respondent's 
obligation  to  make  assignments  and  reassignments  as  provided  in  section  [the  controlling 
statutory  provision]  is  limited  to  attempting  to  place  an  employee  who  would  otherwise  be 
terminated  in  a  position  being  held  by  another  employee  with  less  seniority.  (Duax  v.  Kern 
Community  College  Distr.,  supra,  196  Cal.App.3d  at  pp.  568-569.)  The  argument  by 
Respondent  Hicks  is  not  binding  on  the  District. 

Even  though  the  District  is  retaining  teachers  to  perform  services  that  are  “outside” 

the  parameters  of  particular  credentials  held  by  the  retained  teachers  the  District  acts  in 
compliance  with  Education  Code  section  44256. 
school  district’s  governing  board  to  assign  a  teacher,  with  the  consent  of  that  person,  to  teach 
a  subject  that  is  not  within  the  scope  of  the  affected  teacher’s  credential  where  the  teacher 
has  12  undergraduate  credit  hours  of  study,  or  six  graduate  level  credit  hours  of  study.  Such 
district  action  is  wholly  discretionary  as  the  practice  was  designed  by  the  Legislature  to 
bestow  flexibility  upon  small  high  schools  in  meeting  certain  needs,  but,  a  district  cannot  be 
compelled  to  so  act. 

That  Education  Code  provision  allows  a 

5. 

Board  Resolution  2007-02,  as  adopted  on  March  7,  2007,  stated  that  it  was  the 

Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  ser- 
vices  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  A  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  was  not  cited  as  a 
basis  for  eliminating  9.79  full-time  equivalent  certificated  positions  in  the  District’s  corps  of 
teacher  positions. 

The  preliminary  layoff  notice,  dated  March  8,  2007,  stated  that  the  reason  for  the 

notice  was  due  to  a  decision  “to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  District  beginning 

-7-

  

not  later  than  at  the  commencement  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
Governing  Board,  it  therefore  will  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  employees  in  the  District.”  The  preliminary  notice  did  not 
mention  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  authorizes  a  district’s  governing 

board  to  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  employees 
whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  for  all  schools  in  the  first  six 
months  has  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  school  year  or 
whenever a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year. 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a)  requires  that  no  later  than  March  15 
and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by  the 
superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be  given  to  employees 
and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation. 

The  preliminary  notice  is  intended  to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed  of 

the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be  reem- 
ployed.  The  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  (Karbach  v. 
Bad.  of  Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355 

A  notice  that  specifies  both  grounds,  that  is  PKS  reduction/elimination  and  declining 

average  daily  attendance,  is  suspect.  (See,  Moreland  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109 
Cal.App.  3d  648.)  And,  where  a  notice  specifies  one  of  the  two  statutory  reasons  for  a 
teacher  layoff,  a  governing  board  may  not  later  attempt  to  justify  dismissal  on  the  other 
ground.  (Karbach  v.  Bd.  of Education,  supra,  39  Cal.App.3d  355!  .) 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  need 

not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number  of 
students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number  of  terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within  the 
Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a  particular 
service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

"In  Karbach,  the  governing  board  gave  notice  to  probationary  teachers  that  such  employees  would  not  be 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  on  the  ground  of  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance.  But,  at  the  adminis- 
trative  adjudication  hearing,  the  presiding  officer  allowed  the  board  to  present  evidence  justifying  the  decision  to 
eliminate  positions  of  the  affected  probationary  teachers  on  the  new  theory  of  reduction  in  particular  services.  The 
Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  governing  board  had  no  authority  to  terminate  the  teachers  for  any  reason  not  specified 
in  the  original  preliminary  notice  and  that  the  proposed  terminations  on  the  ground  of  reduction  in  services  were  not 
valid.

  

The  District’s  Governing  Board  did  not  propose  layoffs  for  any  reason  not  specified 

in  the  preliminary  notice  as  sent  to  certificated  employees.  The  projection  of  declining  pupil 
attendance  or  enrollment,  as  offered  in  evidence  by  the  superintendent,  was  one  of  a  few 
reasons  for  consideration  by  that  professional  education  administrator  offered  as  the  ground  , 
for  teacher  lay-off  to  the  subject  governing  board  for  its  decision  to  eliminate  particular  kinds 
of  services.  In  this  matter,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  a  fraudulent, 
arbitrary  or  capricious  action.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796.) 

The  Klamath-Trinity  Joint  Unified  School  District  Governing  Board’s  decision  to 
eliminate  9.79  F.T.E.  positions  for  the  2007-2008  school  (which  may  have  been  based  in 
some  measure  on a  projected  decline  in  enrollment  of  pupils  for  the  2006-2007  school  year) 
was a  discretionary  decision  that  constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
service  under  the  Education  Code. 

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  to  give 

respondents  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  in  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  rendered  by  respondents,  by  reason  of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual 
Findings  10  to  12  inclusive,  16  to  18  inclusive  and  20. 

7. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  each 
respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in  Factual  Finding  19. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained. 

1. 

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Dennis  Doiron  and  Sherri  Hicks  that 

their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  3,  2006 

PERRY  O.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

