BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
RIALTO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff/Accusation 
Against: 

    

OAH  No.  12007030796 

19  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES, 

     

Respondents. 

   

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  Roy  W.  Hewitt,  Administrative  Law 

Judge  (ALJ),  at  Rialto,  California  on  April  24,  2007. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Esq.  of  the  Law  Offices  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  & 

Romo,  represented  the  Rialto  Unified  School  District  (the  district). 

Glenn  Rothner,  Esq.  of  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greensone,  represented  18  of  the  19 

certificated  employees  affected  by  the  proposed  layoffs  (respondents). 

The  remaining  respondent of the  19  certificated  employees  affected  by  the  proposed 

layoffs,  Earl  Anderson,  elected  to  represent  himself,  but  failed  to  appear  at  the  hearing. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24, 

2007, 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Anna  M.  Rodriquez,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services,  acting  in 

her  official  capacity  and  in  conformity  with  a  delegation  of  authority  from  the  district’s 
Superintendent,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  documents  to  be  timely  filed  and 
served  upon  respondents  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  California  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955. 

 

2. 

All  respondents  affected  by  the  layoffs  received  written  notice,  on  or  before 

March  15,  2007,  notifying  them  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  district  had  recommended  they 
not  be  re-employed  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

3. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

4. 

Each  respondent  was  properly  noticed of  the  date,  time  and  place of the  instant 
hearing.  Any  respondent  who  failed  to  appear  at  the  instant  hearing  was  properly  noticed  of 
the  hearing. 

5. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

6. 

On  February  28,  2007,  Edna  E.  Davis-Herring,  Superintendent 
(Superintendent),  sent  a  confidential  memorandum  to  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District 
(the  board)  recommending  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  provided  by  the 
district  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  (Exh.  A.)  The  memorandum  recommended  a 
reduction  in  services  equaling  seven  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions.  In  the 
“RATIONALE?”  section  of  the  memorandum  the  Superintendent  states: 

“The  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  require  that  such  a  Resolution 
be  approved  and  written  notice  be  provided  to  affected  certificated 
employees  prior  to  March  15.  However,  there  are  sufficient  vacancies 
existing  in  the  District  to  reemploy  all  affected  employees  such  that  no 
employees  shall  be  terminated  as a  result  of  this  reduction.  (Exhibit 
A.)” 

The  Superintendent  recommended  the  following  services  for  elimination:  Child 
Development  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (1  FTE);  Reading  First  Coaches  (4  FTE);  and 
Renaissance  Learning  Coaches  (2  FTE).  The  Superintendent  does  not  state  the  precise 
reason(s)  for  recommending  the  elimination  of  these  services. 

7. 

On  February  28,  2007,  the  board  adopted  Resolution  No.  06-07-52  calling  for 

the  elimination  of  seven  FTE  positions,  as  recommended  by  the  Superintendent.  In  the 
February  28,  2007  Resolution,  the  board  does  not  state  the  specific  reason(s)  for  the  need  to 
reduce  the  seven  FTE  positions.  In  pertinent  part,  the  board  states: 

“WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Rialto  Unified  School 
District  has  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth 
herein  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the 
aforementioned  reason',  it  is  in  the  best-interest  of  the  District  that  the 

Notwithstanding  this  language,  no  “aforementioned  reason”  was  given  by  the  board. 

2 

 

number  of  regular  certificated  employees  of  the  District  must  be 
reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  service  of  regular 
certificated  employees  based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily 
attendance  during  the  past  two’years,  (Exhibit  A.)” 

The  Superintendent’s  memorandum  and  the  board  resolution,  considered  together,  fail 
to  reveal  a  reason  for  the  proposed  reduction.  In  fact,  the  portion of the  board  resolution  that 
states  that  the  “  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  service  of  regular  certificated  employees 
based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily  attendance  during  the  past  two  years”  indicates  that  the 
proposed  termination  of  seven  regular  certificated  employees  was  not  based  on  a  reduction  in 
average  daily  attendance. 

8. 

On  March  14,  2007,  the  Superintendent  sent  a  confidential  memorandum  to  the 

board.recommending  that  the  board  approve  “an  Amended  Resolution  authorizing  the 
reduction  and/or  deletion  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  a  corresponding  reduction  of 
certificated  staff  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.”  (Exh.  1.) 
The  memorandum  recommends  the  reduction  of  77  FTE  positions  but  it  does  not  state  a 
specific  reason  for  the  recommendation.  In  the  “RATIONALE”  section,  the  Superintendent 
states: 

“The  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  require  that  such  a  Resolution 
be  approved  and  written  notice  be  provided  to  affected  certificated 
employees  prior  to  March15.  The  District  will  consider  retirements, 
nonreelections,  and  other  attrition  and  give  notice  only  to  those 
employees  who,  according  to  seniority  and  Board-determined  criteria 
are  appropriate  for  layoff.  (Exhibit  1.)” 

That  same  date,  March  14,  2007,  the  Superintendent  provided  the  board  with  another 

confidential  memorandum  recommending  to  the  board  that,  “as  a  result  of  the  Board’s 
determination  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services,  the  appropriate  employees 
as  determined  by  seniority  and  Board-determined  criteria  according  to  statute  be  given  notice 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2007-08  school  year,  . 

.”  (Exh.  2.) 

Other  than  “as  a  result  of  the  Board’s  determination  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
particular  kinds  of  services”  there  is  no  stated  justification  for  the  recommended  reduction  in 
services  of  77  FTE  positions. 

9. 

On  March  14,  2007,  the  board  adopted  “AMENDED  RESOLUTION  NO.  06- 

07-57.”  (Exh.  3.)  Amended  Resolution  number  06-07-57  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“WHEREAS,  The  Board  of  Education  of  the  Rialto  Unified  School 
District  has  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth 
herein  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued;  and 

 
e
w

  

 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because of  the 
aforementioned  reason”,  in  the  best  interest  of  the  District,  the 
corresponding  number  of  regular  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  services  of  regular 
certificated  employees  based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily 
attendance  during  the  past  two  years. 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  has  determined  that  due  to  a  significant 
population  of  English  Language  learners  with  specialized  educational 
needs,  a  specific  and  compelling  need  exists  to  employ  and  retain 
certificated  employees  who  have  authorization  to  teach  English  Learner 
(“EL”)  students,  as  determined  by  the  California  Commission  on 
Teacher  Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience  that 
comes  therewith;  and 

WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955(d)  authorizes  this  Board  to 
deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority 
for  the  above  reason,  if  necessary;  and 

WHEREAS,  State  law  mandates  that  each  failure  to  staff  a  classroom 
containing  one  or  more  EL  students  with  a  certificated  employee 
possessing  an  appropriate  EL  authorization  is  a  “misassignment” 
subject  to  sanction  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing;  and 

WHEREAS,  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  No  Child  Left 
Behind  Act  and  the  Williams  Settlement  require  that  EL  students  be 
served  by  certificated  employees  with  appropriate  EL  authorizations; 
and 

WHEREAS,  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof  should 
not  and  cannot  be  adequately  served  by  concentrating  EL  students  in 
particular  classrooms  in  such  a  manner  as  to  lessen  the  need  for 
certificated  employees  with  EL  authorizations. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education 
of  the  Rialto  Unified  School  District  as  follows: 

That  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  below  be  reduced 

A. 
or  eliminated  commencing  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

Again,  as  with  the  original  resolution,  no  “aforementioned  reason”  was  given  by  the  board.

  

@ 

D. 
‘That  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  be  achieved  by 
termination,  in  seniority  order,  of  only  those  certificated  employees 
who  do  not  possess  EL  authorization  in  one of the  following  approved 
forms: 

That  ‘competency’  as  described  in  Education  Code  section 

E. 
44955(b)  for  the  purposes  of  bumping  shall  necessarily  include 
possession of a  valid  credential  in  the  relevant  subject  matter  area  and 
EL  authorization  as  described  above. 

ok  kk 

H. 
That  this  AMENDED  RESOLUTION  shall  replace  and  supplant 
Resolution  No,  06-07-53,  adopted  by  this  Board  on  February  28,  2007. 
(Exhibit  3)” 

10. 

Pursuant  to  Amended  Resolution  No.  06-07-57,  the  following  “particular  kinds 

of  services”  were  slated  for  reduction  or  elimination  commencing  in  the  2007-2008  school 
year: 

Child  Development  Teachers  on  Special  Assignment 
Reading  First  Coaches 
Renaissance  Learning  Coaches 
SDC  Teachers 
RSP  Teachers 
BTSA  Support  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Reading  First  Coaches,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Elementary  Classroom  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
RSP  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  (6  Grade)  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Art  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Science  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Business  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  English  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Industrial  Arts  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Math  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Music  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  ROTC  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Social  Science  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Secondary  Spanish  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 

1  FTE 
4  FTE 
2  FTE 
2  FTE 
4FTE 
1  FTE 
2  FTE 
4  FTE 
4  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
3  FTE 
1  FTE 
6  FTE 
1  FTE 
7FTE 
3  FTE 
4FTE 
8  FTE 
1  FTE

  

e@ 

Secondary  Study  Skills  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
Special  Education  Teachers,  Non-EL  Authorized 
TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  POSITIONS 

2FTE 
15  FTE 
77  FTE 

11. 

On  March  14,  2007,  the  Superintendent  designated  Assistant  Superintendent 

Rodriguez  as  her  designee  to  act  on  the  Superintendent’s  behalf  for  purposes of  these 
“certificated  Layoff  proceedings.”  (Exh.  4.)  Pursuant  to  this  delegation  of  authority,  Ms. 
Rodriguez  recommended  to  the  board  that  teachers  without  EL  Authorization  be  noticed  of 
the  instant  proceedings  as  required  by  Education  Code  sections  44955  and  44949. 

Ms.  Rodriguez  testified  that  she  recommended  retaining  teachers  with  EL 
Authorization  because  approximately  30  per  cent  of  the  district’s  students  are  Spanish 
speaking,  English  Language  Learners’;  therefore,  to  meet  the  EL  needs  of  such  students,  all 
of  the  district’s  teachers  must  be  EL  Authorized.  Ms.  Rodriguez  testified  that  due  to  the 
settlement  in  the  Williams,  et  al.  v.  State  of  California,  et  al.  case  and  the  resulting 
legislation,  enacted  in  July  2005%,  if  a  classroom  has  only  a  single  EL  student,  the  teacher 
must  be  EL  Authorized.  Consequently,  all  teachers  must  be  EL  Authorized  in  order  to  be 
competent  to  teach  any  subject  in  the  district;  otherwise,  the  district  cannot  remain  in 
compliance  with  the  legislative  mandate(s)  that  it  meet  the  needs  of  EL  students.  As a  result, 
on  March  15,  2007,  47  certificated  teachers  identified  as  not  being  EL  Authorized  were 
notified  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  (Exh.  6.) 

12. 

Of  the  47  certificated  teachers/employees  who  were  noticed  of  termination,  21 
timely  filed  notices  of  defense  and  requests  for  hearing.  The  district  subsequently  dismissed 
the  accusation  against  two  of  the  21  teachers  leaving  19  who  were  noticed  of  the  instant 
hearing.  ‘Then,  during  the  instant  hearing,  the  district  dismissed  the  accusation  against  Jessica 
Wales.  The  accusation  against  Ms.  Wales  and  the  two  other  certificated  employees  was 
dismissed  because  they  now  have  EL  Authorization.  Consequently,  only  18  certificated, 
non-EL  Authorized,  employees  remain  subject  to  the  instant  proceedings. 

13. 

A  review  of  the  records  pertaining  to  the  district’s  compliance  with  the 

mandated  EL  requirements  established  that  during  the  January  2006  through  March  2007 
time-frame,  the  district  was  in  compliance  with  the  “Williams  Settlement  Legislation”  EL 
requirements.  Additionally,  during  this  time-frame  approximately  14  teachers  who  were  not 
EL  Authorized  obtained  their  EL  Authorizations. 

14.  .  Twelve  of  the  18  teachers  impacted  by  the  instant  proceedings  testified  about 

their  teaching  qualifications  and  their  lack  of  awareness  that  failure  to  obtain  EL 
Authorizations  would  result  in  their  potential  layoffs.  In  pertinent  part,  their  testimony  was 
as  follows: 

“English  Language  Learners”  refersto  students  who  have  English  as  a  second  language. 

‘ 

Primarily  embodied  in  Education Code  section  44258.9.  (See  Exh.  C.) 

6

  

  

A. 

Rosemary  Antillon  testified  that  she  has  been  teaching  Freshman 

Seminar  Study  Skills  for  the  district  since  1999.  When  she  was  hired,  EL  Authorization  was 
not  required  by  the  district.  Although  she  did  not  recall  the  district  encouraging  teachers  to 
obtain  EL  Authorization,  she  is,  nonetheless  in  the  process  of  obtaining  her  EL 
Authorization.  She  is  currently  enrolled  in  the  second  of  four  classes  required  to  obtain  EL 
Authorization  and  expects  to  obtain  her  EL  Authorization  by  the  middle  of  May,  2007. 

B. 

Timothy  Bacon  testified  that  he  has  been  teaching  Science  in  the 

district  since  1993.  When  he  was  hired,  EL  Authorization  was  not  required  by  the  district. 
Mr.  Bacon  admitted  that  the  district  has  made  several]  attempts  over  the  years  to  encourage 
teachers  to  become  EL  Authorized.  Last  year,  he  signed  a  written  commitment  with  the 
district  to  become  EL  Authorized.  Mr.  Bacon  is  working  on  obtaining  his  EL  Authorization 
and  reported  that  he  is  currently  working  under  an  emergency  EL  Authorization  that  does  not 
expire  until  November  2007.  He  completed  working  on  his  EL  Authorization  on  April  20, 
2007  and  is  “awaiting  approval.”  Mr.  Bacon  did  not  recall  the  district  establishing  any 
“deadline”  for  obtaining  a  non-emergency  EL  Authorization. 

Cc. 

Thomas  Benedict  testified  that  he  has  been  teaching  History  in  the 

district  for  the  past  27  years.  When  he  was  hired  there  was  “no  such  thing  as  an  EL  language 
learner.”  Mr.  Benedict  acknowledged  that  the  district  has  encouraged  teachers  to  obtain  their 
EL  Authorizations  and  that  he  had  been  warned  by  the  district  that  he  needed  to  obtain  an  EL 
Authorization  by  June  30,  2007.  Currently,  he  has  an  emergency  EL  Authorization  and  is  in 
the  process  of  obtaining  his  regular  EL  Authorization. 

Dz. 

Theodore  Caruthers  II]  testified  that  he  has  been  teaching  Elementary 

School  (fourth  grade)  for  the  past  two  and  one-half years.  When  he  was  hired,  EL 
Authorizations  were  not  required.  Mr.  Caruthers  has  been  on  emergency  leave  since  January 
2007.  When  he  received  his  “layoff  notice  in  April  2007”  indicating  that  he  was  subject  to 
layoff  because  he  did  not  have  an  EL  Authorization,  he  enrolled  in  the  necessary  classes  and 
is  diligently  pursuing  an  EL  Authorization  at  the  University  of  San  Diego.  He  currently  has 
an  emergency  EL  Authorization,  which  is  due  to  expire  in  June  2007,  and  expects  to  receive 
his  regular  EL  Authorization  in  the  middle  of  July  2007. 

E. 

Wayne  Harris  testified  that  he  has  taught  seventh  grade  Mathematics  in 
the  district  for  the  past  17  years.  When  he  was  hired  there  were  “no  EL  Authorizations.”  Mr. 
Harris  acknowledged  receiving  “more  than  one  letter”  from  the  district  over  the  years 
encouraging  teachers  to  obtain  EL  Authorizations.  (See  Exhs.  14,  15,  and  16.)  The  most 
recent  letter  from  the  district,  dated  January  18,  2007  stated,  in  pertinent  part:  “You  are 
presently  performing  your  EL  teaching  duties  under  the  authority  of  an  Emergency  CLAD 
Certificate.  You  must  be  eligible  for  the  CLAD  Certificate  (or  AB2913)  by  June  30,  2007.” 
(Exh.  D.)  Mr.  Harris’  Emergency  EL  Authorization  is  not  due  to  expire  until  November 
2007.  He  has  completed  the  AB2913  Training  and  is  waiting  for  the  EL  Authorization 
paperwork  to  be  processed.

  

F, 

Kenyo  Macias  testified  that  he  currently  teaches  high  schoo}  Spanish  in 
the  district.  Mr.  Macias  was  born  in  Mexico  City  and  came  to  the  United  States  when  he  was 
17  years  old.  English  is  his  second  language  and  he  believes  he  is  competent  to  teach 
Spanish  to  EL  learners.  Nonetheless,  he  has  completed  the  coursework  necessary  to  get  his 
EL  Authorization  and  is  waiting  for  the  transcripts  from  the  University  of  San  Diego. 
Currently  he  holds  an  emergency  EL  Authorization  that  is  due  to  expire  in  June  2007. 

@ 

G. 

Ralph  Mahoney  testified  that  he  has  been  with  the  district  for  the  past 

28  years  coaching  athletics  and  teaching  U.S.  History.  Last  year  Mr.  Mahoney  was  an 
Athletic  Director  and  did  not  believe  he  would  need  an  EL  Authorization.  However,  during 
the  2006-2007  school  year  he  taught  U.S.  History  and  was  told  that  he  needed  to  obtain  an 
EL  Authorization.  Mr.  Mahoney  obtained  an  Emergency  EL  Authorization  that  is  effective 
until  November  2007  and  he  is  in  the  process  of  completing  the  final  class  necessary  to 
obtain  a  Non-Emergency  EL  Authorization. 

H. 

Victoria  Meister  testified  that  this  academic  year  was  her  first  year  with 

the  district.  She  teaches  a  Special  Education  class  and  was  told  to  obtain  EL  Authorization 
within  her  first  year  with  the  district.  Ms.  Meister  has  completed  her  coursework  for  EL 
Authorization  and  is  merely  awaiting  her  transcripts. 

1. 

Theresa  Pulaski  testified  that  this  academic  year  was  her  first  with  the 

district.  She  is  a  Special  Day  teacher  and  has  completed  the  coursework  to  obtain  her  EL 
Authorization,  she  is  merely  waiting  for  her  “paperwork.” 

J. 

Steven  Rodriguez  testified  that  he  has  been  teaching  Music  in  the 

district  for  the  past  seven  years.  There  was  no  “EL  requirement”  when  he  was  hired.  Mr. 
Rodriguez  admitted  that  since  1999,  the  district  has  advised  him  on  an  annual  basis  to  obtain 
his  EL  Authorization;  however,  the  district  never  warned  him  that  lack  of  EL  Authorization 
could  result  in  loss  of  his  job.  Mr,  Rodriguez  has  competed  the  coursework  necessary  to 
obtain  EL  Authorization  and  is  awaiting  transcripts. 

K. 

Arnold  L,  Smith  testified  that  he  has  been  with  the  district  for  13  years. 

Currently,  Mr.  Smith  teaches  Special  Education  and  has  an  emergency  EL  Authorization. 
Prior  to  receiving  his  “layoff  notice,”  Mr.  Smith  had  been  told  by  district  personnel  that  he 
needed  to  obtain  his  EL  Authorization  by  commencement  of  the  next  school  year  (2007- 
2008). 

L. 

Janice  Williams  testified  that  she  was  hired  by  the  district  on 

September  11,  2006  as  a  Reading  First  Coach.  She  was  not  told  that  she  would  need  an  EL 
Authorization  at  the  time  she  was  hired,  however,  she  is  currently  enrolled  in  the  necessary 
classes  and  plans  to  obtain  EL  Authorization  by  the  middle  of  May  2007. 

15. 

Teachers  with  emergency  EL  Authorizations  qualify  to  teach  EL  students  and 

emergency  EL  Authorizations  may  be  renewed  for  a  second  one-year  period.  Historically, 
such  renewals  have  been  readily  granted. 

e

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  instant  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided,  as  required, 

2. 

Seventeen of the  22  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  10  are  not  PKS  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  Those  17  “services”  are  identified  with  the 
“Non-EL  Authorized”  label.  For  example,  “Secondary  Spanish  Teachers,  Non-EL 
Authorized”  is  not  a  PKS  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  The  PKS  is 
“Secondary  Spanish  Teachers.”  “Non-EL  Authorized”  refers  to  a  factor  based  on  the  needs 
of  the  district  and  pupils.  It  is  improper  to  combine  a  factor  such  as  “Non-EL  Authorized” 
and  a  PKS  to  create  a  hybrid  PKS  such  as  “Secondary  Spanish  Teachers,  Non-EL 
Authorized.”  Although  the  district  in  the  present  instance  put  a  novel  spin  on  the  PKS 
concept,  the  district’s  position  does  not  pass  muster.  In  essence,  the  district  identified  the 
positions  being  taught  by  Non-EL  Authorized  teachers  and  then  created  new  “PKS”  that 
would  result  in  the  layoff  of  all  teachers  in  the  district  without  EL  Authorization.  This 
resulted  in  an  improper  use  of  the  layoff  procedures  embodied  in  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955  resulting  in  the  retention  of  more  junior  teachers  while  senior  teachers  were 
subjected  to  “layoff”  due  to  their  lack  of  EL  Authorizations. 

The  identical  situation  was  addressed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Alexander  et  al.  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d 
567.  In  Alexander,  the  school  district  reduced  the  number  of  its  teachers  by  using  the  layoff 
procedures  embodied  in  Education  Code  section  44955  to  eliminate  teachers  who  lacked 
Spanish  speaking  skills.  Rather  than  creating  hybrid  categories  of  “PKS”  as  done  here,  the 
Delano  district  used  Spanish  speaking  abilities  as  bases  for  “bumping”  and  “skipping.” 
Junior  teachers  with  Spanish  speaking  skills  were  allowed  to  “bump”  more  senior  teachers 
who  lacked  Spanish  speaking  skills  and  junior  teachers  with  Spanish  speaking  skills  were 
“skipped”  and  more  senior  teachers  without  such  skills  were  slated  for  layoff.  In  Alexander 
the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that  the  district’s  actions  violated  Education  Code  section 
44955,  The  court  noted  that  Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  seniority 
determines  the  order  of  dismissals  of  permanent  school  district  employees,  and  that  as 
between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  may  be 
based  on  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.  klowever,  for  teachers  having  different 
employment  seniority  dates,  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students  is  not  a  proper  measure 
of priority.  The  court  held  that  already  employed  teachers  who  were  hired  as  monolingual 
teachers  and  who  were  otherwise  compentent  could  not  be  discharged  merely  because  more 
junior  teachers  possessed  bilingual  skills  and  met  the  district’s  current  bilingual  program 
needs.  (/d.  at  572-575.)  The  same  is  true  in  the  present  instance. 

3. 

The  following  five  services  listed  in  Finding  10  are  PKS  within  the  meaning  of 

Education  Code  section  44955:  Child  Development  Teachers  on  Special  Assignment;

  

  

Reading  First  Coaches;  Renaissance  Learning  Coaches;  SDC  Teachers  and  RSP  Teachers. 
These  PKS  total  13  FTE  positions;  however,  the  facts,  considered  in  their  entirety,  fail  to 
reveal  whether  these  13  FTE  positions,  standing  alone,  require  layoffs.  For  example,  on 
February  28,  2007,  when  the  board  initially  adopted  Resolution  No.  06-07-52,  no  layoffs 
were  anticipated  as  a  result  of  the  elimination  of  three  of  these  same  PKS  (Child 
Development  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment,  Reading  First  Coaches  and  Renaissance 
Learning  Coaches)  totaling  7  FTE.  (Findings  6  and  7.)  The  subsequent  “Amended” 
Resolution,  adopted  by  the  board  on  March  14,  2007,  a  mere  two  weeks  after  adoption of  the 
original  Resolution,  called  for  the  reduction  of  77  FTE.  It  became  apparent  during  the 
hearing  that  the  resulting  recommendation  of  teachers  to  be  eliminated  was  based  on  the 
district’s  desire  to  ensure  that  all  teachers  remaining  in  the  district  were  EL  Authorized. 
Having  concluded  that  layoff  proceedings  represent  an  inappropriate  vehicle  for  achieving 
that  goal,  it  is  unclear  whether  the  necessity  of  reducing  the  number of teachers  for  any  other 
reason  still  exists.  Consequently,  the  accusation  shall  be  dismissed  in  its  entirety. 

e@ 

ORDER 

WHEREFORE,  THE  FOLLOWING  ORDER  is  hereby  made: 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  all  respondents  and  the  district  may  not  notify 

respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

DATED:  May  Y  »  2007

wher 

ROY  W.  HEWITT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

