BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
McKINLEYVILLE  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

JENNIFER  ADAMS, 

OAH  No.  N2007030991 

| 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

  

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  20,  2007,  in  Eureka,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the  Humboldt 

County  Office  of  Education  at  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson, 
Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  State  of 
California,  heard  this  matter. 

Stephen  L.  Hartsell,  Attorney  at  Law  of  School  and  College  Legal  Services 

of  California,  901  Myrtle  Avenue,  Eureka,  California  95501-1219,  represented 
Superintendent  Alan  W.  Jorgensen. 

Paul  Hagan,  Attorney  at  Law  of  Bragg,  Perlman,  Russ,  Stunich,  Rudolph  &  Eads 

LLP,  434  Seventh  Street,  P.  O.  Box  1248,  Eureka,  California  95502-1248,  represented 
Respondent  Jennifer  Adams. 

On  April  20,  2007,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April  4,  2007,  in  his  official  capacity,  Alan  W.  Jorgensen, 
Superintendent  (the  Superintendent),  McKinleyville  Union  School  District  (the  District), 
made  and  filed  the  Accusation  regarding  Jennifer  Adams  (Respondent  Adams). 

2. 

Respondent  Adams  is a  fully  credentialed  and  certificated  employee  of  the 
District.  The  District  extends  designation  to  Respondent  Adams  as  a  permanent  teacher. 

3. 

On  February  14,  2007,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s 

Board  of  Trustees  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds 
of  services  (PKS),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the 
District  for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2007-2008). 

-l- 

  

 

4. 

On  February  14,  2007,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously 

adopted  Resolution  No.  06-07-07;  however,  one  board  member  was  absent  at  the  time 
of  the  adoption  of  the  resolution. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  eliminate,  no  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the 
form  of  4.844  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

2.0 
FTE 
0.166  FTE 
2.328  FTE 
FTE 
0.35 

~ 

Kindergarten  to  5th  Grade  Elementary  Teaching  positions; 
Math  Teacher  positions; 
Teacher  positions  for  electives!  for  grades  six  to  eight;  and 
Resource  Specialist  Teacher  positions. 

5. 

By a letter,  dated  March  12,  2007,  the  District’s  Superintendent 
dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  ‘holders,  including 
Respondent  Adams,  that  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  had  an  intention  to  reduce 
or  to  eliminate  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice. 
Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service 
now  rendered  to  the  District,  Respondent  Adams  learned  the  District  would  not 
reemploy  her  in  the  certificated  position  she  had  worked  over  the  past  school  year. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  12,  2007,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s 
resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  Respondent  Adams  that  no 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  Respondent  Adams 
would  be  retained  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  she  was 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students  under  the  District’s  competency 
criteria. 

However,  the  letter  was  not  personally  served  by  the  Superintendent  on 

Respondent  Adams  until  Tuesday,  March  13,  2007. 

6. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  Respondent  Adams  from  the 

Superintendent  and  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient 
reasons  of  the  Governing  Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  elementary  school  teacher 
position  held  by  Respondent  Adams. 

7. 

_.  Respondent  Adams  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 
whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  Respondent  Adams  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

'  The  electives  to  be  eliminated  include:  0.322  FTE  in  Print;  0.664  FTE  in  Success;  0.5 

FTE  in  Fine  Arts;  0.5  FTE  in  Intervention,  and  0.332  in  Academic  Support. 

-2- 

 

  

8. 

Certificated  employee  Holly  Matthews  Sexton  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense 

by  which  she  expressed  a  desire  to  contest  the  District’s  layoff  action  against  her. 
However,  before  the  date  of  the  hearing,  Ms.  Sexton  withdrew  her  request  for  a 
hearing  under  terms  of  a  settlement  agreement. 

9. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  Respondent  Adams  the 

Accusation,  dated  April  4,  2007,  and  related  documents.  Respondent  Adams  filed 
timely  a  notice  of  defense. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

10. 

11. 

Alan  W.  “Skip”  Jorgensen  (the  Superintendent),  in  his  capacity  as  the 

Superintendent,  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing. 

The  Superintendent  established  that  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective 
shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s  budget.  Moreover,  there  were  teachers,  with  lengthy 
seniority  with  the  District  and  during  the  current  school  year  have  worked  in  job-share 
positions,  who  have  expressed a  desire  to  return  to  full-time  teaching  positions  during 
the  ensuing  school  year.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable 
budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s  Superintendent  recommended  that 
certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds  as  well  as  lack  of 
adequate  work  for  the  current  number  of  teachers  within  District  schools.  Also,  the 
prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  due  to  the  declining  pupil 
census  for  the  District  for  the  ensuing  school  year  because  the  enrollment  has  fallen 
over  the  past  three  years  from  1,584  students  to  1,211  students  for  the  current  school 
year. 

12. 

The  Superintendent  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District 

was  required  to  initiate  layoff  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  his  staff,  took  steps  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the 
District’s  teachers. 

The  Superintendent  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s  teachers  who  were 

District  teachers.  He  studied  teachers’  records  and  set  forth  on  the  District’s seniority 
list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  each  teacher  of  the 
District. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be  delivered  to  teachers,  who 

were  affected  by  the  Board’s  resolution,  notices  to  affected  permanent  and  probationary 
teachers  that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 

13. 

Although  he  is  not  an  expert  in  the  area,  the  Superintendent  is  familiar  with 

the  certification  requirements  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing 
(CTC)  for  issuance  of  a  credential  or  authorization  for  a  teacher  to  provide  instruction 

  

3-

  

to  English  language  learners  in  this  state.  The  Superintendent  showed  that  individual 
teachers  in  grades  kindergarten  through  grade  twelve  who  have  one  or  more  English 
language  learners  (ELL)  in  the  teacher’s  classroom  are  required  by  CTC?  to  be  ELL 
certified. 

@ 

14, 

The  Superintendent  noted  that  on  February  8,  2006,  the  Governing  Board 

voted  to  adopt  for  the  District  a  deadline  date  of  January  1,  2007,  for  certificated  employees 
to  meet  the  California  ELL  certification  requirements. 

On  February  14,  2006,  the  Superintendent  issued  a  memorandum,  whose  subject 
was  titled  “California  English  Language  Learner  Certification.”  The  memorandum  set 
out,  in  pertinent  part: 

The  approval  of  AB  2913  by  the  California  Legislature  in  2005 
has  provided  the  opportunity  for  an  additional  six-month  period 
for  teachers  to  earn  the  English  Language  Learner  Certification. 

As  a  result  of  the  legislation,  [the  District’s  Governing  Board] 
has  approved  January  1,  2007,  as  the  date  that  certificated  staff 
of  the  district  are  required  to  have  the  ELL  Certificate.  This  is 
an  extension  to  the  earlier  date  of  June  30,  2006,  established  as  a 
result  of  the  2004  ELL  Compliance  Review.  Individuals  who 
have  not  earned  the  certification  by  January  1,  2007,  risk  being 
exposed  to  layoff  for  the  2007-2008  year. 

e 

?  The  Superintendent  offered  that  the  CTC  Internet’s  site  that  pertains  to  requirements  for 

teachers  of  English  learners  includes  the  following: 

. 

.  public  schools  in  California  are  required  to 

ELs  identified  in  K-12  . 
receive  services  designed  to  meet  their  linguistic  and  academic  needs  based 
on  assessments  made  by  the  local  employing  agency.  An  appropriately 
authorized  teacher  for  ELD  and  academic  content  instruction  is  required. 
The  state  laws  do  not  specify  exemptions  for  a  small  or  particular  number 
of  ELs  in  a  class,  for  a  subject  area  such  as  elective  classes,  nor  for  a  type 
of  setting  such  as  special  education  or  vocational. 

There  is  no  numerical  trigger  and  no  percentage  of  students  needing 
particular  English  learner  services  that  determines  a  misassignment.  If 
one  or  more  of  the  students  in  the  class  needs  English  learner  services  or 
requires  instruction  in  a  subject  area,  the  teacher  providing  the  English 
learner  services  must  hold  an  appropriate  English  learner  credential  or 
authorization. 

Certificate  is  required  on  the  date  when  a  teacher  is  assigned  to  provide 
instructional  services  to  an  EL  student  or  sooner  if  it  is  required  by  the 
employer, 

@ 

-4- 

 

For  those  who  have  completed  a  class,  do  not  forget  the 
requirement  to  file  for  certification  with  [CTC].  [CTC]  will 
then  approve  and  update  your  credential  status. 

15. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the 

District  faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State 
of  California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of 
teacher  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 
including  the  position  held  by  Respondent  Adams. 

16. 

Under  the  proposed  layoff  action,  Respondent  Adams’s  1.0  FTE  teacher 

position  as  a  middle  school  teacher  of  elective  subjects  will  be  eliminated. 

17. 

The  Superintendent  noted  that  for  the  ensuing  year  the  District  will  retain 
Ms.  Carole  Meng,  who  is  junior  to  Respondent  on  the  seniority  list,  to  teach  elementary 
school  classes,  for  which  Respondent  Adams  is  also  qualified  to  teach,  except  that 
Respondent  Adams  did  not  cause  to  be  filed  with  the  State  of  California  Commission 
on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CTC)  until  after  March  15,  2007,  an  application  for  issuance 
of  specialized  credential  under  the  English  language  learner  law  and  regulations. 

District’s  Bases  to  Proceed  Against  Other  Certificated  Employees 

18. 

Except  for  the  position  held  by  Respondent  Adams,  the  District’s 

proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE  positions,  for  the  ensuing 
school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student  population. 

Respondent  Adams’s  Contentions  and  Arguments 

19. 

Respondent  Adams  contends  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally  defective 

and  improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff  of  the  subject  credentialed  employee 
does  not  fully  account  for  her  seniority  in  light  of  the  District’s  retention  of  teacher, 
Ms.  Carole  Meng,  who  is  junior  to  Respondent  Adams. 

Respondent  Adams  contends  she  exerted  good  faith  efforts  to  comply  with  the 

District’s  directive  that  all  teachers,  who  have  English  language  learners  (ELL)  in  a 
classroom,  make  application  for,  and  secure,  an  ELL  credential  or  authorization.  She 
contends  that  District’s  personnel  erred  when  they  failed  to  thoroughly  instruct  her 
that  she  was  duty  bound  to  deliver  to  CTC  office  in  Sacramento  an  application  for  the 
ELL  credential  before  March  15,  2007.  Respondent  Adams  further  contends  that  the 
District  had  ample  notice  before  the  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  she 
had  completed  the  examination  process  that  rendered  her  eligible  to  procure  an  ELL 

-5- 

 

  

certification  and  that  District  personnel  were  obligated  to  have  her  prospective  receipt 
of  an  ELL  credential  reported  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Hence,  Respondent  Adams 
avers  the  District  erred  when  it  did  not  provide  her  with  a  correct  description  of  a 
pending  credential  application  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  that  would  have  enabled  the 
District  to  retain  her  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year  in  light  of  the  fact  the  District 
has  determined  to  reemploy  another  teacher-Ms.  Meng—who  has  supposedly  only  filed 
in  February  2007  her  application  for  an  ELL  authorization  with  CTC.  Additionally,  the 
other  teacher-Ms.  Meng-has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  which  is  one  year, 
six  days  after  the  date  of  hire  of  Respondent  Adams  and  the  junior  teacher  lacks  proof 
that  CTC  has  actually  issued  her  either  a  CLAD  or  an  ELL  certificate  or  other  proof 
the  CTC  deems  Ms.  Meng  to  have  passed  the  CTEL  (California  Teachers  of  English 
Learners)  or  similar  examination. 

The  contentions  and  arguments  by  Respondent  Adams  are  persuasive.  The 

weight  of  the  evidence  establishes  that  the  Superintendent  has  not  met  his  burden  of 
proof  so  as  to  sustain  the  Accusation  against  Respondent  Adams. 

Evidence  on  Behalf of Individual  Respondent  Adams 

20. 

Keith  Wayne  Adams  (Mr.  Adams)  came  to  the  hearing  to  offer  evidence 

on  behalf  of  Respondent  Adams.  By  the  consistency  of  his  testimony,  by  his  attitude 
towards  the  proceedings  and  by  his  general  demeanor,  Mr.  Adams  showed  that  he  was 
a  credible  and  compelling  witness. 

Mr.  Adams  has  been  married  to  Respondent  Adams  over  a  15-year  period. 

Over  the  past  year,  Respondent  Adams  has  discussed  with  Mr.  Adams  the 
importance  of  her  securing  an  ELL  credential  relative  to  her  maintaining  employment 
as  a  teacher  with  the  District. 

On  Wednesday,  March  14,  2007,  Mr.  Adams  traveled  to  a  United  States  Post 

Office  site  to  send,  via  overnight  express  mail,  to  CTC  offices  in  Sacramento  an 
envelope  that  contained  a  check  in  the  amount  of  $55  that  was  associated  with  the 
processing  by  CTC  of  test  results  of  the  examination  as  taken  by  Respondent  Adams 
for  issuance  to  her  of  a  credential  under  the  ELL  program. 

21. 

On  Monday,  March  19,  2007,  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 

Credentialing  posted  on  its  Internet  site  that  that  licensing  agency  had  received  and  filed 
documentation  and  fees  from  Respondent  Adams  that  pertained  to  her  application  for 
issuance  to  her  of  an  ELL  certification  or  authorization. 

22. 

Respondent  Adams  has a first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  as  a 

probationary-one  teacher  as  of  August  21,  1997.  She  holds  a  clear,  multiple  subject 
credential  with  supplemental  authorizations  in  English  and  Computer  Information 
Systems. 

-6- 

 

Respondent  Adams  teaches  at  McKinleyville  Middle  School.  Her  primary 
assignment  for  the  current  year  is  a  CORE  teacher.  (CORE  consists  of  subjects  in 
language  arts,  reading  and  social  studies.)  Also  Respondent  Adams  instructs  seventh 
grade  and  eight  grade  elective  programs,  which  consists  of  technology  and  print  media. 
In  the  past,  she  has  taught  academic  support  and  sixth  grade  CORE.  During  her  first 
year  of  employment  with  the  District,  Respondent  Adams  had  an  assignment  in a  self- 
contained  elementary  school  class  at  a  different  school  site  in  the  District. 

23. 

Respondent  Adams  offered  credible  and  persuasive  evidence  at  the 

hearing  of  this  matter.  By  her  demeanor,  the  consistency  of  her  manner  and  presentation 
and  her  attitude  towards  the  proceeding,  Respondent  Adams  established  that  she  was  a 
credible’  and  reliable  witness. 

A  “couple  of  years  ago,”  Respondent  Adams  learned  that  the  District  had a  policy 

for  teachers  to  become  qualified  as  ELL  teachers.  In  2005  or  2006  Respondent  took  a 
15-week  course  with  the  Humboldt  County  of  Office  of  Education  so  as  to  acquire  the 
ELL  authorization.  With  her  first  attempt  with  the  test,  she  did  not  pass  all  parts  of  the 
ELL  examination.  Her  career  progress  was  delayed  due  to  a  pregnancy  in  2006.  During 
her  maternity  leave,  Respondent  Adams  learned  that  the  District  had  a  policy  that 
teachers  were  required  to  pass  the  ELL  examination  and  to  become  certified. 

In  December  2006,  Respondent  passed  the  ELL  examination.  On  January  19, 
2007,  Respondent  Adams  received,  via  mail,  the  official  news  that  she  had  passed  the 
ELL  examination. 

24. 

Within  a  few  days  of  gaining  possession  on  January  19,  2007,  of  the 

ELL  examination  results  Respondent  Adams  personally  delivered  the  test  results  to  the 
District’s  administrative  office  employee/personnel  clerk,  Ms.  Lisa  Jones,  who  copied 
the  original  ELL  test  results  document.  Respondent  believed  that  when  she  presented 
the  District  with  the  test  results  from  the  ELL  examination  that  she  had  effectively 
satisfied  the  District’s  policy  of  meeting  a  deadline  for  setting  about  to  acquire  the 
ELL  credential. 

Neither  Ms.  Lisa  Jones  nor  any  other  District  office  personnel  instructed  or 
informed  Respondent  on  or  shortly  after  January  19,  2007,  that  the  District  required  her 
to  effect  another  step  so  as  to  cause  the  District’s  seniority  list  to  reflect  that  Respondent 
Adams  had,  or  was  eligible  to  secure,  an  ELL  credential.  That  additional  step,  under 
District  guidelines,  contemplated  that  the  affected  teacher  would  cause  the  test  results 
to  be  mailed  to  and  filed  at  the  CTC  office  in  Sacramento. 

>  Government  Code  section  1  1425.50,  subdivision  (b),  third  sentence. 

-7- 

  

 

  

25. 

On  March  12,  2007,  in  a  meeting  with  the  Superintendent,  Respondent 
gained  an  understanding  that  the  District  required  CTC  actually  to  receive  a  teacher’s 
ELL  examination  results  and  further  that  CTC  must  show  on  its  Internet  site  the  filing 
of  the  ELL  results. 

On  March  12  or  March  13,  2007,  Respondent  Adams  “down  loaded”  an 
application  form,  completed  the  form,  wrote  a  check  for  $55  as  the  costs  for  CTC  to 
process  the  credential  application  and  deposited  the  documents  into  an  envelope  that 
was  addressed  to  the  CTC  office  in  Sacramento.  (On  March  13,  2007,  she  received  by 
personal  delivery  the  letter  that  gave  her  preliminary  notice  of  the  layoff  action  that 
affected  her  future  with  the  District.)  On  March  14,  2007,  the  husband  of  Respondent 
Adams  paid  postage  for  express  mailing  of  the  material  to  CTC  in  Sacramento. 

On  Monday,  March  19,  2007,  the  CTC  placed  on  its  Internet  site  an  announcement 
of  its  receipt  from  Respondent  Adams  of  her  application  for  issuance  of  an  ELL  credential 
certificate. 

26. 

The  District  erred  in  failing  to  carefully  analyze  the  extant  personnel  file 

that  pertains  to  Respondent  Adams  and  to  record  on  the  seniority  list  that  Respondent 
Adams  possessed  test  results  and  filed  such  documents  and  fees  with  CTC  as  to  gain 
the  ELL  credential.  Hence,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision  (c)(3),  the  District’s  procedural  error  was  not  “nonsubstantive,”  and  such 
District  neglect  manifested  as  prejudicial  error  that  adversely  impacted  Respondent 
Adams. 

The  District’s  failure  to  carefully  study,  analyze  and  weigh  the  District’s  own 

personnel  file  that  pertained  to  Respondent  Adams  is  a  substantive  error  that  necessitates 
dismissal  of  the  Accusation  against  her. 

Additional  Findings 

27. 

On  March  14,  2007,  when  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution 
No.  06-07-08,  which  prescribed  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of 
services,  the  Governing  Board  did  not  adopt  a  companion  resolution  that  prescribed 
competency  criteria  for  skipping  of junior  certificated  employees  over  teachers  who 
occupied  higher  ranking  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

28. 

Ms.  Carole  Meng  has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  on  August  27, 

1998,  which  is  one  year,  six  days  after  the  date  of  hire  for  Respondent  Adams  by  the 
District.  Ms.  Meng  has  a  multiple  subject  credential.  (Respondent  Adams  also  has  a 
multiple  subject  credential,  but  in  addition  she  has  supplemental  authorization  in  English 
and  Computer  Information  Systems.)  In  February  2007,  CTC  recorded  on  its  Internet  site 
that  the  application  and  fees  for  issuance  of  an  ELL  credential  had  been  received  from 
Ms.  Meng.  (On  March  19,  2007,  CTC  announced  on  its  Internet  site  its  receipt  of  the 
application  and  fees  by  Respondent  Adams  for  an  ELL  credential.) 

-8-   

Ms.  Meng  does  not  possess  a  CLAD.  Nor  does  Respondent  Adams  hold  a 
CLAD  certificate.  Both  teachers  have  made  application  for  an  ELL  credential,  but  the 
Superintendent  offered  no  documentary  proof  that  the  junior  teacher,  namely  Ms.  Meng, 
actually  holds  an  ELL  certification. 

The  District  filed  no  accusation  against  Ms.  Meng  so  as  to  eliminate  or  reduce  her 

services  to  teach  under  a  Multiple  Subject  credential. 

29. 

Because  Respondent  Adams  has  filed,  like  Ms.  Meng,  an  application  for 

an  ELL  and  CTC  notes  receipt  of  the  document  necessary  for  such  authorization,  and 
because  she  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  credential  and  was  hired  more  than  one  year  before 
Ms.  Meng’s  first  date  of  service  to  the  District,  Ms.  Meng  is  not  senior  to  Respondent 
Adams  insofar  as  competency  may  be  determined. 

30. 

As  to  Respondent  Adams,  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent 

and  the  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  the  1.0  FTE  position  teacher 
who  provides  elective  subjects  were  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  not  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the 
District’s  discretion. 

Ultimate  Findings 

31. 

Respondent  Adams  provided  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  a  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Adams  is  currently  competent  to  teach  and 
for  which  she  is  entitled  to  possess  a  credential. 

32. 
must  be  reversed. 

The  District’s  layoff  action  against  Respondent  Adams  was  erroneous  and 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  10,  inclusive. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  establishes  that  no 
certificated  employee  of  a  school  district  may  be  laid  off  if  another  employee  with 
less  seniority  is  retained  to  render  a service  that  the  noticed  employee  is  “certificated 
and  competent  to  render.” 

-9- 

 

The  District  contends  that  its  seniority  list  showed  Respondent  Adams  to  hold 
neither  an  ELL  credential  nor  a  CLAD  certificate.  The  District  further  contends  that 
Respondent  Adams  provided  the  CTC  on  too  late  a  date  to  authenticate  information  to 
correct  the  District’s  seniority  list  that  she  had  timely  filed  an  application  for  an  ELL 
credential.  Hence,  the  District’s  Superintendent  believed  discretion  could  be  exercised 
to  issue  the  preliminary  decision  to  give  Respondent  Adams  notice  that  her  teaching 
services  would  not  be  retained  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  District  seems  to  rely  on  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978) 
76  Cal.App.3d  796,  and  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  (2004)  116  Cal.App.4th  1070, 
to  support  the  proposition  that  the  District  cannot  be  held  responsible  for  refusing  to  grant 
Respondent  Adams  the  protective  graces  of  seniority  status  by  reason  of  her  existing 
credentials  and  years  of  service  to  the  District  and  its  students.  The  District’s  position  is 
that,  even  though  a  copy  of  the  test  results  that  made  Respondent  Adams  eligible  for  an 
ELL  credential  existed  in  the  personnel  file,  Respondent  Adams  did  not  perform a  step  of 
filing  the  test  results  along  with  a  form  application  and  processing  fees  with  CTC’s  office 
in  Sacramento. 

. 

Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  does  establish  that 
after-acquired  credentials,  which  are  filed  after  the  date  of  mailing  of  a  preliminary 
layoff  notice,  need  not  be  considered  by  a  school  district  in  crafting  the  seniority  list 
for  the  use  in  a  layoff  action.  But,  neither  Campbell  Elementary  Teacher,  supra, 
76  Cal.App.3d  796,  nor  Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified,  supra,  116  Cal.App.4th  1070, 
supports  the  District’s  refusal  to  acknowledge  the  credentials  held  by  Respondent 
Adams. 

The  effect  of  a  teacher’s  failure  to  obtain,  hold  or  file  a  proper  credential  in  a 
timely  manner  is  governed  by  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott,  supra, 
76  Cal.App.3d  796.  In  that  decision,  a  teacher  caused  the  proper  recordation  of  a  critical 
credential  one  day  after  the  final  notice  that  she  has  been  laid  off  by  the  governing  board 
of  the  teacher’s  employing  school  district.  The  Campbell  court  set  out,  “[t]he  governing 
board  is  not  to  be  held  responsible  for  the  fact  that  [the  affected  teacher]  recorded  her 
credential  after  all  notices  had  been  sent,  a  hearing  held,  and  a  decision  rendered.” 
(Emphasis  added.) 

Fine  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District,  supra,  116  Cal.App.4th  1070, 
dealt  with  a  teacher  who  began  work  under  an  emergency  teaching  permit  but  who  ina 
subsequent  year  of  employment  secured  a  credential.  The  essence  of  the  Fine  court’s 
holding  was  that  the  employing  school  district  had  no  duty  to  classify  the  teacher  as 
probationary  to  a  date  retroactive  to  the  actual  validity  date  of  the  credential.  The  basis 
of  the  result  in  the  Fine  opinion  was  that  a  necessary  requisite  for  a  teacher’s  service  is 
the  registration  of  a  teaching  credential.  Thus  “a  teacher  serving  under  an  emergency 
permit  continues  to  serve  under  that  permit,  and  under  the  contract  to  which  she  agreed, 
until  the  teacher  is  issued  a  credential  and  registers  it  with  the  District.”  (Fine,  supra, 
116  Cal.App.4th  at  1078.) 

-10- 

 

In  another  appellate  court  decision,  the  court  noted  a  teacher  was  too  late  when 
the  teacher  filed  a  credential  on  a  date  six  months  after  the  layoff  hearing  was  held,  the 
ALJ  had  recommended  layoff  as  to  60  percent  of  a  full-time  position,  and  the  board  had 
reduced  him  to  40  percent  of  a  full-time  position.  (Daux  v.  Kern  Community  College 
District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  568.)  Such  a  six-month  delay  in  presenting  a 
credential  that  showed  the  affected  teacher’s  capability  to  teach  a  particular  subject 
was  a  practice  condemned  as  overly  burdensome  to  the  District’s  ability  to  manage  its 
costs  of  teacher  personnel. 

In  the  afore-cited  appellate  court  decisions,  the  affected  teacher  presented  the 
employing  school  district  with  a  credential  after  the  administrative  hearing  and  after 
the  issuance  of a  final  layoff  notice  by  the  governing  board  of  the  school  district. 
In 
‘the  important  decision  of  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott,  supra, 
76  Cal.App.3d  796,  the  County  Office  of  Education,  through a clerical  error,  had 
never  registered  the  affected  teacher’s  classroom  teacher’s  credential,  and  hence  the 
governing  board  could  not  be  charged  “with  information  which  it  did  not  have  and 
was  not  responsible  for  recording.”  (76  Cal.App.3d  at  814.) 

In  this  matter,  in  January  2007  the  District  received  from  Respondent  Adams  a 

copy  of  test  results  that  showed  her  to  be  eligible  to  hold  an  ELL  credential.  Thereafter, 
during  January  2007,  Respondent  Adams  had  personally  delivered  the  original  of  the 
test  results  to  the  District  office  where  a  copy  was  filed  and  then  made a  part  of  the 
personnel  file  for  Respondent  Adams.  Respondent  Adams  met  the  burden  of  recording 
documentary  proof  of  her  eligibility  or  entitlement  to  issuance  by  CTC  of  an  ELL 
credential.  Contrary  to  the  facts  in  the  Campbell  Teachers  Association  decision, 
Respondent  Adams  did  not  record  “her  credential  after  all  notices  had  been  sent,  a 
hearing  held,  and  a  decision  rendered.”  (76  Cal.App.3d  at  815.)  Here,  due  to  scant 
instruction  or  prompts  from  District  personnel,  Respondent  comprehended  and  became 
fully  aware  only  on  March  12,  2007,  that  the  ELL  test  results  had  to  be  mailed  by  her 
to  CTC  offices  in  Sacramento  and  that  receipt  of  the  test  results  needed  to  appear  on 
the  CTC  Internet  site. 

Respondent  is  unduly  burdened  by  the  District’s  guideline,  which  discounts 

her  seniority  status,  that  calls  for  an  entry  on  the  seniority  list  of  her  eligibility  for  an 
ELL  certificate  to  hinge  on  the  receipt  by  CTC  of  a  check  and  standard  form  for  the 
processing  of  the  credential.  The  inequity  is  intensified  by  the  fact  that  Respondent 
Adams  dispatched,  via  express  mail,  the  requisite  material  to  CTC  within  one  day  after 
the  date  she  received  the  preliminary  notice,  which  was  a  date  about  five  weeks  before 
the  hearing  in  this  matter. 

Here,  the  error,  if  any,  by  Respondent  Adams  was  that  she  presented  then 

recently  procured  test  results,  which  was  prima  facie  indicia  of  her  entitlement  to  the 
ELL  credential  to  a  District’s  personnel  officer  in  January  2007,  which  was  nearly 
two  months  before  the  dispatch  of  the  preliminary  layoff  notice.  Respondent  Adams 

-ll-

  

  

prompted  her  husband  to  send,  via  express  mail,  to  CTC  the  test  results  on  March  14, 
2007,  which  was  one  day  after  she  received  the  preliminary  layoff  notice.  But  the 
weight  of  credible  evidence  shows  that  the  District’s  file  contained  the  adequate 
documentary  indicia  of  Respondent’s  eligibility  to  acquire  an  ELL  credential  and  that 
District  personnel  failed  to  adequately  instruct  or  prompt  Respondent  Adams  of  the 
need  for  her  to  mail  the  documents  to  CTC.  And  District  personnel  overlooked  or 
ignored  the  copies  of  the  tests  results  that  showed  proof  of  respondent’s  entitlement 
to  issuance  of  the  ELL  credential. 

Although  the  law  has  long  recognized  that  where  competency  is  not  demonstrated 

by  a  senior  employee,  a  junior  employee  who  has  the  ability  to  service  the  needs  of  a 
school  district  program  may  be  retained  by  a  school  district  even  though  such  action  may 
result  in  the  senior  employee,  who  lacks  such  competence,  being  terminated.  (King  v. 
Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  98  Cal.App.3d  1016,  1023;  Moreland  v.  Kurze 
(1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  655.)  However,  a  district’s  action  to  skip  junior  teachers 
over  teachers  with  greater  seniority  must  be  carefully  and  deliberately  implemented. 
(Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.)  The  paramount  rule  is 
that  no  person  may  be  terminated  while  someone  junior  to  that  person  is  to  be  retained 
by  a  school  district  to  perform a  service  that  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render.  (Ed.  Code  §  44955.) 

The  District  bears  a  duty  to  carefully  analyze  its  own  records  (that  is,  personnel 

files  of  certificated  teachers)  in  crafting  seniority  lists  that  serve  as  a  tool  in  layoff 
notices  than  was  shown  by  the  District  in  this  instance  of  Respondent  Adams. 

4, 

Cause  does  not  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955  to  give  Respondent  Adams  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent 
positions  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  rendered  by  Respondent  Adams,  by  reason 
of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  20  and  22  through  32  inclusive. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondent  Jennifer  Adams. 

2. 

Final  notice  may  not  be  given  to  Respondent  Adams  that  her  services  will 
be  eliminated  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  4,  2007 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

-12- 

  

 

