BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
TAFT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  KERN 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff  of: 

SUSAN  TRAPASSO, 

Respondent. 

OAH  Case  No.:  L2007030964 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  26,  2007,  in  Bakersfield,  California. 

Peter  C.  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Curtis  Dubost,  Ph.D.,  Superintendent 

(Superintendent)  of  the  Taft  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Ernest  Tuttle,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Susan  Trapasso  (respondent). 

District  has  decided  to  reduce  certain  educational  services  and  has  given  respondent  and 
other  teachers  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 
Respondent  requested  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying 
her  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  presented  at  the  hearing.  The  record  was  left  open 
for  the  submission  of  written  closing  briefs.  On  May  1,  2007,  both  parties  filed  their  briefs, 
which  documents  have  been  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibits  12  (District’s)  and  B 
(Respondent’s).  The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  1,  2007. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Superintendent  Dubost  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District.

  

3. 

Superintendent  Dubost  recommended  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District 

(Governing  Board)  the  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4. 

4. 

On  March  14,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  approved  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  adopted  Resolution  Number  13,  reducing  the  following  services  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year: 

Service 

Piano  Class 
Drama/Stagecraft  Class 
Dance  Class 

Reduction 

2  Sessions 
2  Sessions 
1  Session 

The  five-session  reduction  is  equal  to  a  .83  Full-Time-Equivalent  (FTE)  reduction,  as 

one  FTE  equals 6  class  periods  of  instruction  and  one  preparation  period. 

5. 

On  March  15,  2007,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  and 
provided  written  notice,  via  certified  mail  sent  to  the  last  known  address,  to  respondent  and  two 
other  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  on a  full-time 
basis  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  District 
seeks  to  reduce  respondent’s  assignment  to  .7  FTE,  or  four  class  sessions  and  a  preparation 
period. 

6. 

On  March  19,  2007,  respondent  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 

for  not  reemploying  her  in  a  full-time  capacity  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

7. 

The  District  filed  the  Accusation  on  April  9,  2007,  and  on  the  same  date 

respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

9. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.' 

10.  |  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
is  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's 

finding  number 4 
discretion. 

"  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

  

 

  

11. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 4  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

12, 

On  March  14,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  Number  14, 
setting  forth  its  tie-breaking  criteria  for  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date.  In  pertinent 
part,  the  Resolutions  provides:  “THIS  BOARD  RESOLVES  that  the  order  of  termination  as 
between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date  shall  be 
based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof.  The  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  this  need  shall  be  as  follows,  but  not  necessarily  listed  in  order  of  importance:  [] 
Credentialing  [4]  Experience  [{]  Extracurricular  Activities  [§]  Training  [{]  Special  Education 
Needs  [4]  Competence  [{]  Evaluations.  . 

.” 

. 

13. 

The  Superintendent  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  select  respondent  for 
partial  layoff,  choosing  to  retain  Mark  Howard  (Howard),  who  has  the  same  seniority  date  as 
respondent.  Howard  holds  a  single  subject  (Music)  credential  and  teaches  band,  piano,  and 
other  instrumental  classes  when  offered.  Superintendent  Dubost  did  not  employ  any  objective 
criteria  or  point  system  to  rank  the  two  teachers.  At  the  hearing,  the  Superintendent  explained 
that  he  did  not  consider  the  criteria  of  competence,  evaluations,  or  special  education  needs. 
Credentials  were  the  same.  Training  did  not  seem  to  play  a  role  either,  as  both  individuals  met 
the  criteria,  albeit  in  different  ways. 

Superintendent  Dubost  considered  experience  and  extra  curricular  activities  in  breaking 
the  tie  between  the  two  teachers.  He  rated  Howard  higher  in  the  experience  criterion  because 
Howard  had  been  hired  to  fulfill  a  full-time  assignment  and  had  taught  instrumental  music  full- 
a  part-time  music 
time  since  his  hiring.  He  viewed  respondent  as  having  been  hired  to 
teaching  position.  Howard  received  the  nod  with  respect  to  extracurricular  activities  because 
the  band  he  leads  is  needed  for  football  games  and  parades. 

fill 

14. 

Respondent’s  seniority  date  is  August  13,  2003.  She  is 

a  permanent  employee 
and  holds  a  clear  single  subject  (Music)  credential.  She  teaches  choir,  piano,  and  music 
appreciation.  She  holds  a  master’s  degree  and  has  been a  teacher  for  eleven  years,  seven  in 
California.  Respondent  participates  in  several  extracurricular  activities,  including  class  advisor 
and  choir  advisor.  The  choir  assignment  involves  after-school  practices,  fundraisers,  and 
performances  before  live  audiences.  Although  she  has  not  always  worked  full  time  as  a  music 
teacher,  respondent  was  hired,  and  has  always  worked,  as  a full-time  employee. 

15. 

The  District  has  one  continuation  high  school.  Several  teachers,  namely,  Ryan 
Heber  (Science),  Scott  Bennett  (Special  Education),  Bennett  Johnson  (History),  Alan  Popejoy 
(English),  Donald  Hansen  (several  core  areas),  and  Julie  Skowron  (English),  who  are  junior  to 
respondent,  teach  part-time  at  the  continuation  school.  These  teachers  teach  in  subject  matter 
areas  specifically  authorized  by  their  respective  credentials.  Superintendent  Dubost  explained 

 

that  the  District  assigns  employees  to  teach  classes  in  the  continuation  school  in  the  same 
manner  as  it  does  in  the  regular  schools.  The  District  assigns  its  teachers  to  areas  authorized  by 
their  individual  teaching  credential,  as  it  believes  such  assignments  are  required  for  compliance 
with  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  of  2001  (NCLB),  Title  22,  United  States  Code  section 
6301  et  seq. 

16. 

Respondent  testified  that  she  is  competent  to  teach  the  continuation  school 
classes  in  English  and  entry-level  or  beginning  Science.  However,  she  acknowledged  that  she  is 
not  “highly  qualified”  to  teach  such  assignment  pursuant  to  NCLB. 

17. 

Respondent  is  competent  to  teach  the  athletic  tutorial  classes  now  taught  by 
Steven  Sprage  (Sprague)  and  Brandelyn  Trejo  (Trejo),  both  of  whom  are  junior  to  her.  The 
former,  the  football  coach,  was  hired  August  13,  2004,  and  holds  a  physical  education 
credential.  The  latter  was  hired  August  12,  2005,  and  holds  a  physical  education  credential. 
Sprague  is  a  permanent  employee  and  Trejo  is  a  probationary  employee.  The  tutorial  classes 
provide  educational  support  to  athletes  in  need  of  remedial  assistance.  Respondent  has  taught 
other  classes  at  the  District  designed  to  provide  remedial  tutoring  to  students  and  no  specific 
subject  matter  credential  is  required  to  teach  the  class.  Superintendent  Dubost  stated  that  the 
District  prefers  to  assign  the  athletes’  coaches  to  teach  the  tutorial,  as  they  have  the  athletes’ 
attention  and  are  able  to  relate  the  instructional  material  to  athletic  pursuits.  However,  this 
preference  has  not  been  formally  adopted  or  published  by  the  Governing  Board.  Although  the 
District  has  offered  one  tutorial  class  per  period,  or  seven  per  day,  Superintendent  Dubost  did 
not  know  if  the  tutorials  would  be  authorized  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  8. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  4  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  4 
and  9. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4,  which  cause  relates  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through 
ll. 

4. 

Section  44955  directs  that  certificated  permanent  and  probationary  employees 
are  to  be  laid  off  by  seniority,  consistent  with  their  qualifications  and  status.  Thus,  subdivision 
(c) 
and 
reassignments  in  such  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their

shall  make  assignments 

“{t]he  governing  board 

provides, 

pertinent 

part: 

in 

  

The  statute,  in  subsection  (b),  gives 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.” 
preference  to  permanent  employees:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of 
no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 

5. 

Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides  that  “[a]s  between  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the 
order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  . 
.  .” 
The  tie-breaking  criteria  adopted  by  the  Governing  Board  as  Resolution  number  14  is  based  on 
the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  and,  therefore,  may  be  used  to  decide  which  teacher, 
respondent  or  Howard,  is  to  be  laid  off.  However,  the  criteria  developed  by  the  Governing 
Board  was  not  properly  applied  in  this  instance. 

The  evidence  presented  at  the  hearing  indicates  that  both  teachers  remain  tied  after 
application  of  the  pertinent  criteria.  Three  of  the  criteria,  competence,  evaluations,  and  special 
education  needs,  were  not  utilized  to  differentiate  between  the  candidates,  and  no  evidence  was 
presented  at  the  hearing  to  enable  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  to  apply  the 
criteria. 
to  assess  given  the  different  musical 
Moreover,  relative  competence  would  be 
emphasis  of  the  two  individuals.  Special  education  considerations  did  not  seem  to  apply.  As 
Superintendent  Dubost  concluded,  both  teachers  possessed  the  same  credentials  and  underwent 
their  respective  areas  of  emphasis.  In  applying  the  decisive  criteria, 
similar  training  in 
experience  and  extracurricular  activities, 
any  objective 
the  Superintendent  did 
measurement  and  instead  made  a  value  judgment  not  in  Resolution  Number  14,  namely,  that 
instrumental  activities  were  of  greater  value  to  the  District  than  choral  ones.  On  the  other  hand, 
respondent  did  not  present  sufficient  evidence  at  the  hearing  from  which  to  conclude  that  she 
has  greater  experience  or  more  extracurricular  activities  than  Howard. 

difficult 

use 

not 

Accordingly,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  respondent  should  lose  the  tie-breaker  to 
Howard.  Both  individuals  should  be  treated  the  same.  Since  both  individuals  were  directly 
impacted  by  the  reduction  of  two  piano  classes,  they  should  each  retain  one  class  session. 
Respondent’s  teaching  load  should  be  increased  accordingly. 

6. 

Respondent  also  asserts  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  two  other 
assignments:  continuation  English  or  entry-level  Science  and  athletic  tutorial.  Section  44865 
.  Commission  for  Teacher 
. 
provides  that  “A  valid  teaching  credential  issued  by  the 
.  shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for  an  assignment  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Preparation  and  Licensing  . 
following  assignments,  provided  that  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  to 
a  position  for  which 
qualifications  are  prescribed  by  this  section  shall  be  made  only  with  the  consent  of  the  teacher: 
[4]  . 
.  .”  By  virtue  of  her  certification  and  consent,  respondent 
is  “certificated”  to  teach  at  the  continuation  school.

-  [§]  (e)  Continuation  schools.  . 

. 

. 

- 

  

However,  she  is  not  competent  to  teach  at  the  continuation  school.  The  District  has,  in 
effect,  adopted  a  competency  standard  for  this  assignment,  namely,  that  teachers  must  hold  a 
single  subject  certification  to  teach  the  class  in  question,  which  credentialing  is  deemed  NCLB- 
compliant. 

In  Forker  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1994)  160  Cal.App.3d  13, 

19,  the  Court  defined 
“competent,”  in  the  context  of  a  reemployment  proceeding  under  section  44956,  in  terms  of  the 
teachers’  skills  and  qualifications,  as  “relating  to  special  qualifications  for  a  vacant  position, 
rather  than  relating  to  the  on-the-job  performance  of  the  laid-off  permanent  employee.”  In 
doing  so,  the  Court  noted  that  courts  in  reduction  in  force  cases,  namely  Brough  v.  Governing 
Board  (1981)  118  Cal.App.3d  702,  714-15  and  Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980) 
109  Cal.App.3d  648,  654-55,  had  interpreted  the  term  in  a  similar  manner. 

In  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  565,  the  court 
permitted  a  governing  board  to  define  competency  if  such  definition  considered  “[t]he  skills 
and  qualifications  of  the  teacher  threatened  with  layoff.”  (See  also  Martin  v.  Kentfield  School 
District  (1983)  35  Cal.3d  294,  299-300  (1983);  Forker,  supra,  160  Cal.  App.3d  13.)  The  board 
had  established  a  standard  of  competency  that  required  one  year  of  full-time  teaching  in  the 
subject  area  within  the  last  ten  years.  The  Court  found  that  such  a  standard  “clearly  related  to 
skills  and  qualifications  to  teach”  and  was,  therefore,  a  reasonable  one. 
(Duax,  supra,  196 
Cal.App.3d  555,  567.)  The  Court  also  concluded  that  the  standard  did  not  define  competency 
too  narrowly. 

The  District’s  competency  rule  relates  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  its  certificated 
employees  and  is  reasonable.  Respondent  does  not  possess  a  credential  or  other  authorization  in 
English  or  Science  and,  therefore,  is  not  competent  to  teach  in  the  continuation  school. 

7. 

Respondent  has  established  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  the 
athletic  tutorial  class,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding  numbers  14  and  17.  Her  credential  allows 
teaching  remedial  subjects  and  she  has  in  fact  taught  such  subjects  in  the  past.  The  desire  to 
have  the  coaches  provide  the  remedial  assistance,  while  understandable,  is  not  a  credentialing 
requirement.  Nor  has  the  District  established  specific  need  or  competence  criteria  to  preclude 
respondent  from  qualifying  to  teach  the  athletic  tutorial  classes.  She  also  has  more  seniority 
than  the  two  individuals  assigned  to  provide  the  instruction.  Respondent  may,  therefore,  bump 
the  more  junior  employees  if  the  athletic  tutorial  class  is  offered  during  the  2007-2008  school 
year. 

8. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondent  for  the  2007-2008 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  12,  13,  14,  and  17  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  4,  5,  and  7.

  

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed. 

The  District  may  not  terminate  respondent  Susan  Trapasso’s  services  for  the 

2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

1. 

2. 

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

