BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
WASHINGTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Layoff): 

PROPOSED  REDUCTION  OR 
ELIMINATION  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS 
OF  SERVICES  OF  46.3  FULL  TIME 
EQUIVALENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N2007020258 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Catherine  B.  Frink,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  17-18,  2007,  in  West  Sacramento, 
California. 

The  Washington  Unified  School  District  was  represented  by  Terry  Fillinian,  Attorney 

at  Law,  Atkinson,  Adelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  2485  Natomas  Park  Drive,  Suite  240, 
Sacramento,  CA  95833. 

Respondents  were  represented  by  Margaret  A.  Geddes,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Eileen 

Bissen,  Attorney  at  Law,  Beeson,  Tayer  and  Bodine,  520  Capitol  Mall,  Suite  300, 
Sacramento,  California  95814. 

The  record  remained  open  for  the  submission  of  closing  briefs.  The  District’s  Post- 

Hearing  Brief  was  received  on  April  25,  2007,  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  7  for 
identification.  Respondents’  Post-Hearing  Brief  was  received  on  April  25,  2007,  and  was 
marked  as  Exhibit  L  for  identification.  Respondents’  Post-Hearing  Reply  Brief  was  received 
on  April  27,  2007  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  8  for  identification.  The  District’s  Reply  Brief 
was  received  on  April  27,  2007  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  M  for  identification.  The  record 
was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  27,  2007.

  

  

Jurisdiction 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Steven  Lawrence,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Washington  Unified 

School  District  (District).  Don  Beno  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  for 
the  District,  and  is  the  Superintendent’s  designee  for  personnel  matters.  Mr.  Beno  made  and 
filed  each  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Each  of  the  respondents!  listed  on  Attachment  A,  attached  and  incorporated  by 

reference,  was  at  all  times  and  now  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  067-27,  relating  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of 
certificated  services  (PKS),  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  give  notices  to  certificated 
employees  that  their  services  would  not  be  needed  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

4. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  067-31  providing  for  the 
release  and  reassignment  of  three  certificated  administrators  whose  positions  were  eliminated 
by  Resolution  No.  067-27. 

5. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Closed  Session  Resolution  No.  067-29 

non-reelecting  eight  probationary  teachers  for  the  2007-2008  year  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  section  44929.21. 

6. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Closed  Session  Resolution  No.  067-30 

non-reelecting  |  1  additional  probationary  teachers  for  the  2007-2008  year  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44929.21  and/or  44954,  if  deemed  applicable,  for  failure  to  hold  a 
preliminary  or  clear  credential.” 

7. 

On  March  8,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Closed  Session  Resolution  No.  067-32 

releasing  three  temporary  teachers,  including  respondent  Michelle  Pile,  for  the  2007-2008 
school  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section-44954,  and  non-reelecting  them  as 
probationary  employees  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44929.21  should  any  of  them 
claim  to  be  a  probationary  employee. 

'  Michelle  Pile  is  listed  as  a  respondent,  and  she  was  permitted  to  participate  in  these  proceedings  in  order  to 
determine  whether  or  not  she  was  a  probationary  employee  who  should  have  received  a  layoff  notice  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

*  At  its  meeting  on  February  22,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  approved  reclassifying  22  certificated  employees  as 
probationary  who  had  previously  been  classified  by  the  District  as  temporary,  to  comply  with  the  holding  in 
Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  Unified  School  District  (2007)  145  Cal.App.4th 
1260.  The  reclassified  employees  lacked  preliminary  or  clear  credentials.  As  probationary  employees,  the  District 
chose  not  to  re-elect  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44929.21,  subdivision 
(b).  If  the  employees  were  later  deemed  to  have  been  erroneously  classified  as  probationary,  and  were  in  fact 
temporary,  the  Board  also  resolved  to  release  said  employees  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44954. 

 

8. 

On  March  9,.2007,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  in  writing  of  the 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  certificated  employees of  the  District,  including 
respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

9. 

On  March  12,  2007,  District  site  administrators  hand-delivered  notices  of  non- 
reelection  to  the  19  probationary  employees  who  were  named  in  Resolution  No.  067-29  and 
Resolution  No.  067-30. 

10. 

On  March  13,  2007,  12  of  the  19  non-reelected  probationary  employees  were 
served  with  written  “precautionary”  notice  that  they  had  been  “non-reelected”  according  to 
law  and  were  also  being  noticed  for  layoff;  such  layoff  and  right  to  hearing  would  be 
provided  only  if  it  was  determined  they  were  entitled  to  such  rights  under  law.  Due  to  a 
concern  about  incorrect  postage,  the  12  non-reelected  probationary  employees  were  served 
with  a  second  notice  by  certified  mail  on  March  15,  2007.  All  12  teachers  actually  received 
the  precautionary  layoff  notice. 

11. 

Ten  of  the  12  non-reelected  employees  requested  a  hearing  within  the  time 

limit  specified  in  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (b). 

12. 

On  March  13,  2007,  30  respondents  were  served  in  the  manner  prescribed  by 
law  with  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  them  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2007-2008  school  year.  Such  notice  stated  the 
reasons  for  such  recommendation,  and  Board  Resolution  No.  067-27  was  attached. 

13. 

The  30  respondents,  within  the  time  limit  specified  in  Education  Code 

section  44949,  subdivision  (b),  requested  a  hearing  to  determine if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

14. 

Michelle  Pile  was  not  served  with  written  notice  of  proposed  layoff  pursuant 

to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Nevertheless,  Ms.  Pile  submitted  a  request  for 
hearing,  which  was  received  by  the  District  on  March  22,  2007. 

15. 

The  District  filed  Accusations  which  were  timely  served  on  all  respondents, 

except  Michelle  Pile  who  was  not  served  with  an  Accusation  because  the  District  considered 
her  to  be  a  temporary  employee.  Each  respondent  appearing  in  this  matter,  including  nine 
non-reelected  probationary  employees,  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.*  Ms.  Pile  also  filed 
a  Notice of  Defense. 

*  Sharon  Atkins,  one  of  the  non-reelected  probationary  employees  who  received  a  “precautionary”  layoff  notice, 
filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  and  was  served  with  the  Accusation.  Ms.  Atkins  did  not  file  a  Notice  of  Defense, 
and  she  was  not  a  party  to  the  administrative  hearing.

  

  

16. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

Status  of Non-reelected  Probationary  Employees 

17. 

The  District  provided  notice  of  non-reelection  to  two  groups  of  probationary 

teachers  prior  to  March  15,  2007.  The  first  group  of  eight  teachers  was  non-reelected 
because,  after  either  one  or  two  years  of  service,  they  did  not  fit  the  needs  of  the  District, 
considering  the  skills  and  other  qualities  possessed  by  the  teachers.  The  eight  teachers  given 
notice  of  non-reelection  were  identified  based  on  principal  recommendations.  The  second 
group  of  I]  teachers  was  non-reelected  because  they  did  not  hold  preliminary  or  clear 
credentials,  and  the  District  has  identified  a  goal  to  employ  fully-credentialed  teachers,  as 
reflected  in  Board  Resolution  No.  067-30. 

18. 

The  Board  considered  and  approved  the  non-reelection  of  the  two  groups  of 
probationary  employees  in  closed  session  on  March  8,  2007,  at  the  same  meeting  at  which 
the  Board  in  open  session  considered  and  approved  Resolution  No.  067-027,  calling  for 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  PKS  (economic  layoff).  However,  the  reasons  for  non- 
reelection  of  the  19  probationary  employees  were  not  related  to  the  economic  layoff,  and  the 
19  probationary  teachers  were  identified  for  non-reelection  in  a  process  totally  separate  from 
the  process  that  identified  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated.  Furthermore,  there  is  no 
evidence  that  the  non-reelection  of  the  probationary  teachers  identified  in  Resolutions  No. 
67-029  and  No.  67-030  was a  pretext  to  avoid  including  the  teachers  in  the  layoff 
proceeding. 

19. 

The  District  has  authority  to  non-reelect  probationary  teachers  for  any  non- 

discriminatory  reason.  (Summerfield  v.  Windsor  Unified  School  District  (2002) 
95  Cal.App.4th  1026;  Fischer  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  (1999)  70  Cal.App.4th 
87;  Bellflower  Education  Association  v.  Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1991) 
228  Cal.App.3d  805.)  However,  a  school  district  may  not  non-reelect  probationary  teachers 
exclusively  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  staff  for  economic  reasons;  such  action  must  be  taken 
in  accordance  with  the  layoff  statutes.  (Cousins  v.  Weaverville  Elementary  School  District 
(1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846;  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911,  917,  fn.  4.) 

20. 

In  Cousins  v.  Weaverville  Elementary  School  District,  supra,  the  district 

expressly  admitted  that  the  purpose  of  the  non-reelections  was  to  reduce  staff  due  to  financial 
circumstances  and  to  avoid  the  time  and  expense  of  a  layoff  hearing.  The  district  did  not 
conduct  any  layoff  hearing.  The  court  held  that  all  provisions  of  the  Education  Code  had  to 
be  read  together,  to  harmonize  and  give  effect  to  every  section;  to  allow a  district  to.use  the 
non-reelection  procedure  to  reduce  probationary  staff  for  economic  reasons  would  render 
inapplicable  the  statutory  protections  afforded  to  probationary  employees  under  the 
Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955.  “Section  44955  is  a  specific  provision  dealing 
with  terminations  for  economic  reasons  and,  when  applicable,  prevails  over  the  general 
provisions  of  section  44929.21.”  (id.,  at  p.  1854,  emphasis  added.)  The  court  further  stated: 

 

is  apparent  that  section  44929.21  is 

When  read  together  it 
qualified  by  sections  44955  and  44949.  A  school  district  may 
elect  not  to  retain  a  probationary  employee  and  need  not  assert  a 
reason  for  termination  but  where,  as  here,  it  is  undisputed 
that  termination  was  prompted  by  the  conditions  described 
in  section  44955  (decline  in  daily  attendance,  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  services,  modification  of  curriculum)  then  a 
school  district  is  obliged  to  provide  appropriate  notice  and  right 
to  a  hearing  as  prescribed  by  section  44949.  Layoffs  must 
proceed  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  set  forth  in  section 
44955  and  the  procedures  prescribed  by  section  44949  [citations 
omitted].  (bid.,  emphasis  added.) 

21. 

In  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Mendocino  Unified  School  District 

(2001)  92  Cal.App.4th  522,  the  probationary  teacher’s  position  was  slated  for  layoff,  she  was 
in  fact  laid  off,  and  then  the  District  chose  not  to  reelect  her  for  the  next  school  year.  At  that 
point,  the  decision  was  not  considered  to  be  an  economic  one,  and  the  District’s  action  was 
upheld.  The  court  stated: 

Sections  44949,  44955  and  44957  together  recognize  that 
economic  considerations  may  sometimes  force  schoo!  districts 
to  lay  off  otherwise  good  and  effective  teachers.  Under  those 
statutes,  if  the  economic  factors  that  motivated  the  layoffs  abate, 
the  affected  teachers  can  have  their  jobs  back.  Section  44929.21, 
by  contrast,  has  a  different  purpose:  to  ensure  that  the  children 
of  this  state  are  instructed  by  qualified  teachers.  As  our  Supreme 
Court  has  explained,  "our  school  system  is  established  not  to 
provide  jobs  for  teachers  but  rather  to  educate  the  young. 
Establishing  a  test  period  for  teachers  to  prove  themselves  is 
essential  to  a  good  education  system."  (Turner  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1976)  16  Cal.3d  818,  82;  see  also  Round  Valley, 
supra,  13  Cal.4th  at  p.  278.)  To  carry  out  this  important 
function,  school  districts  have  been  given  "the  absolute  right  to 
decide  not  to  reelect  probationary  teachers  without  providing 
cause  or  other  procedural  protections  . 
supra,  13  Cal.4th  at  p.  281,  italics  added.)  A  "school  board  can 
base  its  final  determination  about  reelection  or  nonreelection  of 
probationary  teachers  on  any  lawful  reason  regardless  of  the 
sufficiency  of  the  cause.  ..  ."  (Fischer  v.  Los  Angeles  Unified 
School  Dist.  (1999)  70  Cal.App.4th  87,  94,  citation  omitted.)  ... 
When  the  policies  reflected  by  these  competing  statutory 
schemes  conflict,  the  critical  task  of  educating  the  children  of 
this  state  must,  in  our  view,  prevail.  Harmonizing  section 
44929.21  with  section  44949,  44955,  or  44957,  we  hold  that  a

."  (Round  Valley, 

. 

. 

  

  

school  district  that  has  told  a  probationary  teacher  he  or  she  will 
be  laid  off  for  economic  reasons  under  section  44955,  may 
thereafter  validly  determine  not  to  reelect  the  teacher  under 
section  44929.21.  (California  Teachers  Association  v. 
Mendocino  Unified  School  District,  supra,  92  Cal.App.4th  at  p. 
528.) 

22. 

The  process  utilized  in  Mendocino  to  non-reelect  a  probationary  employee 

after  the  employee  was  laid  off  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955  was  cited  with  approval  in  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Vallejo  City  Unified 
School  District  (2007)  149  Cal.App.4th  135,  stating,  “Based  on  the  Mendocino  decision,  if  a 
school  district  wishes  to  nonreelect  certain  probationary  employees  after  a  layoff  (such  as 
those  lacking  full  credentials),  it  may  do  so.”  (/d.,  at  p.  157).  The  court  went  on  to  state  in  a 
footnote: 

This  is  not  to  say  that  a  school  district  may  rely  on  section 
44929.21  to  deny  layoff  rights  to  probationary  employees  in  the 
first  place  when  they  are  terminated  for  economic  reasons. 
The  Mendocino  court  carefully  distinguished  Cousins,  supra,  24 
Cal.App.4th  1846  and  Gassman  v.  Governing  Board,  supra,  18 
Cal.3d  137,  because  the  district's  decision  not  to  reelect  the 
teacher  in  question  was  not  based  on  economic  considerations; 
rather,  the  district  had  concluded  the  teacher  was  "  'not  a  good 
match  for  the  district.’  "  (Mendocino,  supra,  92  Cal.App.4th  at 
pp.  529-530.)  Thus,  although  a  school  district  must  follow  the 
layoff  statutes  when  it  releases  a  probationary  employee  for 
economic  reasons  (Cousins,  supra,  24  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1853- 
1854),  it  may  thereafter  choose  to  nonreelect  that  employee  for 
other  reasons,  such  as  his  or  her  lack  of  a  full  or  clear  teaching 
credential.  (Mendocino,  supra,  92  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  528-530.) 
(d.,  at  p.  157,  fn.  11,  emphasis  added.) 

23. 

The  question  not  specifically  resolved  by  case  law  is  the  one  that  is  presented 

by  the  facts  in  this  case,  namely,  (1)  if  the  District  chooses  not  to  reelect  certain  probationary 
employees  for  non-economic  reasons,  and  that  decision  is  made  at  or  before  the  time  the 
District  chooses  to  reduce  or  eliminate  PKS;  and  (2)  if  the  PKS  layoff  includes  services  that 
the  non-reelected  employees  are  providing;  are  those  probationary  employees  entitled  to  the 
protections  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955?  When a  district  chooses  to  non- 
reelect  a  second-year  probationary  employee,  notice  must  be  given  to  the  employee  “on  or 
before  March  15  of  the  employee’s  second  complete  year  of  employment  by  the  district  in  a 
position  or  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications...”  (Ed.  Code  §  44929.21,  subd. 
(b).)  If  the  district  fails  to  give  notice  pursuant  to  section  44929.21  on  or  before  March  15, 
“the  employee  shall  be  deemed  reelected  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year.” 

Thus,  in 

“In  Mendocino,  the  non-reelected  teacher  was  a  first  year  probationary  employee. 

  

 

many  instances,  a  district  that  waited  until  after  completing  the  layoff  procedure  to  non- 
reelect  probationary  employees  would  be  precluded  from  doing  so  by  the  terms  of  Education 
Code  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b). 

24. 

Under  all  the  facts  and  circumstances  herein,  the  District  was  entitled  to  issue 
notices  of  non-reelection  to  the  19  probationary  employees  affected  by  Resolutions  No.  067- 
29  and  No.  067-30  for  non-economic  reasons.  Since  the  non-reelections  were  not  motivated 
by  economic  considerations,  the  more  specific  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955  are  not  applicable  to  those  employees,  and  they  are  not  properly  subject  to  this 
layoff  proceeding,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they  received  “precautionary”  layoff  notices 
from  the  District. 

25. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  issuance  of  precautionary  layoff 

nolices  to  the  affected  respondents  after  they  received  notices  of  non-reelection  established 
and/or  revived  their  rights  to  hearings  and  preferential  rehire  under  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.  This  argument  is  not  persuasive.  As  previously  noted,  the  Education 
Code  sections  concerning  economic  layoff  take  precedence  over  the  more  general  rules 
pertaining  to  non-reelection  of  probationary  employees  only  when  the  reason  for  not 
retaining  the  employee  is  economic.  Furthermore,  the  identification  of  probationary 
employees  with  provisional  credentials  for  non-reelection  was  specifically  discussed  and 
approved  in  Vallejo,  and  was  not  deemed  discriminatory. 

26. 

For  the  reasons  set  forth  above,  the  following  non-reelected  probationary 

employees  are  not  subject  to  the  layoff  procedures  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955,  and  are  not  entitled  to  participate  in  this  proceeding:  Cory  Cunningham;  Cathy 
Davis;  Bradley  Engel;  Dubarrie  Fagout;  Alan  Frantz;  Sarah  Gorvad;  Susan  Morgan;  April 
Pickett;  and  Chau  Tran.* 

Status of Michelle  Pile 

27. 

Michelle  Pile  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Credential,  with  an 
authorization  in  General  Subjects,  and  a  CLAD  certification.  Her  assignment  for  the  2006- 
2007  school  year  was  as  a  sixth  grade  teacher. 

28. 

Ms.  Pile  was  employed  on  a  temporary  contract  for  2006-2007.  The  contract 

did  not  state  a  specific  reason  for  the  temporary  service.  The  District  maintained  three 
temporary  teachers,  including  Ms.  Pile,  to  replace  four  regular  teachers  on  leave  of  absence 
for  the  entire  school  year.  Ms.  Pile  signed  her  temporary  contract  on  August  25,  2006.  On 

  

°  The  District,  in  an  abundance  of  caution,  created  an  alternative  “bumping”  list  in  the  event  the  non-reelected 
probationary  teachers  were  deemed  to  be  included  in  this  layoff  proceeding.  The  evidence  established  that  all  of  the 
affected  teachers  were  served  with  layoff  notices  and,  had  they  been  eligible  to  participate  in  the  layoff proceeding, 
were  properly  subject  to  layoff,  in  that  no  less  senior  teacher  has  been  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said 
probationary  employees  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render.

  

  

February  13,  2007,  the  District  Human  Resource  Office  sent  Ms.  Pile  a  letter  back-dating  her 
first  date  of  paid  service  from  August  28,  2006  to  August  21,  2006.  The  letter  provided  no 
explanation  of  why  the  first  date  of  paid  service  was changed.° 

29. 

Since  Ms.  Pile’s  first  date  of  paid  service  preceded  the  date  of  her  employment 
contract,  she  was  improperly  classified  as  a  temporary  employee,  and  must  be  reclassified  as 
a  probationary  employee  pursuant  to  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District  (2003)  24  Cal.4th  911. 

30. 

The  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  067-32  to  release  Ms.  Pile  as  a  temporary 

certificated  employee  in  closed  session  on  March  8,  2007.  By  means  of  Resolution  No.  067- 
32,  the  Board  also  determined  it  to  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  to  non-reelect  her  for 
the  2007-2008  school  year  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44929.21,  should  a  claim  of 
probationary  status  be  raised.  Ms.  Pile  was  informed  of  the  Board’s  action  to  release  and 
non-reelect  her  by  letter  dated  March  12,  2007. 

31. 

Having  successfully  challenged  her  status  as  a  temporary  employee,  Ms.  Pile 

was  nevertheless  properly  non-reelected  by  the  District.  Her  non-reelection  was  not  for 
economic  reasons  and  was  not  related  to  the  PKS  layoff.  For  the  reasons  set  forth  in 
Findings  17  through  24  above,  Ms.  Pile  is  not  subject  to  the  layoff  procedures  of  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  is  not  entitled  to  participate  in  this  proceeding. 

Reduction/Elimination  of PKS 

32. 

The  District  serves  approximately  7,000  students  from  kindergarten  through 
grade  12  at  eight  elementary  schools,  one  middle  school  and  one  high  school.  The  District 
also  operates  an  adult  education  program  and  two  alternative  secondary  schools  -  an 
opportunity  school  and  a  continuation  high  school.  The  District  employs  approximately 
400  certificated  employees. 

33. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  067-27,  The  Board  of  Education  decided  to 

eliminate  60  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  by  reducing  or  eliminating  the  following 
kinds of  certificated  services: 

(A)  |  Elementary  (Grades  K-6)  Classroom  Instructional  Services: 

1. 
2. 
3. 

Elementary  Classroom  Teaching  Services 
Elementary  Art  Preparation  Period  Teaching  Services 
Elementary  Music  Preparation  Period  Teaching  Services 

6.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

°  District’s  Exhibit  V,  page  82,  “06/07  TEMPORARY  EMPLOYEES,”  also  lists  Ms.  Pile’s  “Start  Date”  as  August 
21,  2006. 

 

(B) 

English  Teaching  Services 
Math  Teaching  Services 
Science  Teaching  Services 
Health  Teaching  Services 
Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
Foods/Vocational  Education  Teaching  Services 
English  Language  Learner  Teaching  Services 

Secondary  (Grades  7-12)  Departmentalized  Classroom  Instructional  Services: 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11.  Wood  Shop  Teaching  Services 
12.  Physical  Education  Teaching  Services 

5.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
5.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 

(C) 

Categorical  Funded  Certificated  Services: 
13.  Program  Specialist-Math  Coaching  Services 
14.  Reading  Specialist  Services  (Reading  Coach/ 

Reading  Specialist) 

15.  Math  Specialist  Services 
16.  Language  Development  Specialist  Services 
17.  Reading  Teacher  Instructional  Services 

Preschool  Instructional  Services: 
18.  Preschool  Teaching  Services 

Administrative  Services: 
19.  Assistant  Principal  Services 
20.  Director  of  Categorical  Funding  Services 

(F) 

Program  Services 
21.  Program  specialist  ~  ROP  Coordinator 

(D) 

(E) 

(C) 

Categorical  Funded  Certificated  Services: 
13,  Program  Specialist-Math  Coaching  Services 
14,  Reading  Specialist  Services 
Reading  Coach 
Reading  Specialist 

15.  Math  Specialist  Services 
16.  Language  Development  Specialist  Services 
17.  Reading  Teacher  Instructional  Services 

(D)  —  Preschool  Instructional  Services: 
18.  Preschool  Teaching  Services 

2.0  FTE 

10.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
8.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE 

3.0  FTE 
1.3  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

0

34. 

As  of  the  date  of  hearing,  the  District  had  reduced  the  number  of  positions 

being  eliminated  from  60  FTE  to  46.3  FTE,  by  modifying  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the 
following  services  (#13-#18): 

  

35. 

|  As  aconsequence  of  the  District’s  modification  of  the  PKS  reduction,  the 

District  withdrew  the  Accusations  against  Crystal  Cheng  and  Maureen  Morales. 

Reduction/Elimination  of  Categorically  Funded  Specialist/Coaches  Services 

36. 

As  of  the  date  of  hearing,  the  District  proposes  to  reduce  or  eliminate  12.3 

FTE  categorically  funded  programs.  In  recent  years,  it  was  not  the  practice  of  the  District  to 
classify  any  employees  as  temporary  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44909  who  were 
employed  to  serve  in  categorically-funded  services  or  programs  or  to  fill  in  for  permanent 
employees  assigned  to  such  services  or  programs.  Furthermore,  the  District  did  not  require 
individuals  filling  positions  designated  as  specialist  positions  to  have  specialist  credentials  or 
authorizations. 

37. 

According  to  the  testimony  of  Susan  Brothers,  Assistant  Superintendent  of 

Educational  Services,  the  services  identified  in  items  #13-17  of  Resolution  No.  067-27  were 
funded  almost  100  percent  by  categorical  funding  sources,  including  Title  I,  Part  A;  Title  Il 
Economic  Impact  Aid  (English  Language  Learner);  Title  I,  Part  B  (Reading  First).  The 
funding  for  these  programs  is  not  being  increased,  at  a  time  when  the  District  is  seeking  to 
raise  teacher  salaries.  Furthermore,  for  the  past  few  years,  the  District  has  been  spending 
down  its  categorical  reserves  to  maintain  the  current  level  of  services.  The  District  intends  to 
eliminate  coaching  services  (where  teachers  are  assisting  other  teachers,  and  not  working 
directly  with  students)  and  to  reduce  the  number  of  language  development  and  reading 
specialists  working  diréctly  with  students.  The  District  is  also  in  the  process  of  reviewing 
certificated  job  descriptions  as  they  pertain  to  specialist  and  coach  positions,  to  identify 
outdated  descriptions. 

38. 

The  District  identified  incumbents  in  positions  providing  the  services  to  be 

reduced  or  eliminated  as  identified  in  items  #13-17  of  Resolution  No.  067-27.  The  fact  that 
various  job  descriptions  may  have  been  used  by  the  District  for  individuals  providing  the 
identified  services  does  not  mean  that  the  District  has  failed  to  identify  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated.  Respondents’  contention  that  “specialist/coach” 
services  are  not  valid  PKS  subject  to  reduction  or  elimination  is  not  persuasive. 

Tiebreaker  Criteria 

39. 

As  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  the  Board 

adopted  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  as  between  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date  (“tiebreaker  criteria”).  This  criteria  was  set  forth  in 
Resolution  No.  067-027,  which  states,  that  “the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  solely  on 
the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof,  as  determined  by  the  point  system 
described  herein.”  Teachers  who  were  actually  impacted  by  a  tie  were  awarded  points  based 
upon  the  criteria.  District  personnel  applied  the  tiebreaker  criteria  between  the  following 
teachers: 

 

A, 

(#412)  Donna  Kellegar  and  (#422)  Magdelana  Suminska  -  Suminska  won. 

B. 

Cc. 

(#372)  Paula  Liermann  and  (#373)  Frank  Parker  -  Parker  won. 

(#242)  Shannon  Woods  and  (#243)  Shelly  Alton  -  Alton  won. 

The  Board  determined  the  order  of  termination  as  between  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the 
students  thereof. 

Bumping  and  Skipping 

40. 

As  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c), 

economic  layoffs  are  generally  to  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  seniority.  A  teacher  with 
more  seniority  typically  has  greater  rights  to  retain  employment  than  a  junior  teacher.  The 
District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their 
positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials 
and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  That  displacement  of  a  junior  teacher  is  known  as 
“bumping.”  The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and  a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential 
or  skills  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more  senior  teacher  is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is 
recognized  by  statute  (Ed.  Code  §  44955,  subd.  (d)(1))  and  appellate  law.  (Santa  Clara 
Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Santa  Clara  Unified  School 
District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  In  order  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic 
layoff,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  requires  the  District  to 
“demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study... 
and  that  the  certificated  employee  (to  be  skipped)  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

41. 

As  set  forth  in  Resolution  No.  067-27,  the  Board  identified  two  areas  in  which 

it  proposed  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of  seniority. 
Paragraph  5  of  Resolution  No.  067-27  identifies  “the  specific  need  of  the  District  to  hire  and 
retain  only  highly  qualified  teachers  in  core  academic  subject  areas,”  and  authorizes  a 
deviation  from  strict  seniority  “in  instances  where  a  less  senior  employee  possesses  a 
currently  valid  preliminary  or  clear  California  teaching  credential  and  evidence  of  core 
academic  subject  competency  in  accordance  with  the  NCLB’  and  a  more  senior  employee 
meets  certification  or  licensing  requirements  solely  on  an  emergency,  temporary,  or 
provisional  basis,  or  does  not  possess  evidence  of  core  academic  subject  competency  in 
accordance  with  the  NCLB.”  Paragraph  6  of  Resolution  No.  067-27  identifies  “the  specific 
need  of  the  District  to  assign  teachers  credentialed  and  qualified  to  teach  English  Language 
Learners  due  to  legal  requirements  for  providing  a  course  of  study  in  classes  containing 
English  Language  Learners,”  and  authorizes  a  deviation  from  strict  seniority  “in  instances 

”  The  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  of  2001  (NCLB)  set  as  a  performance  goal  for  states  that  all  students  will  be 
taught  by  “highly  qualified  teachers”  in  core  academic  subjects  by  the  end of  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

11

  

  

where  a  less  senior  employee  possesses  a  currently  valid  English  Language  Learner 
certificate  or  authorization...and  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  a  class  with  one  or  more 
English  Language  Learners  and  a  more  senior  employee  does  not  possess  such  certificated 
[sic]  or  authorization  and  is  not  eligible  to  teach  such  students.” 

42. 

On  April  12,  2007,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  067-34  rescinding 

Paragraph  6  of  Resolution  No.  067-27  (the  English  Language  Learner  credential  criteria) 
because  “the  accurate  implementation of  the  deviation  from  seniority  under  Paragraph  #6  of 
Resolution  067-27  is  made  impracticable  due  to  collection  of  data  required.” 

43. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District  risks  loss  of  federal  funds  for  failure  to 

ensure  that  English  language  learners  are  assigned  to  properly  authorized  teachers  as 
required.  Respondents  argue  that  the  District  should  be  “estopped”  from  asserting  the  NCLB 
“highly  qualified”  requirement  as‘a  basis  for  skipping  less  senior  teachers,  when  it  is  not 
skipping  less  senior  teachers  to  meet  the  English  Language  Learner  requirement. 
Respondents’  contention  is  without  merit.  The  decision  to  skip  teachers  is  within  the 
discretion  of  the  District.  The  District’s  compliance  with  English  Language  Learner 
requirements  is  outside  the  scope  of  this  proceeding. 

44, 

Under  NCLB,  to  be  deemed  “highly  qualified,”  teachers  of  core  academic 
subjects  must  have  a  bachelor’s  degree;  hold  a  state  credential  or  intern  certificate,  or  be 
currently  enrolled  in  an  approved  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CCTC) 
intern  program;  and  demonstrate  core  academic  subject  matter  competency.  Core  academic 
subject  areas  under  NCLB  include  English,  reading/language  arts,  mathematics,  science, 
foreign  language,  civics/government,  economics,  arts,  history,  and  geography. 

45. 

As of April  4,  2007,  the  District  identified  11  teachers  who  were  not  highly 
qualified,  out  of  more  than  400  teachers  employed  by  the  District.  Of  the  11,  one  resigned 
(Ryan  Arba);  four  were  non-reelected  (Nancy  Abplanalp,  Jeff  Cox,  Dubarrie  Fagout,  April 
Pickett);  three  teach  special  education  which  was  not  impacted  in  the  reduction  of  services 
(Catherine  Ceccarelli,  Cyrus  Jokhi,  Joseph  Salonga);  and  one  taught  math  where  no  layoffs 
of  employees  resulted  due  to  vacancies  (Val  Barcenas).  The  last  two  teachers  identified  as 
not  highly  qualified  are  Miranda  Burton  and  Mila  Pantovich.  Ms.  Burton  (#440  on  the 
District’s  seniority  list)  was  the  first  teacher  with  a  multiple  subject  credential  assignment  to 
be  bumped  by  the  District,  because  she  was  not  highly  qualified.*'  Ms.  Pantovich  teaches  in 
the  District’s  alternative  education  program,  and  her  status  is  addressed  in  Finding  64  below. 

Positively  Assured  Attrition 

46. 

The  District  is  not  required  to  consider  attrition  in  layoffs  based  upon 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  PKS.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  vy.  Allen  (1983) 

*  Sara  Kehrt  (#441)  was  a  less  senior  multiple  subject  teacher  than  Ms.  Burton,  but  Ms.  Burton  was  bumped  first 
because  Ms.  Kehri  was  highly  qualified.  Ms.  Kehrt  was  subsequently  bumped  by  Stephen  McNeil  (#28)  and  is 
slated  for  layoff. 

 

144  Cal.App.3d  627,  636.)  Nevertheless,  the  District  has  considered  positively  assured 
attrition  up  to  the  date of  hearing  in  determining  the  number  of  layoffs  to  be  implemented,  to 
minimize  the  impact  on  current  employees.  The  District  considered  resignations, 
retirements,  and  positions  being  vacated  by  non-reelected  probationary  employees  within  the 
services  being  reduced.  As a  result,  out  of  the  46.3  FTE  positions  currently  identified  for 
elimination,  approximately  23  FTE  positions  will  be  absorbed  by  attrition,  or  by  employees 
bumping  into  vacant  positions. 

Identification  of Employees  for  Layoff 

47. 

After  the  District  identified  PKS  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated,  the  District  used 

a  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  bumping  list  of the  least  senior  employees 
currently  assigned  for  each  service  being  reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the 
least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  therefore  entitled  to  “bump” 
into  positions  for  which  they  were  certificated  and  qualified,  beginning  with  the  least  senior 
certificated  employee.  The  District  was  not  required  to  bump  and  re-bump  to  save  a 
particular  teacher,  nor  was  it  required  to  do  bumping  in  any  particular  way.  The  District  was 
not  required  to  make  assignments  and  reassignments  to  transfer  more  senior  employees  to 
other  positions  in  order  to  retain  more  junior  employees.  Thus,  the  District  has  the  discretion 
to  determine  how  it  carried  out  the  bumping  process,  and  so  long  as  it  did  not  act  arbitrarily 
or  capriciously,  the  process  was  valid. 

48. 

The  District  developed  a  “Layoff/Bump List  by  Service”  which  summarized 
the  results  of  the  bumping  process  and  identified  the  specific  individuals  to  be  laid  off.  For 
purposes  of  the  hearing,  the  District  also  analyzed  various  alternative  bumping  scenarios,  in 
anticipation  of  arguments  that  might  be  raised  by  respondents. 

Teachers  Retained  to  Provide  Specific  Services 

49. 

Charlotte  Ghio.  Charlotte  Ghio  (#353)  holds  a  preliminary  single  subject 

credential  with  a  physical  education  authorization  and  CLAD  certification.  Her  current 
teaching  assignment  is  4  periods  high  school  physical  education  and  2  periods  Athletic 
Director.  Ms.  Ghio’s  status  in  addressed  in  Finding  60  below. 

50. 

Shelly  Alton.  Shelley  Alton  (#243)  and  Arturo  Bustamante  (#190)  each  hold 

a  Clear  Single  Subject  Credential  with  authorization  to  teach  Social  Science,  with  a  CLAD 
certification.  Ms.  Alton  currently  teaches  two  periods  of  U.S.  government,  and  three  periods 
of  Leadership;  she  is  also  assigned  one  period  as  Activities  Director.  Leadership  and 
Activities  Director  are  not  positions  that  require  a  highly  qualified  teacher,  nor  do  they 
require  a  particular  credential.  The  District  has  proposed  to  lay  off  Ms.  Alton  for  .4  FTE 
social  science,  and  Mr.  Bustamante  for  .6  FTE  social  science,  due  to  the  reduction  in 
secondary  social  science  teaching  services.  Under  the  District’s  proposal,  Ms.  Alton  would 
be  retained  to  provide  services  that  Mr.  Bustamante  or  any  other  more  senior  teacher  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render,  in  violation  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 
Consequently,  Mr.  Bustamante  shall  be  retained  to  provide  1.0  FTE  services  in  secondary 

  

. 

13

  

  

  

social  science,  and  Ms.  Alton  would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  1.0  FTE.  Ms.  Alton’s  status  is 
further  addressed  in  Finding  52,  below. 

51, 

Shannon  Woods.  Shannon  Woods  (#242)  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Social 
Science  credential  and  a  Designated  Subjects  Credential  in  Drivers  Education  Training.  For 
the  past  several  years,  Ms.  Woods  has  consistently  taught  Drivers  Education  classes  at  the 
high  school  as  part  of  a  three  course  year-long  “wheel”  (Geography,  Health,  and  Drivers 
Education).  Her  teaching  assignment  for  the  fall  semester  of  2006  was  4  periods  of  Drivers 
Education,  1  period  of  Yearbook  and  1  period  of  Computer  Literacy.  For  the  spring  semester 
of  2007,  her  assignment  was  4  periods  of  Geography,  1  period  of  Yearbook,  and  1  period  of 
Computer  Literacy.  Ms.  Woods  has  less  seniority  than  Arturo  Bustamante  (#190),  Mark 
Leffler  (#207),  and  Shelly  Alton  (#243),  all  of  whom  hold  Single  Subject  Social  Science 
Credentials,  and  have  been  identified  for  possible  layoff  by  the  District.  The  District 
proposes  to  skip  Ms.  Woods  because  of  the  District’s  need  for  Ms.  Woods  to  teach  a  specific 
course  that  requires  a  specialized  credential  not  possessed  by  the  more  senior  certificated 
employees,  namely,  Drivers  Education.  Although  the  Board  is  currently  considering 
eliminating  Drivers  Education  as  a  high  school  course  and  graduation  requirement,  the  Board 
had  taken  no  action  on  this  issue  as  of  the  date  of  hearing,  and  Health/Drivers  Education 
remains  a  high  school  graduation  requirement.  The  District  is  entitled  to  skip  Ms.  Woods  in 
order  for  her  to  teach  Drivers  Education  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

52. 

Respondents  correctly  point  out  that  Ms.  Woods’  current  teaching  assignment 

included  social  science  classes,  for  which a  specific  credential  and  highly  qualified  staff  is 
required,  as  well  as  special  assignments  that  do  not  require  a  specific  credential.  Because 
Ms.  Woods  is  being  retained  to  provide  a  different  specific  service  to  the  District  that 
requires  a  particular  credential  that  she  possesses  (Drivers  Education),  this  results  in  the  de- 
facto  creation  of  a  vacant  position  into  which  one  of  the  respondents  proposed  for  layoff  can 
bump.  Shelly  Alton  (#243)  is  the  most  senior  teacher  with  the  appropriate  credential  to  fill 
the  vacancy  who  is  slated  for  layoff.  Consequently,  Ms.  Alton  shall  be  retained. 

Bumping  into  “Alternative  Schools” 

53. 

The  District  has  two  secondary  alternative  schools.  Yolo  Continuation  High 

School  (Continuation  School)  employs  seven  teachers  and  one  counselor  to  serve  140 
students  in  grades  9  through  12.  Some  students  are  “at  risk,”  and  others  voluntarily  attend 
because  the  program  is  smaller  and  less  structured  than  the  regular  high  school.  Classes  are 
departmentalized  with  students  changing  classes  six  periods  each  day. 

54. 

Yolo  Opportunity  School  (Opportunity  School)  employs  four  certificated  staff 

to  serve  6]  seventh  through  tenth  grade  students  up  to  a  maximum  age  of  15  years.  The 
students  have  been  habitually  truant,  insubordinate,  disorderly  or  were  failing  academically 
while  attending  comprehensive  school.  The  instructional  day  is  180  minutes  for  Opportunity 
School  students  versus  a  minimum  240  minute  instructional  day  in  the  regular  schools. 
Students  normally  stay  at  the  Opportunity  School  for  a  maximum  of  one  semester  before 
returning  to  regular  school.  Instruction  is  provided  in  self-contained  classes.  Teachers  must 

14 

 

be  willing  to  work  with  at  risk  students  with  significant  emotional  instability  in  a  different 
environment  than  exists  in  the  regular  schools. 

55. 

As  was  previously  noted  in  Findings  41  and  44,  a  teacher  must  be  “highly 

qualified”  to  teach  core  academic  subjects  in  secondary  school  under  NCLB.  A  teacher  with 
a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  is  usually  highly  qualified  to  teach  self-contained  classes.  The 
highly  qualified  requirement  also  applies  to  teachers  in  special  programs,  including 
alternative  schools,  and  a  teacher  in  alternative  schoo!  who  teaches  more  than  one  subject 
must be  highly  qualified  in  all  core  academic  subjects  taught,  even  in  a  self-contained  class 
setting. 

56. 

Education  Code  section  44865  provides  in  part  that,  “[a]  valid  teaching 

credential  issued  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  the  Commission  for  Teacher  Preparation 
and  Licensing,  based  on  a  bachelor’s  degree,  student  teaching,  and  special  fitness  to  perform, 
shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for  assignment  as  a  teacher  in  the  following  assignments, 
provided  that  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  to  a  position  for  which  qualifications  are  prescribed 
by  this  section  shall  be  made  only  with  the  consent  of  the  teacher:...  (e)  Continuation 
schools.  (f)  Alternative  schools.  (g)  Opportunity  schools.....” 

57. 

California  Teachers’  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of Central  Union  High 

School  District  (1983)  141  Cal.App.3d  606,  held  that  Education  Code  section  44865  requires 
teacher  consent  for  certain  assignments  outside  the  initial  authority  of  the  credential,  but  does 
not  require  consent  for  those  assignments  by  teachers  whose  credentials  already  contain 
authority  for  such  assignments.  “The  purpose  of  section  44865  is  similar  to  the  other 
enumerated  sections  in  that  it 
school  board  to  place  willing  individuals  in  job  assignments  outside  the  scope  of  their 
respective  credentials.”  (emphasis  in  original)  (id.,  at  page  615).  The  consent  requirement 
adds  a  layer  of  protection  for  the  teacher;  the  court  noted: 

is  designed  to  expand  rather  than  restrict  the  authority  of  the 

[t]here  is  good  reason  for  the  requirement  of  consent  if  a  teacher 
is  assigned  outside  the  scope  of  his  or  her  expertise.  Evaluation 
is  made  on  the  basis  of  performance  of  the  assigned  task.  A 
teacher  may  be  unwilling  to  risk  a  critical  evaluation  while 
teaching  outside  the  ambit  of  his  or  her  credential.  (/d.,  at  page 
612). 

Thus,  Education  Code  section  44865  acts  as  a  shield  to  protect  a  teacher  whose 
credentials  do  not  contain  authority  for  an  assignment  from  involuntary  placement  in  such  an 
assignment.  The  question  remains  whether,  and  under  what  circumstances,  it  can  become  a 
sword  to  allow  a  teacher  to  serve  in  a  position  outside  the  initial  authority  of  his  or  her 
credential. 

  

”  March  1,  2004  NCLB  Teacher  Requirements  Resource  Guide,  prepared  by  the  California  Department  of 
Education,  Professional  Development  and  Educational  Support  Division,  at  page  13,  section  2.3. 

1S

  

  

58. 

In  this  case,  the  District  has  demonstrated  a  legitimate  interest  in  “skipping” 
highly  qualified  less  senior  teachers.  Given  the  requirements  imposed  by  NCLB,  a  senior 
teacher  in  the  regular  program  is  entitled  to  bump  a  highly  qualified  junior  teacher  teaching 
core  subjects  in  the  alternative  education  program  only  if  the  senior  teacher  is  highly 
qualified  to  teach  the  subject  matter.  Under  these  conditions,  it  would  not  appear  that  the 
consent  of  the  teacher  would  be  required  for  assignment  to  an  alternative  program  placement 
(since  the  teacher  would  be  credentialed  to  serve  in  the  assignment);  however,  any  teacher 
identified  for  reassignment  to  an  alternative  program  shall  be  given  the  opportunity  to  accept 
or  decline  the  assignment,  and  if  he  or  she  declines,  the  teacher  shall  be  laid  off. 

Continuation  School 

59, 

There  are  currently  two  vacancies  at  the  Continuation  School:  physical 

education,  and  mathematics.  In  addition,  there  are  five  teachers  currently  assigned  to  teach 
the  following  classes:  John  Miller  (#18)  -  Science;  James  Dawson  (#130)  -  Social  Science; 
Nancy  Bruce  (#164)  —  English  and  Home  Economics;  Alice  Penrose  (#284)  -  English;  and 
Cyrus  Jokhi  (#391)  -  Special  Education  Resource  Specialist.  Teachers  of  all  of  these 
departmentalized  subjects  except  physical  education  are  required  to  be  highly  qualified.  All 
of  the  teachers  except  Cyrus  Jokhi  have  been  determined  to  be  highly  qualified.  Mr.  Jokhi 
was  first  employed  in  2006-2007.  He  holds  a  Preliminary  Level  1  Education  Specialist 
Credential,  with  a  “Mild/Moderate”  authorization. 

60. 

|  The  vacant  Continuation  School  physical  education  position  does  not  require  a 

Thus,  by  allowing  teachers  whose  positions  have  been  reduced  to  bump  into 

highly  qualified  teacher.'°  However,  the  position  requires  “special  fitness  to  perform,”  in 
that  it  requires  experience  teaching  special  education.  The  District  has  eliminated  2.0  FTE 
high  school  physical  education  positions  from  the  regular  education  program.  There  is  a 
vacant  elementary  physical  education  position  as  a  result  of  the  District’s  non-reelection  of 
Sharon  Atkins. 
available  vacant  positions,  the  District  need  not  lay  off  any  physical  education  teacher 
currently  employed  by  the  District.  The  two  least  senior  high  school  physical  education 
teachers  are  Sarah  Mankewich  (#356)  and  Charlotte  Ghio  (#353).''  Ms.  Ghio’s  current 
assignment  is  .6  FTE  physical  education  and  .4  FTE  Athletic  Director,  The  Athletic  Director 
position  is  a  special  assignment  for  which  no  specific  credential  is  required.  The  District 
shall  be  permitted  to  assign  Ms.  Mankewich  and  Ms.  Ghio  to  vacant  physical  education 
positions  in  a  manner  that  best  serves  the  needs  of  the  District  and  students.  Any  teacher 
whom  the  District  proposes  to  reassign  to  the  Continuation  School  vacant  position  shall  be 

'°  The  most  senior  teacher  slated  for  layoff  is  Spencer  Yarwood  (#80).  Mr.  Yarwood  holds  a  clear  single  subject 
credential  in  Industrial  Technology  Education.  It  was  not  established  that  Mr.  Yarwood  has  ever  taught  physical 
education,  or  that  he  has  ever  taught  in  an  alternative  school.  Mr.  Yarwood  did  not  request  a  hearing  and  is  not  a 
respondent  in  this  matter. 

"'  Paul  Dennis  (#189)  is  the  next  senior  high  school  physical  education  teacher  whose  position  was  affected  as  a 
result  of  the  PKS  reduction.  He  is  eligible  to  bump a less  senior  physical  education  teacher  and  is  not  slated  for 
layoff. 
Continuation  School. 

At  hearing,  he  expressed  his  consent  to  reassignment  to  the  vacant  physical  education  position  at  the 

 

given  the  opportunity  to  consent  to  the  assignment,  and if  the  teacher  does  not  consent,  the 
teacher  shall  be  laid  off. 

61. 

With  regard  to  the  vacant  mathematics  position  at  the  Continuation  School,  a 

highly  qualified  teacher  must  fill  that  position.  There  are  no  teachers  being  laid  off  with 
math  credentials  and/or  who  are  highly  qualified  to  bump  into  the  math  vacancy.  Similarly, 
there  are  no  teachers  being  laid  off  who  are  highly  qualified  and  properly  credentialed  with 
more  seniority  than  the  incumbent  teachers  in  the  remaining  positions  at  the  Continuation 
School. 

Opportunity  School 

62. 

There  are  four  teachers  at  the  Opportunity  Schoo!  who  teach  the  following 
subjects:  Mary  Cook  (#38)  -  Math;  Pete  Benitti  (#346)  -  Social  Studies;  Sandra  Lorenzo 
(#352)  -  English;  and  Mila  Pantovich  (#420)  -  English,  Math,  and  Earth  Science.  With  the 
exception  of  Ms.  Pantovich,  the  current  Opportunity  School  teachers  have  been  deemed 
highly  qualified  to  teach  in  their  core  subject  areas. 

63. 

Mark  Leffler  (#207)  is  a  teacher  in  the  regular  education  program  whom  the 

District  has  proposed  for  layoff.  Mr.  Leffler  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  Social  Science 
Credential  and  is  highly  qualified  in  several  social  science  subjects.  He  is  more  senior  than 
Peter  Benitti  (#346)  who  holds  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Social  Science  Credential  and 
teaches  secondary  social  science  at  the  Opportunity  School.  Mr.  Leffler  is  entitled  to  bump 
Mr.  Benitti  from  his  entire  1.0  FTE  assignment  at  the  Opportunity  School.  Mr.  Leffler  shall 
be  given  the  opportunity  to  consent  to  the  assignment,  and  if  he  does  not  consent,  he  shall  be 
laid  off. 

64,  —  Mila  Pantovich  (#420)  has  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential,  which  would 
authorize  her  to  teach  several  subjects  in  a  self-contained  classroom  in  kindergarten  through 
eighth  grade,  and  an  additional  authorization  to  teach  Social  Science.  Ms.  Pantovich  is  not 
highly  qualified  to  teach  English,  mathematics,  or  earth  science  in  a  secondary  school 
environment.  Peter  Benitti  (#346)  is  the  next  most  senior  teacher  with  an  academic  subject 
credential  who  is  slated  for  layoff. 
Mr.  Benitti  is  entitled  to  bump  Ms.  Pantovich  from  her 
1.0  FTE  assignment  at  the  Opportunity  School.  Inasmuch  as  Mr.  Benitti  is  currently 
assigned  to  a  position  in  the  Opportunity  School,  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  District  to  obtain 
his  consent  to  the  assignment. 

District  Bumping  Error 

65. 

In  its  Closing  Brief,  the  District  pointed  out  an  error  on  its  Seniority/Bumping 

List  (District  Exhibit  Tab  VI).  Stephen  McNeil  (#28)  is  shown  as  bumping  .5  FTE  Sarah 
Kerht  (#441),  .5  FTE  Nicole  Martinez  (#430),  and  .5  FTE  Tim  Fegan  (#424),  for a  total  of 
1.5  FTE,  which  is  more  than  one  full  time  position.  The  District  contends  that  Stephanie 
Gregson  (#290)  (multiple  subject)  bumps  .5  FTE,  resulting  in  Mr.  Fegan  having  a  .5  FTE 
layoff.  However,  the  Districts  contention  is  not  supported  by  evidence  in  the  record.  Ms. 

17

  

  

Gregson’s  current  assignment  is  as  a  vice  principal  for  the  District.  She  was  one  of  the  three 
administrators  whose  positions  was  eliminated  by  Resolution  No.  067-27,  and  who  was 
reassigned  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  067-031  (Finding  4).  The  District’s 
Seniority/Bumping  List  does  not  include  any  information  about  credentials  held  by  Ms. 
Gregson,  and  it  shows  that  Ms.  Gregson  was  “reassigned  to  admin.  position.”  Likewise,  the 
District’s  Layoff/Bump  List  by  Service  shows  Ms.  Gregson  as  being  reassigned  to  an 
administrative  position.'?  In  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of  Ms.  Gregson’s  credentials,  it 
was  not  established  that  Ms.  Gregson  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  services 
provided  by  Mr.  Fegan.  Mr.  Fegan  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Credential  with  CLAD 
certification.  The  most  senior  certificated  employee  proposed  for  layoff  by  the  District  with 
a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  is  Paula  Liermann  (#372).  Therefore,  Ms.  Liermann  shall  be 
retained  for  .5  FTE. 

Issues  Involving  Particular  Teachers 

66. 

Sheila  Mathrole  (#374)  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential,  with 

supplementary  authorizations  to  teach  Social  Science,  English,  and  Mathematics.  Her 
current  assignment  is  high  schoo!  Algebra.  Ms.  Mathrole  is  being  retained  by  the  District  to 
teach  mathematics,  and  no  more  senior  teacher  with  a  multiple  subject  credential  can  bump 
into  that  assignment.  There  are  no  math  teachers  with  greater  seniority  than  Ms.  Mathrole 
being  laid  off. 

67. 

Val  Barcenas  (#444)  holds  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Mathematics 

Credential  and  teaches  middle  school  mathematics.  Although  he  is  not  a  highly  qualified 
teacher,  he  is  not  proposed  for  layoff.  The  District  has  a  shortage  of  math  teachers,  even 
with  the  proposed  PKS  reduction  in  math  teaching  services.  No  math  teachers  were  actually 
proposed  for  layoff  by  the  District,  because  the  reduction  of  3.0  FTE  was  accomplished 
through  resignations/attrition. 

68. 

Corrine  Kelly  (#225)  testified  at  hearing  that  she  should  have  the  same 

seniority  date  as  Nagiba  Gregory  (#224).  Both  Ms.  Gregory  and  Ms.  Kelly  are  credentialed 
to  teach  Art.  The  District’s  Seniority/Bumping  list  shows  Ms.  Gregory’s  seniority  date  as 
August  21,  2000,  and  Ms.  Kelly’s  seniority  date  as  August  23,  2000.  Neither  Ms.  Kelly  nor 
Ms.  Gregory  is  being  proposed  for  layoff.  The  evidence  introduced  at  hearing  was 
insufficient  to  support  a  change  in  Ms.  Kelly’s  seniority  date. 

Other  Matters 

69. 

Except  as  noted  above,  no  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is 
retained  to  perform  services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

70. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The 

"  Interestingly,  Mr.  Fegan  is  not  listed  at  all  on  the  District’s  Layoff/Bump  List  by  Service. 

18 

 

decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather 
a  proper  exercise  of  discretion  of  the  District  Superintendent  and  Governing  Board.  The 
reduction  in  PKS  is  the  sole  cause  for  not  re-employing  respondents. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable  Statutes  and  Case  Law 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by 
the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing 
board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the 
superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a 
district  which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the 
governing  board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given 
to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

Until  the  employee  has  requested  a  hearing  as  provided  in  subdivision 
(b)  or  has  waived  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing,  the  notice  and  the 
reasons  therefor  shall  be  confidential  and  shall  not  be  divulged  by  any 
person,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  performance  of  duties. 
However,  the  violation  of  this  requirement  of  confidentiality,  in  and  of 
itself,  shall  not  in  any  manner  be  construed  as  affecting  the  validity  of 
any  hearing  conducted  pursuant  to  this  section. 

(b)  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine if  there  is  cause 
for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  A  request  for  a 
hearing  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be  delivered  to  the  person  who  sent 
the  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a),  on  or  before  a  date  specified  in 
that  subdivision,  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date 
on  which  the  notice  is  served  upon  the  employee.  If  an  employee  fails 
to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to 
do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her  waiver  of his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing. 
The  notice  provided  for  in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of 
the  provisions  of  this  subdivision. 

(c)  In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding 
shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5 
(commencing  with  Section  11500) of Part  1  of  Division  3  of Title  2  of 
the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power 
granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall 
apply:

  

(1)  The  respondent  shali  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within 
five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

e@ 

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days 
after  service  of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section 
11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. 

(3)  The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who 
shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a 
determination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are 
related  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The 
proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall 
contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a 
recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall 
make  the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and 
disposition.  None  of  the  findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations 
contained  in  the  proposed  decision  prepared  by  the  administrative  law 
judge  shall  be  binding  on  the  governing  board.  Nonsubstantive 
procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board 
of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the 
charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed 
decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee 
on  or  before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is  commenced. 
All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the  administrative  law 
judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

The  board  may  adopt  from  time  to  time  such  rules  and  procedures  not 
inconsistent  with  provisions  of  this  section  as  may  be  necessary  to 
effectuate  this  section. 

(d)  Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is 
delivered  in  person  to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is 
deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and 
addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the  employee. 

(c) If after  request  for  hearing  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  any 
continuance  is  granted  pursuant  to  Section  11524  of  the  Government 
Code,  the  dates  prescribed  in  subdivision  (c)  which  occur  on  or  after 
the  date  of  granting  the  continuance  and  the  date  prescribed  in 
subdivision  (c)  of  Section  44955  which  occurs  after  the  date  of  granting 
the  continuance  shal]  be  extended  for  a  period of time  equal  to  the 
continuance. 

e 

  

@ 

20

  

Education  Code  section  44955 provides  in  relevant  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived of his  or  her  position  for 
causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and 
Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee 
shall  be  deprived of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as  specified 
in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of 
the  schools of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in 
session  shall  have  declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of 
the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever  the  governing  board 
determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following 
year  as  a  result  of  the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement 
as  defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to 
be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following 
school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the 
modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing 
board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of 
these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the 
district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more 
than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the 
district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school 
year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this 
section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with 
less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

In  computing  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  for  purposes  of  this 
section  for  a  newly  formed  or  reorganized  school  district,  each  school 
of  the  district  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  a  school  of  the  newly 
formed  or  reorganized  district  for  both  of  the  two  previous  school 
years. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of 
termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination 
is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later 
than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in 
accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used 
in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request, 

21

  

  

a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination 
shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or 
interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th 
of  May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such 
employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they 
were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent 
or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right  to  a 
hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such 
a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which 
their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior 
to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject 
which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does 
not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's 
major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 
governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of 
the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by 
a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel 
services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee 
has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess. 

Education  Code  section  44956,  subdivision  (a)(1),  provides: 

(a)  Any  permanent  employee  whose  services  have  been  terminated  as 
provided  in  Section  44955  shall  have  the  following  rights: 

(1)  For  the  period  of  39  months  from  the  date  of  such  termination,  any 
employee  who  in  the  meantime  has  not  attained  the  age  of  65  years 
shall  have  the  preferred  right  to  reappointment,  in  the  order  of  original 
employment  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  Sections  44831  to  44855,  inclusive,  if  the  number  of 

22 

   

employees  is  increased  or  the  discontinued  service  is  reestablished, 
with  no  requirements  that  were  not  imposed  upon  other  employees  who 
continued  in  service;  provided,  that  no  probationary  or  other  employee 
with  less  seniority  shall  be  employed  to  render  a  service  which  said 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  However,  prior  to 
reappointing  any  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not 
previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of 
postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board 
shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in 
the  appropriate  subject. 

4. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular  kind 

of  service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another  manner.  (Gallup  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571;  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  of  Goleta  Union  School  Dist.  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32.) 

5. 

In  the  course  of  reducing,  discontinuing  or  eliminating  a  particular  kind  of 
service,  the  Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondent(s)  to 
perform  services  which  respondent(s)  is/are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
(Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kruse  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648;  Levin  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1976)  62  Cal.App.3d  977.) 

6. 

A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  statute  either  by 

determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by  reducing  the 
number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees 

of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tilapias  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local 
2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d 
831.) 

Hearing  Issues 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  17  through  26,  the  District  properly  non-reelected 

probationary  employees  Cory  Cunningham,  Cathy  Davis,  Bradley  Engel,  Dubarrie  Fagout, 
Alan  Frantz,  Sarah  Gorvad,  Susan  Morgan,  April  Pickett,  and  Chau  Tran,  who  are  not 
subject  to  the  layoff  procedures  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  are  not 
entitled  to  participate  as  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

 

23 

  

9. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  27  through  31,  Michelle  Pile  is  properly  classified  as  a 

probationary  employee;  however  the  District  properly  non-reelected  her.  Therefore,  she  is 
not  subject  to  the  layoff  procedures  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  is  not 
entitled  to  participate  as  a  respondent  in  this  proceeding. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  35,  the  Accusations  against  Crystal  Cheng  and 

Maureen  Morales  are  withdrawn. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  36  through  38,  the  District  properly  reduced  and/or 

eliminated  categorically  funded  specialist/coaches  services. 

As  set  forth  in  Findings  40  through  45,  the  District  properly  exercised  its 

discretion  in  identifying  highly  qualified  teachers  as  a  basis  for  deviating  from  strict  seniority 
in  determining  which  employees  should  be  laid  off,  and  which  employees  should  be  retained. 

13. 

Pursuant  to  Finding  50,  Arturo  Bustamante  shall  be  retained  to  provide  1.0 

FTE  services  in  secondary  social  science. 

14. 
Education  services. 

Pursuant  to  Finding  51,  Shannon  Woods  shall  be  retained  to  provide  Drivers 

Pursuant  to  Finding  52,  Shelly  Alton  shall  be  retained  by  the  District  to 

provide  services  which  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  60,  the  District  shal]  retain  Paul  Dennis,  Charlotte 

Ghio,  and  Sarah  Mankewich  to  provide  services  which  they  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render,  and  which  shall  include  possible  assignment  to  a  position  teaching  physical  education 
at  Yolo  Continuation  School,  provided  the  teacher  consents  to  the  assignment;  if  the  teacher 
does  not  consent,  he  or  she  shall  be  laid  off. 

17. 

Pursuant  to  Finding  63,  Mark  Leffler  shall  be  retained  to  provide  services  in  a 
teaching  position  at  Yolo  Opportunity  School,  provided  he  consents  to  the  assignment;  if  Mr. 
Leffler  does  not  consent,  he  shall  be  laid  off. 

Pursuant  to  Finding  64,  Peter  Benitti  shall  be  retained  to  provide  services  in  a 

teaching  position  at  Yolo  Opportunity  School. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  65,  Paula  Liermann  shall  be  retained  by  the  District  to 

provide  .5  FTE  services  which  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

20. 

All  other  arguments of  the  parties  not  specifically  addressed  herein  were 

considered  and  are  rejected. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

15. 

16. 

18. 

19. 

24 

 

Conclusion 

21. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

22. 

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation of the  particular  kinds  of 

services  and  of  46.3  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2006-2007  school  year,  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Therefore,  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  schoo]  year,  2007-2008. 

ORDER 

2. 

3. 

1. 

The  accusations  against  Crystal  Cheng  and  Maureen  Morales  are  dismissed 

pursuant  to  Legal  Conclusion  10.  They  shall  be  retained  for  the  2007-08  school  year. 

The  District  shall  comply  with  Legal  Conclusions  8  and  9,  and  1]  through  19. 

Notices  shall  be  given,  in  inverse  order  of  seniority,  to  the  following 

individuals,  including  respondents,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-08 
school  year  because  of  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services:  Jamie 
Hughes  (#443);  Sarah  Kehrt  (#441)  (.5  FTE);  Miranda  Burton  (#440);  Nicole  Martinez 
(#430);  Erica  Alvarado  (#429);  Tim  Fegan  (#424)  (.5  FTE);  Mila  Pantovich  (#420); 
Elizabeth  Paredes  (#419);  Mindy  Yu  (#416);  Elizabeth  Altschule  (#414);  Donna  Kellagher 
(#412);  Susan  Peyton  (#401);  Amy  Sceirine  (#400);  Jean  Strothers  (#399);  Carissa  Walker 
(#396);  Cindy  Robinson  (#383);  Sally  DeLaMora  (#382);  Paula  Liermann  (#372)  (.5  FTE); 
Joshua  Strong  (#350);  Leora  Roscoe-Moses  (#317);  Dave  Contreras  (#266);  and  Spencer 
Yarwood  (#80). 

DATED:  May  3,  2007 

  

Ciethurnne  poh 

CATHERINE  B.  FRINK 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

25

  

  

ATTACHMENT  A 
WASHINGTON  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
RESPONDENTS  TO  HEARING 

Alton,  Shelley 
Alvarado,  Erika 
Advis,  Nikki 
Avelar,  Veronica 
Bustamante,  Arturo 
Cheng,  Crystal 
Contreras,  Dave 
Cunningham,  Cory 
Davis,  Cathy 
De  La  Mora,  Sally 
Dennis,  Paul 
Engel,  Bradley 
Fagout,  Dubarrie 
Fegan,  Timothy 
Frantz,  Alan 
Ghio,  Charlotte 
Gorvad,  Sarnah 
Kellagher,  Donna 
Kelly,  Corrine 
Leffler,  Mark 
Liermann,  Paula 
Mankewich,  Sarah 
Martinez,  Nicole 
Morales,  Maureen 
Morgan,  Susan 
Pantovich,  Mila 
Parades,  Elizabeth 
Parker,  Frank 
Peyton,  Susan 
Pickett,  April 
Pile,  Michelle 
Rabb-Patterson,  Belinda 
Roscoe-Moses,  Leora 
Sceirine,  Amy 
Shields,  James 
Stewart,  Laurie 
Strothers,  Jean 
Suminska,  Magdalena 
Tran,  Chau 
Walker,  Carissa 

26 

 

