BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
BISHOP  JOINT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  INYO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Julie  Castaneda,  Natalie  D’  Angelo, 
Adrian  Sears,  and  Gail  Wallace, 

Respondents. 

OAH  Case  No.:  L2007040056 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  30,  2007,  in  Bishop,  California. 

Sarah  Levitan  Kaatz,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Maggie  Kingsbury,  Superintendent 

of  the  Bishop  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Adrian  Sears  (Sears)  and 

Gail  Wallace  (Wallace). 

District  has  decided  to  reduce  certain  educational  services  and  has  given  respondents 
notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Respondents  requested 
a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007- 
2008  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  presented  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Superintendent  filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The  Superintendent  has  recommended  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District 

(Governing  Board)  the  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4.

  

  

4. 

On  January  29,  2007,  the  Governing  Board  approved  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  and  adopted  Resolution  06-07-09,  reducing  the  following  services  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year: 

Service 

Full-Time-Equivalent  Positions 

English 
Math 
Social  Science 
Health 
Science 
Spanish 
Physical  Education 
Resource 
Choir 
Non  Departmentalized  Programs 

Title  I  Reading 
AVID 
WASC 
ELD  Tutorial 

Total 

PGHS  (Continuation  High  School) 

1 
 
D
D
W
A
L
N
O
R

 
H
K
V

 
w
b
B
d
x
o
l

 
a

 
o
i

5. 

On  March  14,  2007,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  and 
provided  written  notice,  via  personal  service,  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

Respondents  thereafter  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 

reemploying  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

7. 

The  District  filed  the  Accusation  on  April  9,  2007,  and  served  it  by  certified  mail 

on  each  respondent. 

8. 

Respondents  Julie  Castaneda  and  Natalie  D'Angelo  subsequently  filed  a  notice 
withdrawing  their  request  for  hearing,  thereby  waiving  their  right  to  a  hearing  to  determine  if 
there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

9. 

Respondent  Sears  did  not  file  a  notice  of  defense,  but  appeared  at  the  hearing. 
Respondent  Wallace  filed  a  notice  of  defense  on  April  24,  2007,  seven  days  after  receiving  the 
Accusation.  Inasmuch  as 
it  was  not  shown  that  the  District  or  other  employees  will  be 
prejudiced,  respondents  Sears  and  Wallace  are  deemed  to  have  filed  timely  notices  of  defense.

  

  

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

10. 

11. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.' 

12. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  4  based  on  anticipated  loss  of  student  enrollment.  The  decision  to  reduce  the 
services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's 
discretion. 

13. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 4  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

14. 

Respondent  Wallace  is 

a  permanent  employee  of  the  District  with  a  seniority 
date  of  August  22,  2002.  She  holds  several  special  education  credentials  and  teaches  two 
periods  of  special  education  resource  classes  and  three  periods  of  remedial  reading.  The  District 
proposes  to  reduce  her  teaching  load  by  two  classes.  Respondent  Wallace  argued  that  she  can 
teach  entry-level  English  classes,  but  does  not  hold  the  required  credential.  Respondent  Wallace 
is  the  sole  supporter  of  her  family  and  will  face  significant  financial  hardship  if  her  teaching 
assignment  is  reduced.  However,  the  teacher  retained  to  teach  special  education  has  greater 
seniority  than  respondent  Wallace. 

15. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  10. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  4  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  4 
and  11. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  4,  which  cause  relates  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through 
15. 

'  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

  

in 

4. 

part: 

pertinent 

provides, 

“[t}he  governing  board 

Section  44955  directs  that  certificated  permanent  and  probationary  employees 
are  to  be  laid  off  by  seniority,  consistent  with  their  qualifications  and  status.  Thus,  subsection 
(c) 
shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
The  statute,  in  subsection  (b),  gives 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.” 
preference  to  permanent  employees:  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of 
no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 
District  complied 
with  section  144955,  as  no  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  or  terminate  the  services  of  respondents  Julie  Castaneda, 
Natalie  D’Angelo,  Adrian  Sears,  and  Gail  Wallace  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  15,  and 
legal  conclusion  numbers  |  through  4. 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained. 

ORDER 

2. 

The  District  may  notify  respondents  Julie  Castaneda,  Natalie  D’Angelo,  Adrian 
Sears,  and  Gail  Wallace  that  their  full-time  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2007-2008 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

