  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
BISHOP  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  INYO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Susan  Dillard  and  Other 
Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Bishop  Union  Elementary  School  District, 

Respondents. 

OAH  Case  No.  L2008030558 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  25,  2008,  in  Bishop,  California. 

Darren  C.  Kameya,  Attorney 

at 

Law, 

represented 

Barry  Simpson  (Simpson), 

a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists 

record,  was  received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

Superintendent  of  the  Bishop  Union  Elementary  School  District  (District). 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  written  and  oral  stipulation  on  the 

John  F.  Kohn,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Jeff  Burror  (Burror),  Susan  Dillard 
(Dillard),  Meghan  Hosey  (Hosey),  Trisha  Hildenbrand  (Hildenbrand),  and  Usha  Wilbur 
(Wilbur),  collectively  referred  to  as  Respondents. 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
not 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

   

  

Superintendent  Simpson  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

for 

1. 

2. 

  

3. 

On  February  28,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  number  07-08-06,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year: 

Service 

Full-Time-Equivalent  Positions 

Title  One  Intervention 
Sixth  Grade  Instruction 
Eighth  Grade  Instruction 
Fifth  Grade  Instruction 
First  to  Fourth  Grade  Instruction 
Administration  Services 

Total 

1741 

5 
1.57 

1.0 
3.0 
1.0 

7.24 

4. 

Superintendent  Simpson  timely  notified  the  Governing  Board,  and  provided 
timely  notice  to  Respondents,  that  Respondents’  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

Respondents  requested  a  hearing, 

and 
Respondents  thereafter  filed  notices  of  defense,  to  determine  if  there 
is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  As  stipulated  by  the  parties,  all  documents 
were  timely  filed. 

an  accusation, 

District 

issued 

the 

6. 

7. 

and  Wilbur. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  dismissed  the  accusation  against  Respondents  Burror 

8. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.' 

9. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  factual  finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  State  funding.  The 
District  fears  it  may  lose  approximately  $600,000  based  on  the  Governor’s  latest  budgetary 
proposals.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

"  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

  

  

10. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3 

is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

11. 

The  District  retained  four  employees  junior  to  Respondents,  one  of  whom  is 
teaching  science  and  three  of  whom  are  teaching  special  education.  All  retained  employees 
have  credentials  to  teach  their  subject  matter  areas,  and  no  Respondent  is  certificated  to  teach 
the  special  education  and  science  classes  at  issue.  Retention  of  these  four  junior  employees  is 
appropriate  as  the  District  demonstrated  the  specific  need  for  their  services  and  the  individuals 
in  question  have  the  requisite  training  and  experience. 

12. 

The  Governing  Board  has  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-07,  setting  forth  the 
criteria  to  determine  seniority  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service 
a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date  (tie-breaking  criteria).  It  sets  forth  the  following  criteria, 
in  order  of  importance:  No  Child  Left  Behind  Compliance;  Crosscultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development/  Bilingual  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development 
(CLAD/BCLAD)  Certifications  or  Equivalent;  Multiple  Credentials  and  Subject  Matter 
Authorizations;  07-08  Experience  in  Stipend/Coaching/Extra-curricular  Positions;  Advanced 
Degrees;  and  Years  of  Service.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  are  reasonable  as  they  relate  to  the 
skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees  and  to  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

in 

13. 

14. 

Respondent  Hildenbrand  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  17,  2007,  and  holds  a 
preliminary  multiple  subject  credential.  She  and  two  individuals  who  did  not  request  a  hearing, 
Julie  Castaneda  and  Abby  Sada,  share  the  same  seniority  date  and  are  the  most  junior 
certificated  employees  holding  multiple  subject  credentials. 

The  District  properly  utilized  the  criteria  to  break  ties  involving  Respondents 
Burror,  Dillard,  Hosey,  and  Wilbur,  two  of  whom  were  retained.  Each  of  these  Respondents 
first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  capacity  on  August  21,  2006,  and  hold  multiple 
subject  credentials.  All  met  the  first  two  criteria  (No  Child  Left  Behind  Compliance  and 
CLAD/BCLAD  authorization).  Respondent  Wilbur  received  the  greatest  seniority  rank  because 
she  also  holds  a  single  subject  (art)  credential  (third  criterion).  Respondent  Burror  was  ranked 
above  Respondents  Dillard  and  Hosey  because  of  his  experience  in 
a  position  receiving  a 
stipend,  tech  leader. 

   

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  6. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

15. 

1. 

  

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3 
and  8. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  |  through  15. 

4, 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  Susan  Dillard,  Megan 
Hosey,  and  Trisha  Hildenbrand  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  6,  and  8  through  15,  and  legal 
conclusion  numbers  |  through  3. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  Susan  Dillard, 
Megan  Hosey,  and  Trisha  Hildenbrand  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

   

