   
  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
KERN  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  KERN 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2008030852 

William  L.  Crowles,  Sr. 
John  Hansen 
Ricardo  Ishida 
Leslie  Lipton 
Sophia  M.  Lopez 
Donald  Wayne  Mills,  Jr. 
Elizabeth  Munoz-Herrera 
Terri  Murray 
Evelia  Rodriguez 
Deborah  A.  Schmidt 
Scott  A.  Smith 

Respondents, 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Mark  E.  Harman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2008,  in  Bakersfield,  California. 

Peter  C.  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Kern  High  School  District  (District). 

Ernest  H.  Tuttle,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  William  L.  Crowles,  Sr.  (Crowles), 
John  Hansen  (Hansen),  Ricardo  Ishida  (Ishida),  Leslie  Lipton  (Lipton),  Sophia  M.  Lopez 
(Lopez),  Donald  Wayne  Mills,  Jr.  (Mills),  Elizabeth  Munoz-Herrera  (Munoz-Herrera),  Terri 
Murray  (Murray),  Evelia  Rodriguez  (Rodriguez),  Deborah  A.  Schmidt  (Schmidt),  and  Scott 
A.  Smith  (Smith),  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  Respondents. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  taken.  The  record  was  closed,  and  the  matter 

was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  25,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Donald  E.  Carter  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  filed  the  Accusation 

   

1. 

in  his  official  capacity.

  

  

  

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  adopted  a  resolution 
on  March  10,  2008,  reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  equal  to  95.0  Full- 
Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  will  be  reduced  or  eliminated  include  the  following: 

  

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 

NUMBER  OF  FTE 
POSITIONS 

  

High  School  Programs 

English 
Math 

21.6 
16.5 
11.0 
12.4 
6.6 
8.4 
6.4 
7A 

Social  Studies 
Science 
Fine  Arts  (Drama,  Music,  &  Art) 
CTE  (Bus.,  Voc.  Arts,  Industrial  Arts,  &  Agr.) 
Modern  Language 
Physical  Education/Health 

  
    
  

Lerdo  Program  (Jail  Education) 

Adult  Programs 

Total 

95.0 

5.0 

4. 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  directed  the  Superintendent  to  determine 

which  employees’  services  may  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of 
this  reduction  in  services  and  to  give  those  employees  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  that  they  will  not  be  reemployed.  The  Superintendent  has  calculated  that 
57.0  FTE  positions  will  become  vacant  due  to  resignations,  retirements,  and  non-retention  of 
District  employees,  and  that  the  District  will  only  need  to  terminate  38.0  FTE  employees 
pursuant  to  this  proceeding. 

5. 

On  or  before  March  13,  2008,  the  District  personally  served  on  each 

Respondent  a  written  “reduction  in  force”  notice  (RIF  notice)  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year. 
Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board 
had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  95.0  FTE  positions.

  

6. 

Respondents  Hansen,  Lipton,  Lopez,  Munoz-Herrera,  Murray,  and  Rodriguez 

timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying 
them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

7. 

Assuming  that  all  certificated  employees  would  file  a  request  for  hearing,  the 
District  issued  the  Accusation  dated  April  7,  2008,  and  personally  served  the  Accusation  on 
each  Respondent  on  or  before  April  9,  2008.  All  notices  of  defense  were  timely  filed  or  were 
treated  as  if  timely  filed. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

9. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  indicated  that  the  District  had  withdrawn  and 

rescinded  the  RIF  notices  as  to  Respondents  Crowles,  Ishida,  Mills,  Schmidt,  and  Smith. 

10. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

11. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 

in  factual  finding  number  3  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  State  funding  and  the 
accompanying  need  to  reduce  staff.  Further,  the  District  is  restructuring  as  a  result  of 
prospective  openings  of  two  additional  high  schools.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the 
District's  discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

13. 

On  March  3,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted a  resolution  setting  forth  the 

criteria  to  determine  seniority  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date  (tie-breaking  criteria).  The  tie-breaking  criteria  are 
reasonable  as  they  relate  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees  and  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  Neither  the  criteria  nor  their  application  were  challenged 
by  Respondents. 

14. 

Respondents  Hansen,  Lopez,  Munoz-Herrera,  and  Rodriguez  each  hold  a  single 

subject  credential  (Social  Sciences),  services  that  suffered  a  reduction  of  11.0  FTE  positions. 
Hansen  has a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007,  and  the  other  three  are  more  junior  certificated 
employees  than  Hansen.  Respondent  Lipton  holds  a  multi-subject  credential  and  is  teaching 
education.  Lipton  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007.  Respondent  Murray  holds  a  single 
subject  credential  (Art).  Murray  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007. 

15. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondents  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondents  were  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

 

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  8. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955. 

3. 

Cause  exists  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding 
numbers  |  through  15. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondents  John  Hansen,  Leslie 

Lipton,  Sophia  M.  Lopez,  Elizabeth  Munoz-Herrera,  Terri  Murray,  and  Evelia  Rodriguez  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  15,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  1 
through  3. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  John  Hansen, 

Leslie  Lipton,  Sophia  M.  Lopez,  Elizabeth  Munoz-Herrera,  Terri  Murray,  and  Evelia 
Rodriguez  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated: 

MARK  E.  HARMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

