BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
RAMONA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
the  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Ramona 
Unified  School  District  Receiving  Notice  of 
Recommendation  that  Services  Would  Not 
Be  Required  for  the  2008-2009  School  Year, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030060 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  E.  Hjelt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Ramona,  California,  on  April  18,  2008. 

Anthony  P.  DeMarco,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Ramona  Unified  School 

District. 

Fern  Steiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents,  certificated  employees, 

Victoria  Barlow,  Robyn  Bash,  Christine  Bates,  Susan  Beffa,  Michele  Beus,  Nicole  Brown, 
Carolyn  Budd,  Carol  Canfield,  Marie  T.  Ellsworth,  Gina  Gonzalez,  Marianne  Grisbeck, 
Christine  Hill,  Kerri  Janak,  Ashley  Lang,  Emily  Maehler,  Amy  McClure,  Keven  McNees, 
Griselda  Nuno,  Elizabeth  Ryan,  Kimberly  Schramm,  Adriana  Soltero,  Tracey  Stewart, 
Kathleen  Taber,  and  September  Tamburrino. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  remaining  certificated  employees  of 

the  Ramona  Unified  School  District  who  received  notice  of  the  recommendation  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  18,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Ramona  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Ramona  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  a  semi-rural 

area  in  northern  San  Diego  County.  The  District  provides  educational  services  and  supports 

  

1
  

to  students  from  Kindergarten  through  12th  grades.  The  District  operates  five  elementary 
schools,  a  middle  school,  one  comprehensive  high  school,  and  two  alternative  schools. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five-member  Board.  The  Board’s  Chief 

Executive  Officer  is  Peter  M.  Schiff,  Superintendent  of  Schools.  Superintendent  Schiff  is 
assisted  by  an  administrative  staff  that  includes  Joe  Annicharico,  Jr.,  Ph.D.,  the  District’s 
Assistant  Superintendent  of  Schools,  Human  Resources  Development. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since 
Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to 
other  governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  a  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  budgeting 
problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  board’s  legal  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 

teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  affected 
certificated  employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4. 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  aware of the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems.  As  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget,  the  District 
projected  a  budget  deficit  of  about  $2.9  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  District 
was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  meet  the  projected  budget  deficit. 

Under  the  Superintendent’s  direction,  budgetary  cuts  were  considered  across  the 
board  including  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the 

 

  

District’s  certificated  employees.  On  March  4,  2008,  Dr.  Schiff  presented  to  the  Board  a 
recommendation  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-08-14,  which 
directed  that  certain  services  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and 
other  matters.  The  Board’s  adoption  of  the  resolution  was  based  on  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  their  pupils.  The  resolution  provided: 

RAMONA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESOLUTION  No.  2007-08-14 

REDUCTION  OR  ELIMINATION  OF  CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  SERVICES 
(Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955) 

WHEREAS,  Sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code  require  action  by the 
Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  eliminate  services  and  permit  the layoff of  certificated 
employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Superintendent  of  Ramona  Unified  Schoo!  District  has  recommended  to 

the  Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or  elimination of 

particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year; 
and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition which 

has  occurred  to  date,  that  is,  all  deaths,  resignations,  retirements  and  other  permanent  vacancies  in 
reducing  these  services  and,  but  for  the  attrition  already  assured,  would  have  found  it  necessary  to 
reduce  additional  particular  kinds  of  services. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  Ramona  Unified 

School  District: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

That  all  of  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being 
insufficient  to  maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program 
changes  resulting  therefrom,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to  reduce 
or  eliminate  those  positions  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A,  attached  hereto  and 
incorporated  by  reference  herein,  listing  by  level,  subject  field  or classification, 
and  full-time  equivalent,  those  positions  which  shall  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

That  because of the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
listed  in  Exhibit  A  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end of  the  2007-2008  school 
year  certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to  the  positions  affected  in  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  above  described  service. 

 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

Il. 

That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some  of  the  employees  in  the  services 
being  reduced  or  eliminated  are  such  that  they  have  displacement  rights  by  virtue 

of seniority,  and  that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior 

employee  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who 
shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code 
section  44955  requires  the  Governing  Board  to  state  specific  criteria  to  be  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered 
paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date  are  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B, 
which  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference  herein. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order of termination  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date,  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B,  are 
based  solely  on  the  needs  of  the  Ramona  Unified  School  District  and  the  students 
thereof. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who 
shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code  § 
44955  allows  the  Governing  Board  to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated 
employee  in  order  of  seniority  by  virtue  of  their  competence,  credential(s), 
assignment,  and  the  specific  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated 
employees  who  may  otherwise  be  terminated  by  order  of  seniority  will  be  based 
on  the  needs of the  students  of  the  District,  and  will  ensure  that  no  employee  will 
be  terminated  while  a  Jess  senior  employee  is  retained  to  render  service  which  the 
more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

That  the  Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative  will  send  appropriate 
notices  to  all  employees  possibly  affected  by  virtue  of  the  reduction  and 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service. 

That  the  action of this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be  considered  to 
prejudice  the  rights  of  certificated  employees  to  whom  notice  will  be  given  as  to 
the  Superintendent’s  consideration  of  any  proposed  decision  by  an  administrative 
law  judge 

in  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  any  employee. 

   

(9-12) 
3) 
(i- 

1.0 
49 

Grade 

FTE 

4 

Agricultural  Teaching  Services 
Core  Support  Teaching  Services 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

  

6. 

Exhibit  A  set  forth  a  list  of the  particular  kinds  of  services  being  reduced  and 

the  extent  of  the  reductions  measured  by  full  time  equivalent  positions  (FTEs)  as  follows: 

  

Core  Support  Teaching  Services 
6) 
(4- 
Counseling  Services 
(9-12) 
Elementary  Classroom  Teaching 
(K-  6) 
English  Teaching 
(7-  8) 
(9-12) 
English  Teaching 
Foreign  Language  (Spanish)  Teaching  (9-12) 
(9-12) 
Mathematics  Teaching  Services 
8) 
Physical  Education  Teaching  Services  (7- 
Physical  Education  Teaching  Services  (9-12) 
(9-12) 
Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
(7- 
Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
8) 
(9-12) 
Special  Education  Teaching  (RSP) 
(K-12) 
Teacher  on  Assignment  (Categorical) 
(K-6) 
Teacher  on  Assignment  (Support) 

49 
1.0 
9.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
28 

  

Total 

24.26 

7. 

The  District  established  tie-breaking  criteria,  identified  as  Exhibit  B,  to  be 

applied  in  those  instances  in  which  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  hire  were 
scheduled  to  be  terminated  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  force.  The  tie-breaking  criteria 
were  prepared  specifically  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students.  Application  of 
the  tie-breaking  criteria  in  this  matter  was  a  moot  point  because  no  tie  that  was  broken  using 
the  tie-breaking  criteria  resulted  in  a  layoff. 

8. 

The  District’s  amended  seniority  list  contained  the  names  of  all  credentialed 
employees  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior  employee  in  descending  order 
of  longevity  of  service,  the  extent  of  the  employee’s  full  time  employment  (with  the 
maximum  being  expressed  as  1.0  FTE),  the  site  where  the  employee  provided  services,  the 
employee’s  hire  date  (i.e.,  the  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  on  a 
probationary  basis),  whether  the  employee  was  permanent,  probationary  2,  or  probationary  1, 
the  employee’s  credential(s),  the  employee’s  field,  any  supplemental  authorizations,  whether 
the  employee  held  CLAD,  SDAIE,  ELD,  LDS,  BCLAD,  BCC  certifications,  whether  the 
employee-was  bilingual,  whether  the-employee-held-a-master’s  degree,  and  the  department  to 
which  the  employee  was  currently  assigned. 

9. 

The  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  24.26  FTEs 
in  particular  kinds  of  services.  Using  the  Board’s  resolution  and  the  District’s  seniority  list, 
Dr.  Annicharico  and  his  staff  identified  the  most  recently  hired  certificated  employees 
providing  the  services  that  were  scheduled  to  be  eliminated  under  the  resolution.  Preliminary 
notices  of  termination  were  sent  to  52  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employees  on 
the  basis  that  the  budget  was  uncertain  and  the  District  needed  to  maintain  maximum 
flexibility  to  meet  unexpected  shortfalls.  In  deciding  who  to  serve  with  the  preliminary 
notices,  Dr.  Annicharico  did  not  consider  positive  attrition  because  particular  kinds  of 
services  were  being  reduced,  a  type  of  reduction  in  force  that  did  not  require  consideration  of 
positive  attrition.  A  notice  of  the  District’s  decision  to  release  from  employment  was  sent  to

    

  

24  temporary  certificated  employees.  The  District  does  not  intend  to  reemploy  these 
temporary  employees. 

10. 

Onor  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  a  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given  notice  that  the  Board  had  recommended  that  his  or  her  services  with 
the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year  “as  a  result  of 
financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being  insufficient  to  maintain  current  levels  of 
programs,  and  necessary  program  changes  resulting  therefrom”  A  copy  of  the  Board’s 
resolution  was  attached  to  the  notice,  as  was  a  copy  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  being 
reduced  and  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  A  request  for  hearing  and  an  acknowledgment  of 
receipt  accompanied  the  notice.  47  of  the  certificated  employees  served  with  the  preliminary 
layoff  notice  requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation  packet  was  served  on  those  employees 
requesting  a  hearing,  and  46  of  those  employees  with  the  accusation  packet  filed  a  notice  of 
defense.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

11. 

On  April  25,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

It  was  stipulated  that  the  Accusations  filed  against  Damon  Baldwin,  Victoria  Barlow, 

William  Clark,  Joyce  Evans,  Tiffany  Giles,  Ashley  Gotowala,  Susan  Henderson,  Larry 
Hofer,  Sandra  Jimenez,  Goldie  Kakacek,  Jaime  King,  Jeff  Klauda,  Jane  Lynnell  Knauer, 
Joseph  Krainock,  Toccara  Maytrott,  Cori  McDonald,  Jaime  Parsley,  Jeremy  Patenaude, 
Kathryn  Reeves,  Marie  Antoinette  Rodriguez,  Courtney  Sawada,  Joyce  Schildhouse,  Tracy 
Stephens,  and  Laura  Worthen  be  dismissed. 

The  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  An  opening  statement  was  given  on  behalf 

of  all  respondents  who  were  represented  by  counsel.  Several  trial  briefs  were  submitted. 
Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  a  written  stipulation  to  jurisdictional  facts  was 
received,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  closing  arguments  were 
given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  Particular  Kinds of Services 

12. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Exhibit  A 

(Factual  Finding  6)  were  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and 
discontinued.  The  reduction  and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within 
the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District,  the  schools,  and  the  students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by 
federal  and  state  laws. 

The  Seniority  List 

13. 

With  few  exceptions,  which  do  not  impact  the  layoffs  in  this  matter,  but  which 

could  affect  the  order  of  rehiring  (which  are  not  at  issue  in  this  matter),  the  District’s 

6 

 

seniority  list  was  accurate.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the 
certificated  employees  who  were  the  subject  of  direct  and  cross-examination  were 
improperly  classified.  Nevertheless,  the  District  should  be  available  to  make  corrections  to 
the  seniority  list,  as  may  be  appropriate  following  this  hearing  upon  verification  of  the  new 
information  provided. 

The  District  ’s  Layoff Procedure 

14. 

According  to  Dr.  Annicharico,  afier  the  Board’s  resolution  was  adopted,  the 

District  decided  not  to  reduce  2.0  FTEs  related  to  Physical  Education  and  1.0  FTE  related  to 
Categorical  Teacher  on  Assignment.  The  District  also  decided  not  to  reduce  the  1.0  FTE 
regarding  Special  Education  Teaching  Services. 

The  District’s  staff  reviewed  the  Board’s  resolution  and  determined  the  most  junior 

employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  the  Board’s  resolution.  For 
those  employees,  the  District  attempted  to  determine  if  a  displaced  employee  could  “bump”  a 
more  junior  employee  providing  a  service  that  the  “bumped”  senior  employee  was 
credentialed  and  competent  to  provide.’  The  Board  tie-breaking  criteria  established  a 
method  by  which  employees  having  the  same  seniority  date  could  be  ranked  for  layoff 
purposes.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  based  on  the  welfare  and  needs  of  the  students. 
However,  the  use  of  the  tie-breaking  procedure  was  not  necessary  to  resolve  any  dispute 
related  to  the  layoffs  in  this  matter.  Through  this  elimination  process,  the  District  correctly 
determined  which  certificated  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices.  No 
permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service 
any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

Respondent  ’s  Contentions 

15. 

Respondent  contended  the  District  skipped  junior  employees  to  provide 

services  more  senior  employees  were  credentialed  and  competent  to  provide.  The  evidence 
did  not  support  his  contention.  No  junior  employee  was  skipped  over  a  more  senior 
employee. 

Respondent  suggested  that  the  District  may  have  failed  to  afford  permanent  status  to 

some  employees  who  were  classified  as  probationary  employees,  or  may  not  have  provided  a 
correct  seniority  date  for  employees  who  had  worked  under  emergency  permits  or  as  teacher 
interns,  or  may  not  have  afforded  individuals  providing  services  in  categorically  funded 
programs  the  rights  to  which  they  were  entitled. 
in  classifying  any  certificated  employee  had  any  impact  on  this  layoff  proceeding.  Any  error 
in  classification  that  might  impact  a  certificated  employee's  rehiring  rights  is  not  at  issue  in 
this  proceeding  and  was  moot. 

No  evidence  established  that  any  mistake 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position,  which  he 

' 
or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  holds  that  position.

  

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

16. 

The  District  is,  at  the  time  of  hearing,  aware  that  here  will  be  some 

resignations/retirements  and  anticipates  taking  this  into  consideration  before  final  decisions 
are  made  about  staffing  for  2008-2009. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

lL. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  respondent  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  A  board  may  consider  the  school  district’s 
economic  circumstances  in  making  the  determination  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  a  particular  kind of service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  a  school 
board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute.  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (d)  provides: 

“(d)  | Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 
reasons: 

(1) 

The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 

specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2) 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

4. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 

8 

 

 

needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated if  junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  render  services  that  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  that  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the  senior 

5. 

As  a  result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  previously  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their 
employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services 
will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  those  respondents  identified  in 
the  stipulation  resulting  in  the  dismissal  of  the  Accusations. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously  served 

with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
except  for  those  respondents  identified  in  Factual  Finding  11.  These  employees  to  receive 
final  notices  include: 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Bash 
Bates 
Beffa 
Beus 
Brown 
Budd 
Canfield 
Ellsworth 
Gonzalez 
Hill 
Janak 
King 
Klauda 
Knauer 
Krainock 
Lang 
Maehler 

Robyn 
Christine 
Susan 
Michele 
Nicole 
Carolyn 
Carol 
Marie  Therese 
Gina 
Christine 
Kerri 
Jaime 
Jeff 
Jane  Lynnell 
Joseph 
Ashley 
Emily 

~ 

325 
375 
367 
352 
+351 
358 
357 
353 
348 
360 
363 
297 
300 
153 
177 
370 
339 

8/24/06 
N/A 
N/A 
8/23/07 
8/23/07 
8/23/07 
8/23/07 
8/23/07 
8/23/07 
8/23/07 
N/A 
8/23/05 
8/26/04 
8/29/94 
8/28/96 
N/A 
8/24/06 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
      
  
    

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

 
    
  

  

  

  

McNees 
Nuno 
Ryan 

Schramm 
Soltero 
Stewart 
Taber 
Tamburrino 

Kevin 
Griselda 
Elizabeth 
Kimberly 
Adriana 
Tracey 
Kathleen 
September 

  
E—-5-0¥ 

8/23/07 
N/A 
N/A 
8/24/06 
8/24/06 
8/24/06 
N/A 
8/24/06 

361 
382 
372 
329 
327 
326 
376 
328 

    

STEPHEN  E.  HJE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

10 

  

