BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE  SANTA  BARBARA  SCHOOL  DISTRICTS 

   
  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2008040130 

Araujo,.  Elayne;  Bailey,  John;  Burke,  Anais; 
Carmean,  Patty  Jo;  Carson,  Tiffany; 
Checketts,  Elizabeth;  Chiu,  Clanci;  Claffey, 
James;  Cornelius,  Ashley;  Cruz,  Marcelo; 
Cowden,  Suzanne;  Eisen,  Brian;  Estes, 
Patrick;  Finlay,  Krista;  Gallardo,  Juan; 
Gleason,  Ryan;  Harbison,  Sarah;  Hernandez, 
Helen;  Lane,  Rebecca;  Lent,  Valerie; 
Marshall,  Heather;  Martinez,  Amanda; 
McLain,  Christine;  Moran,  Matt;  Ohm,  Luke; 
Ortega,  Charles;  Rapp,  Jessica;  Sanchez, 
Francisco;  Sheldon,  Alexander;  Slatus, 
David;  Vaa,  Jeremy;  Vogt,  Tracy;  Woodard, 
Lindsay;  and  Zamora,  Joseph, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Chris  Ruiz,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2008,  in  Santa  Barbara,  California. 

Mary  L.  Dowell,  Esq.,  of  Liebert  Cassidy  Whitmore,  represented  the  Santa  Barbara 

School  Districts  (District). 

Robert  A.  Bartosh  and  Jeffrey  J.  Stinnett,  Esqs.,  of  Hathaway,  Perrett,  Webster, 

Powers,  Chrisman  and  Gutierrez,  represented  all  Respondent  teachers  (Respondents). 

   

The  District  served  a  Notice  of  Layoff  on  each  of  the  teacher  Respondents.  At  the 

hearing,  the  District  moved  to  dismiss  the  Accusation  as  to  all  Respondents,  with  the 
following  exceptions:  Araujo,  Elayne;  Bailey,  John;  Carson,  Tiffany;  Cornelius,  Ashley; 
Eisen,  Brian;  Estes,  Patrick;  Finlay,  Krista;  Gallardo,  Juan;  Gleason,  Ryan;  Hernandez, 
Helen;  Moran,  Matt;  Ohm,  Luke;  Sanchez,  Francisco;  Sheldon,  Alexander;  and  Vogt, 
Tracy.  The  District’s  motion  was  granted.

  

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

J.  Brian  Sarvis,  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acting  in  his  official  capacity, 
caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served  upon  each  Respondent 
pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  parties,  by  and 
through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been 
met. 

2. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  District  as  permanent,  probationary,  intern, 

pre-intern,  emergency  permitted,  waiver,  and/or  temporary  certificated  employees  of  the 
District. 

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  (Board)  was  given  written  notice  of  the 
recommendation  by  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that 
recommendation. 

4. 

On  March  15,  2008,  Respondents  were  given  written  notice  of  the 

recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

On  or  about  March  25,  2008,  Respondents  requested  a  hearing. 

It  was  established  that  cause  exists,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  for  not  re-employing  Respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year  for 
all  of  the  reasons  set  forth  below. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

The  District  decided  the  following: 

The  following  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  District  will  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-09  school 
year: 

Art 

English 

Health 

Foreign  Language 

(2.0  FTE') 

(11.0  FTE) 

(3.0  FTE) 

(1.0  FTE) 

'PTE  is  the  acronym  for  Full-Time  Employee  Position(s).

  

Math 

Music 

PE 

Psychologists 

Science 

Social  Science 

Special  Education 

(8.0  FTE) 

(1.0  FTE) 

(3.0FTE) 

(5.0  FTE) 

(5.0  FTE) 

(6.0  FTE) 

(6.0  FTE) 

  

  

TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  POSTIONS 

51  FTE 

8. 

The  Board  decided  that  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  services.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related 

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
as  determined  by  the  Board. 
The  District  proposed  an  “across-the-board”  two-percent  reduction.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
rather,  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

These  reductions  are  necessary  because  of  budget  reductions. 

10. 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2008.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.  3d  627  at  636). 

11. 

The  District  properly  created  its  seniority  list  by  determining  the  first  date  of 

paid  service  of  each  certificated  employee  and  properly  utilized  reasonable  “tie-breaker” 
criteria  when  necessary. 

“Skipping”  by  the  District 

12. 

The  District  retained,  or  “skipped”,  teachers  in  certain  programs,  such  as 

CORE  Knowledge  and  La  Cuesta  Community  Day  School,  contending  that  those  particular 
positions  require  special  training.  Whether  or  not  this  “skipping”  was  done  according  to  the 
law  need  not  be  decided  by  the  ALJ  because  the  “skipping”  of  these  teachers  only  affected 

 

  

certain  Respondents  who  were  dismissed  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing.  It  was  not 
established  that  the  District’s  “skipping”  affected  any  of  the  remaining  fifteen  Respondents. 
Thus,  it  was  not  established  that  the  District  gave  notice  to  a  Respondent  teacher  with  more 
seniority  in  order  to  retain  a  more  junior  teacher. 

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Findings  7-9  is  a  particular  kind  of  service 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law. 

3. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither 

arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  District's  teaching  positions  as  described  above  and 
to  give  notice  to  the  affected  teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  (Campbell 
vy,  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based  on  the  above  Findings,  including  the  preamble  to  this  Proposed  Decision,  the 
names  of  the  affected  teachers,  those  as  to  whom  final  notices  of  layoff  may  be  given,  are  as 
follows: 

Araujo,  Elayne;  Bailey,  John;  Carson,  Tiffany;  Cornelius,  Ashley;  Eisen,  Brian;  Estes, 
Patrick;  Finlay,  Krista;  Gallardo,  Juan;  Gleason,  Ryan;  Hernandez,  Helen;  Moran,  Matt; 
Ohm,  Luke;  Sanchez,  Francisco;  Sheldon,  Alexander;  and  Vogt,  Tracy. 

ORDER 

Because  of  the  reductions  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  the  teachers 
identified  in  Legal  Conclusion  No.  4  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year. 

Dated:  April___,  2008. 

CHRIS  RUIZ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

