BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
DESERT  SANDS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
116.6  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees, 

OAH  No.  2008030255 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Indio,  California,  on  April  24,  2008. 

Candace  M.  Bandoian,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Desert  Sands  Unified  School 

District. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Elizabeth  Aceves-Garcia, 

Christopher  Aguilar,  Nicole  Blakely,  Bridget  Burden,  Erin  Brande,  Brenna  Carnt, Astria 
Cota,  Darcie  Cotton,  Michael  Daugherty,  Amy  Diaz,  Sean  Dougherty,  Vanessa  Encinias, 
Jean  Emerson,  Luz  Franco,  Jared  Goldman,  Kimberly  Jenkins,  Kendra  Kamp,  Heidi  Knigge, 
Karl  Krebs,  Erica  McDonnell,  Jamie  McDuffie,  Terra  Manthey,  Robin  Markson,  Tiffany 
Martin,  Maria  Mendoza,  Rosa  Mesa,  Lori  Moore,  Julia  Morgan,  Cynthia  Mulvey,  Paul 
Murray,  John  Ohrenstein,  Jorge  Pareja,  Stephen  Peterson,  Kenneth  Petronis, Robert 
Quintana,  Shirley  Ramsay,  Sheryl  Rodriguez,  Steven  Royal,  Wendy  Rush,  Heather  Solis, 
Phillip  Solis,  Michelle  St.  Louis,  Christina  Taylor,  and  Ashley  Waggle. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondents  Carol  Acker,  Timothy 

Boyajian,  Mark  Brenner,  Kristine  Cattedra,  Victoria  Dougherty,  Steven  Eelkema,  Jennifer 
Fanton,  Eileen  Flanary  Jones,  Tara  Grover,  George  Ihara,  James  Hutcheson,  Linda  Knight, 
Tamara  Lindsay,  Julia  Morgan,  Kathryn  O’Dowd,  Jacelyn  Olson,  Cilvia  Ornelas,  Jean 
Ornelas,  Michelle  Ostendorf,  Belma  Pera,  Angella  L.  Plowman,  Briana  Samuelson,  Brooke 
Shapter,  Laura  Spradlin,  Michael  Sugarman,  Adela  Tili,  and  Clinton  Vallie. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24,  2008.

  

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Desert  Sands  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Desert  Sands  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  a  public  school 

district  headquartered  in  La  Quinta,  California.  The  District  serves  most  of  Indio,  La  Quinta, 
Palm  Desert,  Indian  Wells,  Bermuda  Dunes,  and  portions  of  Rancho  Mirage.  It  provides 
services  to  approximately  28,500  students  from  Kindergarten  through  12"  grades.  The 
District  maintains  and  operates  20  elementary  schools,  seven  middle  schools,  three 
comprehensive  high  schools,  two  alternative  high  schools,  and  several  other  programs.  It 
employs  nearly  1,500  certificated  employees. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five  member  Board  of  Education  (the 

Board).  Four  rotating  appointed  students  assist  the  Board. 

The  Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Dr.  Sharon  McGehee,  who  is  the 
Superintendent  of  Schools.  Jon  P.  Gaffney  is  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent, 
Personnel  Services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  the 
passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of 
California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  the  budgeting 
problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under  Education 
Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  certificated  employees 
no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority. 

A  public  school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in 

reverse  order  of  seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees 

  

 

2 

  

possess  a  credential,  special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  services  which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4. 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems.  As a result  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  District  projected  a  budget  deficit  of  about 
$13  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to 
balance  its  projected  budget  shortfall. 

Under  the  direction  of  Dr.  McGehee  and  Assistant  Superintendent  Gaffney,  the 
Districts  administrative  staff  prepared  a  recommendation  that  was  presented  to  the  Board  on 
March  4,  2008,  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  15/2007-2008,  which  provided 
that  certain  services  would  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  that 
certificated  employees  who  possessed  highly  needed  qualifications  should  be  retained  in  the 
2008-2009  school  year  regardless  of  seniority.  The  resolution  directed  the  Superintendent  to 
determine  which  employees’  services  might  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
and  to  give  notice  to  those  employees  as  required  by  law. 

5. 

Exhibit  A  to  Resolution  No.  15/2007-2008  (Reducing  or  Eliminating  Certain 

Certificated  Services  for  the  2008-2009  School  Year)  provided: 

Service 

2007-2008 
FTEs 

2008-2009 
FTEs 

FTE! 
Reduction 

  

ELEMENTARY  EDUCATION 

= 

-70.0 

4 
| 
i 

_ 
_ 

16.0 
0.6) 

    

  

  

  

  

70.0  | 
of: 

0.0 
oe 
0.0, 
0.0} 

"Subtotal  —  Elementary  Program  _  i 

"Elementary  Class  Size  Reduction, 
|  Grades K  -  3 
_  Elementary  Counselors 
   Jementary  Music 

     
      
  
  
  

= 16.0 
| 
‘Secondary Class Size  Increase  Student 
  | to  Teacher Ratio 29.0  to  29.5 

SECONDARY  EDUCATION 

16.0/——O*0.0 

FTE  stands  for  “full  time  equivalent.”

0.0 

  

a 

- 

_ 

. 

e@ 

  

  

“1.0. 
0.0, 
[ 
"Middle  School  Counselor 
00-05 
Middle  School  Music 
    
      
ATS 
(Subtotal—SecondaryProgram 

1.0 
0.5 

17.5 

: 

  

} 

_ 

__ 

__  | 

LE 

_ 

ee 

  

  

SPECIAL  EDUCATION 

| 
| 

- 

1.0 

-1.0 

0.0, 
| 

1.0. 
0.5)  | 

  

  

  

|  Preschool  Non-severe  Special  Day 
_ Classroom  (SDC) 
_  Preschool  Severe  SDC 
_Head  Start  SDC 
| 
_Subtotal—Secondary  Program 

    
    
    
    

‘Project Facilitators and Teachers 
'  Total  FTE  Reductions  — All 
(Programs 

10) 
I 

-116.6FTEs  | 

  

-1.0 
-0.5 | 

0.0 
0.0, 

250 

| 

    

| 

6. 

Exhibit  B  to  Resolution  No.  15/2007-2008  (Reducing  or  Eliminating  Certain 

@ 

Certificated  Services  for  the  2008-2009  School  Year)  provided: 

“The  services  of  certificated  employees  who  possess  credentials  and  qualifications 
needed  for  the  following  programs  shall  be  retained  in  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year 
regardless  of  seniority: 

1. 

2. 

All  Regular  Special  Education  Programs  and  Services  excluding 
services  limited  to  Early  childhood  Special  Education  Programs 

Fully  Credentialed  and  Authorized  Single  Subject  Credentials  in  the 
following  areas: 

a. 

English 

b.  Mathematics 

c. 

Science 

d. 

Social  Science 

e. 

Business 

e@ 

f. 

Foreign  Language 

 

  

  

  

  

g.  Music 

h. 

Art 

i. 

Home  Economics 

3. 

Individuals  who  possess  a  Reading  Specialist  Credential.” 

7. 

The  administrative  staff  reviewed  the  District’s  seniority  list,  a  document 
listing  an  employee  seniority  ranking  number  (from  most  recently  hired  extending  to  the 
most  senior  employee,  from  1  through  1424);  the  employee’s  name  associated  with  that  rank; 
that  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  in  a  probationary  capacity;  whether 
the  employee  was  a  first  year  probationary  employee,  a  second  year  probationary  employee, 
or  a  tenured  employee;  the  employee’s  teaching  credential;  and  whether  the  employee  had 
any  special  certifications  such  as  CLAD  (Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic 
Development)  Certificate. 

The  District’s  seniority  list  was  sent  to  each  school  site  in  February  2008,  and 

employees  were  invited  to  make  any  changes  or  corrections  to  the  list.  The  instructions 
accompanying  the  seniority  list  and  the  request  that  it  be  reviewed  did  not  specify  that  the 
updated  seniority  list  might  be  used  by  the  District  for  purposes  of  issuing  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  but  the  possibility  of  layoffs  was  well  known  within  the  District  and  there  was  no 
evidence  that  any  employee  suffered  prejudice  by  the  lack  of  information  related  to  the 
possible  use  of  the  seniority  list.  Before  issuing  the  recommendation  to  serve  preliminary 
layoff  notices,  the  District’s  seniority  list  was  revised  to  accurately  reflect  new  information  it 
received  and  verified,  and  all  known  positive  attrition  including  resignations,  retirements  and 
probationary  non-reelects  was  considered  to  determine  the  number  of  layoff  notices  that 
needed  to  be  served  and  upon  whom  they  should  be  served. 

8. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  with  the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year 
and  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  upcoming  2008-2009 
school-year:-Each-employee-was-notified-of  the  right  to  a  hearing...The-preliminary_notices 
were  personally  served  on  employees  by  the  site  supervisors,  except  when  an  employee  was 
not  at  the  site;  for  those  employees  not  on  site,  notices  were  served  by  regular  mail  and  by 
certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested.  Numerous  employees  served  with  preliminary 
notices  timely  requested  an  administrative  hearing.  The  accusation  and  other  required 
jurisdictional  documents  were  timely  served  on  those  employees,  most  of  whom  filed  a 
notice  of  defense.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

 

  

  

The  Administrative  Hearing 

9. 

On  April  24,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  The 

District  gave  an  opening  statement.  Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  the  District 
dismissed  numerous  accusations,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received, 
closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

10. 

The  District  dismissed  the  accusations  against  respondents  Clinton  Vallie, 

Veronica  Fernandez,  Carol  Miller,  Allison  Hillman,  Maria  Angie  Tapia,  Christina  Taylor, 
Megan  Weitz,  Whitney  Rosam,  Justin  Martin,  Michael  Walsh,  Christa  Aubry,  John  Mook, 
Tiffany  Black,  Angela  Borgen,  Lisa  Kenmuir,  Verdlee  Stevenson,  Jeanette  Rudolph,  Nicole 
Phillips,  Meredith  Choate,  Nancy  Chin,  Julia  Morgan,  Richard  Keene,  Jean  Emerson, 
Theresa  McFarland,  Jennifer  O’Donnell,  Amy  Pollock,  Helen  Chang,  Karen  Tenenbaum, 
Kira  Zabrowski,  Nicole  Faay  Dean,  Kristin  Walker,  Caroline  Dourley,  Omar  Castro,  Paul 
Gilbert,  Michael  Miller,  Cynthia  Mulvey,  and  Carol  Carey. 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

ll. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Exhibit  A 

(Factual  Finding  5)  were  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and 
discontinued.  The  reduction  and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within 
the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  cause  for  the  layoff  related  to  the  welfare 
of  the  District  and  the  students  it  serves. 

No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated 

by  state  or  federal  law. 

The  Seniority  List 

12. 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list,  a  living  document  that  is  updated  as  new 

employees  are  hired  and  as  other  employees  retire  or  resign.  The  method  by  which  the  District 
attempted  to  maintain  an  accurate  seniority  list  in  this  matter  was  described  in  Factual  Finding  7. 

13. 

The  amended  seniority  list  finally  used  by  the  District  in  this  layoff  proceeding 

was  accurate,  except  for  employee  Paul  Murray,  whose  correct  seniority  date  was  September  10, 
2007,  and  not  October  10,  2007,  as  originally  set  forth.  Corrections  were  made  to  reflect  that 
employee’s  proper  seniority  date.

The  District’s  Layoff Procedure 

14. 

According  to  Assistant  Superintendent  Gaffney,  the  District  determined  there 
was  a  need  to  retain  junior  employees  who  possessed  certain  skills  or  capabilities  which  their 
more  senior  counterparts  lacked  in  order  to  carry  out  the  District’s  educational  mission.  On 
that  basis,  the  District  decided  to  skip: 
Education  programs  and  services,  excluding  services  limited  to  early  childhood  Special 
Education  programs;  (2)  employees  who  were  fully  credentialed  with  credentials  authorizing 
them  to  teach  a  single  subject  in  English,  Mathematics,  Science,  Social  Science,  Business, 
Foreign  Language,  Music,  Art,  or  Home  Economics;  and  (3)  individuals  who  possessed  a 
Reading  Specialist  Credential.  The  District  has  a  high  need  to  retain  these  individuals.  The 
District  sent  “skipping”  letters  to  these  employees. 

(1)  All  employees  providing  regular  Special 

The  District  then  looked  at  the  Board’s  resolution  and  determined  who  the  most 

junior  employees  were  who  were  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  were 
scheduled  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  under  the  resolution.  For  these  employees,  the  District 
attempted  to  determine  if  an  employee  could  “bump”  a  more  junior  employee.”  The  Board 
adopted  a  tie-breaking  procedure,  a  method  by  which  employees  having  the  same  seniority 
date  could  be  ranked  for  layoff  purposes,  but  the  use  of  the  tie-breaking  procedure  was  not 
necessary  to  resolve  any  dispute  in  this  matter.  Through  this  elimination  process,  the  District 
determined  which  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

Ultimately,  no  junior  employee  was  retained  to  provide  services  a  more  senior 
employee  was  available  to  provide  unless  the  junior  employee  was  “skipped”  in  accordance 
with  the  Board’s  resolution. 

Preliminary  layoff  notices  were  sent  to  130  employees.  The  District  sent  notices  to 
more  employees  than  the  number  of  FTE  reductions  because  many  employees  had  the  same 
seniority  date  (August  31,  2006)  and  had  same  rank  under  the  tie-breaker.  When  the  budget 
problems  became  clearer,  the  District  retained  these  (and  several  more  senior)  employees. 
The  District  rescinded  several  layoff  notices  that  were  sent  to  employees  who  established 
that  information  contained  in  the  seniority  list  was  incorrect. 

    

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

2 
or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  holds  that  position.

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

2. 

1. 

students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services  to  reduce.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion  to 
determine  the  extent  to  which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 

reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  A  school  board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply 
because  the  school  board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board 
of  Trustees  of  Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute. 

: 

4. 

For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b)  provides: 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.” 

5. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  who  render  services  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  A  district  may  move  a  junior 
employee  upward  from  the  bottom  of  a  seniority  list,  “skipping”  over  more  senior 
employees,  so  long  as the  junior  employee  being  retained  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render  services  which  more  senior  employees  are  not.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

6. 

In  accordance  with  the  District’s  representations,  cause  exists  to  dismiss  the 

accusations  filed  against  respondents  Clinton  Vallie,  Veronica  Fernandez,  Carol  Miller, 
Allison  Hillman,  Maria  Angie  Tapia,  Christina  Taylor,  Megan  Weitz,  Whitney  Rosam,  Justin 
Martin,  Michael  Walsh,  Christa  Aubry,  John  Mook,  Tiffany  Black,  Angela  Borgen,  Lisa 
Kenmuir,  Verdlee  Stevenson,  Jeanette  Rudolph,  Nicole  Phillips,  Meredith  Choate,  Nancy 
Chin,  Julia  Morgan,  Richard  Keene,  Jean  Emerson,  Theresa  McFarland,  Jennifer  O’Donnell, 
Amy  Pollock,  Helen  Chang,  Karen  Tenenbaum,  Kira  Zabrowski,  Nicole  Faay  Dean,  Kristin 

  

 

  

Walker,  Caroline  Dourley,  Omar  Castro,  Paul  Gilbert,  Michael  Miller,  Cynthia  Mulvey,  and 
Carol  Carey. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  9  and  10. 

7. 

As  a  result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  who  are  not  identified  in  Legal 
Conclusion  6  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close of  the  current  school  year 
and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously  served 

with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
except  for  those  respondents  identified  in  Factual  Finding  10  and  Legal  Conclusion  6. 

DATED: 

25 

10  g 

rasta 

JAMES  AHLER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

