  

BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE  EL  MONTE  CITY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  NO.  L2008030261 

Respondents  Listed  on  Exhibit  “A”  Who 
Have  Returned  a  Request  for  Hearing  form 

Respondents. 

  

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  23,  2008,  at  the  Board  Room  of  the  El  Monte 
City  School  District,  El  Monte;  California. 

Susan  Ormond,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  El  Monte  City  School  District. 

Richard  J.  Schwab  and  Laurence  Trygstad,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

Respondents. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision.  During  the 
hearing,  the  District  submitted  the  “District’s  Prehearing  Brief,”  which  was  marked  as 
exhibit  17.  Respondents  submitted  “Respondents’  Administrative  Law  Brief,”  which  was 
marked  as  exhibit  K. 

SUMMARY 

The  Board  of  Education  of  the  E]  Monte  City  School  District  (District)  decided  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  personnel  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the 
competency  and  dedication  of  the  teachers  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be  reduced  or 
eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking  ties  between  employees  with 
the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code 
requirements. 

 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Jeff  Seymour,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District,  filed  the  Accusation  in  his 

official  capacity. 

2.  Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3.  On  or  about  March  10,  2008,  Mr.  Seymour  recommended  that  the  Board  of 

Education  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  Mr.  Seymour  recommended  the  reduction  and/or  elimination  of  46 
full-time-equivalency  (FTE)  certificated  employees  as  follows: 

Nursing  Services 

School  Psychologist  Services 

Kindergarten  through  8th  Grade  Special  Education 
Mild/Moderate  Classroom  Teaching  Services 

Kindergarten  through  8th  Grade  Inclusion  Specialist  Services 

4.0  FTE 

Special  Education:  Physically  Handicapped  Teaching  Services 

2.0  FTE 

Kindergarten  through  8th  Grade  Self-Contained  Classroom 
Teaching  Services 

24.0  FTE 

6th  Grade  through  8th  Grade  Departmentalized 
Classroom  Teaching  Services  (core  setting) 

Assistant  Principal 

1.0  FTE 

_  LOFTE 

6.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE 

5.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

46.0  FTE 

Administrator  of  Alternative  Education 

  

TOTAL  CERTICATED  POSITIONS 

4.  On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08:04,  to  discontinue  or 

reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3.  The  Board  further 
determined  that  based  on  the  discontinuance  or  reduction  of  services,  it  would  be  necessary 
to  decrease  the  number  of  certified  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school  year  by  a 
corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions.  The  Board  also  directed  the 
Superintendent  to  “take  all  actions  necessary  and  proper  to  the  accomplishment  of  the 
purposes  of  this  Resolution.”

  

  

5.  On  March  11,  2008,  the  superintendent  notified  Respondents  in  writing  that  he  had 
recommended  to  the  governing  board  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year.  The  mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification.  All  but  one  respondent  made 
timely  requests  for  hearing. 

6.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  employees 

who  requested  a  hearing. 

7.  The  Notice  of  Accusation  stated  that  “unless  a  written  request  for  hearing  signed 

by  you  or  on  your  behalf  is  received  by  the  Governing  Board  on  or  before  4:30  p.m.  on 
Monday,  April  7,  2008,  the  Board  may  proceed  on  the  Accusation  without  a  hearing.  The 
request  for  a  hearing  may  be  made  by  mailing  or  delivering  the  enclosed  form  entitled 
‘Notice  of  Defense’  or  by  delivering  or  mailing  in  a  Notice  of  Defense  as  provided  in  Section 
11506  of  the  Government  Code,  to:  ...”  All  but  two  of  the  respondents  filed  Individual 
Notices  of  Defense  by  April  7,  2008.  Respondents  Michelle  Aviles  and  Stella  Redenbaugh 
each  submitted  an  individual  Notice  of  Defense  on  April  9,  2008.  The  District  contends  that 
respondents  Aviles  and  Redenbaugh  do  not  have  a  right  to  a  hearing  because  their  failure  to 
submit  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  The  District’s  contention  is  not  persuasive.  It  is  noted, 
that  on  March  12,  2008,  respondents’  counsel  served  the  District  with  a  Special  Notice  of 
Defense  specifically  citing  Government  Code  section  11506.  In  this  Notice  of  Defense, 
respondents’  counsel  states  that  he  is  representing  all  respondents  and  that  he  is  requesting  a 
hearing  on  behalf  of  all  respondents.  This  satisfies  the  requirements  of  section  11506. 
Therefore,  all  named  respondents,  including  respondents  Aviles  and  Redenbaugh  are  entitled 
toa  hearing.  All  other  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in 

Factual  Finding  3,  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

9.  The  Board  considered  attrition,  including  resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for 

leave,  in  determining  the  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  employees. 

10.  The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  current  assignments  and  locations, 
advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations. 

11,  Employee  Laura  King,  who  is  not  a  respondent  in  this  matter,  is  classified  as  a 
probationary  employee  and  is  listed  as  number  226  in  the  seniority  list  based  on a  first  date 
of  hire  of  September  1,  1994.  Ms.  King  was  hired  to  work  in  the  Child  Development 
Program  in  1994  and  became  a  permanent  employee.  She  resigned  from  that  position  prior 
to  the  2007/2008  school  year.  Ms.  King  was  then  rehired  on  September  4,  2007,  to  teach  a 
kindergarten  class  for  students  in  special  education  —  mild/moderate.  The  District 
reclassified  Ms.  King  as  probationary  when  she  was  rehired. 

 

  

12.  With  respect  to  Ms.  King,  the  District’s  seniority  list  is  incorrect  for  two  reasons. 
Ms.  King’s  seniority  date  should  be  September  4,  2007,  and  she  should  have  been  classified 
as  a  permanent  employee. 
In  San  Jose  Teacher  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.  3d  627, 
the  Court  of  Appeal  states  on  page  641,  “If  a  certificated  employee  resigns  and  is  thereafter 
reemployed,  his  date  of  employment  is  normally  deemed  by  section  44848  to  be  the  date  of 
reemployment....”  The  court  also  held  that,  under  section  44931,  a  permanent  employee 
does  not  lose  permanent  status  if  the  employee  is  rehired  within  39  months  after  resigning. 
The  court  stated,  “We  hold  that  section  44931  provides  that  a  break  in  service  shall  be 
‘disregarded’  as  to  individual  rights,  burdens  and  benefits,  but  not  as  to  seniority  rights  which 
affect  other  employees.” 

13.  Therefore,  Ms.  King  should  be  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  under 

Education  Code  section  44931,  with  a  seniority  date  of  September  4,  2007,  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44848.  Ms.  King’s  proper  place  in  the  seniority  list  should  be 
number  627.  As  a  result,  seven  named  respondents  who  teach  in  special  education  — 
mild/moderate  have  more  seniority  than  Ms.  King. 

14.  Respondents  argue  that  all  seven  of  the  respondents  who  teach  in  special 
education  should  be  retained  because  they  have  more  seniority  than  Ms  King.  Respondents’ 
argument  is  rejected.  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  states  in  pertinent  part, 
“Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any 
other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  In  this  case,  all  of  the  seven  special 
education  teachers  who  received  notices  are  probationary.  Under  Education  Code  section 
44955,  they  are  not  entitled  to  “bump”  Ms.  King. 

15.  Respondent  Leticia  Serrano  submitted  evidence  that  she  has  earned  a 

Supplementary  Subject  Matter  Authorization  —  Introductory  English.  However,  Ms.  Serrano 
did  not  submit  this  supplemental  authorization  to  the  District  for  inclusion  in  her  employee 
file.  Even  if  respondent  Serrano  were  given  credit  for  this  supplemental  authorization,  she 
would  nevertheless  be  subject  to  layoff  as  she  would  only  move  up  one  spot  on  the  seniority 
list. 

16.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

17.  The  District  served  seven  respondents  with  precautionary  notices  in  the  event  the 

District  erred  in  preparing  the  seniority  list  or  in  the  event  that  the  District  improperly 
skipped  a  certificated  employee. 

18.  The  District  also  served  precautionary  notices  on  respondents  Stephanie  Lai  and 

Kimberly  Mejia.  The  District  contends  that  respondents  Mejia  and  Lai  are  temporary 
employees  providing  services  in  a  categorically  funded  program.  However,  there  was  no 
evidence  presented  at  the  hearing  that  these  categorically  funded  programs  will  lose  funding

  

for  the  2008/2009  school  year.  In  an  abundance  of  caution,  the  District  served  respondents 
Mejia  and  Lai  with  a  notice  of  recommendation  and  an  accusation.  Both  filed  timely 
requests  for  hearing  and  a  timely  Notices  of  Defense.  Respondent  Lai  holds  a  clear  school 
psychologist  credential  and  provides  services  as  a  school  psychologist.  As  noted  in  Factual 
Finding  3,  the  District  is  reducing  school  psychologist  services  by  1  FTE,  and  respondent  Lai 
is  the  least  senior  employee  providing  such  services.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the 
District’s  decision  to  reduce  psychologist  services  by  1  FTE  is  arbitrary. 

19,  The  evidence  established  that  respondent’s  are  all  outstanding  teachers. 
However,  the  District  has  projected  a  budget  deficit  for  the  ensuing  school  year  of  6.9%, 
amounting  to  several  million  dollars. 

20.  During  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  and  made  a  motion  to  dismiss  the 
accusations  against  three  respondents  who  were  served  with  precautionary  notices,  including 
respondents  Andrea  Delgado,  Pedro  Galindo  and  Tina  Hu.  The  District  also  made  a  motion 
to  dismiss  the  accusations  against  respondents  Jennifer  Park  and  Rosanna  Pitassi.  The 
motions  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  respondents  Delgado,  Galindo,  Hu,  Park  and 
Pitassi  were  granted. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
were  met.  Therefore,  jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all  Respondents. 

2.  Cause  was  established  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce  the 
number  of  certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds 
of  services.  The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  identified  services  were  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decisions  relate  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools 
and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 

3.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more 

senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

4.  Cause  exists  to  layoff  respondents  Pamela  Alderete,  Stephanie  Arnold,  Michelle 

Aviles,  Angelica  Bahena,  Eliza  Blanco,  Ava  Brooks,  Coleen  Casado,  Betty  Castaneda, 
Denise  Contreras,  Kara  De  Belius,  Allan  Edpao,  Nicandro  Gutierrez,  Jeff  Ha,  Susan 
Halcomb,  Demetria  Hall,  Joy  Healy,  Laura  Jasso,  Oscar  Lopez,  Christina  Mendoza, 
Gabriella  Montoya,  Nicole  Morris,  Sylvia  Najera,  Tammy  Okado,  Monica  Ortiz-Salazar, 
Bellanira  Pesina,  Stella  Redenbaugh,  Whitney  Relf,  Bertha  Rodriguez,  Ronald  Sais,  Maria 
Sanchez,  Leticia  Serrano,  Darlene  Sleight,  Randel  Syrja,  Joanne  Tran,  and  Stephanie  Lai 

5,  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  employees  Jennifer  Park,  Rozanna 

Pitassi,  Andrea  Delgado,  Pedro  Galindo,  and  Tina  Hu,  pursuant  to  Factual  Finding  20. 

| 

|

  

  

6.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  Jasmine  Gamboa,  Yajaira  Mancia, 

Alfredo  Plazas,  Lucia  Soltero  and  Kimberly  Mejia.  These  respondents  were  given 
precautionary  notices  and  the  evidence  established  that  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  layoff  the 
respondents  who  were  given  precautionary  notices  in  order  for  the  District  to  meet  its  goal  of 
reducing  particular  kinds  of  services. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Pamela  Alderete,  Stephanie  Arnold,  Michelle 

Aviles,  Angelica  Bahena,  Eliza  Blanco,  Ava  Brooks,  Coleen  Casado,  Betty  Castaneda, 
Denise  Contreras,  Kara  De  Belius,  Allan  Edpao,  Nicandro  Gutierrez,  Jeff  Ha,  Susan 
Halcomb,  Demetria  Hall,  Joy  Healy,  Laura  Jasso,  Oscar  Lopez,  Christina  Mendoza, 
Gabriella  Montoya,  Nicole  Morris,  Sylvia  Najera,  Tammy  Okado,  Monica  Ortiz-Salazar, 
Bellanira  Pesina,  Stella  Redenbaugh,  Whitney  Relf,  Bertha  Rodriguez,  Ronald  Sais,  Maria 
Sanchez,  Leticia  Serrano,  Darlene  Sleight,  Randel  Syrja,  Joanne  Tran,  and  Stephanie  Lai, 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

2.  The  Accusations  against  respondents  Jennifer  Park,  Rozanna  Pitassi,  Andrea 

Delgado,  Pedro  Galindo,  and  Tina  Hu,  Jasmine  Gamboa,  Yajaira  Mancia,  Alfredo  Plazas, 
Lucia  Soltero  and  Kimberly  Mejia  are  dismissed. 

Dated: 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

