BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
LEMON  GROVE  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff/Accusation 
Against: 

    

OAH  No.  2008030256 

36  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES, 

      

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  before  Roy  W.  Hewitt,  Administrative  Law 

Judge,  at  Lemon  Grove,  California  on  May  2,  2008. 

Anthony  P.  De  Marco,  Esq.  of  the  Law  Offices  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  & 

Romo,  represented  the  Lemon  Grove  School  District  (the  district). 

During  the  course  of  the  hearing  the  district  dismissed  the  accusation  against  the 

following  22  respondents:  Hillary  Anelli;  Denise  Baldreaux-Hernandez;  Kelly Campbell; 
Pablo  Charavin;  Darryl  Cooke;  Ellen  Davis;  Susan  Farnsworth;  Kyle  Griffith;  James  Haynes; 
Kellie  Labor;  Shari  Mathes;  Kristine  Morgan;  Melvetta  Owens;  Sarah  Ponce;  Irma  Poulin; 
Sylvia  Sana;  Michelle  Silverio;  Veronica  Siordia;  Cynthia  Smith;  Sandra  Smith;  Trisha  Stack; 
and  Joseph  Walters. 

One  of  the  remaining  14  respondents,  Diane  Gibson,  waived  her  right  to  a  hearing  by 

failing  to  file  a  notice  of  defense. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Esq.  of  Tosdal,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  11  of  the  14 
remaining  respondents  and  two  of  the  14  respondents,  Kristina  Luchtel-(a.k.a.  Kristina 
Rhoades)  and  Cynthia  Piligian  represented  themselves. 

  

  Oral and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May  2, 

2008. 

- 

 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

On  February  26,  2008,  the  Superintendent  of  the  district  recommended,  with 

regard  to  the  ensuing  school  year,  that  the  Governing  Board of the  district  (the  board)  reduce 
or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  provided  by  the  district  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

2. 

On  February  26,  2008,  the  board  adopted  Resolution  number  07-08-09, 

determining  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at 
the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  The  board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  must  be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time  equivalent 
(FTE)  positions: 

PKS 

Administrative  Services 
K-5  Program  Reduction 
Middle  School  English  Language  Arts 
Middie  School  Math 
Middle  School  History/Social  Sciences  (Social  Studies) 
Middle  School  Science 
Physical  Education  Grades  6-7-8 
Physical  Education  Support 
Categorical  Program  Support 
Psychologist 
Social  Worker 
RSP 

Total  FTE  positions  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated 

ETE 

 
W
Y
A
N
N
Y
N
N

 
E
N
B

 
E
H
N
F

36 

The  parties  do  not  dispute  the  fact  that  the  services  listed  above  are  PKS,  which  may 

be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

3. 

The  district’s  recommendation  and  the  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  the  services  listed  in  Finding  2,  above,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious; 
rather,  the  recommendation  and  decision  were  due  to  “the  financial  constraints  resulting  from 
revenue  being  insufficient  to  maintain  current  levels  of  programs  and  necessary  program 
changes  resulting  therefrom.”  (Exhibit  I.)  Thus  the  board’s  decision  represents  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

4. 

The  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  determined  by  the  board. 

 

  

5. 

On  March  5,  2008,  all  respondents  affected  by  the  layoffs  received  written 

notice  notifying  them  that  “pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the 
Governing  Board  has  directed  that  notice  be  given  to  you  that  your  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year.”  (Exhibit  2.)  That  same  date,  March  5, 
2008,  respondents  were  also  served  with  a  copy  of  the  Board’s  resolution  number  07-08-09,  a 
list  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  and  a 
blank  “Request  for  Hearing.”  Additionally,  the  March  5,  2008  notice  advised  respondents 
that  they  must  file  their  requests  for  hearing  with  the  district  by  March  14,  2008  and  that 
“Failure  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified  above  will  constitute  a  waiver  or 
the  chance  to  participate  in  a  hearing,  and  to  an  advisory  determination  by  an  administrative 
law  judge  regarding  your  release.”  (Exhibit  2.) 

6. 

On  April  4,  2008,  the  Superintendent  of  the  district  made  and  filed  an 

accusation  in  his  official  capacity.  That  same  date,  the  accusation,  a  blank  notice  of  defense,  a 
notice  of  hearing  and  copies  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  and  Government 
Code  sections  11500,  11505,  11506,  11507.5,  11507.6,  11507.7,  11509,  and  11520  were 
served  on  respondents. 

7. 

Thirty-four  (34)  of  the  36  respondents  timely  submitted  their  requests  for  a 
hearing  and  notices  of  defense  requesting  a  hearing  to  determine  if  cause  exists  for  not  re- 
employing  them  for  the  ensuing  year.  Two  respondents,  Diane  Gibson  and  Irma  Poulin, 
failed  to  file  notices  of  defense.' 

8. 

10. 

11. 

9. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

Each  of  the  34  respondents  who  requested  a  hearing  and  filed  notices  of 

As  part  of  the  overall  reduction  in  PKS,  the  district  is  releasing  its  temporary 

defense  was  properly  noticed  of  the  date,  time  and  place  of  the  instant  hearing. 

certificated  employees.  As.a  general  rule,  the  district  releases  all  temporary  certificated 
employees  prior  to  releasing  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees.  District 
temporary  certificated  employees  are  employed  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44909. 
Education  Code  section  44909  allows  categorically  funded  employment  under  specific  terms 
and  conditions.  Education  Code  section  44909  provides,  “The  terms  and  conditions  under 
which  such  persons  are  employed  shall  be  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  employee  and  the 
governing  board  and  such  agreements  shall  be  reduced  to  writing.” 

    

  

In  the  present  instance,  all  temporary certificated  employees  signed  a  written 
employment  contract  that  specifically  and  unequivocally  set  forth  the  term  of  employment 
and  stated,  “The  anticipated  length  of  employment,  if  specified  above,  is  not  to  be  construed 

Notwithstanding  this  failure,  as  noted  in  the  procedural  section of this  proposed  decision,  the  accusation 

* 
was  dismissed  as  to  respondent  Irma  Poulin.

as  a  promise  or  agreement  of  employment  for  a  particular  length  of  time.”  The  contract  for 
these  employees  further  defined  “temporary.”  The  temporary  certificated  employees  who 
signed  the  contract  were  informed  that  they  were  considered  temporary  because  “You  are 
employed  to  perform  services  in  a  categorically  funded  project  (or  to  replace  a  regular 
teacher  who  is  performing  services  in  a  categorically  funded  project)  which  is  not  required  by 
federal  or  state  statute  pursuant  to  and  under  the  terms  and  conditions  of  Education  Code 
section  44909.”  (Exhibit  9.) 

All  teachers  who  signed  the  temporary  certificated  employee  contracts  understood  that 

there  was  no  guarantee  that  categorically  funded  programs  would  be  continued  from  year  to 
year  because  the  continuation  of  categorically  funded  programs  depended  on  whether  they 
would  be  funded  in  the  future.  Funding  of  categorically  funded  programs  is  not  controlled  by 
the  district.  For  example,  there  are  federal,  state,  county,  and  city  categorically  funded 
programs  which  are  dependent  on  the  availability  of  funds  from  the  federal,  state,  county  and 
city  funding  sources.  If  the  funds  are  depleted  and  not  replenished,  the  programs  end  and 
there  are  no  longer  positions  for  the  teachers  employed  to  provide  the  programs. 

12. 

Three  respondents,  Lauren  Keane,  Cynthia  Piligian,  and  Stephanie  Webster  are 

classified  by  the  district  as  temporary  certificated  employees.  All  three  are  “backfilling”  for 
teachers  participating  in  categorically  funded  programs.  For  example,  Nina  Drammissi,  a 
certificated  employee  with  a  first  date  of  paid  service  of  September  2,  1987,  is  currently  “on 
loan  to  Ruben  H.  Fleet”  participating  in  a  grant  program.  Respondent  Stephanie  Webster 
was  hired  by  the  district  to  teach  respondent  Drammissi’s  classes  while  Drammissi  was 
working  in  the  grant  program.  Obviously,  when  the  Ruben  H.  Fleet  grant  program  ended 
Webster  knew  that  Drammisi  would  return  to  the  district  and  Webster’s  services  would  no 
longer  be  required  to  fill  Drammisi’s  position. 

13. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  as  to  respondent  Kristina  Luchtel  (a.k.a.  Rhoades) 

the  district  was  not  seeking  elimination  of  her  position,  it  was  only  eliminating  .2FTE  of  her 
position,  thus  reducing  her  position  from  |  FTE  to  .8  FTE. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  instant  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided,  as  required. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  2  are  PKS  within  the  meaning  of 

Education  Code  section  44955. 

3. 

Based  on  the  Factual  Findings,  considered  in  their  entirety,  cause  exists  to 

reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  by  36  FTE  positions,  due  to  the 

budget  crisis  described  in  Factual  Finding  3.  

  

4, 

5. 

Cause  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  certificated  teachers  who  were  working  for  the 

district  under  contracts  of  employment  as  temporary  certificated  employees  should  be 
classified  as  probationary  employees.  Respondents  are  incorrect.  As  noted  in  Finding  11, 
Education  Code  section  44909  expressly  allows  the  district  to  hire  personnel  for  categorically 
funded  programs  under  contracts  that  specify  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  temporary 
employment.  Respondents  Lauren  Keane,  Cynthia  Piligian,  and  Stephanie  Webster  were  not 
hired  to  work  on  categorically  funded  projects.  They  were,  however,  hired  to  “backfill”  or 
substitute  for  teachers  who  were  working  in  categorically  funded  programs.  Respondents 
signed  temporary  certificated  employee  contracts  with  the  district  and  knew  that  their 
employment  was  contingent  on  continuation  of  the  categorically  funded  programs. 
Respondents  were,  therefore,  properly  categorized  as  temporary  certificated  employees  by 
the  district  and  are  appropriately  slated  for  lay-off. 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  13,  the  district  is  not  seeking  complete  elimination  of 

Kristina  Luchtel’s  (a.k.a.  Rhoades)  position;  rather,  it  is  only  eliminating  .2  FTE  of  her 
position,  thus  reducing  her  position  from  1  FTE  to  .8  FTE. 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  the  introductory  portion  of  this  proposed  decision,  the  district 

8. 

Based  on  the  modifications  set  forth  in  Legal  Conclusions  6  and  7,  above, 

dismissed  the  accusation  against  the  following  22-respondents:  Hillary  Anelli;  Denise 
Baldreaux-Hernandez;  Kelly  Campbell;  Pablo  Charavin;  Darryl  Cooke;  Ellen  Davis;  Susan 
Farnsworth;  Kyle  Griffith;  James  Haynes;  Kellie  Labor;  Shari  Mathes;  Kristine  Morgan; 
Melvetta  Owens;  Sarah  Ponce;  Irma  Poulin;  Sylvia  Sana;  Michelle  Silverio;  Veronica  Siordia; 
Cynthia  Smith;  Sandra  Smith;  Trisha  Stack;  and  Joseph  Walters. 

cause  exists  to  notify  the  remaining  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during 
the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  PKS. 
/// 
HH 
/// 

   

  

WHEREFORE,  THE  FOLLOWING  ORDER  is  hereby  made: 

ORDER   

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained,  in  part.  The  district  shall  notify  the  following  13 

respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to 
lack  of  funds  and  the  resulting  need  to  reduce  or  discontinue  PKS: 

1. 
3. 
5. 
7. 
9. 
ll. 
13. 

Andreen,  Kevin 
Keane,  Lauren 
Lamp,  Hanya 
Nunez,  Susan 
Stathis,  Esme 
Warren,  Adrianne 
Wulftange,  Frank 

2. 
4, 
6. 
8. 
10. 
12. 

Gibson,  Diane 
Lacsamana,  Francisco 
Menikoff,  Stacy 
Piligian,  Cynthia 
Walker,  Erin 
Webster,  Stephanie 

2. 

The  district  shall  notify  respondent  Kristina  Luchtel’s  (a.k.a.  Rhoades)  that  her 

position  is  being  reduced  from  ]  FTE  to  .8  FTE. 

3. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  the  22  respondents  listed  in  Legal 

Conclusion  7,  above,  and  the  district  may  not  notify  those  respondents  that  their  services  will 
not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

G  ,  2008 

DATED:  May 

ROY  W.  HEWITT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

Paxta dl Sap 

  
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  

