  

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
THE  SAN  MARINO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  12008030387 

Certificated  Employees  of  the  San  Marino 
Unified  School  District: 

CRUZ,  ROCIO 
D’AMATO,  ROSE 
DENG,  JOSHUA 
FONG,  HANNAH 
GIBSON,  CATHARINE 
GLENNY,  EMMA 
KEMERY,  CHERYL 
KUHN,  MELISSA 
LEAHY,  LAUREN 
SOHN,  CHRISTINE 
VALCORZA,  OLIVER 

  

Teachers  of  the  San  Marino  Unified  School 
District 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Chris  Ruiz,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14,  2008,  at  1665  West  Drive,  San  Marino,  California. 

Howard  A.  Friedman  and  Maggy  M.  Athanasious,  Esqgs.,  of  Fagan  Friedman  and 

Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented  the  San  Marino  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Richard  Schwab,  Esq.,  of  Trygstad,  Schwab  and  Trygstad,  represented  all  Respondent 

teachers  (Respondents). 

The  District  served  a  Notice  of  Layoff  on  each  of  the  teacher  Respondents.  At  the 

hearing,  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  as  to  Respondents  Kemery  and  Sohn. 
Additionally,  the  District  requested  that  it  be  allowed  to  “skip”  Respondent  Valcorza,  or,  in 

 

  

the  alternative,  that  an  Order  issue  allowing  the  District  to  give  Respondent  Valcorza  notice 
of  layoff  along  with  the  remaining  Respondents. 

After  the  hearing,  the  record  remained  to  allow  the  parties  to  submit  briefs  which 

were  due  by  April  16,  2008.  The  District  filed  a  closing  brief  which  was  marked  as  exhibit 
16.  Respondents  filed  a  closing  brief  which  was  marked  as  exhibit  C. 

The  issues  in  this  case  are  clear.  Respondents’  contend  that  the  District  improperly 
“skipped  over”  Respondent  Valcorza,  the  least  senior  secondary  English  teacher,  and  also 
that  two  “temporary”  teachers  were  not  given  notice  of  layoff  while  other  permanent  teachers 
were  given  said  notice. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

L. 

Linda  de 

la  Torre,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acting  in  her 
official  capacity,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served  upon 
each  Respondent  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955. 
The  parties,  by  and  through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met,  with  the  exception  that  the  District  contended  that  only 
Respondents  Sohn,  Leahy,  and  Kuhn  properly  requested  a  hearing.  The  District’s  contention 
was  overruled  for  all  the  reasons  set  forth  on  the  record. 

2. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  District  as  permanent,  probationary,  intern, 
pre-intern,  emergency  permitted,  waiver,  and/or  temporary  certificated  employees  of  the 
District. 

3. 

On  March  4,  2008,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the 
Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  issued  a  written  Resolution  (number  10)  which 
approved  the  recommendation  by  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that 
recommendation. 

On 

4. 

March 

the 
recommendation  that 
to  Respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

2008, 
be  given 

7, 
notice 

Respondents 

written 

notice 

given 

were 

of 

5. 

It  was  established  that  cause  exists,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  for  not  reemploying  Respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year  for 
all  of  the  reasons  set  forth  below. 

 

  

6. 

The  District  decided  the  following: 

The  following  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  District  will  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-09  school 
year: 

At  Risk  Counselor 

English  Teacher-Secondary 

English  Lang.  Development-Elementary  .6 

Elementary-General 

Math-Secondary 

Pre-K-Intensive  Needs 

Program  Specialist-Special  Education 

Spanish-Secondary 

Social  Science-Secondary 

4 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

4 

4 

FTE! 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

FTE 

6"  Grade  Social  Science-English 

7. 

8. 

  

11.4  FTE 

TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  POSTIONS 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related 

The  Board  decided  that  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  services.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  rather,  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

   

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
as  determined  by  the  Board. 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2008.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 

This  reduction  is  necessary  because  of  budget  reductions. 

'  Full-  Time  Employee  position(s). 

9. 

(1983)  144  Cal.App.  3d  627  at  636).  The  District  further  stated  its  intent  to  withdraw  layoff 
notices  to  the  most  senior  teachers  laid  off  if  additional  attrition  occurs. 

e 

10. 

The  District  properly  created  its  seniority  list  by  determining  the  first  date  of 

paid  service  of  each  certificated  employee  and  properly  utilized  reasonable  “tie-breaker” 
criteria  when  necessary. 

“Skipping”  Respondent  Valcorza 

ll. 

The  District  retained,  or  “skipped”,  Respondent  Valcorza  and  gave  notice  to  a 

teacher  with  more  seniority  in  order  to  retain  Respondent  Valcorza.  Respondent  Valcorza 
holds  a  provisional  internship  permit  to  teach  English,  with  a  Cross-cultural,  Language  and 
Academic  Development  Certificate,  commonly  referred  to  by  its  acronym  CLAD. 
Respondent  Gibson  was  the  more  senior  teacher  affected  by  the  “skipping”  of  Respondent 
Valcorza.  Both  were  considered  for  layoff  under  the  category  “English  Teacher-Secondary.” 

13. 

12. 

e 

Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  states: 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate 
from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for 
either  of  the  following  reasons: 

The  District  demonstrated  a  specific  need  to  retain  Respondent  Valcorza  for 
the  coming  school  year.  The  District  serves  a  very  demanding  community  and  the  speech 
and  debate  classes,  as  well  as  the  debate  team,  are  an  important  component  of  the  high- 
quality  services  the  District  attempts  to  provide  the  community  it  services.  Respondent 
Valcorza  is  uniquely  qualified  to  teach  the  following  classes:  Speech,  Oral  Interpretation,  and 
Debate.  These  classes  are  different  than  the  a  standard  “English”  course.  He  also  coaches 
the  debate  team  which  requires  his  unique  skills  and  also  requires  travel  as  part  of  his 
employment.  Respondent  Valcorza  has  experience  as  both  a  debate  competitor  and  as  a 
debate  coach.  While  Respondent  Gibson  is  more  senior  to  Respondent  Valcorza,  and  holds  a 
Preliminary  English  credential,  it  was  not  established  that  she  has  the  unique  skills  necessary 
to  teach  these  classes  and/or  to  coach  the  debate  team.  Respondent  Gibson  did  not  testify. 

    

(1) 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary 
to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 
(2) 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 

@

14. 

There  is  thus  a  two  prong  test  under  subdivision  (d)(1)  for  skipping  a  junior 
employee:  (1)  a  district  must  demonstrate  a  specific  need  for  a  specific  course  or  course  of 
study;  and  (2)  the  junior  employee  has  the  special  training  to  teach  the  course  which  a  more 
senior  teacher  does  not.  The  District  sustained  its  burden  with  respect  to  showing  a  specific 
need  to  retain  Respondent  Valcorza.  He  possesses  the  necessary  training  and  experience 
required  under  Education  Code  Section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  to  be  properly  skipped. 

The  Use  of  “Skipping”  Rather  Than  Tie-Breaker  Criteria 

15.  Respondent  Valcorza  and  Respondent  Gibson  have  the  same  seniority  date. 

Counsel  for  Respondents  contended,  and  it  was  established,  that  if  the  tie-breaking  criteria 
was  used,  rather  than  skipping,  Respondent  Gibson  would  have  been  retained.  However,  the 
language  of  the  Board  Resolution  clearly  states  that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  is  not  applicable 
to“...  exemptions  based  upon  District  need  (skipping  criteria)  ..  .”  (Resolution,  exhibit  3, 
page  3).  Thus,  as  the  District  established  a  specific  need  that  only  Respondent  Valcorza  can 
provide,  the  District  is  entitled  to  “skip”  Respondent  Valcorza  and  is  not  required  to  use  the 
tie-breaking  criteria. 

Temporary  Teachers 

16. 

Respondents  also  contend  that  two  temporary  teachers  were  not  given  notice  of 
layoff  (employees  Pinkerton  and  Santley).  Both  are  employed  as  replacements  for  full-time 
teachers  who  are  on  leave.  Both  signed  temporary  employment  contracts.  Respondents  did 
not  establish  that  the  District  will  be  using  temporary  teachers  for  purposes  not  authorized  by 
state  law.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the  District  is  classifying  these  employees  as 
“temporary”  in  order  to  avoid  having  to  include  them  in  the  layoff  proceedings. 

Other  Findings 

17.  Respondents  Leahy  and  Kuhn  testified  and  it  was  established  that  they  are 

dedicated  and  devoted  to  their  chosen  profession. 

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Sections 

2. 

Each of the  services  set  forth  in  Findings  5  and 6  is  a  particular  kind  of 

service  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and 
case  law. 

3. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither 

arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

  

 

  

4. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  District's  teaching  positions  as  described  above  and 
to  give  notice  to  the  affected  teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955.  (Campbell 
v,  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based  on  the  above  Findings,  including  the  preamble  to  this  Proposed  Decision,  the 
names  of  the  affected  teachers,  those  as  to  whom  final  notices  of  layoff  may  be  given,  are  as 
follows: 

CRUZ,  ROCIO 
D’  AMATO,  ROSE 
DENG,  JOSHUA 
FONG,  HANNAH 
GIBSON,  CATHARINE 
GLENNY,  EMMA 
KUHN,  MELISSA 
LEAHY,  LAUREN 

Dated:  April  ___,  2008. 

ORDER 

Because  of  the  reductions  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  the  teachers 
identified  in  Legal  Conclusion  No.  4  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year. 

CHRIS  RUIZ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

