BEFORE  THE 
AMADOR  COUNTY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction 
in  Force)  against: 

    

Mary  Reed 

     

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2008040041 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  5,  2008,  in  Sutter  Creek,  California. 

Joseph  C.  Kinkade,  Attorney  at  Law,  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of  California 

represented  the  Amador  County  School  District. 

Thomas  J.  Driscoll,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Mary  Reed. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  5,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  and  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Michael  Carey,  Ed.D.  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Amador  County  School 

District  (District).  Rosalie  McProuty  is  the  District  Executive  Director  of  Personnel.  Their 
actions  and  the  actions  of  the  Amador  County  Unified  School  District  Board  Of  Trustees 
(Board)  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  District  served  on  Ms.  Reed  a  written  notice  that  it 

had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  her  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  The 
written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had 
passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  12.31  full-time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions.  Ms.  Reed  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 
not  reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

 

  
  

3. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against  Ms.  Reed  on  April 

8,  2008.  The  Accusation  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  a  blank  Notice  of 
Defense  were  timely  served.  Ms.  Reed  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

4. 

Ms.  Reed  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  She  was 

employed  by  the  District  on  January  4,  1994.  She  is  a  registered  nurse  and  holds  a  pupil 
services  credential  in  nursing.  She  is  one  of  three  school  nurses  providing  registered  nursing 
services  to  the  District.  She  provides  0.8  FTE  in  nursing  services  to  the  District. 

5. 

Prior  to  March  5,  2008,  the  Board  was  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s 

recommendations  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  12.31  FTE  positions  be 
given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the 
reasons  for  that  recommendation.  The  reason  for  the  proposed  reduction  was  the  budget 
shortfall  anticipated  in  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  the  need  to  balance  the  budget  for  the 
welfare  of  students. 

6. 

On  March  5,  2008,  at  a  regular  meeting  of  the  Board,  the  Board  adopted 
Resolution  No.  07/2008-18,  providing  for  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  0.8  FTE 
School  Nurse  Position.'  The  Board  resolved  that  the  District  Superintendent  or  his  designees 
initiate  and  pursue  procedures  necessary  to  not  reemploy  0.8  FTE  certificated  employees  of 
the  District  due  to  the  reduction  in  nursing  services. 

7. 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees, 
credentials,  and  authorizations.  Credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from  the 
District’s  records. 

8. 

Dr.  Carey  and  Ms.  McProuty  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible 
for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  They  identified  two  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  who  provided  nursing  services.  Ms.  Reed  and  Patricia  Knobelauch 
hold  the  Professional  Clear  School  Nurse  Services  Credential.  Ms.  Reed’s  seniority  date  is 
January  4,  1994.  Ms.  Knobelauch’s  seniority  date  is  November  1,  1983.  Ms.  Reed  is  the 
least  senior.  Ms.  Reed  does  not  hold  credentials  which  would  authorize  her  to  provide 
teaching  or  administrative  services  to  the  District. 

9. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  nursing  services  was  based  upon  the 

District’s  determination  that  it  could  comply  with  all  statutory  mandates  with  a  reduced 
nursing  staff.  After  reduction  of  the  nursing  staff  by  0.80  FTE,  the  District  will  have  0.8 
FTE  nursing  services  from  Ms.  Knobelauch  and  0.8  nursing  services  from  an  employee  of 
the  County  Office  of  Education,  Gretchen  Carlson.  As  Ms  Carlson  is  not  a  District 
employee,  she  was  not  considered  for  layoff. 

'  The  District  adopted  a  separate  resolution  for  each  service  it  reduced.  The  remaining  resolutions  are  not  at  issue 
here. 

 

  

  

10. 

Ms.  Reed  contends  that  the  District’s  reduction  of  nursing  services  is  not  in  the 

best  interests  of  the  students,  and  that  the  District  is  reducing  nursing  services  to  the  point 
that  mandated  programs  will  be  affected.  She  offered  evidence  of  the  numerous  State 
mandated  services  the  nurses  provide,  including  vision  and  hearing  exams,  scoliosis 
screening,  immunizations,  serving  as  members  of  individual  education  plan  (IEP)  teams  and 
implementing  nursing  components  of  the  IEP,  and  providing  instruction  in  development  and 
HIV.  Additionally,  nurses  provide  numerous  services  not  mandated  by  the  State,  but 
necessary  for  the  health  and  welfare  of  the  students.  These  services  include,  among  others, 
unscheduled  screenings  and  follow-ups,  first  aid,  administration  of  medications,  training  staff 
in  first  aid  and  medication  administration,  making  appointments  for  students  for  medical 
services,  color  vision  screening,  and  organizing  health  fairs  and  events. 

The  nurses  also  serve  as  liaisons  between  numerous  agencies  and  parents,  make 

referrals,  train  LVNs  to  administer  daily  care  to  students,  check  the  care  provided  to  special 
needs  students  by  their  aides  or  their  LVNs.  Additionally,  evidence  was  presented  that  the 
District,  with  approximately  4600  students,  is  large  and  the  schools  far  flung,  and  that  travel 
alone  consumes  a  great  deal  of  the  nurses’  time. 

11. 

Ms.  Reed  also  argues  that  the  District  does  not  in  actuality  receive  the  nursing 

services  of  three  nurses.  Each  of  the  three  are  .80  FTE.  Ms.  Carslon  is  shared  with  the 
County  Office  of  Education.  She  is  assigned  0.4  of  her  time  to  the  needs  of  the  students 
under  the  auspices  of  the  County  Office  of  Education.  Ms.  Knobelauch  has  multiple 
administrative  duties  in  addition  to  her  nursing  duties.  Thus,  Ms.  Reed  maintains  that 
nursing  services  are  already  below  mandated  levels  and  cannot  legally  be  reduced  further. 

12. 

Ms.  Reed  produced  evidence  that  the  California  School  Nursing  Organization 

recommends a ratio  of  one  nurse  to  every  seven  hundred  and  fifty  students.  Under  ideal 
economic  circumstances,  a  District  could  observe  this  ratio,  although  there  is  no  evidence 
that  any  California  School  District  observes  this  ratio.  However,  even  though  there  are  State 
mandated  health  services  there  is  no  State  mandated  ratio  of  students  to  registered  nurses. 
Additionally,  the  State  does  not  require  that  every  mandated  health  service  be  provided  by  a 
registered  nurse  or  a  certificated  nurse,  only  that  the  specified  services  be  provided. 
Additionally,  should  the  District  find  that  it  is  unable  to  meet  State  mandates  with  1.60  FTE 
school  nursing  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  it  may  provide  mandated  services  by 
contracting  with  outside  agencies  authorized  to  perform  the  services  by  the  County 
Superintendent  of  Schools.  (Education  Code  section  49452.5  (scoliosis  screening)  and 
section  49452  (sight  and  hearing  tests). 

13. 

The  District,  after  examination  of  services  and  staff  allocations,  is  confident 

that  the  remaining  nursing  staff  can  deliver  the  mandated  services,  especially  because 
enrollment  is  declining  and  the  District  has  been  able  to  satisfy  State  mandates  in  the  past 
with  fewer  FTEs  in  nursing.  Specifically,  the  District  plans  to  reduce  or  eliminate  Ms. 
Knobelauch’s  administrative  duties  if  necessary,  and  examine  other  methods  of  providing 
mandated  services.  While  it  is  clear  that  the  nurses  who  remain  in  the  District  will  be 

  

 

  

working  harder  due  to  the  reduction  of  a  0.8  FTE  position,  it  was  not  established  that  the 
reduction  would  prevent  the  District  from  providing  mandated  services. 

e 

14. 

Ms.  Reed  maintains  that  the  District  has  not  met  its  burden  of  showing  it  will 

meet  State  mandates.  She  maintains  that  there  is  no  plan  to  eliminate  Ms.  Knobelauch’s 
administrative  time  so  that  she  could  devote  her  full  time  to  nursing.  Specifically,  she  claims 
that  Ms.  Knobelauch’s  administrative  duties  were  not  reduced  pursuant  to  a  Board  resolution 
and  thus  it  did  not  intend  to  move  her  to  nursing.  This  argument  is  not  persuasive.  Ms. 
Knobelauch  does  not  hold  an  administrative  credential  and  does  not  occupy  an  administrative 
position.  The  District  may  assign  and  reassign  her  as  it  sees  fit,  within  her  credential.  It 
need  not  eliminate  her  present  duties  by  Board  resolution  in  order  to  assign  her  to  other 
duties  she  is  credentialed  to  perform. 

15. 

Ms.  Reed  maintains  that  she  may  bump  Ms.  Carlson  out  of  0.4  FTE  of  her 

position  because  Ms.  Carlson  is  on  loan  to  the  District  from  the  County  Office  of  Education 
ona0.4  FTE.  Therefore,  Ms.  Reed  argues,  Ms.  Carlson  is  a  0.4  FTE  temporary  employee  of 
the  District  and  can  be  bumped  out  of  this  temporary  position.  This  argument  is  not 
persuasive.  Ms.  Carlson  is  employed  by  the  County  Office  of  Education,  and  has  been  for 
many  years.  She  is  not  a  District  employee,  temporary  or  otherwise,  and  the  District  is 
therefore  not  in  a  position  to  lay  her  off.  Ms.  Reed  is  essentially  asking  that  the  District 
terminate  its  arrangement  with  the  County  Office  of  Education  to  share  Ms.  Carlson’s 
services  and  retain  0.4  FTE  of  Ms.  Reed’s  services  instead.  There  is  no  authority  to  compel 
the  District  to  do  this. 
In  fact,  as  set  forth  in  Finding  12,  the  District  is  authorized  by  statute 
to  provide  mandated  services  by  contracting  with  outside  agencies. 

@ 

16. 

Ms.  Reed  is  a  longtime  and  very  valued  employee  of  the  District.  She  has  at 

all  times  been  a  superior  nurse.  The  District  decision  to  discontinue  her  services  was  due 
solely  to  the  financial  circumstances  and  needs  of  the  District. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

lL. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  service  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  07/2008-18 

is  a  particular  kind 
of  service  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  service  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 

  

r  ) 

| 

 

  

deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179. 

4. 

An  existing  budget  shortfall,  and  expected  decline  in  enrollment  and  the 

anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  State  for  the  next  school  year  are  appropriate 
bases  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  on 
the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section,  and,  “in  fact,  when 
adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff,  section  44955  is  the 
only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that  reduction.”  The 
District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings  are  necessary  to 
resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Board’s  decision  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  nursing  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  nursing  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and 
pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

6. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.  Ms.  Reed  did  not  maintain  that  she  had  the 
right  to  “bump”  junior  employees,  and  as  the  least  senior  employee  providing  registered 
nursing  services,  she  was  not  entitled  to  bump  other  employees  providing  registered  nursing 
services.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 
which  Ms.  Reed  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondent  Mary  Reed  that  her  services  will  not  be  required 

for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  12,  2008 

    
ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

