  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OAK  PARK  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  VENTURA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Jennifer  Aaronson,  and  Other 

Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Oak  Park  Unified  School  District, 

OAH  Case  No.:  L2008030063 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  9,  2008,  in  Oak  Park,  California. 

Warren 

S. 

Kinsler, 

Attorney 

at 

Law, 

represented  Anthony  Knight 

(Knight), 

Superintendent  of  the  Oak  Park  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Paul  D.  Powers  and  Jeanne  MacCalden  Kvale,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Marjorie 
Cohen  (Cohen),  Kristin  Dikes  (Dikes),  Nicole  Elsokary  (Elsokary),  Debi  Fries  (Fries),  Stacy 
Gettleson  (Gettleson),  Allan  Hunt  (Hunt),  Matt  Kracht  (Kracht),  Dianne  Large  (Large),  Anna 
Lovejoy  (Lovejoy),  Daniel  O’Brien  (O’Brien),  Ken  Paulson  (Paulson),  Brandie  Pryor  (Pryor), 
Michelle  Schlatter  (Schlatter),  Tristine  Wenker  (Wenker),  Erica  White  (White),  and  Jan  Willis 
(Willis),  collectively  referred  to  as  Respondents. 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for 
not 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists 

for 

Oral  and  documentary,  evidence,  and  evidence  by  oral  stipulation  on  the  record,  was 

received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Superintendent  Knight  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

  

 

3. 

On  February  28,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  number  08-06,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year: 

Service 

Full-Time-Equivalent  Positions 

Kindergarten  through  Fifth  Grade  Classroom  Instruction 
Elementary  Music  Instruction 
Elementary  Counseling  Services 
Elementary  Science  Specialist  Services 
Middle  School  Title  I  Reading  Intervention 
Middle  School  Art  Instruction 
Middle  School  Physical  Education  Instruction 
Middle  School  Language  Arts  Instruction 
Middle  School  Drama  Instruction 
Middle  School  Social  Studies  Instruction 
Middle  School  Instrumental  Music  Instruction 
Middle  School  Science  Instruction 
Middle  School  Mathematics  Instruction 
High  School  Choral  Music  Instruction 
High  School  Theatre  Arts  Instruction 
High  School  Science  Instruction 
High  School  Art  Instruction 
High  School  Mathematics  Instruction 
High  School  Chinese  Instruction 
High  School  French  Instruction 
High  School  Dance  Instruction 
High  School  Instrumental  Music  Instruction 
High  School  English  Instruction 
High  School  History/Social  Science  Instruction 
High  School  American  Sign  Language  Instruction 
High  School  Computer  Instruction 
High  School  Technical  Support  Services 
Nursing  Services 
Secondary  Counseling  Services 
ROP  Computer  Instruction 
ROP  Athletic  Training 
ROP  Millwork,  Cabinet-making  &  Drafting 
ROP  Theatre  Occupations 

15 

2.8 
1 
 
W
A
N
R
A
R
P
D

 
D
N
E
N
R
A
F

 
e
w

 
b
b
a
b
e

 
e
n
u

 
r
o
t

 
u
m
a
L

Total 

 
e
w

 
»

o
o

  

  

to 

4, 

the 

last  known  address,  to 

On  or  about  March  13,  2008,  Superintendent  Knight  notified  the  Governing 
Board  and  provided  written  notice,  via  personal  service  or,  in  two  instances,  via  express  mail 
sent 
42  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  including 
Respondents,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  notices  sent  to  Tim  Chevalier,  Jonathan  Murphy, 
Liz  Blum,  and  Brenda  Pasqua  were  designated  as  “precautionary,”  in  the  event  that  it  was 
determined,  after  hearing,  that  their  services  should  be  terminated  instead  of  the  services  of 
other  employees  selected  by  the  District. 

5. 
is  cause  for 

Respondents  requested  a  hearing,  and  filed  notices  of  defense,'  to  determine  if 
All  hearing 

the  2008-2009  school  year. 

not  reemploying  them  for 

there 
requests/notices  of  defense  were  timely  filed. 

6. 

Assuming  that  all  certificated  employees  would  file  a  request  for  hearing/notice 
of  defense,  the  District  issued  the  Accusation  on  March  12,  2008,  and  served  it  on  Respondents 
with  the  March  13,  2008  notice  set  forth  on  factual  finding  number  4. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

All prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  dismissed  the  accusation  against  Respondent  Wenker. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  449552 

10. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  factual  finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  State  funding.  The 
Board  was  also  aware  that  enrollment  in  the  District  declined  from  3,654  in  the  2006-2007 
school  year  to  3,591  in  the  current  school  year,  and  that  it  is  projected  to  decline  to  3,470  in  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

11, 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3  is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

'  The  District  provided  Respondents  with  a  single  “Request  For  Hearing/Notice  of 

Defense”  form. 

?  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

   

@ 

  

  

12. 

On  February  28,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  08-05, 
setting  forth  the  criteria  to  determine  seniority  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  in 
a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date  (tie-breaking  criteria).  The  tie-breaking 
criteria  are  reasonable  as  they  relate  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees. 
Moreover,  the  District  properly  utilized  the  criteria  to  break  ties  involving  Respondents. 

13. 

The  reduction  of  15  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  in  Kindergarten  to  fifth 
grade  class  instruction  impacted  Respondents  Cohen,  Elsokary,  Gettleson,  Pryor,  Schlatter,  and 
White.  They  each  hold  multiple  subject  credentials  that  allow  them  to  teach  in  self-contained 
classrooms  in  grades  Kindergarten  through  twelve,  but,  with  the  exception  of  Respondent 
Schlatter,  did  not  have  sufficient  seniority  to  bump  into  any  other  assignment  for  which  they 
were  credentialed.  Respondent  Schlatter,  whose  seniority  date  is  August  25,  2003,  also  holds  a 
supplemental  authorization  in  social  sciences,  which  enabled  her  to  retain  .6  FTE  of  her 
assignment  by  displacing,  or  “bumping,”  a  less  senior  employee  teaching  social  sciences  at  the 
middle  school. 

14. 

Respondent  Dikes  holds  a  single  subject  credential  (physical  education).  Her 
seniority  date  is  August  28,  2006.  The  District  proposes  to  lay  her  off  because  the  services  she 
performed,  .4  FTE  of  High  School  Dance  Instruction,  have  been  discontinued. 

15. 

The  reduction  in  counseling  services  resulted  in  notices  to  Respondents  Fries  and 
Large.  Respondent  Fries,  who  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential  and  who  was  hired  on 
August  23,  2004,  works  as  a  high  school  counselor.  She  was  displaced  by  the  reduction  in 
elementary  school  counseling  services,  as  a  more  senior  counselor  at  that  level,  Deborah  King, 
was  able  to  bump  into  the  high  school  assignment.  Respondent  Large  has  a seniority  date  of 
February  17,  2007  and  holds  a  pupil  personnel  services  credential.  The  services  Respondent 
Large  performed,  secondary  school  counseling,  were  reduced,  and  she  is  the  most  recently 
hired  counselor. 

16. 

|  Respondent  Hunt  holds  a  vocational  education  credential,  theatrical  occupations, 
and  has a  seniority  date  of  August  25,  2003.  He  teaches  theatre  arts.  His  position  was  reduced 
by  .8  FTE  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  theatre  arts  instruction  (.2  FTE  in  the  discontinuation 
of  High  School  Theatre  Arts  instruction  and  .6  in  that  of  ROP  Theatrical  Occupations). 

17. 

|  Respondent  Kracht,  whose  seniority  date  is  August  30,  2004,  holds  a  single 
subject  credential  (biological  sciences).  He  taught  high  school  science,  a  service  that  suffered  a 
.6  reduction.  He  lost  another  .2  FTE  as  a  result  of  being  bumped  by  Debbie  West,  a  teacher 
credentialed  to  teach  high  school  science  with  the  same  seniority  date,  but  who  benefited  from 
having  multiple  subject  matter  authorizations,  criterion  13  in  the  tiebreaking  criteria. 

 

18. 

Respondent  Lovejoy  has  a  professional  clear  single  subject  credential  (art),  and 
teaches  art  at  the  high  school,  a  service  reduced  .4  FTE.  Her  seniority  date  is  August  29,  2005. 
Another  teacher,  Blum,  one  of  the  certificated  employees  who  received a  provisional  notice, 
However,  the  District 
also  teaches  art  at  the  high  school  and  has  the  same  seniority  date. 
decided  to  retain  Blum  based  on  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  As  all  preceding  criteria  were  equal, 
the  tie  was  broken  by  resort  to  criterion  number  18,  the  total  number  of  semester  credits  earned 
at  an  accredited  institution  of  higher  education.  Blum  had  172  units  to  Respondent  Lovejoy’s 
In  addition  to  the  loss  of  .4  FTE  directly  attributable  to  the  reduction  in  art  instruction, 
165. 
Respondent  Lovejoy  lost  another  period,  or  .2  FTE,  to  a  more  senior  certificated  employee, 
Annette  Johnson,  whose  middle  school  art  instruction  assignment  had  been  reduced.  The 
District  plans  to  retain  Respondent  Lovejoy  to  teach  a  .4  FTE  assignment. 

19. 

The  reduction  of  music  instruction  impacted  Respondent  O’Brien.  His  seniority 
date 
is  January  8,  2007,  and  he  holds  a  single  subject  credential  (music).  He  teaches 
instrumental  music,  one  of  the  services  reduced  .2  FTE.  He  lost  the  rest  of  his  assignment  when 
bumped  by  a  more  senior  teacher  displaced  by  cuts  in  elementary  music  instruction,  Cynthia 
Hall. 

20. 

Respondent  Paulson,  whose  seniority  date  is  August  28,  2006,  lost  .6  FTE  when 
classes  he  was  credentialed  to  teach,  ROP  Millwork,  Cabinet  Making,  and  Drafting,  were 
discontinued. 

21. 

Respondent  Willis,  who  holds  a  single  subject  credential  (physical  education), 
with  authorizations  to  teach  introductory  science  and  introductory  English,  was  hired  on  August 
27,  2007.  She  taught  High  School  English,  one  of  the  services  reduced. 

22. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  of  the  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  7. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3 
and  9. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  1  through  22. 

  

 

  

4. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  District  is  laying  off  a  disproportionate  number  of 
certificated  employees.  Respondents  assert  that  since 
District  was  concerned  about 
declining  enrollment,  the  number  of  teachers  selected  for  layoff  must  proportionally  correspond 
to  the  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA).  Since  the  declines  in  enrollment  are  relatively 
small,  it  is  argued,  so  should  the  number  of  employees  laid  off. 

the 

sets 

Section  44955,  subdivision  (b), 

forth  the  following  grounds  for  a  district  to 
undertake  an  economic  layoff:  “Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all 
of  the  schools  of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is 
in  session  shall  have 
declined  below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever 
the  governing  board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the  following  year  as 
a  result  of  the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as  defined  in  Section  46304, 
whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is 
to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or  whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the 
modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it 
shall  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  of  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year...  .” 

this  case  establishes  that 

The  undisputed  evidence  in 

Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides  for  four  independent  grounds  for  undertaking  a 
layoff  of  certificated  employees.  Nothing  in  the  statute  mandates  a  specific  basis,  and,  no 
limitations  are  placed  on  the  reason(s)  a  district  may  have  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation 
of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  Nor  have  Respondents  provided  any  authority  or  persuasive 
argument  to  require  the  District  to  undertake  the  layoff  on  grounds  of  a  decline  in  ADA  merely 
because  of  concerns  about  declining  enrollment. 

the  District  was  primarily 
concerned  about  the  uncertain  level  of  State  funding  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  While  the 
District  was  also  concerned  about  declining  enrollment,  it  did  not  undertake  to  conduct  the 
layoff  pursuant  to  the  declining  ADA  provisions  of  the  statute  and,  therefore,  did  not  make  the 
requisite  comparative  ADA  decline  calculations.  Rather,  as  the  statute  permits,  the  Governing 
Board  adopted  a  resolution  focusing  on  particular  kinds  of  services  as  the  basis  for  the  layoff. 
Consistent  with  this  decision,  the  notices  sent  to  Respondents  refer  to  the  financial  uncertainty 
and  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services. 

   

v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  808,  provided  the  following  guidance  to  evaluate  a  district’s  exercise  of  its 
‘In  determining  whether  the  decision  of  a  school  board  is  reasonable  as 
discretion: 
distinguished  from  fraudulent,  arbitrary,  or  capricious,  its  action  is  measured  by  the  standard  set 
by  reason  and  reasonable  people,  bearing  in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may  permit  a  difference 
of  opinion  on  the  same  subject.’  (Arthur  v.  Oceanside-Carlsbad  Junior  College  Dist.  (1963) 

The  court  in  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc. 

“ 

With  respect  to  the  specific  facts  before  it,  the  court  noted  that 
216  Cal.App.2d  656,  663.)  ” 
while  the  district  wanted  to  keep  as  many  certificated  employees  as  possible,  it  faced  many 
financial  uncertainties.  The  district  also  desired  to  maintain  maximum  flexibility  in  determining 
staffing  for  the  ensuing  school  year  in  light  of  available  resources  and  educational  needs.  The 
governing  board  met  and  consulted  with  its  business  manager  regarding  the  district’s  financial 
position.  In  these  circumstances,  the  court  concluded,  the  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

In  the  instant  case,  as  in  Campbell,  the  District  provided  sufficient  evidence  to  establish 
it  had  not  abused  its  discretion,  which  evidence  was  not  contradicted.  In  light  of  its  concern 
about  future  State  funding,  even  if  it  was  also  concerned  about  declining  enrollment,  which, 
incidentally,  would  lead  to  further  loss  of  State  revenue,  it  was  not  unreasonable  for  the 
Governing  Board  to  meet  the  challenges  it  faced  by  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds 
of  services.  In  these  circumstances,  the  District’s  decision  to  choose  to  undertake  a  layoff  based 
on  one  of  the  available  grounds  and  to  reduce  of  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set 
forth  in  factual  finding  number 3  is  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondents  Marjorie  Cohen,  Kristin 
Dikes,  Nicole  Elsokary,  Debi  Fries,  Stacy  Gettleson,  Allan  Hunt  (.8  FTE),  Matt  Kracht  (.8 
FTE),  Dianne  Large,  Anna  Lovejoy  (.6  FTE),  Daniel  O’Brien,  Ken  Paulson  (.6  FTE),  Brandie 
Pryor,  Michelle  Schlatter  (.4  FTE),  Erica  White,  and  Jan  Willis  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1 
through  7,  and  9  through  22,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  |  through  4. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  Marjorie  Cohen, 
Kristin  Dikes,  Nicole  Elsokary,  Debi  Fries,  Stacy  Gettleson,  Allan  Hunt,  Matt  Kracht,  Dianne 
Large,  Anna  Lovejoy,  Daniel  O’Brien,  Ken  Paulson,  Brandie  Pryor,  Michelle  Schlatter,  Erica 
White,  and  Jan  Willis  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school  year 
due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

