BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SADDLEBACK  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations 
Against: 

JENNIFER  ALBERT  AND  OTHER 
CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  and 
TEACHERS  OF  THE  SADDLEBACK 
VALLEY  UNIFIIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

OAH  No.  L-2008020108 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  on  April  10 

and  11,  2008,  in  Mission  Viejo.  Complainant  Saddleback  Valley  Unified  School  District 
was  represented  by  David  C.  Larsen,  Attorney  at  Law. 

Except  for  the  four  respondents  and  four  certificated  teachers  who  represented 

themselves  at  the  hearing,  respondents  and  other  certificated  teachers,  and  each  of  them, 
were  represented  by  Marianne  Reinhold,  Attorney  at  Law.  Respondents  Geraldine  Jacome, 
Douglas  Meeuwsen,  Charmaine  Potter,  and  Lynne  Lidie  were  present  and  represented 
themselves  at  the  hearing. 
Certificated  teachers  Elizabeth  Brown,  Marion  Craine,  and 
Patricia  O’Neill,  who  have  been  classified  by  the  school  district  as  temporary  employees, 
were  not  represented  by  counsel  and  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing. 

For  the  hearing  in  this  matter,  complainant  presented  documentary  evidence  and  the 

testimony  of  the  Assistant  Superintendents  of  Personnel  Services  and  Business  and  the 
directors  of  secondary  and  elementary  education.  Respondents  presented  documentary  and 
oral  evidence.  Respondents  who  represented  themselves  also  testified.  In  addition,  the 
parties  presented  oral  stipulations  that  were  placed  on  the  record  and  made  argument. 

 

  

Documentary,  stipulated,  and  oral  evidence  having  been  received  and  the  matter 

submitted  for  decision,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  finds  as  follows:! 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that  the  Accusations  were 

made  and  filed  by  Jennifer  Huff  in  her  official  capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent  of 
Personnel  Services  and  as  a  designee  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  Saddleback  Valley  Unified 
School  District  (hereinafter  District). 

2. 

Respondents,  and  each  of  them,  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

For  2008-2009,  the  Assistant 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  the  District’s  Business 
Division  published  a  2007-2008  Second  Interim  Financial  Report  which  stated  that,  due  to 
the  release  of  the  Governor’s  January  Budget  for  2008-2009,  school  districts  are  “bracing  for 
what  is  likely  the  worst  budget  ever  presented  to  education.” 
Superintendent  estimated  that  the  District  would  have  a  loss  of  revenue  of  approximately 
$10.6  million.  In  order  to  maintain  solvency  and  reach  a  “positive  certification  for  the  multi- 
year  projections,”  the  Assistant  Superintendent  indicated  that  the  District  was  required  to 
develop  a  $19.3  million  “worst  case  scenario  budget  reduction  list.”  A  draft  Prioritized 
Budget  Reduction  List  for  2008-2009  proposed,  in  part,  the  elimination  or  reduction  of 
certain  services  that  would  result  in  general  fund  savings  of  $19,534,910.  After  the  $19.3 
million  in  budget  reductions,  the  District  would  have  an  ending  balance  of  $1.5  million 
above  a  two  percent  reserve.  If  the  Governor’s  January  2008  Budget  Proposal  is  enacted,  or 
fiscal  conditions  deteriorate  further,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  indicated  that  the  District 
would  implement  the  $19.3  million  in  ongoing  budget  reductions  to  maintain  the  positive 
certification  that  the  school  district  will  meet  its  financial  obligations  for  the  current  and 
subsequent  two  fiscal  years. 

4, 

On  March  11,  2008,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

the  Superintendent  of  the  District  gave  written  notice  to  the  Governing  Board  of  his 
recommendation  that  certificated  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  his  recommendation. 
Thereupon,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  41:07-08  which  found  that  the 
Governor’s  proposed  budget  cuts  for  the  2008-2009  fiscal  year  requires  the  District  to  cut 
approximately  $19  million,  the  District  must  eliminate  programs  and  services  to  maintain  a 
balanced  budget  and  provide  for  essential  services,  and  that  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  now  being  rendered  by  certificated  personnel  for  the 
2008-2009  fiscal  year. 

The  Governing  Board  further  resolved  that  the  Superintendent  be 

'  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  also  marks  and  admits  the  contracts,  agreements,  and 
notices  of  the  certificated  teachers  classified  by  the  school  district  as  temporary  employees  as 
Exhibit  19A,  collectively. 

 

directed  to  give  written  notice  to  certificated  employees  prior  to  March  15,  2008,  in  order  to 
reduce  the  number  of  certificated  positions  in  accordance  with  Exhibit  A  to  the  Resolution, 
or  Services  or  Programs  to  be  Eliminated  or  Reduced. 
The  Governing  Board  also  adopted 
tiebreaker  criteria  and  a  point  system  (Resolution,  Exh.  B)  that  the  District  was  to  apply 
when  certificated  employees  shared  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service. 

5. 

On  March  12,  2008,  pursuant  to  the  resolution  of  the  Governing  Board  and  the 

provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  Assistant  Superintendent  Huff  as 
designee  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  gave  written  notices  to  respondents,  and  each 
of  them,  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year.  The  written  notices 
included  the  resolution  of  the  Governing  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  services  or 
programs  in  the  District  and  a  request  for  hearing.  Respondents  were  notified  that  their 
positions  would  be  eliminated  or  filled  by  a  regular  certificated  employee  with  more 
seniority. 
received a  preliminary  layoff  notice  and  file  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if 
there  was  cause  not  to  re-employ  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  District  executed 
receipts  acknowledging  receipt  of  the  requests  for  hearing. 

The  District  had  respondents,  and  each  of  them,  sign a  certification  that  they  had 

6. 

The  notice  dated  March  12,  2008  and  served  upon  respondents  was  sufficient 
in  providing  notice  to  respondents,  and  each  of  them,  under  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955.  Respondents  were  not  prejudiced  by  errors  in  the  notice,  if  any,  with  respect  to 
the  description  of  their  current  assignments  or  any  other  matters.  No  claims  were  raised  that 
the  notices  were  deficient. 

7. 

On  or  about  March  21,  2008,  the  District  served  respondents,  and  each  of 

them,  with  an  Accusation,  Statement  to  Respondent,  copies  of  Government  Code  sections 
11507.5  and  11507.6  -  11507.7,  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and  Notice  of  Hearing. 
Respondents  filed  timely  notices  of  defenses,  requesting  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 
cause  not  to  employ  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

On  March  11,  2008,  pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  41:07-08,  the  Governing 

Board  of  the  District  resolved  and  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  services  or 
programs  offered  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  in  the  following  full-time 
equivalent  positions  (hereinafter  FTE): 

Administration 

Elementary  Principal  II 
Elementary  Principal  I 
High  School  Assistant  Principal 
High  School  Activity  Director 
Intermediate  Assistant  Principal 

Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions 

2.0 
2.0 
4.0 
4.0 
2.0

  

  

Elementary  Assistant  Principal 
District  Coordinator 
Program  Specialist  I 
Program  Specialist  IU 

Administrative  Support  Services 

High  School  Librarian 

Pupil  Services 

School  Psychologist 
School  Counselor 

Instructional  Program 

2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
1.0 

4.0 

2.0 
2.0 

Language  Arts  Assistance  Program 
Elementary  Field  Studies  Science  Program 
Elementary  Music  Specialists 
Secondary  Course  Offering,  Cultural  Geography 
Class  Size  Reduction  Program  Option  I,  Grades  1-3 

1.0 
2.0 
16.0 
15.0 
130.0 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  services  set  forth  hereinabove  constitute  a  total  of 
193.0  full-time  equivalent  positions. 

9. 

(A)  The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  8  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  determination  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
services  is  within  the  sound  discretion  of  the  District  and  is  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

(B)  Further,  the  District  has  obviated  the  need  to  terminate  certificated 

employees  pursuant  to  this  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  by 
taking  into  account  personnel  changes  due  to  temporary  and  permanent  attrition  and 
reassignment  of  individual  employees  within  the  District. 
determined  that  these  services  in  administration,  administrative  support  services,  pupil 
services,  and  instructional  programming  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued  to  maintain  a 
balanced  budget  and  provide  essential  services. 

Nevertheless,  the  District  has 

10. 

(A)  After  the  Board  Resolution  on  March  11,  2008,  and  the  service  of  the 

Accusations,  and  before  the  hearing  in  this  matter,  the  District  dismissed  the  Accusations 
against  the  following  27  certificated  employees  and  reinstated  them:  Erin  Adragna,  Roberta 
Austin,  Margaret  Boss,  Tiffany  Bromm,  Rae  Caso,  Cassandra  Clark,  Elisa  Felix,  Lucille 
Francis,  Melinda  Hawkins,  Charles  Hughes,  Valerie  Lau,  Lisa  Lotito-Byers,  Martin  Mackey, 

 

  

Susan  Marron,  Daniel  Moon,  Deborah  Morines,  Lori  Null,  Pamela  Olaveson,  Daniel  Oshea, 
Lisa  Paisley,  Daniel  Peters,  Kristen  Quintero,  Kristen  Roush,  Pamela  Rudkin,  Jonathan 
Stewart,  Susan  Volas,  and  Monique  Yessian. 

(B)  During  the  hearing  in  this  matter,  the  District  dismissed  the  Accusations 
against  the  following  five  certificated  employees:  Elissa  Babiuk,  Liam  Clemons,  Darlene 
Sands,  Jennifer  Frisk,  and  Michael  Spencer. 

Administration 

11. 

(A)  The  District  currently  employs  12  assistant  principals  and  four  activity 

Assistant  principals  serve  as  educational 

directors  at  its  four  high  schools  and  proposes  to  reduce  or  discontinue  assistant  principals  by 
4.0  FTE  and  all  4.0  FTE  of  its  activity  directors. 
leaders  and  assist  principals  in  planning,  coordination,  and  directing  of  various  activities  and 
programs.  Activity  directors  oversee  different  student  activities  at  the  high  schools, 
including  dances  and  assemblies,  and  supervise  student  clubs  and  organizations  and  their 
teacher-sponsors.  The  District  has  four  intermediate  schools  and  proposes  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  assistant  principals  at  its  intermediate  schools  by  2.0  FTE. 
reductions  in  administrative  positions,  the  District  anticipates  that  there  will  be  less  services 
and  supports  for  students,  teachers,  and  parents  but  expects  other  administrators  and  teachers 
to  assume  the  additional  duties  of  these  positions.  Staff  Reduction  Flow  Charts  demonstrate 
that  two  high  school  assistant  principals  remain  subject  to  lay-off  while  two  assistant  high 
school  assistant  principals,  four  high  school  activity  directors,  and  two  intermediate  assistant 
principals  have  been  reassigned. 

With  these 

(B)  At  the  elementary  school  level,  the  District  proposes  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  elementary  principals  I  and  II  and  elementary  assistant  principals  by  2.0  FTE 
The  District  plans  on  having  principals  supervise  more  than  one  elementary  school. 
each. 
As  such,  four  additional  school  sites  would  have  shared  principals.  The  Staff  Reduction 
Flow  Chart  for  this  service  shows  that  two  elementary  principals  have  been  reassigned  to 
different  positions  in  the  District  and  two  assistant  principals  are  subject  to  lay-off  in  this 
proceeding. 

(C)  The  District  currently  employs  a  district  coordinator  of  special  projects 

who  serves  as  the  senior  administrative  officer  for  such  projects  as  federal  and  state 
consolidated  programs,  vocational  and  adult  education,  and  grant  programs.  The  District 
also  employs a  district  coordinator  of  the  Healthy  Kids  program  who  implements  programs 
in  health,  physical  education,  and  drug,  alcohol,  and  tobacco  prevention.  The  District 
proposes  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  district  coordinator  positions,  which  comprise  2.0 
FTE,  and  have  the  services  performed  or  shared  by  other  administrators. 

(D)  No  specific  evidence  was  presented  with  respect  to  the  reduction  or 

discontinuance  of  program  specialists  I  and  III  by a  total  of  3.0  FTE.  Staff  Reduction  Flow 
Charts  show  that,  of  five  program  specialists  I  and  two  program  specialists  II,  only  one

  

  

program  specialist  III,  who is  junior  to  all  of  the  others,  is  subject  to  layoff. 
No  claims  or 
complaints  were  lodged  by  administrative  personnel  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  services  in  administration. 
personnel  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  administrative  services  by  21.0 
FTE. 

Accordingly,  the  District  may  terminate  administrative 

Administrative  Support  and  Pupil  Services 

12. 

(A)  The  District  currently  employs  a  high  school  librarian  at  each  of  its  four 

high  schools.  Each  high  school  librarian  is  responsible  for  overseeing  the  supervision, 
budget,  and  philosophy  of  the  high  school  library;  providing  instruction  to  pupils  in  the  use 
of  the  library  and  information  and  media  literacy;  providing  research  and  support  to  teachers 
and  department  chairpersons;  and  ordering  relevant  materials  and  books  for  the  library.  The 
high  school  librarian  usually  holds  a  special  credential.  Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  41:07-08, 
the  District  has  proposed  to  eliminate  or  reduce  all  4.0  FTEs  for  high  school  librarians.  The 
District  expects  that  the  various  duties  of  the  high  school  librarians  will  be  undertaken  by 
assistant  principals,  department  chairpersons,  and  teachers.  Staff  Reduction  Flow  Chart  for 
this  program  indicates  that  the  most  junior 
of  the  four  librarians  is  subject  to  layoff  while  the 
three  others  have  been  reassigned. 

(B)  The  District  proposes  to  eliminate  or  reduce  school  psychologists  and 

school  counselors  by  2.0  FTEs  in  each  field  or  service.  None  of  the  psychologists  requested 
a  hearing.  The  District  employs  27  counselors  at  its  intermediate  and  high  schools.  After  the 
elimination  or  reduction  of  counselors  by  2.0  FTEs,  the  students  will  receive  less  individual 
counseling.  However,  the  District  will  still  have  approximately  25  counselors  and  there  will 
be  counselors  assigned  at  every  intermediate  and  high  schools. 

(C)  The  District  may  terminate  high  school  librarians  by  4.0  FTE,  school 

psychologists  by  2.0  FTE,  and  school  counselors  by  2.0  FTE  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services. 
notice  not  to  re-employ  or  accusation  were  reassigned  to  the  classroom,  resulting  in  the 
proposed  layoff  of  one  classroom  teacher.  The  District  served  notices  not  to  re-employ  or 
accusations  upon  six  counselors  but  the  notices  or  accusations  were  withdrawn  for  four  of 
them,  and  one  of  the  counselors,  who  has  a  credential  in  mathematics,  bumped  a  classroom 
teacher  and  was  reassigned  to  another  position. 

High  school  librarians  who  received  a 

Course  Offerings/Instructional  Programs 

13. 

Language  Arts  Assistance  Program—The  Language  Arts  Assistance  Program 

is  a  District  elementary  educational  program  to  assist  students  who  have  difficulty  in  reading. 
The  coordinator  of  the  program  supervises  classified  employees  who  provide  instructional 
assistance  to  students  in  reading  and  language  arts.  The  District  proposes  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  Language  Arts  Assistance  Program  by  1.0  FTE  which  means  that  the 

 

coordinator  of  the  program  will  be  terminated  from  his  or  her  employment.  In  addition,  the 
District  has  proposed  the  termination  of  the  classified  employees  from  their  employment  in 
the  program. 
No  issues  or  claims  were  raised  whether  there  is  cause  for  the  District  not  to 
re-employ  the  coordinator  of  the  Language  Arts  Assistance  Program.  The  Staff  Reduction 
Flow  Chart  for  this  position  shows  that  the  sole  certificated  employee  affected  by  this 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  this  program  has  been  reassigned. 

14. 

The  Elementary  Field  Studies  Program  is  headed  by  an  elementary  science 

Elementary  Field  Studies  Program—The  Elementary  Field  Studies  Program  is 
a  District  elementary  educational  program  designed  to  provide  support  in  science  to  teachers 
and  enrichment  and  hands-on  activities  in  science  to  elementary  students  in  grades  four 
through  six. 
specialist  who  provides  direct  instruction  in  the  District’s  science  curriculum,  teaches  science 
to  students  in  a  field  study  setting,  and  develops  lesson  plans  and  instructional  materials  for 
classroom  teachers.  The  District  proposes  to  reduce  the  Elementary  Field  Studies  Program 
by  2.0  FTE  and  expects  that  elementary  school  teachers  will  provide  science  activities  to 
their  students  in  the  next  school  year.  No  issue  or  claims  were  raised  whether  there  is  cause 
for  the  District  to  reduce  the  Elementary  Field  Studies  Program  due  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Staff  Reduction  Flow  Chart  indicates  that 
the  sole  certificated  employee  affected  by  this  reduction  or  discontinuance  has  been 
reassigned  to  a  new  position. 

Elementary  Music 

15. 

The  District  employs  certificated  employees  in  20  positions  in  its  elementary 

music  and  performing  arts  program.  An  elementary  music  teacher  provides  instruction  in 
instrumental  and/or  choral  music  to  students  in  grades  one  through  six  and  develops  and 
conducts  a  comprehensive  music  education  program.  As  part  of  its  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District 
proposes  to  reduce  or  discontinue  its  elementary  music  and  performing  arts  program  by  16.0 
FTE. 
This  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  elementary  music  program  will  mean  the 
elimination  of  music  instruction  in  the  elementary  classrooms,  chorale  music  for  grades  four 
through  six,  and  instrumental  music  for  grades  five  and  six. 
program,  choral  music  instruction  usually  occurs  after  school  hours  and  instrumental  music 
instruction,  such  as  for  string  orchestra  and  band,  occurs  during  regular  school  hours. 

In  the  elementary  music 

16. 

(A)  As  part  of  its  proposed  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  elementary  music 

and  performing  arts  program,  the  District  served  notices  and/or  accusations  upon  16 
elementary  music  or  performing  arts  teachers.  Eight  of  those  teachers  have  been  reassigned 
to  different  positions.  Respondents  Janice  Dove,  Claire  Hsu,  Fabio  Kayama,  Diane  Mecham, 
and  Kimberly  Robes  are  the  most  junior  of  the  remaining  elementary  music  and  performing 
arts  teachers  subject  to  layoff. 
Respondents  Hsu,  Kayama,  and  Mecham  hold  single  subject  credentials  in  music. 
Respondent  Dove  holds  a  multiple-subject  credential  with  supplemental  authorizations  in 
music  and  math  and  respondent  Robles  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a 

All  of  them  have  a  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006. 

  

 

  

supplemental  authorization  in  music. 
respondents  Dove,  Hsu,  Kayama,  Mecham,  and  Robles  have  the  credentials  or  competency 
to  provide  services  to  the  District  in  positions  other  than  as  elementary  music  teachers. 

It  was  neither  contended  nor  established  that 

(B)  Respondent  Sarah  E.  Norris  is  a  music  and  English  teacher  at  Laguna  Hills 

Norris  is  one  of  the  most  junior  of  respondents  in  this 

High  School.  She  has  dual  single  subject  credentials  in  music  and  English  and  a  seniority 
date  of  September  4,  2007. 
proceeding  and  is  apparently  subject  to  lay-off  due  to  being  bumped  by  a  more  senior  music 
teacher  from  the  elementary  music  program. 
teaches  in  the  Advancement  Via  Individual  Determination  (AVID)  program  and  is  director  of 
the  choral  department.  According  to  Norris,  her  high  school  has  experienced  turnover  in  the 
directorship  of  the  choral  department  over  the  past  four  years  and  the  choral  program  and 
students  in  the  program  need  stability  for  the  sake  of  development  and  morale. 

In  addition  to  music  and  English,  Norris 

(C)  Respondents  Dove,  Hsu,  Kayama,  Mecham,  Robles,  and  Norris  may  be 

terminated  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  of  16.0  FTE  positions  for 
elementary  music  teachers.”  It  was  not  established  there  are  any  certificated  employees  with 
less  seniority  than  these  respondents  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render  services 
that  they  are  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

17. 

In  addition  to  the  16.0  FTE  of  elementary  music  teachers,  the  District  served 

18. 

The  District  has  musical  band  programs  at  its  four  high  schools,  each  of  which 

notices  and  accusations  upon  three  high  school  music  teachers  and  band  directors: 
respondents  Daniel  C.  Fritz,  Andrew  G.  Julian,  and  Russell  Moreau.  The  positions  of  these 
three  high  school  music  and  band  teachers  are  not  necessarily  subject  to  termination  as  part 
of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  16.0  FTE  of  the  elementary  music  program.  Rather, 
these  three  high  school  music  and  band  teachers  are  junior  in  seniority  to  six  other 
elementary  and  high  school  music  teachers  and  subject  to  be  bumped  by  them.  The  District 
desires  to  maintain  its  high  school  band  programs  but  has  not  determined  which  of  the  six 
elementary  and  high  school  music  teachers  and  the  three  high  school  band  directors  have  the 
credentials  and  competency  to  fill  the  three  positions  of  high  school  music  teachers  and  band 
directors  as  a  matter  of  the  welfare  and  best  interests  of  the  schools  and  students. 

   

is  under  the  supervision  of  a  band  director.  To  qualify  to  work  as  a  band  director,  a 
certificated  employee  must  have  a  music  credential.  A  band  director  teaches  seven  periods 
of  music,  which  may  include  classes  in  instrumental  music,  symphonic  music,  orchestra,  and 
marching  band. 
supervise  the  competitive  band  program  at  the  school  site  which  is  comprised  of  a  marching 
band,  color  guard,  and  drum  lines.  As  such,  a  high  school  band  director  must  possess  the 
requisite  special  skills,  knowledge,  and/or  experience  in  the  areas  of  teaching  competitive 

subject  to  possible  retention  based  on  that  authorization,  as  discussed  in  Finding  29  below. 

?  Respondent  Janice  Dove  also  has  a  supplemental  authorization  in  math  and  is 

In  addition,  a  high  school  band  director  is  required  to  organize  and 

   

band  groups,  interfacing  with  booster  groups,  engaging  in  fund  raising  for  the  band 
programs,  and  leading  and  supervising  band  groups  at  state  and  national  competitions. 

19, 

(A)  Respondent  Daniel  Fritz  is  one  of  three  high  school  music  teachers  who 
have  been  served  with  a  notice  and  accusation.  He  has a  single  subject  credential  in  music. 
His  seniority  date  is  September  6,  2005.  Fritz  is  a  music  teacher  and  band  director  at  El  Toro 
High  School. 
For  the  past  three  school  years,  Fritz  has  been  the  sole  director  of  instrumental 
music  at  El  Toro  High  School.  He  completed  his  student  teaching  at  the  elementary  and 
intermediate  school  levels.  Fritz  asserts  that  teaching  music  to  high  school  students  is 
different  from  teaching  elementary  and  intermediate  school  students  in  that  a  high  school 
music  teacher  may  have  the  same  students  for  a  four-year  period.  Prior  to  Fritz’s  arrival 
there,  El  Toro  High  School’s  music  and  band  program  had  not  been  consistent  and  stable,  for 
the  program  had  nine  different  band  directors  over  the  course  of  10  years. 

(B)  Respondent  Andrew  G.  Julian  is  one  of  the  three  high  school  music 

teachers  who  have  been  served  with  a  notice  and  accusation.  He  also  has  a  single  subject 
credential  in  music  and a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005.  Julian  is  employed  as  a  music 
teacher  and  band  director  at  Laguna  Hills  High  School.  No  additional  evidence  about  Julian 
was  presented  at  the  hearing  in  this  matter. 

(C)  Respondent  Russell  Moreau  is  one  of  the  three  high  school  music  teachers 
who  have  been  served  with  a  notice  and  accusation.  He  also  has  a  single  subject  credential  in 
music  and  a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005.  Moreau  is  a  music  teacher  and  band 
director  at  Trabuco  Hills  High  School.  No  additional  evidence  about  Moreau  was  presented 
at  the  hearing. 

20. 

(A)  Respondent  Ben  Fawley  is  an  elementary  music  teacher  and  possesses  a 

single  subject  credential  in  music.  His  seniority  date  with  the  District  is  September  2,  1997. 
Fawley  desires  to  continue  as  a  music  teacher  for  the  District  at  any  grade  level.  He  asserted 
that  two  elementary  music  teachers,  who  have  less  seniority,  were  retained,  skipped,  or 
reassigned  to  the  classroom,  but  those  two  teachers  also  have  credentials  in  English  and 
Math,  respectively,  which  allow  them  to  teach  those  subjects  and  to  bump  other  teachers  of 
those  subjects  who  have  less  seniority. 

(B)  Fawley  contends  that  he  can  teach  band,  orchestra,  choir,  and  jazz  band  at 
the  high  school  level.  He  completed  his  student  teaching  at  high  and  intermediate  schools  in 
the  San  Fernando  Valley  where  he  worked  with  the  bands,  orchestra,  and  jazz  bands. 
While 
he  has  not  worked  with  marching  or  competitive  bands  or  taught  music  at  the  secondary 
level,  he  works  with  choral  groups  at  his  elementary  school  and  has  volunteered  his  time  to 
work  with  choral  groups  at  Trabuco  Hills  High  School.  During  his  eleven  years  with  the 

>  The  District  also  has  a  chorale  music  program  at  its  high  schools  and  intermediate 

schools.  A  teacher  in  the  chorale  music  program  must  possess  a  music  credential  and  is 
required  to  teach  beginning  choir  and  show  choir  and  supervise  chorale  performance  groups.

   

  

  

District,  Fawley  has  received  awards  as  the  music  teacher  of  the  year  and  helped  developed 
the  District’s  arts  plan.  He  plays  the  guitar  and  trumpet  and  teaches  guitar. 

21. 

(A)  Respondent  Kenneth  G.  Lee  is  an  elementary  school  music  instructor  and 
music  coordinator  for  the  District.  His  seniority  date  with  the  District  is  September  2,  1997. 
Lee  has a  life  credential  to  teach  music  to  students  in  grades  7  through  12.  He  has  bachelor 
and  master  of  art  degrees  in  music  from  California  State  University  Fullerton. 

(B)  Prior  to  being  hired  by  the  District  in  September  1997,  Lee  was  the 

director  of  concert,  marching,  and  jazz  bands  at  Gladstone  High  School  in  Azusa  from  1979 
to  1980;  director  of  concert  and  marching  bands  at  Desert  High  School  in  North  Edwards 
from  1980  to  1982;  director  of  marching,  concert,  and  jazz  bands  at  Buena  Park  Highs 
School  from  1982  to  1984;  and  director  of  concert  and  beginning  band  at  Northview  Junior 
High  School  in  Duarte  and  director  of  marching,  concert, and  jazz  bands  at  Duarte  High 
School  from  1984  to  1997.  Respondent  Lee  is  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  music  at 
the  secondary  level. 

22. 

Respondent  Dolores  Sahelian  is  an  elementary  music  teacher  and  music 

coordinator  for  the  District.  She  possesses  a  single  subject  credential  in  music.  Her  seniority 
date  with  the  District  is  November  12,  1997. 
Sahelian  teaches  vocal  music  and  chorale.  She 
attended  college  in  Pennsylvania  and  has  completed  work  towards  a  master’s  degree  in  early 
childhood  education  and  music  education.  She  was  trained  in  instrumental  music  and  as  a 
vocalist.  As  a  student  teacher,  Sahelian  assisted  the  string  orchestra  and  band  at  an 
elementary  school.  Sahelian  has  been  an  elementary  music  teacher  for  23  years  and  loves 
music.  She  has  no  prior  experience  with  high  school  bands. 

23. 

(A)  Respondent  Donn  R.  Jones  is  an  instrumental  music  teacher  at  Rancho 
Santa  Margarita  Intermediate  School.  He  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  music  and  a 
multi-subject  credential  with  a  supplemental  authorization  in  music.  He  has  a  seniority  date 
with  the  District  of  September  22,  1998. 
Presumably  like  other  teachers,  Jones  is  subject  to 
layoff  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  elementary  music  teachers  and/or  as  a  result 
of  bumping  by  another  music  teacher  with  more  seniority. 

(B)  Respondent  Jones  has  been a  teacher  at  the  elementary,  intermediate  and 
high  school  levels  for  many  years.  Prior  to  joining  the  District  in  1998,  he  taught  band  and 
music  at  elementary  schools  for  approximately  12  years.  Subsequently,  he  taught  band, 
marching  band,  jazz  band,  drum  line,  and  color  guard  at  the  high  school  level  for  another  five 
years.  Since  joining  the  District  nine  years  ago,  Jones  has  not  been  a  band  director  at  the 
high  school  level. 

24. 

Respondent  Douglas  Meeuwsen  is  a  music  teacher  at  Mission  Viejo  High 

School.  He  possesses  a  single  subject  credential  in  music.  His  seniority  date  with  the 
District  is  September  7,  1999.  Meeuwsen  is  one  of  two  band  directors  at  Mission  Viejo 
High  School.  He  teaches  or  works  with  the  wind  ensemble,  symphonic  band,  jazz  combo, 
jazz  big  band,  marching  band,  and  color  guard.  He  also  teaches  a  band  competition  class. 

10 

 

Under  his  direction,  the  marching  band,  jazz  band,  and  drum  line  have  performed  and  won 
accolades  at  state  and  national  competitions.  In  addition,  Meeuwsen  has a  degree in  jazz 
studies  and  performs  as  a  professional  brass  musician. 

25. 

Respondent  Theodore  Wait  is  a  music  teacher  at  Los  Alisos  Intermediate 
School.  He  has a  single  subject  credential  in  music  and  a  supplemental  authorization  in 
marketing.  His  seniority  date  is  September  2,  2003.  Wait  has  experience  teaching  high 
school  band.  From  1995  through  1999,  he  was  a  high  school  band  director  at  Sultana  High 
School  in  Hesperia  where  he  worked  with  the  field  and  parade  marching  band  and  choir. 
has  also  taught  beginning  band  at  the  high  school  level  and  middle  school  band  with  other 
school  districts 
instructor  and  assisted  with  musicals  at  Trabuco  Hills  High  School. 
and/or  pep  bands  at  San  Diego  State  University  before  its  football  games. 

In  addition,  while  working  for  the  District,  Wait  has  helped  the  brass 

He  also  assists  the  spirit 

He 

26. 

(A)  Based  on  Findings  8  —  9  and  17  —  25  above,  respondents  Lee,  Jones,  and 

Meeuwsen  shall  be  retained  by  the  District  as  high  school  music  teachers  and  band  directors. 
Based  on  their  individual  experiences,  these  three  respondents  are  the  most  senior  of  the 
music  teachers  who  have  the  requisite  competency  to  act  as  high  school  band  directors. 
Respondents  Fritz,  Julian,  Moreau,  and  Wait  have  the  competency  to  act  as  high  school  band 
directors  but  they are  junior 
seniority  with  the  District,  are  deemed  not  to  have  the  competency  to  act  as  high  school  band 
directors  due  to  their  lack  of  experience  in  this  field. 

in  seniority.  Respondents  Fawley  and  Sahelian,  while  having 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  8  —  10  and  17  —  25  above,  respondents  Fritz,  Julian, 
Moreau,  Wait,  Fawley,  and  Sahelian  may  be  terminated  from  their  employment  with  the 
District  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  of  elementary  music  teachers. 
There  are  no  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority  than  these  respondents  who  are  being 
retained  by  the  District  to  render  services  which  said  respondents  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  provide. 

Tie-Breaking  Criteria 

27. 

(A)  Respondent  Robyn  Audrey  Fischbach  is  a  sixth  grade  teacher  at  El  Cerro 
Elementary  School.  She  possesses  a  multi-subject  credential  for  kindergarten  through  grade 
She  has a seniority  date  of  September  8,  1998,  that  she  shares  with  approximately  31 
12. 
other  elementary  teachers.  After  the  District  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  her  and  other 
certificated  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  date,  Fischbach  returned  with  a  ranking  of 
number  22.  Fischbach  complains  about  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  She  has  been  employed 
with  the  District  for  almost  ten  years.  In  past  school  years,  she  has  been  the  acting  principal 
at  her  school  site,  a  teacher  for  a  gifted  class,  advisor  for  the  Associated  Student  Body,  and  a 
mentor  for  new  teachers  under  the  BTSA  program.  Fischbach  argues  that  she  should  receive 
credit  or  points  for  these  activities  under  tie-breaking  criteria.  Respondent  Fischbach’s 
contentions  are  not  persuasive,  for  it  was  not  established  that  the  District’s  development  of 
its  tie-breaking  criteria  for  certificated  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  and  its 

11  

  

decision  not  to  give  credit  for  other  worthwhile  activities  undertaken  by  teachers,  are 
necessarily  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

(B)  Respondent  Linda  M.  Lees  is a  first  grade  teacher  at  Melinda  Heights 

She  attended  Southern  Connecticut 

Elementary  School.  She  holds  a  multi-subject  credential  for  kindergarten  through  grade  12 
and  has a  seniority  date  of  September  8,  1998.  After  the  District  applied  the  tie-breaking 
criteria  to  her  and  other  certificated  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  date,  Lee  returned  with  a 
ranking  of  number  12  among  a  group  of  32  elementary  teachers  whose  first  date  of  paid 
service  is  September  8,  1998.  Lees  contends  that  the  District  did  not  correctly  apply  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria  to  her  because  she  did  not  receive  a  credit  or  a  point  for  “having  a  major  in 
the  subject  taught  in  the  2007-2008  school  year.” 
College  in  New  Haven,  Connecticut,  and  attained  a  bachelor  of  science  degree  in  elementary 
education.  Because  she  taught  elementary  school  for  the  District  for  the  2007-2008  school 
year,  Lees  contends  that  she  is  entitled  to  credit  for  majoring  in  elementary  education. 
Respondent  Lees’  contentions  do  not  warrant  a  change  in  her  ranking  after  application  of  the 
tie-breaking  criteria. 
In  college,  Lees  majored  in  elementary  education.  Last  school  year, 
she  was  an  elementary  school  teacher  but  did  not  teach  a  particular  subject,  such  as  math, 
English,  or  science.  As  established  by  the  rebuttal  testimony  of  the  Assistant  Superintendent, 
this  particular  tie-breaking  criterion  was  meant  to  apply  to  secondary  teachers  who  majored 
in  substantive  subjects  in  college  and  then  taught  the  subjects  in  the  District  last  year. 
Elementary  teachers  teach  students  in  several  academic  areas  but  do  not  teach a  certain 
substantive  subject.  Lees  did  receive  tie-breaking  credit  for  having  attained  a  master’s 
degree. 

(C)  Respondent  Karen  L.  Simeroth  is  kindergarten  teacher  for  the  District  at 

Glen  Yermo  Elementary  School.  She  possesses  a  teaching  credential  and  has  a  seniority  date 
of'September  5,  2000.  Due  to  her  position  and  seniority  date,  Simeroth  is  part  of  a  group  of 
elementary  teachers  who  were  subject  to  the  tie-breaking  criteria.  She  contends  that  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria  were  not  fair  because  the  District  gave  credit  or  tie-breaking  points  to 
teachers  for  being  department  chairs  and  BTSA  support  providers  but  only  for  the  2007-2008 
school  year.  Simeroth  was  department  chair  for  two  school  years  and  a  BTSA  support 
provider  for  one  year  in  earlier  school  years. 
under  the  circumstances.  It  was  not  established  that  the  District’s  decision  to  limit  tie- 
breaking  credits  to  the  one  school  year  of  2007-2008  is  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

Simeroth’s  contentions  are  not  persuasive 

(D)  The  District  developed  the  tie-breaking  criteria  only  after  reviewing  the 

teachers’  collective  bargaining  agreement  and  consulting  with  the  teachers’  association.  The 
criteria  were  then  presented  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  which  adopted  them. 
The  evidence  showed  that  the  development  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  was  made  in 
furtherance  of  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  its  students. 

(E)  It  was  not  established  that  respondents  Fischbach,  Lees,  and  Simeroth 

were  eligible  for  skipping  or  reassignment  due  the  possession  of  other  credentials  or 
competencies,  such  as  bilingual  accreditation.  Fischbach,  Lees,  and  Simeroth  may  be 
terminated  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  for  elementary  teaching  by 

12 

 

130.0  FTE.  It  was  not  established  there  are  any  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority 
than  said  respondents  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render  services  that  said 
respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

Other  Teachers 

28. 

(A)  Respondent  Henry  C.  Chen  is  a  health  and  driver  education  teacher  and 

head  volleyball  coach  for  boys  and  girls  at  Laguna  Hills  High  School.  He  possesses  a  single 
subject  credential  in  health  and  driver  education.  Chen  teaches  one  section  of  driver 
education.  Due  to  his  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006,  he  received  a  notice  and 
accusation  after  the  District  apparently  determined  that  he  should  be  bumped  by  another 
certificated  employee  with  more  seniority. 

(B)  Chen  contends  that  he  should  be  retained  because  the  District  must  offer 

In  addition,  the  District  is  retaining  two  teachers  who  have  credentials  to  teach 

driver  education  and  is  concerned  that  the  District  will  have  another  teacher  instruct  students 
in  driver  education  who  is  not  properly  credentialed  to  do  so.  Chen’s  contentions  were  not 
borne  out  by  the  evidence.  The  District  offers  five  or  six  sections  of  driver  education  among 
its  high  schools  and  has  two  classes  of  driver  education  each  semester  at  Laguna  Hills  High 
School. 
driver  education  and  possess  more  seniority  than  Chen:  Thomas  V.  Millich,  a  senior 
physical  education  teacher  at  El  Toro  High  School,  and  Robert  A.  Anderson,  a  senior 
physical  education  teacher  at  Trabuco  Hills  High  School.  Accordingly,  respondent  Chen 
may  be  terminated  pursuant  to  the  District’s  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds 
of  services.  It  was  not  established  that  the  District  is  retaining  any  certificated  employee 
with  less  seniority  than  Chen  to  provide  services  that  Chen  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

29. 

(A)  Respondent  Francine  R.  Kim  is  a  science  teacher  at  Rancho  Santa 

Margarita  Intermediate  School.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  supplemental 
authorizations  in  math,  science,  and  physical  education.  She  has  a  seniority  date  of 
September  5,  2006,  and  received  a  notice  and  accusation  that  her  services  were  not  needed 
for  the  next  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 
Kim  challenges  the  District’s  retention  of  an  intermediate  school  colleague  who  has  the  same 
credential  and  seniority  date. 

(B)  Similarly,  respondent  Janice  Dove  has a  seniority  date  of  September  5, 

2006,  and  received  a  notice  and  accusation  that  her  services  will  not  be  needed  for  next  year. 
Dove  is  an  elementary  music  teacher  with  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  supplemental 
authorization  in  music  and  is  therefore  subject  to  layoff  due  to  elimination  or  reduction  of  the 
elementary  music  or  performing  arts  program.  However,  Dove  also  possesses  a 
supplemental  authorization  to  teach  math. 

(C)  Susan  M.  Volas  is  a  math  teacher  at  Los  Alisos  Intermediate  School  who 

has  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  supplemental  authorization  in  math.  Her  seniority 

  

13

  

date  is  September  5,  2006.  Volas  was  not  served  with  a  notice  or  accusation  and  is  not  a 
respondent  in  this  matter.  The  District  did  not  establish  the  reason  why  Volas  is  being 
retained  and  why  respondent  Kim  and  Dove  are  being  terminated.  Nor  did  the  District 
demonstrate  that  respondent  Kim,  Dove,  and  Volas  were  involved  in  any  application  of  the 
tie-breaking  criteria  or  an  examination  of  their  respective  credentials  or  competencies,  which 
resulted  in  the  retention  of  Volas  and  not  the  other  two  teachers. 

Cultural  Geography 

30. 

Under  Resolution  No.  41:07-08,  the  District  proposes,  in  part,  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  the  secondary  course  offering  in  cultural  geography  by  15.0  FTE. 
geography  is  a  course  required  of  all  freshmen  in  the  District’s  high  schools.  The  District 
plans  to  eliminate  the  courses  in  cultural  geography  and  compensate  for  that  course  loss  by 
reducing  the  secondary  school  day  from  seven  to  six  periods  and  the  number  of  credits 
required  for  graduation  by  10  credits.  In  lieu  of  cultural  geography,  students  will  be  able  to 
take  elective  courses,  such  as  foreign  language,  fine  arts,  or  technology,  to  meet  graduation 
requirements.  The  District  does  not  anticipate  any  impact  on  secondary  class  sizes  or 
staffing  ratios  by  the  elimination  of  the  course  offering  in  cultural  geography. 

Cultural 

31. 

(A)  Respondent  Kristine  N.  Ortiz  is  a  senior  social  studies  teacher  at  Trabuco 
Hills  High  School.  She  possesses  a  single  subject  credential  in  social  science.  Her  seniority 
date  is  September  6,  2005.  The  District  proposes  to  terminate  Ortiz  from  her  employment 
pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  secondary  course  offering  in  cultural 
geography.  Ortiz  contends  that  a  colleague  Sean  F.  Fletcher  is  being  retained  and  he  has  less 
seniority  and  a  social  science  credential. 

(B)  Respondent  Lindsay  Chappell  is  social  science  teacher  and  member  of  the 

athletics  department  at  Laguna  Hills  High  School.  She  teaches  the  honors  class  in  cultural 
geography  and  directs  the  Model  United  Nations  program  at  her  high  school.  Chappell  holds 
a  single  subject  credential  in  social  science  and  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005. 
She  also  points  out  that  colleague  Sean  F.  Fletcher  is  being  retained  and  he  also  teaches 
social  science  and  has  the  same  seniority  date  with  the  District. 

(C)  Respondents  April  Daems  and  Michael  Grant  are  high  school  social 

science  teachers  for  the  District.  Daniel  O’Shea,  Jonathan  Stewart,  and  Lisa  Lotito-Byers  are 
also  high  school  or  intermediate  social  science  teachers.  All  of  them  hold  single  subject 
credentials  in  social  science,  have  the  same  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005,  and  were 
Subsequently,  O’Shea,  Stewart,  and 
ranked  after  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria. 
Lotito-Byers  had  their  notices  of  lay-off  rescinded  based  on  their  rankings  under  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria.  Respondents  Daems  and  Grant,  like  Ortiz  and  Chappell,  received  notices 
and  accusations  from  the  District  and  remain  subject  to  lay-off  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  cultural  geography. 

14 

 

(D)  Sean  F.  Fletcher  did  not  receive  a  notice  or  accusation  from  the  District 
and  he  is  being  retained.  His  seniority  date  is  September  5,  2006,  like  that  for  respondents 
Ortiz,  Daems,  and  Grant.  While  Fletcher  is  credentialed  to  teach  social  science,  he  also  has  a 
credential  in  geoscience  and,  unlike  respondents  Ortiz,  Chappell,  Daems,  and  Grant,  may 
teach  geoscience  or  science  for  the  District.  In  fact,  Fletcher  has  a  dual  assignment  and 
teaches  science  or  earth  science  in  addition  to  social  science  at  Laguna  Hills  High  School. 
The  District  has  not  decided  where  Fletcher  should  be  assigned  to  teach  for  the  next  school 
year  but  he  can  teach  earth  science. 

32. 

Based  on  Findings  8  —  10  and  30  —  31  above,  respondents  Kristine  N.  Ortiz, 
Lindsay  Chappell,  April  Daems,  and  Michael  Grant  as  well  as  the  other  certificated  social 
science  teachers  who  received  notices  and  accusations  may  be  terminated  pursuant  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  for  the  secondary  course  offering  in  cultural 
geography  by  15.0  FTE.  It  was  not  established  there  are  any  certificated  employees  with  less 
seniority  than  said  respondents  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render  services  that 
said  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

Class  Size  Reduction  for  Grades  1-3 

33. 

Under  Resolution  41:07-08,  the  District  has  proposed,  in  part,  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  the  Option  I  Class  Size  Reduction  Program  for  grades  one  through  three  by 
130.0  FTE  to  achieve  budget  savings  and/or  to  prevent  encroachment  upon  the  general  fund. 
Under  the  Option  I  program,  the  District  has  been  offering  a  reduced  class  size  in  its 
elementary  classrooms.  The  District’s  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  class  size  reduction 
program  would  mean  that  all  classes  in  grades  one  through  three  would  increase  to  30 
students.  To  mitigate  this  increase  in  class  size,  the  District  is  considering  the 
implementation  of  the  Option  II  program  in  which  certificated  part-time  teachers  would 
supplement  the  instruction  of  the  regular  classroom  teachers  by  coming  into  the  classroom 
and  teaching  reading,  language,  and  math  to  students  for  one-half  of  the  school  day. 

34. 

For  the  elimination  of  the  reduced  class  size  program,  the  District  served 

notices  and  accusations  upon  certificated  elementary  school  teachers  to  achieve  the 
elimination  of  130.0  FTE  positions.  A  number  of  certificated  elementary  school  teachers 
were  reassigned  to  different  positions  based,  in  part,  on  their  possession  of  additional 
credentials.  Approximately  10  elementary  school  teachers  with  less  seniority  were  skipped 
and  retained  due  to  their  possessing  bilingual  credentials  and  competency  in  teach  in  the  dual 
or  Spanish  immersion  program  at  Gates  Elementary  School,  a  charter  school  dedicated  to 
The  immersion  program  at  Gates  Elementary  School  has 
bilingual  learning  and  fluency. 
approximately  22  teachers,  all  of  whom  must  have  proficiency  in  Spanish.  The  retention  of 
the  bilingual  teachers  for  the  immersion  program  meant  that  a  number  of  more  senior 
teachers  were  bumped  and  given  notices  and  accusations  that  their  services  will  not  be 
needed  next  year. 
immersion  program  at  Gates  Elementary  School  was  in  the  best  interest  and  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  students  and  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

The  determination  of  the  District  to  skip  bilingual  teachers  in  the  Spanish 

  

15 

 

  

35. 

Respondent  Geraldine  Jacome  and  Brittany  L.  Pelzel  are  Spanish  immersion 

teachers  at  Gates  Elementary  School.  Each  has  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  bilingual 
emphasis.  Jacome’s  seniority  date  is  September  8,  2006. 
September  4,  2007.  Jacome  and  Pelzel  are  the  two  most  junior  of  the  Spanish  immersion 
teachers  at  Gates  Elementary  School. 

Pelzel’s  seniority  date  is 

36. 

|  Respondent  Tracy  M.  Feller  is  a  first  grade  teacher  at  Gates  Elementary 

School.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  but  not  a  bilingual  credential.  As  such,  she  is 
not  credentialed  or  competent  to  teach  in  the  Spanish  immersion  program.  Feller  complains, 
however,  that  the  District  has  skipped  and  retained  too  many  bilingual  teachers  for  the 
immersion  program.  Feller  contends  that  the  elimination  of  the  reduced  class  size  program 
will  mean  that  immersion  classes  will  likewise  be  increased  in  size  and  less  Spanish  bilingual 
teachers  will  be  needed  for  those  classes.  Feller’s  contentions  were  not  established  by  the 
evidence,  for  the  District  has  skipped  and  retained  only  about  10  or  11  immersion  teachers 
with  less  seniority  than  other  certificated  employees. 

37. 

(A)  Respondent  Charmaine  Potter  is  a  third  grade  teacher  at  Foothill 

Elementary  School.  She  has  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  seniority  date  of  September 
8,  1998. 

(B)  Respondent  Mona  Lee  Montgomery  is a  fifth  grade  teacher  at  Melinda 

Heights  Elementary  School.  She  possesses  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  Her  correct 
seniority  date  is  September  7,  1999. 

(C)  Respondent  Beverly  J.  Stephenson  is  a  second  grade  teacher  at  Portola 

Hills  Elementary  School.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  Her  correct 
seniority  date  is  September  9,  1999. 

38. 

Respondent  Alison  E.  Brick  is  a  sixth  grade  teacher  at  Gates  Elementary 

School.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  for  kindergarten  through  grade  12  but  has  no 
bilingual  credential  or  certificate.  Her  seniority  date  is  December  10,  1999.  Brick  has  also 
taught  first  grade  and  a  combination  first  and  second  grade  class.  Like  Feller,  Brick  contends 
that  too  many  bilingual  teachers  are  being  retained  for  the  immersion  program.  She  points 
out  that  she  teaches  immersion  students  in  English  language  development  and  math  and  that 
teachers,  who  are  junior  to  her,  like  Adam  Wright,  are  being  retained  and  did  not  receive 
Brick’s  contentions  do  not  warrant  her  retention.  Spanish  immersion  teachers  with 
notices. 
less  seniority,  including  Adam  Wright,  Kevin  M.  Rohr,  and  Ana  C.  Silva,  possess  credentials 
in  Spanish  or  bilingual  education  and  were  skipped  in  order  to  maintain  the  immersion 
program  at  the  District’s  charter  school. 

39. 

Based  on  Findings  8  —  10  and  33  —  38  above,  respondents  Geraldine  Jacome, 

Brittany  L.  Pelzel,  Tracy  M.  Feller,  Alison  E.  Brick,  Charmaine  Potter,  Mona  Lee 
Montgomery,  and  Beverly  J.  Stephenson  as  well  as  other  respondents  who  are  certificated 
elementary  school  teachers  and  received  notices  and  accusations  may  be  terminated  pursuant 
to  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  services  under  the  reduced  class  size  program  for  grades 

16 

 

one  through  three  by  130.0  FTE.  It  was  not  established  there  are  any  certificated  employees 
with  less  seniority  than  said  respondents  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  to  render 
services  that  said  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

Teachers  Classified  as  Temporary  Employees 

40. 

(A)  On  or  about  March  12,  2008,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  on  behalf  of  the 

Superintendent  duly  notified  approximately  55  certificated  teachers  by  letter  that  the 
District’s  records  indicated  they  were  temporary  employees  and  that  the  District  was  not 
reelecting  each  of  them  as  certified  employees  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  pursuant  to  the 
Education  Code. 

41. 

The  teachers  were  further  notified  that  any 

(A)  Among  the  55  certificated  teachers  that  the  District  released  and  notified 

(B)  This  March  12  notice  added  that,  if  the  teachers  were  claiming 
employment  status  other  than  as  temporary  employees,  the  teachers  were  further  notified  that 
the  Superintendent  was  recommending  to  the  Governing  Board  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  under  Resolution  41:07-08. 
probationary  or  permanent  position  claimed  to  be  held  by  each  of  them  would  be  eliminated 
or  filled  by  a  regular  employee  with  more  seniority  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  To 
the  extent  that  teachers  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees,  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  notified  them  of  their  rights  under  Education  Code  section  44949  to  request  a 
hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  year  and 
enclosed  copies  of  pertinent  sections  of  the  Education  Code,  the  resolution,  and  a  request  for 
hearing  form. 
The  notice  dated  March  12,  2008,  was  sufficient  in  providing  notice  to  the  55 
certificated  teachers,  and  each  of  them,  under  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955. 

as  temporary  employees  that  they  were  not  re-elected  for  next  year,  35  of  them  filed  requests 
for  hearing.  On  March  21,  2008,  the  District  served  these  35  certificated  teachers,  and  each 
of  them,  with  an  Accusation,  Statement  to  Respondent,  copies  of  Government  Code  sections 
11507.5  and  11507.6  -  11507.7,  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and  Notice  of  Hearing.  As  such, 
these  35  teachers  filed  timely  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  not  to 
employ  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met 
under  sections  44949  and  44955. 

   

(B)  In  this  proceeding,  approximately  16  of  these  35  teachers  challenge  their 
classifications  as  temporary  employees  and  factual  findings  regarding  their  claims  are  made 
herein.  Nine  of  the  certificated  teachers  concede  through  counsel  that  any  claims  about  their 
temporary  employment  status  is  “negatively  impacted  by  the  applicable  statute  of 
limitations.”  No  findings  are  made  for  these  nine  certificated  teachers  or  for  the  remaining 

*  Further  section  references  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

17 

certificated  teachers  classified  as  temporary  employees  for  whom  no  claims  were  made 
regarding  their  employment  status  or  classifications. 

42. 

(A)  Patricia  O’Neill  is  a  fourth  grade  teacher  at  Melinda  Heights  Elementary 
School.  She  has  a  multiple  subject  credential  CLAD  credential.  For  the  2005-2006  school 
year,  O’Neill  was  a  temporary  employee  under  a  Temporary  Contract.  At  the  end  of  that 
school  year,  on  June  12,  2006,  the  District  advised  O’Neill  that  her  contract  would  be 
concluded  at  end  of  its  term,  released  her  from  her  temporary  job,  and  placed  her  on  a 
substitute  list  for  the  next  school  year. 

(B)  On  September  5,  2006,  O’Neill  began  working  for  the  District  for  the  new 
school  year.  On  September  18,  2006,  O’Neill  accepted  an  offer  from  the  District  to  work  as 
a  long-term  substitute  with  the  understanding  that  she  could  be  converted  to  a  temporary 
contractor  depending  on  the  needs  of  the  District.  On  or  about  September  26,  2006,  she 
signed  a  Temporary  Contract  which  set  forth  her  employment  status  and  salary  for  the  school 
year.  At  the  end  of  that  school  year,  on  June  1,  2007,  the  District  released  her  from  the 
temporary  contract. 

(C)  On  July  11,  2007,  ONeill  accepted  a  position  with  the  District  as  a  long- 

term  substitute  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Her  position  was  subject  to  conversion  to  a 
temporary  employee  by  contract  depending  upon  the  District’s  needs.  On  September  4, 
2007,  she  signed  a  contract  to  be  a  temporary  teacher  on  her  first  date  of  paid  service  for  the 
2007-2008  school  year. 

(D)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  42(A){C)  above,  in  September  2006, 

O'Neill  is  deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2006-2007  under  section  44916 
because  she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  or  salary  as  a  permanent, 
probationary,  temporary,  or  substitute  teacher  on  her  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the 
District  for  that  school  year.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District  (2003)  29  Cal.  4th  911.)  Subsequently,  the  District  properly  terminated  O’Neill  as  a 
first  year  probationary  employee  by  giving  her  notice  by  the  end  of  the  2006-2007.  (Vasquez 
v.  Happy  Valley  Union  School  District  (2008)  159  Cal.App.  4th  969,  974;  California 
Teachers  Assn.  v  Mendocino  Unified  School  Dist.  (2001)  92  Cal.App.4th  522,  526-527.)  For 
2007-2008,  she  signed  a  substitute  agreement  and  then  temporary  teacher  contract  which  put 
O’Neill  on  notice  that  she  was  a  temporary  employee.  As  such,  O’Neill  is  properly  classified 
as  a  temporary  employee. 

    

Trabuco  Mesa  Elementary  School.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  For 
2005-2006,  Kemmerle  was  employed  with  the  District  as  a  temporary  employee  after  signing 
a  Temporary  Contract  before  the  start  of  the  school  year  on  September  2,  2005. 
of  the  school  year,  the  District  released  her  from  her  temporary  position. 

2006-2007  but  after  she  had  already  started  working  that  school  year  as  an  elementary 

(A)  Joyce  Kemmerle,  also  known  as  Joyce  Levaratt,  is  a  first  grade  teacher  at 

(B)  On  September  22,  2006,  Kemmerle  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for 

At  the  end 

43. 

18

teacher.  At  the  end  of  that  school  year,  on  June  12,  2006,  the  District  released  her  from  the 
temporary  contract  and  placed  her  on  the  substitute  list.  On  June  13,  2007,  Kemmerle 
entered  into  another  contract  to  work  as  a  temporary  employee  for  2007-2008. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  43(A)-(B)  above,  Kemmerle  is  deemed  to 

have  been a  probationary  employee  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  under  section  44916 
because  she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  or  salary  on  her  first  date  of  paid 
service  with  the  District  that  school  year.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High 
School  District,  supra.)  However,  the  District  then  terminated  Kemmerle’s  employment  as  a 
probationary  teacher  by  releasing  her  by  the  end  of  the  2006-2007  school  year.  Thereafter, 
Kemmerle  rejoined  the  District  as  a  temporary  employee  after  signing  a  temporary  teaching 
contract  before  the  2007-2008  school  year.  As  such,  Kemmerle  is  properly  classified  as  a 
temporary  employee. 

44. 

(A)  Kathryn  O’Brien  is  a  second  grade  teacher  at  Melinda  Heights  Elementary 

School.  She  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  For  2005-2006,  O’Brien  started 
work  for  the  District  at  the  start  of  the  school  year  and  then  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  on 
October  18,  2005.  She  was  released  by  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

(B)  For  2006-2007,  O’Brien  rejoined  the  District  after  signing  a  Temporary 

Contract  on  November  29,  2006. 
2008,  O’Brien  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  before  she  began  working  for  the  District. 

She  was  released  at  the  end  of  the  school  year.  For  2007- 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  44(A)-(B)  above,  O’Brien  is  deemed  to 

have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916  because  she  was  not 
notified  of  her  employment  status  or  salary  on  or  before  her  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the 
District  that  school  year.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District, 
supra.)  However,  the  District  then  terminated  Kemmerle’s  employment  as  a  probationary 
teacher  by  notifying  her  of  her  release  by  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year  under  section 
44954.  Thereafter,  Kemmerle  rejoined  the  District  as  a  temporary  employee  after  signing 
temporary  teaching  contracts  before  working  in  the  2006-2007  and  2007-2008  school  years. 
These  contracts  provided  notice  that  she  was  a  temporary  employee.  As  such,  O’Brien  is 
properly  classified  as  a  temporary  employee.  It  was  not  established  that  the  District  had  an 
administrative  practice  of  releasing  teachers  and  rehiring  them  in  order  to  evade  the  teacher 
classification  rules  or  that  O’Brien  had  an  expectation  of  re-employment.  (See  Balen  v. 
Peralta  Junior  College  District  (1974)  11  Cal.  3d  821,  830-831.) 

   

  

(A)  Tiffany  Voss  is  a  fifth  grade  teacher  at  Lake  Forest  Elementary  School. 
She  has  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  On  September  6,  2005,  Voss  started  working 
for  the  District.  On  September  27,  2005,  Voss  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  2005- 
2006  school  year  after  she  started  working  for  the  District.  The  District  did  not  release  Voss 
from  her  contract  by  or  before  the  end  of  the  school  year.  Instead,  on  or  about  June  1,  2006, 
Voss  signed  another  Temporary  Contract  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  The  District  did  not 
release  her  at  the  end  of  that  school  year  either.  On  June  13,  2007,  she  entered  into  another 
Temporary  Contract  to  work  as  a  District  elementary  teacher  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

45. 

19 

  

   (B)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  45(A)  above,  in  September  2005,  Voss  is 

deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916  because 
she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of  paid 
service  to  the  District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District, 
supra.)  Moreover,  Voss  was  not  terminated  as  a  probationary  employee  or  released  as  a 
temporary  employee  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year. 
Rather,  she  was  signed  to 
another  temporary  contract,  which  meant  that  she  was  re-employed  or  rehired.  Because  the 
District  did  not  release  her  at  the  end  of  2005-2006,  Voss  was  likewise  a  probationary 
employee  for  a  second  year  when  she  returned  to  work  for  the  District  in  the  next  school 
year,  2006-2007.  Subsequently,  the  District  failed  to  timely  notify  Voss  as  a  second-year 
probationer  by  March  15,  2007,  of  a  decision  not  to  re-elect  for  the  next  or  third  school  year. 
Accordingly,  Voss  is  deemed  to  have  been  re-elected  for  2007-2008  and  classified  as 
permanent  employee  under  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Voss  is  a 
permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005,  and  entitled  to  receive 
notice  that  her  services  are  not  needed  for  next  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
services  under  sections  44949  and  44955.  Voss  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and  an 
accusation  for  this  lay-off. 

46. 

(A)  Thomas  Williams  is  a  secondary  technology  education  teacher  at  Laguna 

Hills  High  School.  He  has  a  designated  credential  in  carpentry  and a  full-time  CLAD 
credential  in  auto  mechanics  and  business.  Thomas  first  began  working  for  the  District  in  the 
2005-2006  school  year.  He  started  teaching  on  September  6,  2005.  After  starting  work,  he 
signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  on  October  21,  2005. 
He  was 
not  released  at  the  end  of  the  school  year.  Instead,  on  June  15,  2006,  Thomas  and  the  District 
One  year  later,  he 
entered  into  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  next  school  year,  2006-2007. 
signed  another  Temporary  Contract  to  work  as  secondary  teacher  for  the  2007-2008  school 
year. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  46(A)  above,  in  September  2005,  Williams 
is  deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916  because 
he  was  not  notified  of  his  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of  paid 
service  to  the  District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District, 
supra.)  At  the  end  of  the  2005-2006,  Williams  was  not  terminated  as  a  probationary 
employee  or  released  as  a  temporary  employee.  Instead,  the  District  signed  him  to  another 
temporary  contract  which  meant  that  he  was  re-employed  or  rehired.  Because  the  District 
did  not  release  him  at  the  end  of  2005-2006,  Williams  was  likewise  a  probationary  employee 
for  a  second  year  when  he  returned  to  work  for  the  District  in  the  next  school  year,  2006- 
2007.  Subsequently,  the  District  failed  to  timely  notify  Williams  by  March  15,  2007,  of  a 
decision  not  to  re-elect  him  for  the  next  or  third  school  year.  Accordingly,  Williams  is 
deemed  to  have  been  re-elected  for  2007-2008  and  classified  as  permanent  employee  under 
section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Williams  is  a  permanent  employee  of  the 
District  with  a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005.  He  is  entitled  to  receive  notice  that  his 
services  are  not  needed  for  next  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  under 
sections  44949  and  44955.  In  fact,  Williams  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and  an 
accusation  for  this  reduction  in  force  proceeding. 

20 

   

   

47. 

(A)  Sharon  Smith  is  a  first  and  second  grade  teacher  at  Gates  Elementary 

School.  She  possesses  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential. 
District  in  September  2005.  For  the  2005-2006  school  year,  the  District  began  school  on 
September  5,  2005.  On  September  8,  2005,  Smith  accepted  a  substitute  assignment.  Two 
weeks  later,  on  September  21,  2005,  she  signed  a  Temporary  Contract.  The  District  released 
Smith  at  the  end  of  the  school  year. 

Smith  began  working  for  the 

(B)  On  August  24,  2006,  Smith  accepted  a  position  as  a  substitute  teacher  by 

signing  a  Statement  of  Acceptance  of  Substitute  Agreement.  On  September  21,  2006,  she 
signed  a  Temporary  Contract.  The  District  did  not  release  her  at  the  end  of  the  school  year. 
Instead,  on  June  13,  2007,  Smith  signed  another  Temporary  Contract  for  the  2007-2008 
school  year. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  47(A)-(B)  above,  Smith  is  deemed  to  have 

been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916  because  she  was  not 
notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  her  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the 
District.  (See  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District,  supra.)  She 
signed  the  substitute  and  temporary  teacher  agreements  after  she  started  working.  However, 
the  District  terminated  Smith’s  employment  as  a  probationary  teacher  by  releasing  her  at  the 
end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year.  Thereafter,  she  rejoined  the  District  for  2006-2007  as  a 
substitute  teacher  and  then  as  a  temporary  teacher.  By  signing  the  Statement  of  Acceptance 
before  she  started  working  in  2006-2007,  Smith  was  put  on  notice  that  her  employment  was 
temporary  for  that  school  year.  She  signed  another  Temporary  Contract  before  the  2007- 
2008  school  year.  As  such,  Smith  is  properly  classified  as  a  temporary  employee. 

48. 

(A)  Jeremy  Sherman  is  a  special  day  class  teacher  for  the  non-severely 
handicapped  in  the  District’s  Special  Schools  program.  He  holds  a  special  education 
credential  in  mild  and  moderate  disabilities.  For  the  2005-2006  school  year,  the  District 
started  school  on  September  6,  2005.  On  September  7,  2005,  Sherman  signed  a  Temporary 
Contract  to  work  as  a  temporary  teacher  for  the  District. 

(B)  For  the  2006-2007  school  year,  he  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  on  June 
16,  2006.  For  the  2007-2008  school  year,  Smith  entered  into  another  Temporary  Contract. 
He  signed  this  contract  on  June  20,  2007,  which  was  before  he  started  his  job  as  a  teacher. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  48(A)-(B)  above,  Sherman  is  deemed  to 
have  been a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916  because  he  started 
working  and  was  not  notified  of  his  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  his  first  date 
of  paid  service  to  the  District.  (See  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District,  supra.)  The  District  then  effectively  terminated  Sherman’s  employment  as  a 
probationary  employee  at  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year  when  the  parties  entered  into 
a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  next  year.’  For  the  following  two  school  years,  2006-2007  and 

°  In  her  brief,  respondent’s  counsel  concedes  that  the  District  released  Sherman  before 

the  end  of  the  2006-2007  school  year. 

21 

 

  

2007-2008,  Sherman  was  notified  before  his  first  dates  of  paid  service  that  his  job  was 
temporary  since  he  agreed  to  be  a  temporary  teacher  before  the  start  of  each  school  year.  As 
such,  Sherman  is  properly  classified  as  a  temporary  employee.  It  was  not  necessarily 
established  that  Sherman  was  a  probationary  employee  during  2006-2007  based  on  an 
evaluation  that  described  his  position  as  a  second  year  probationary  employee.  No  evidence 
was  presented  regarding  this  evaluation  and  it  was  not  shown  that  the  District  adopted  the 
description  of  Sherman’s  position  as  being  correct. 

49. 

(A)  Carolyn  Yatco  is  a  first  grade  teacher  at  Cordillera  Elementary  School. 

She  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential  and  a  supplemental  authorization  in  art. 
June  14,  2005,  Yatco  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  and  taught 
for  the  rest  of  the  school  year.  At  the  end  of  the  school  year,  on  June  12,  2006,  the  District 
released  her  from  her  temporary  employment  and  placed  her  on  the  substitute  list  for  the  next 
school  year. 

On 

(B)  On  September  5,  2006,  Yatco  began  working  for  the  District  for  the  new 

school  year.  She  did  not  sign  a  Temporary  Contract  for  2006-2007  until  September  25, 
2006.  On  June  12,  2006,  the  District  notified  Yatco  that  it  was  releasing  her.  On  June  14, 
2007,  she  signed  another  temporary  teacher  contract  for  2007-2008  but  before  she  began 
working  for  the  District. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  49(A)-(B)  above,  Yatco  was  a  temporary 
employee  for  all  of  the  2005-2006  school  year.  In  September  2006,  Voss  is  deemed  to  have 
been  a  probationary  employee  for  2006-2007  under  section  44916  because  she  was  not 
notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the 
District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District,  supra.)  Because 
she  worked  as  a  temporary  employee  for  the  preceding  school  year  and  was  then  employed 
as  a  probationary  employee  for  the  following  school  year,  Yatco  is  deemed  to  have  been  a 
second-year  probationary  employee  for  2006-2007  under  section  44918,  subdivision  (a). 
Subsequently,  the  District  failed  to  timely  notify  Yatco  by  March  15,  2007,  of  a  decision  not 
to  re-elect  for  the  next  or  third  school  year.  Accordingly,  Yatco  is  further  deemed  to  have 
been  re-elected  for  2007-2008  and  classified  as  permanent  employee  under  section  44929.21, 
subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Yatco  is  a  permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of 
September  6,  2005,  and  entitled  to  receive  notice  that  her  services  are  not  needed  for  next 
year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  under  sections  44949  and  44955. 
Yatco  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and  service  of  an  accusation  for  this  lay-off. 

50. 

(A)  Joyce  Taysom  is  an  Option  II  elementary  teacher  at  La  Madera 

Elementary  School  and  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  She  has  been  working 
under  temporary  contracts  for  several  years.  For  2005-2006,  Taysom  signed  her  Temporary 
Contract  for  the  school  year  on  September  8,  2005,  after  starting  work  for  the  District  two 
days  earlier.  At  the  end  of  the  school  year,  on  June  12,  2006,  the  District  released  Taysom 
and  placed  her  on  the  substitute  list. 

 

  

22 

  

   (B)  For  2006-2007,  Taysom  started  teaching  for  the  District  again  on 

September  5,  2006.  She  did  not  sign  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  school  year  until 
September  26,  2006. 
released  her  from  her  temporary  position.  For  the  current  2007-2008  school  year,  Taysom 
entered  into  a  temporary  teacher  contract  before  starting  work  with  the  District. 

At  the  end  of  the  school  year,  on  June  1,  2007,  the  District  again 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  50(A)-(B)  above,  in  September  2005, 

Taysom  is  deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916 
because  she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of 
paid  service  to  the  District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District,  supra.)  The  District  released  her  at  the  end  of  2005-2006.  However,  Taysom  is 
deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  again  for  2006-2007  because  she  was  not 
notified  of  the  temporary  nature  of  her  job  on  or  before  her  first  day  of  paid  service  for  that 
school  year.  She  should  be  considered  to  have  been  a  second-year  probationary  employee 
for  2006-2007  under  the  provisions  of  sections  44916  and  44918.  Moreover,  because  the 
District  failed  to  timely  notify  Taysom  as  a  second-year  probationer  by  March  15,  2007,  of 
the  decision  not  to  re-elect  for  the  next  or  third  school  year,  she  is  deemed  to  have  been  re- 
elected  for  2007-2008  and  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  under  section  44929.21, 
subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Taysom  is  a  permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of 
September  6,  2005,  and  entitled  to  receive  notice  that  her  services  were  not  needed  for  next 
year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  under  sections  44949  and  44955. 
Taysom  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and  service  of  an  accusation  notifying  her  of  her 
prospective  lay-off. 

51. 

(A)  Heather  Lébus  is  a  first  grade  teacher  at  Len  Yermo  Elementary  School 
who  has  been  classified  as  a  temporary  employee.  She  possesses  a  multiple  subject  CLAD 
credential.  For  2005-2006,  Lebus  began  teaching  when  the  school  year  began  on  September 
6,  2005.  Three  days  later,  on  September  9,  2005,  she  signed  a  Statement  of  Acceptance  of 
Substitute  Assignment.  Two  weeks  later,  on  September  22,  2005,  she  signed  a  Temporary 
Contract. 

(B)  At  the  end  of  the  2005-2006  school  year,  the  District  did  not  release  Lebus 

but,  instead,  on  June  15,  2006,  signed  her  to  a  Temporary  Contract  for  2006-2007.  At  the 
end  of  2006-2007,  on  June  1,  2007,  the  District  released  her  from  the  temporary  contract. 
Later  that  month,  on  June  20,  2007,  Lebus  accepted  a  long-term  substitute  assignment  for 
2007-2008.  On  September  20,  2007,  she  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  remainder  of 
the  2007-2008  school  year. 

     

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  51(A)-(B)  above,  in  September  2005, 

   

Lebus  is  deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916 
because  she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of 
paid  service  to  the  District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District,  supra.)  Because  the  District  did  not  terminate  or  release  her  at  the  end  of  2005- 
2006,  and  instead  signed  her  to  another  temporary  contract,  Lebus  was  likewise  a 
probationary  employee  for  a  second  year  when  she  returned  to  work  for  the  District  for  the 

23 

  

school  year  of  2006-2007.  Because  the  District  failed  to  timely  notify  Lebus  by  March  15, 
2007,  of  the  decision  not  to  re-elect  for  the  next  or  third  school  year,  Lebus  is  deemed  re- 
elected  for  2007-2008  and  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  under  section  44929.21, 
subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Lebus  is  a  permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of 
September  6,  2005,  and  entitled  to  receive  notice  that  her  services  were  not  needed  for  next 
year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  under  section  44949  and  44955. 
Lebus  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and  service  of  an  accusation  for  this  lay-off 
proceeding. 

52. 

(A)  Cynthia  Pieterse  is  a  sixth  grade  teacher  at  Montevideo  Elementary 

School,  who  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential  and  has  been  classified  as  a 
temporary  employee.  For  2005-2006,  Pieterse  was  hired  and  then  released  as  a  temporary 
employee.  For  2006-2007,  she  began  teaching  when  school  began  on  September  5,  2006. 
One  week  later,  on  September  12,  2006,  she  signed  a  Statement  of  Acceptance  of  Substitute 
Assignment.  Ten  days  later,  Pieterese  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  that  outlined  her 
position  and  salary  for  2006-2007.  At  the  end  of  the  school  year,  on  June  1,  2007,  the 
District  released  Pieterse  from  her  temporary  contract. 
long-term  substitute  assignment  before  starting  work  for  the  2007-2008  school  year. 
September  19,  2007,  she  signed  a  contract  to  be  a  temporary  elementary  teacher. 

On  June  14,  2007,  she  accepted  a 
On 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  52(A)  above,  Pieterse  is  deemed  to  have 

been  a  probationary  employee  for  2006-2007  under  section  44916  because  she  was  not 
notified  of  her  employment  status  or  salary  on  her  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District 
for  that  school  year.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District, 
supra.)  Subsequently,  she  signed  a  substitute  and  then  temporary  teacher  contracts  which 
were  not  effective  in  changing  her  deemed  classification  as  a  probationary  employee. 
However,  the  District  terminated  Pieterse’s  employment  as  a  probationary  teacher  by 
releasing  her  at  the  end  of  the  2006-2007  school  year.  Thereafter,  Pieterse  rejoined  the 
District  as  a  temporary  employee  after  signing  a  substitute  contract  before  the  next  school 
year.  As  such,  Pieterse  is  properly  classified  as  a  temporary  employee. 

53. 

(A)  Alice  Donawerth  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential  and  is 

employed  as  a  fifth  grade  teacher  at  Valencia  Elementary  School. 
Donawerth  and  the  District  entered  into  a  Settlement  Agreement  and  Release  in  settlement  of 
a  discrimination  complaint  by  the  teacher.  Under  this  agreement,  the  District  agreed  that 
Donawerth  would  continue  as  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  for  the  rest  of  the  2005-2006 
school  year  and  then  be  placed  on  the  non-seniority  based  Re-employment  List  of  Temporary 
Teachers  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  for  possible  hire  as  a  full-time  elementary  teacher. 

On  March  31,  2006, 

(B)  On  September  5,  2006,  Donawerth  was  hired  and  began  working  for  the 
District  on  the  first  day  of  the  new  school  year.  Two  weeks  later,  on  September  21,  2006, 
she  signed  a  Temporary  Contract.  On  June  1,  2007,  the  District  gave  her  notice  that  she  was 
being  released.  Three  weeks  later,  on  June  22,  she  accepted  a  long-term  assignment  as  a 
substitute  teacher  for  the  next  school  year.  On  September  21,  2007,  Donawerth  signed  a 
Temporary  Contract  after  the  start  of  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

24 

 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  53(A)-(B)  above,  it  was  not  established 

that  Donawerth  should  be  deemed a  probationary  employee  under  section  44916  at  the 
beginning  of  2006-2007  due  to  the  District’s  failure  to  notify  her  of  her  employment  status 
on  her  first  day  of  paid  service.  By  entering  into  the  Settlement  Agreement  in  March  2006, 
Donawerth  was  duly  notified  that  she  was  to  be  a  temporary  employee  if  hired  for  the  2006- 
2007  school  year.  Thereafter,  she  worked  as  a  temporary  teacher,  was  properly  released 
from  her  temporary  position,  and  re-hired  in  a  temporary  position  for  2007-2008.  Her 
signing  of  the  long-term  substitute  contract  notified  her  of  the  temporary  nature  of  her 
assignment.  As  such,  Donawerth  is  properly  classified  as  a  temporary  employee. 

54. 

(A)  Gayle  Dains  holds  standard  elementary  CLAD  credentials  in  biological 

At  the  start  of 
science  and  sociology  and  is  a  science  teacher  at  an  intermediate  school. 
2005-2006  school  year,  on  September  6,  2005,  she  began  working  for  the  District.  One 
month  later,  on  October  3,  2005,  she  entered  into  a  Temporary  Contract. 
not  notify  her  that  she  was  released  at  the  end  of  that  school  year. 

The  District  did 

(B)  On  August  24,  2006,  Dains  accepted  the  assignment  of  a  long-term 

substitute.  She  started  teaching  at  the  start  of  the  2006-2007  school  year.  On  September  22, 
2006,  she  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for  the  year.  At  the  end  of  the  school  year,  on  June 
1,  2007,  the  District  notified  Dains  that  she  was  released  from  her  contract.  On  August  3, 
2007,  Dains  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  for  2007-2008  before  the  start  of  the  school  year. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  54(A)-(B)  above,  in  September  2005, 

Dains  is  deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916 
because  she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of 
paid  service  to  the  District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District,  supra.)  Moreover,  because  the  District  did  not  terminate  or  release  her  at  the  end  of 
2005-2006,  Daims  continued  as  a  probationary  employee  for  a  second  year  when  she 
returned  to  work  for  the  District  in  the  next  school  year,  2006-2007.  Because  the  District 
failed  to  timely  notify  Daims  by  March  15,  2007,  of  the  decision  not  to  re-elect  for  the  next 
or  third  school  year,  she  is  deemed  re-elected  for  2007-2008  and  should  be  classified  as  a 
permanent  employee  under  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Daims  is  a 
permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005,  and  was  entitled  to  receive 
notice  that  her  services  were  not  needed  for  next  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  services  under  sections  44949  and  44955.  Daims  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and 
service  of  an  accusation  for  this  lay-off  proceeding. 

   

who  holds  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  At  the  start  of  the  2005-2006  school  year,  on 
September  6,  2005,  Chretin  began  working  for  the  District.  One  month  later,  on  October  5, 
2005,  she  signed  a  Temporary  Contract.  At  the  end  of  that  school  year,  on  June  12,  2006,  the 
District  released  Chretin  from  her  job. 

(A)  Shelley  Chretin  is  an  Option  II  teacher  at  Cielo  Vista  Elementary  School 

(B)  For  2006-2007,  Chretin  started  work  for  the  District  on  the  first  day  of 

Three  weeks  later,  on  September  25,  2006,  Chretin  signed  a 

school  which  was  September  5. 

55. 

25 

  

Temporary  Contract.  On  June  1,  2007,  the  District  gave  notice  to  Chretin  that  she  was 
released  at  the  end  of  the  school  year.  For  2007-2008,  Chretin  signed  a  Temporary  Contract 
before  starting  work  for  the  District. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  55(A)-(B)  above,  in  September  2005, 

Chretin  is  deemed  to  have  been  a  probationary  employee  for  2005-2006  under  section  44916 
because  she  was  not  notified  of  her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  the  first  day  of 
paid  service  to  the  District.  (Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 
District,  supra.)  The  District  released  her  at  the  end  of  2005-2006,  but  Chretin  is  deemed  to 
have  been  a  probationary  employee  again  for  2006-2007  because  she  was  not  notified  of  the 
temporary  nature  of  her  job  on  or  before  her  first  day  of  paid  service  for  that  school  year. 
Whether  she  was  a  probationary  employee  in  2005-2006,  Chretin  should  be  considered  to 
have  been  a  second-year  probationary  employee  for  2006-2007  under  the  provisions  of 
sections  44916  and  44918.  Because  the  District  failed  to  timely  notify  Chretin  as  a  second- 
year  probationer  by  March  15,  2007,  of  the  decision  not  to  re-elect  for  the  next  or  third 
school  year,  she  is  deemed  to  have  been  re-elected  for  2007-2008  and  classified  as 
permanent  employee  under  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b).  Therefore,  Chretin  is  a 
permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005,  and  entitled  to  receive 
notice  that  her  services  were  not  needed  for  next  year  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance 
of  services  under  sections  44949  and  44955.  Chretin  received  proper  and  timely  notice  and 
service  of  an  accusation. 

56. 

(A)  Christine  Blanchard  is  a  third  grade  teacher  at  Cordillera  Elementary 

School.  She  possesses  a  multiple  subject  credential.  On  June  20,  2006,  Blanchard  signed  a 
Temporary  Contract  with  the  District  and  accepted  employment  as  a  temporary  elementary 
teacher  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  On  June  1,  2007,  the  District  notified  Blanchard  that 
her  temporary  contract  was  to  conclude  on  June  21  because  there  may  not  be  any  teaching 
assignment  available  for  her  next  year.  On  June  27,  2007,  she  accepted  an  offer  from  the 
District  to  work  as  a  long-term  substitute  for  2007-2008.  After  the  eighth  day  of  enrollment, 
the  district  was  to  analyze  its  needs  and  possibly  convert  her  to  a  temporary  contract  to 
replace  a  teacher  on  a  leave  of  absence.  Three  months  later,  on  September  20,  2007, 
Blanchard  signed  a  Temporary  Contract  and  accepted  a  position  as  a  temporary  elementary 
teacher  for  2007-2008  school  year.  The  Temporary  Contract  set  forth  her  employment  status 
as  a  temporary  teacher  for  the  school  year  and  her  salary  for  that  time  period. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  56(A),  it  was  not  established  that 

Blanchard  should  be  deemed  a  probationary  employee  at  the  beginning  of  2007-2008  under 
section  44916.  In  June  2007,  she  accepted  a  substitute  teacher’s  position  for  the  school  year 
and  was  therefore  notified  by  written  statement,  prior  to  and  at  the  time  of  her  initial 
employment  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  of  her  status  as  a  temporary  teacher.  (See 
Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District,  supra.)  The  District 
properly  classified  Blanchard  as  a  temporary  employee. 

57. 

(A)  Respondent  Lynne  Lidie  is  an  Option  IJ  teacher  at  Valencia  Elementary 

School.  She  possesses  a  multiple  subject  CLAD  credential.  For  portions  of  the  2006 

 

  

26 

calendar  year,  Lidie  worked  as  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  for  the  District.  On  October 
31,  2006,  after  working  as  a  substitute  since  the  start  of  the  school  year,  she  signed  a 
Temporary  Contract  to  work  as  a  part-time,  Categorical  Title  I  elementary  teacher  at  San 
Joaquin  Elementary  School.  On  June  1,  2007,  Lidie  was  released  by  the  District  and  placed 
on  a  substitute  list.  For  2007-2008,  she  accepted a  full-time  teaching  position  as  a  long-term 
substitute  in  August  2007  and  started  the  school  year  working  as  a  substitute  teacher  at 
Rancho  Canada  Elementary  School.  On  October  8,  2007,  Lidie  signed  a  Temporary  Contract 
for  her  present  position  as  a  part-time  Option  2  elementary  teacher. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  57(A)  above,  Lidie  is  deemed  to  have  been 
a  probationary  employee  for  2006-2007  under  section  44916  because  she  was  not  notified  of 
her  employment  status  and  salary  on  or  before  her  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 
(See  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District,  supra.)  She  signed  the 
temporary  teacher  agreement  after  she  started  working  that  school  year.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  District  terminated  her  employment  as  a  probationary  teacher  by  releasing  her  at  the  end 
of  the  2006-2007  school  year.  Thereafter,  she  rejoined  the  District  for  2007-2008  as  a 
substitute  teacher  and  then  as  a  temporary  teacher.  By  accepting  the  substitute  position 
before  her  first  date  of  paid  service  for  2007-2008,  Lidie  was  duly  notified  that  her 
employment  was  temporary  for  that  school  year.  As  such,  Lidie  is  properly  classified  as  a 
temporary  employee.  Lidie  asserts  that  she  was  misled  by  her  principal  into  accepting  the 
substitute  teacher  position  in  August  2007  and  missed  job  opportunities.  It  was  not 
established,  however,  that  the  District  had  a  policy  or  practice  to  evade  the  teacher 
classification  rules  or  that  Lidie  had  an  expectation  of  re-employment  after  signing 
temporary  teacher  agreements.  (See  Balen  v.  Peralta  Junior  College  District,  supra.) 

58. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District’s  announcements  of  open  certificated 
positions  (Exh.  20)  were  actually  read  or  relied  upon  by  any  particular  certificated  teacher, 
who  has  been  classified  as  a  temporary  employee,  in  applying  for  or  accepting  a  teaching  job 
with  the  District. 

59. 

(A)  Based  on  Findings  45,  46,  49,  50,  51,  54,  and  55  above,  certificated 

teachers  Tiffany  Voss,  Thomas  Williams,  Carolyn  Yatco,  Joyce  Taysom,  Heather  Lebus, 
Gayle  Dains,  and  Shelley  Chretin,  who  were  initially  classified  as  temporary  employees,  are 
deemed  to  be  permanent  employees.°  These  certificated  teachers  may  be  terminated  from 

©  The  claims  of  these  certificated  teachers  for  permanent  employment  status  are  not 

barred  by  Vasquez  v.  Happy  Valley  Union  School  District,  supra,  for  that  opinion  of  the 
Court  of  Appeal  of  the  Third  Appellate  District  sets  forth  factual  circumstances  which  are 
distinguishable  from  the  facts  of  the  teachers’  cases  here.  Nor  was  it  established  that  the 
claims  are  barred  by  the  equitable  defense  of  laches.  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that 
the  teachers  unreasonably  delayed  in  claiming  that  they  are  permanent  employees, 
acquiesced  to  the  complained  employment  status,  or  caused  prejudice  to  the  District  thereby. 
(See  Johnson  v.  City  of Loma  Linda  (2000)  24  Cal.  4th  61,  68.)  Here,  the  evidence  suggests 
that  this  layoff  proceeding  is  the  first  opportunity  for  these  teachers  to  question  and  learn 
about  their  employment  status  and  their  claims  date  back  only  two  school  years.  Contrary  to 

  

27 

 

  

their  employment  with  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds 
of  services,  including  the  reduced  elementary  class  size  program. 

(B)  Based  on  Findings  42,  43,  44,  47,  48,  52,  53,  56,  and  57  above,  certificated 

teachers  Patricia  O’Neill,  Joyce  Kemmerle,  Kathryn  O’Brien,  Sharon  Smith,  Jeremy 
Sherman,  Cynthia  Pieterse,  Alice  Donawerth,  Christine  Blanchard,  and  Lynne  Lidie  are  all 
properly  classified  as  temporary  employees.  These  certificated  teachers  may  be  released 
from  their  employment  inasmuch  as  they  have  been  duly  notified  that  their  contracts  will  not 
be  renewed  and  they  would  not  be  re-elected  for  the  next  school  year. 

(C)  Based  on  Findings  40  —  41  and  59(B)  above,  any  certificated  teachers  who 

have  been  classified  as  temporary  employees  and  did  not  present  any  claim  regarding  their 
employment  status  or  did  not  request  a  hearing,  may  be  released  from  their  employment 
inasmuch  as  they  have  been  duly  notified  that  their  temporary  contracts  will  not  be  renewed 
and  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  next  school  year. 

60. 

With  respect  to  those  respondents  whose  employment  has  been  found  to  be 
subject  to  termination  by  the  District  and  any  other  respondents  or  certificated  employees 
who  received  notices  but  did  not  request  a  hearing  and  for  whom  no  specific  findings  have 
been  made,  the  causes  set  forth  in  the  Accusations  relate  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's 
schools  and  pupils.  No  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  of  said  respondents 
or  certificated  employees  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  any  one  of  said 
respondents  or  certificated  employees  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

eR  OR  Kk Ok 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the 

following  determination  of  issues: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  exists  for  the  subject  proceedings  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955;  and  all  notices,  accusations,  and  other  related  papers  and  reports 
required  by  said  sections  have  been  provided  in  timely  manner  and,  as  such,  the  parties  have 
complied  with  the  requirements  of  said  sections. 

2. 

Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  reduce 
by  193.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  the  concomitant  number  of  certificated  employees  of 

  

the  District’s  contention,  it  was  not  shown  that  the  teachers  relied  upon  the  position  opening 
postings  (Exh.  20).  The  District  is  not  necessarily  prejudiced  by  these  claims  because  it  has 
noticed  and  served  accusations  upon  all  teachers  classified  as  temporary  employees. 

  

28 

 

  

the  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  as  set  forth 
in  Findings  1  —  60  above.  Said  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  of  the 
District  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

3. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  terminate  respondents  Kenneth  G.  Lee,  Donn  R.  Jones, 

and  Douglas  Meeuwsen,  all  of  whom  are  music  teachers  for  the  District,  from  their 
employment  with  the  District,  based  on  Findings.8  —  9  and  17-26  above. 
respondents  will  be  retained  as  high  school  band  directors. 

These  three 

4. 

Cause  does  not  necessarily  exist  to  terminate  respondents  Francis  R.  Kim  and 
Janice  Dove  in  that  it  was  not  establish  why  said  respondents  are  being  terminated  due  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  but  Susan  M.  Volas,  who  has  the 
same  seniority  date  and  similar  credential(s),  is  being  retained  by  the  District,  based  on 
Finding  29. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  deem  certificated  teachers  Tiffany  Voss,  Thomas  Williams, 

Carolyn  Yatco,  Joyce  Taysom,  Heather  Lebus,  and  Gayle  Dains,  who  were  initially  classified 
as  temporary  employees,  as  permanent  employees  of  the  District  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44916,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  45,  46,  49,  50,  51,  54,  55,  and  59(A)  above. 
certificated  teachers  were  properly  given  notices  of  their  prospective  termination  and  served 
with  accusations  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  and  may  be  terminated 
due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  Of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

These 

6. 

There  are  no  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority  than  respondents  or 

other  certificated  employees  who  are  being  retained  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year  to  render  services  which  respondents  or  other  certificated  employees  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  provide. 

WHEREFORE,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Order: 

1. 

The  Accusations  against  respondent  Erin  Adragna  and  the  31  other 

respondents  named  or  listed  in  Findings  10(A)  and  (B)  above  are  dismissed  due  to  the 
representations  and  motions  to  dismiss  made  by  the  District. 

2. 

The  Accusations  against  Kenneth  G.  Lee,  Donn  R.  Jones,  and  Douglas 
Meeuwsen  are  dismissed  and  these  respondents  will  be  retained  as  high  school  band 
directors,  based  on  Conclusion  of  Law  3  above. 

   

ORR  RR  KOK 

ORDER 

29 

  

3. 

Provided  that  the  District  determines  that  the  reasons  that  respondent  Susan 

Volas  is  being  retained  and  respondents  Francine  R.  Kim  and  Janice  Dove  are  being 
terminated  are  valid  and  supported  by  their  seniorities,  credentials,  and  positions,  the 
Accusations  against  respondents  Kim  and  Dove  may  be  sustained  due  to  the  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  based  on  Conclusion  of  Law  4  above. 

4. 

The  Accusations  against  certificated  teachers  Tiffany  Voss,  Thomas  Williams, 

Carolyn  Yatco,  Joyce  Taysom,  Heather  Lebus,  Gayle  Dains,  and  Shelley  Chretin  who  were 
initially  classified  as  temporary  but  are  deemed  permanent  employees  of  the  District,  based 
on  Conclusion  of  Law  5  above,  may  be  sustained  provided  that  the  District  performs 
application  of  tie-breaking  criteria  to  them,  if  applicable,  due  to  their  deemed  date  of  first 
paid  service  as  well  as  analyses  of  their  standing  or  eligibility  for  termination  or  retention 
based  on  their  seniority  ranking,  credentials,  and  service  positions  as  affected  by  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

The  Accusations  against  certificated  teachers  Patricia  O’Neill,  Joyce 

Kemmerle,  Kathryn  O’Brien,  Sharon  Smith,  Jeremy  Sherman,  Cynthia  Pieterse,  Alice 
Donawerth,  Christine  Blanchard,  Lynne  Lidie,  and  the  other  certificated  teachers  who  were 
classified  as  temporary  employees,  as  set  forth  in  Findings  59(B)-(C)  above,  are  sustained 
inasmuch  as  these  certificated  teachers  are  temporary  employees  and  have  been  released  but 
nevertheless  received  timely  and  proper  notice  and  service  of  accusations  for  their 
termination  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

The  Accusations  are  sustained  as  to  all  other  respondents,  and  each  of  them, 

and  notice  may  be  given  to  all  of  them,  as  well  as  to  those  certificated  employees  who 
received  written  notices  and/or  accusations  but  did  not  request  a  hearing  or  appear  at  the 
hearing,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

7. 

Before  giving  notice  in  inverse  order  of  seniority  under  Education  Code 

section  44955  to  respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  who  did  not  request  a  hearing 
or  appear  at  the  hearing,  the  District  shall  determine  and  take  into  account  positively  assured 
attrition  among  certificated  employees,  if  applicable,  in  deciding  how  many  and  when 
certificated  employees  should  be  terminated  before  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year. 

Dated: 

Vincent  Nafarrete 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

30

  

