@ 

‘BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
CARLSBAD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of 
Certain  Certificated  Teachers  Employed  by 
the  Carlsbad  Unified  School  District, 

OAH  No.  2008030381 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  E.  Hjelt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Carlsbad,  California,  on  April  30,  2008. 

e 

Melanie  A.  Petersen  and  Kerrie  Taylor,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Carlsbad 

Unified  School  District. 

Jon  Y,  Vanderpool,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  103  of  respondent  certificated 
employees  of  the  Carlsbad  Unified  School  District  who  received  preliminary  layoff  notices 
as  indicated  in  the  record.  Respondent  Cathy  Francois  appeared  and  represented  herself. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  remaining  certificated  employees  of 
the  Carlsbad  Unified  School  District  who  received  notice  of  the  recommendation  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  30,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Carlsbad  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Carlsbad  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  near  the  Pacific 

r 

Ocean  in  northern  San  Diego  County.  The  District  provides  educational  services  and 
supports  to  approximately  10,500  students  from  Kindergarten  through  twelfth  grades.  The 
District  operates  nine  elementary  schools,  three  middle  schools,  and  one  comprehensive high 
school.  There  is  also  one  alternative  school  providing  services  to  students  from  Kindergarten 
through  twelfth  grade.  The  District  employs  approximately  565  certificated  employees. 

  

1
  

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five-member  Board  of  Trustees.  The 
Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  John  A.  Roach,  Ed.D.,  the  Superintendent  of  Schools. 
Dr.  Roach  is  supported  by  an  administrative  staff  including  Torrie  Norton,  the  Assistant 
Superintendant  of  Personnel  Services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  -  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major 

source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  Proposition  13, 
public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to  other 
governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  a  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  budgeting 
problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  board’s  legal  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 

teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  affected 
certificated  employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4. 

By  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  was  well  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems.  As  a result  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget,  the  District 
projected  an  estimated  budget  deficit  of  about  $4.5  —  $6  million  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  meet  the  budget  deficit. 

Under  the  Superintendent’s  direction,  budgetary  cuts  were  considered  across  the 

board  including  the  elimination  and  reduction of  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the 
District’s  certificated  employees.  On  February  27,  2008,  Dr.  Roach  presented  to  the  Board  a 
recommendation  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  in 
the  approximate  amount  of  187.6  FTEs  (full  time  equivalent  positions). 

2 

 

  

5. 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  #16-0708  recommending 
a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  District  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
together  with  the  adoption  of  tie-breaking  criteria.  The  Board’s  adoption  of  the  resolution 
and  tie-breaking  criteria  was  based  on  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

6. 

Resolution  #16-0708  provided: 

RESOLUTION  #16-0708 
RESOLUTION  OF  INTENTION  TO 
DISMISS  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES 

On  motion  of  Member  Tanner,  seconded  by  Member  Rodman,  the  following  resolution  is 

adopted: 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Carlsbad  Unified  School  District  has 
determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  of 
the  District  as  itemized  in  Exhibit  “A”  at  the  close of  the  current  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  shall  be  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2007  -  2008  school  year, 

the  employment  of  certain  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as  a  result  of  this  reduction  or 
discontinuance  in  particular  kinds  of  services; 

THEREFORE  BE  IT  RESOLVED,  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  Carlsbad  Unified 
School  District  is  directed  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  services  shall  be 
terminated  by  virtue  of  this  action.  Nothing  herein  shall  be  deemed  to  confer  any  status  or  rights 
upon  temporary  or  categorically  funded  project  certificated  employees  in  addition  to  those 
specifically  granted  to  them  by  statute. 

BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED,  that  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Carlsbad  Unified 

School  District,  this  27"  day  of  February,  2008,  hereby  adopted  Resolution  #16-0708. 

7. 

Exhibit  A  to  the  resolution  set  forth  a  list  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services 

being  reduced  and  the  extent  of  the  reductions  measured  by  FTEs  as  follows: 

Services 

  

  

1.  Administrators 
Principals 

RECOMMENDED  REDUCTION  IN  2008-2009  PROGRAMS/SERVICES  FOR 
CARLSBAD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

The  Superintendent  recommends  that  the  Governing  Board  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce  the  programs  and 
services  for  2008  -  2009  as  follows: 

   

  
  
    

Assistant  Principals 
Directors 
Coordinators 

Number of Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions 

2.  Counselors 
3.  Librarians 

13.0 
7.0 
4.0 
1.0 
14.6 
2.2 

  

e@ 

e@ 

  

  

  

  

  

  

4.  Nurses 
5,  Teachers  on  Special  Assignment 
6.  Athletic  Director 
7.  Opportunity 
8.  Math 
9.  English 
10.  Elementary  Teaching  Services  CSR 
Elimination 

Grades  K,  1,2,3 

  

  

11,  Secondary  Teaching  Services  CSR  Elimination 

Grade  9  Math/English 

12.  Health 
13,  School  Success 
14.  P.E. 
15.  Dance 
16.  Peer  Advocates 
17.  Advanced  Communication 
18.  AVID 
19.  French 
20.  German 
21,  ASL 
22.  Digital  Photo 
23.  Activities  Director  (ASB) 
24.  Music 
25-  Wood 
26.  ELD  Courses 
27.  Science 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

| 28.  Social  Science 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  
    

29.  Art 
30.  Theater/Drama 
3.1.  Multi  Media 
32.  ROP  Small  Engines 
33.  ROP  Cabinet  Making 
34.  ROP  Architectural  Design 
35.  ROP  Drafting 
36.  ROP  Law  Enforcement 
37.  Study  Skills 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

__ 

__ 

1.8 
3.0 
6 
1.0 
4.0 
5.0 
54.0 

6.8 

2.2 
2.2 
A 
2 
2 
1.2 
6 
2.0 
12 
6 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
6.0 
1.0 
3.0 
2.0 
5.0 
2.0 
2.2 
1.0 
2 
4 
6 
4 
8.0 

8. 

The  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  provided: 

CARLSBAD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

DETERMINATION  OF  TIE-BREAKING  CRITERIA  FOR  2008  -  2009 

Pursuant  to  provisions  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  the  Board  of  Education 

is  required  to  determine  the  District  needs  should  it  become  necessary  to  determine  the 
order  of  termination  for  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 
same  day.

r 

For  the  2008  -  2009  school  year  only,  to  meet  the  requirements  of  Education  Code 

section  44955,  the  Board  of  Education  determines  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the 
students  by  establishing  the  following  tie-breaking  criteria: 

The  following  rating  system  shall  be  applied  in  determining  the  order  of 

termination  of  certificated  employees: 

Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials.  Rating:  +1  per 

A. 
credential 

B. 
authorization 

C. 

D. 

E. 

Number  of  supplementary  authorizations.  Rating:  +1  per  supplementary 

Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BAIBS  level.  Rating:  +1  per  degree 

National  Board  Certification  Rating:  +1  per  certification 

CLAD  (Crosscultural  Language  Acquisition  Development)  and/or  SDAIE 

(Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English)  Certificate  Rating:  +1  per 
certification 

TIE-BREAKING  PROCEDURE, 

In  the  event  that  common  day  hires  have  equal  qualifications  based  on  application 

of  the  above  criteria,  the  District  will  then  break  ties  by  utilizing  a  lottery. 

The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  were  to  be  applied  to  certificated  employees  with 

the  same  date  of  hire  were  scheduled  to  be  terminated.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were 
prepared  specifically  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students. 

9. 

Before  preliminary  layoff  notices  were  served,  the  administrative  staff 

circulated  a  certificated  seniority  list  that  contained  the  names  of  all  credentialed  employees, 
ordered  in  longevity  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior  employee;  the  site 
where  the  employee  provided  services;  the  subject/grade  level  in  which  services  were 
provided;  the  employee’s  full  time  employment  status  (a  “1.0  FTE”  indicated  full  time 
employment);  the  employee’s  credential(s)  information;  the  employee’s  seniority  date  (i.e., 
the  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  District  on  a  probationary  basis);  the 
employee’s  hire  date;  and  the  employee’s  tenured  status  (i.e.,  permanent,  probationary  2  or 
probationary  1).  Employees  were  invited  to  review  the  seniority  list  and  to  respond  to  the 
administrative  staff  with  any  changes  or  corrections. 

10. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given a letter  and  notice  that  the  Board  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  with  the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year. 
The  letter  stated  the  reduction  in  the  District’s  workforce  was  due  to  California’s  serious 
budget  shortfall.  A  notice  advised  each  respondent  that  his  or  her  services  would  be 

 

terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year,  that  the  reasons  for  the  termination  were 
set  forth  in  the  Board’s  resolution  (which  was  enclosed),  that  the  employee  had  the  right  to 
request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  termination,  and  specified  dates  on 
which  the  request  for  hearing  had  to  be  filed. 

11. 

Most  of  the  certificated  employees  served  with  the  preliminary  layoff  notice 

requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation  packet  was  thereafter  served  on  the  110  certificated 
employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  District  determined  that  all  respondents  who  were 
served  with  the  Accusation  packet  were  entitled  to  a  hearing  even  if  a  Notice  of  Defense  was 
not  filed. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  for  the  respondents  in  this  proceeding, 

except  for  Anthony  Castro. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

12. 

On  April  30,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  It 

was  stipulated  that  the  Accusations  filed  against  Jennifer  Cockerham,  Heather  Embrey, 
Teanna  Evans,  Lorelei  Kelleher,  Jaime  Kennedy,  Leslie  LaMontagne,  Odile  Ponsolle,  and 
Patrick  Shinnefield  were  withdrawn;  the  Accusations  against  these  employees  were 
dismissed.  Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented.  Respondents  filed  a  joint  amended 
notice  of  defense.  The  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  An  opening  statement  was  given 
on  behalf  of  all  respondents  represented  by  counsel.  A  written  stipulation  to  jurisdictional 
facts  was  filed,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  closing  arguments 
were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

Service  on  Anthony  Castro 

13. 

Anthony  Castro,  a  permanent  employee  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  2, 

2004,  was  not  properly  served  with  required  notices.  Under  the  Education  Code,  he  must  be 
deemed  reemployed. 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

14. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Exhibit  A 

(Factual  Finding  7)  were  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and 
discontinued.  The  reduction  and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within 
the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District,  the  schools,  and  the  students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by 
federal  and  state  laws.  Nursing  services  were  eliminated,  but  the  District  proposes  to  provide 
mandated  health  services  through  independent  contractors  on  an  as  needed  basis. 

 

  

The  Seniority  List 

15. 

With  a  few  exceptions  which  do  not  impact  the  layoffs  in  this  matter  but  which 
possibly  could  affect  the  order  of  rehiring  (the  order  of  rehiring  is  not  at  issue  in  this  matter), 
the  District’s  seniority  list  was  accurate.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish 
that  the  certificated  employees  who  were  the  subject  to  direct  and  cross-examination  were 
improperly  classified.  Nevertheless,  the  District  should  be  available  to  make  corrections  to 
the  District’s  seniority  list,  as  may  be  appropriate  following  this  hearing  upon  verification  of 
the  new  information  provided.  Specifically,  the  District  should  review  and  verify  the 
credential  of  respondent  Jeff  Simon. 

The  District's  Layoff Procedure 

16. 

The  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  about  187 

FTEs  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  Using  the  Board’s  resolution  and  the  District’s  seniority 
list,  the  District’s  staff  identified  the  most  junior  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  identified  in  the  resolution.  For  those  employees  who  were  displaced,  the  District 
attempted  to  determine  if  the  displaced  employee  could  “bump”  a more  junior  employee  by 
providing  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  the  displaced  senior  employee  was  credentialed 
and  competent  to  provide.’  The  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  established  a  method  by  which 
employees  having  the  same  seniority  date  could  be  ranked  for  layoff  purposes.  However,  the 
use  of  the  tie-breaking  procedure  was  not  necessary  to  resolve  any  dispute  related  to  the 
layoffs  in  this  matter.  Through  the  tedious  step-by-step  elimination  process,  the District 
correctly  determined  which  certificated  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices. 
No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to  render  a 
service  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

17. 

Respondents  contended  the  District  retained  the  services  of several  junior 

employees  to  provide  services  more  senior  employees  who  were  laid  off  were  credentialed 
and  competent  to  provide.  The  evidence  did  not  support  this  contention.  No junior 
employee-was  retained.over.a.more.senior.employee. 

Respondents  suggested  that  the  District  may  have  failed  to  afford  permanent  status  to 
some  employees  who  were  classified  as  probationary  employees,  or  may  not  have  provided  a 
correct  seniority  date  for  employees  who  had  worked  under  emergency  permits  or  as  teacher 
interns,  or  may  not  have  afforded  employees  providing  services  in  categorically  funded 
programs  the  seniority  rights  to  which  they  were  entitled.  No  evidence  established  that  any 
mistake  in  classifying  any  certificated  employee  had  any  impact  in  this  layoff  proceeding. 
Any  error  in  classification  that  might  impact  a  certificated  employee’s  rehiring  rights  was  not 
at  issue  in  this  proceeding  and  was  moot. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  that  he  or 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

‘ 
she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  holds  that  position. 

 

There  was  a  concern  that  the  retention  of  Anthony  Castro,  a  permanent  employee  with 

a  seniority  date  of  August  2,  2004,  who  was  not  properly  served  with  mandated  layoff 
notices,  required  that  all  employees  senior  to  Mr.  Castro  be  retained  under  the  plain  language 
of  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b).  This  argument  is  sometimes  referred  to  as 
the  “domino  effect.”  However,  there  was  no  evidence  presented  to  suggest  that  Mr.  Castro’s 
retention  was  the  result  of  anything  more  than a  clerical  error,  and  on  that  basis  actual 
prejudice  was  not  shown.  The  appropriate  remedy  is  to  lower  the  FTE  held  by  Mr.  Castro  by 
one  position. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  All  notices and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  respondent  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  A  board  may  consider  the  school  district’s 
economic  circumstances  in  making  the  determination  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  a  school 
board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute,  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (d)  provides: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
“(d) 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 

reasons; 

(1)  _  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 

specific  course  or  course of study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

 

8 

  

  

(2) 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

4. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  render  services  that  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (A  lexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  that  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the  senior 

5. 

As a 

result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  previously  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their 
employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services 
will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  those  respondents  identified  in 
the  stipulation  resulting  in  the  dismissal  of  the  Accusations. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

It  is  recommended  that  the  reduction  in  force  for  the  position  held  by  Anthony 

Castro  be  reduced  by  one  FTE. 

1. 

2. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  dismiss  the  Accusations  filed against 

Anthony  Castro;  Jennifer  Cockerham,  Heather  Embry,  Teanna  Evans,  Lorelei Kelleher, 
Jaime  Kennedy,  Leslie  LaMontagne,  Odile  Ponsolle,  and  Patrick  Shinnefield. 

3. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously 

served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close 
of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year  including  Christine  Andrews,  Lane  Baima,  Jennifer  Barrie,  Laurel  Basic,  Krista 
Berntsen,  Corey  Bess,  Ashley  Bitner,  Daniel  “Jake”  Blackburn,  Anne  Blakely,  Roger  Brown, 
Robert  Brown,  Kathryn  Browne,  Paul  Clark,  Ashley  Cotter,  Kate  Dendy,  Jessica  Dooley, 
Kelli  Dow,  Gina  Fogarty,  Stephanie  Fogarty,  Linda  Fornelli,  Kelly  Foulk,  Cathy  Francois, 
Kim  Fuentes,  Jessica  Fuller,  Gina  Garcia,  Jennifer  Glassey,  Alicia  Granberg,  Marina  Hall, 
Sarah  Hasty,  Darien  Hawley,  Lillian  Hebert,  Joanne  Hemmings,  Heather  Hirschkoff,  Craig 
Hobart,  Ashley  Houser-Hartman,  Cynthia  Irwin,  Joy  Jansen,  Hun  Kaplowitz,  Donna  Kirsch, 
Kevin  Knoll,  Rosemary  Kolden,  Walter  Konieczko,  Jessica  Koren,  Dawn  Kramer,  Michelle 

9 

 

Kuehner,  Christine  Kunkel,  Carol  LaBreche,  Syndi  Lyon,  Rod  Lyon,  Lisa  Martin,  Philip 
Martinez,  Denise  Maulden,  Blake  Maxon,  Kelly  McCabe,  Corey  McCann,  Melanie 
McGinnis,  Courtney  Mehring,  Marissa  Meinhardt,  Kelly  Momeyer,  John  Moreno, Angelika 
Moschner-Arganda,  Christine  Moser  Kohn,  Chelsea  Murray,  Stephanie  Nasser,  Kathy 
Nienhaus,  Christy  Owen,  Nicole  Paynter,  Amanda  Phillipe,  Judith  Pounds,  Anjali  Pujji, 
Joseph  Purser,  Julia  Redfield,  Renae  Ringen,  Anna  Lisa  Robusto,  Jamie  Rushing,  Tamara 
Salvaggio,  Treda  Sanchez,  Melony  Schroh,  Olivia  Schulenberg,  Debra  Schwend,  Triesta 
Shuck,  Jeff  Simon,  Scott  Southerland,  Jenesa  Stayton,  Holly  Stipe,  Kelly  Szabo,  Vincente 
Tamayo,  Marisa  Tatar,  Margaret  Tessier,  Kim  Thorne,  Marin  Tinnerstet,  Kristin  Tomkinson, 
Michele  Tsutagawa  Ward,  Aven  Valenty,  Keith  Van  Asdalan,  Anne  Van  Hollebeke,  Pam 
Venable,  Jill  Ward,  Brooke  Williamson,  Erin  Wilson,  Susan  Woolley,  and  Sharon  Zak. 

patep:  &  >  S -  of 

   *  STEPHEN  E.  HJELT 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

