e@ 

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE 
SAN  BERNARDINO  CITY  UNITED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008030391 

Respondents  listed  on  Exhibit  “A” 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Vallera  J.  Johnson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Bernardino,  California  on  April  15,  2008. 

e 

Sherry  G.  Gordon,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented 
Harold  Vollkommer,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  San  Bernardino  City 
Unified  School  District. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Esq.,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  Respondents,  with  the 
exception  of  Respondents  Jessica  Aguilar,  Lori  Caruthers  Collins,  Karen  Castille,  John 
Cooper,  Erika  Cordova,  Cassandra  Hart,  Tara  Schmidt,  Herbert  Shand  and/or  Rebecca 
Southworth. 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  Respondents  Jessica  Aguilar,  Lori 
Caruthers  Collins,  Karen  Castille,  John  Cooper,  Erika  Cordova,  Cassandra  Hart,  Tara 
Schmidt,  Herbert-Shand-and/or  Rebecca-Southworth. 

- 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2008. 

. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Harold  Vollkommer  (Vollkommer)  made  and  filed  Accusation,  dated 

March  14,  2008,  against  the  Employees  listed  in  Exhibit  “A”  (Respondents)  in  his  official 
capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources  (Assistant  Superintendent),  San 
Bernardino  City  Unified  School  District  (District)  and  designee  of  Dr.  Arturo  Delgado, 
Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  District. 

e 

  

 

2. 

Respondents  are  permanent,  probationary,  intern,  provisional,  waiver,  and/or 

temporary  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

The  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  San  Bernardino 

City  Unified  School  District  (Board)  and  Respondents  that  he  recommended  that  notice  be 
given  to  Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  the  Resolution  that  reduced  or  eliminated 

particular  kinds  of  services  and  tie-breaker  criteria  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Respondents  were  served  with  the  preliminary  layoff  notice  on  March  14,  2008. 

The  written  notice  of  termination  stated  that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be 

required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
The  recommendation  that  Respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
competency. 

In  addition,  the  notice  advised  Respondents  of  the  right  to  hearing,  that  the  request  for 

hearing  was  required  to  be  delivered  to  the  Superintendent’s  Office  no  later  than  April  3, 
2008,  not  less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  and  that  the 
failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

Some  but  not  all  Respondents  filed  a  timely  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of 

Defense. 

An  Accusation  was  timely  served  on  Respondents. 

4. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  satisfied. 

5. 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  Respondents  Jessica  Aguilar,  Lori 

Caruthers  Collins,  Karen  Castille,  John  Cooper,  Erika  Cardova,  Cassandra  Hart,  Tara 
Schmidt,  Herbert  Shand  and/or  Rebecca  Southworth. 

6. 

The  District  rescinded  the  preliminary  layoff  notices  previously  issued  to 

Respondents  Janine  Milligan  and  Roberta  L.  Lehfeldt. 

7. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  a  Resolution  and  took  action  to  reduce 
or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  commencing  in  the  2008- 
2009  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Elementary  Teachers 

Counselor 

101 

27 

 

  

  

Secondary  Teacher 

27 

English 
Social  Studies 
Physical  Education 
Cadet  Corps 
Foreign  Language  (Spanish) 
Art 
Auto  Shop 

 
s
n
A

 
I
r
U
V

 
e
e
S

8. 

9. 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  155.0  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  was  responsible  for  implementing  the  technical 

aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  developed  a  seniority  list  that  contained,  among other 
things,  each  employee’s  name,  seniority  date,  tie-breaker  number  (if  any),  current 
assignment,  credential(s)  and  authorization(s). 

The  seniority  date  was  based  on  the  first  date  of  paid  service  rendered.’  A  teacher 

hired  as  a  probationary  employee,  who  worked  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee  for  at 
least  75  percent  of  the  school  days  during  the  previous  year  and  performed  the  duties 
normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  was  deemed  to  have 
served  a  complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee,  if  the  employee  was  employed  as 
a  probationary  employee  for  the  following  school  year.  The  teacher  was  entitled  to  have  that 
earlier  year  counted  as  a  year  of  probationary  service.  The  prior  year  was  “tacked”  on  for 
seniority  purposes.”  Only  one  year  could  be  tacked. 

10. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and 

"bumping"  list  to  determine  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
services-being  reduced.-The District  then  determined  if  the  least  senior  employees  held 
credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  "bump"  other  more  junior  employees.  In 
determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the 
number  of  reductions  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they 
could  “bump”  other  employees. 

11. 

Respondent  Santford  Summers  challenged  the  information  contained  in  the 

District’s  file  regarding  his  seniority  date  and  credential  status. 

' 

= 

Education  Code  section  44845. 

Education  Code  section  44918. 

 

According  to  District  records,  Respondent  Santford  Summers’  seniority  date  was 

August  20,  2007;  he  holds  a  Clear  Pupil  Personnel  Services  (PPS)  Credential  and  a 
Preliminary  Single  Subject  Credential  in  Social  Sciences.  He  was  assigned  to  San 
Bernardino  High  School  as  a  counselor;  on  or  about  June  1,  2008,  he  will  receive  an 
additional  stipend  from  the  District  for  services  provided  as  Associated  Student  Body  (ASB) 
Director  one  period  each  school  day  during  school  year  2007  -  2008. 

Respondent  Santford  Summers  testified  that  he  reported  to  work  sometime  between 

July  31  and  August  2,  2007  in  his  capacity  as  ASB  Director  and  began  working  two  days 
later  as  a  counselor;  further,  Respondent  Santford  Summers  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject 
Credential.  The  status  of  his  Single  Subject  Credential  changed  on  or  prior  to  March  15, 
2008.  He  offered  no  testimonial  or  documentary  evidence  to  establish  that  he  filed  this 
updated  information  with  the  District  on  or  before  March  15,  2008. 

The  District  is  only  required  to  consider  credentials  that  Respondent  Santford 
Summers  had  on  file  by  the  time  of  the  March  15  notice  deadline.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board  of  Wiseburn  School  District  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  Insufficient  evidence  was 
offered  to  establish  that  Respondent  Santford  Summers’  Clear  Single  Subject  Credential  was 
on  file  with  the  District  on  or  before  March  15,  2008. 

A  teacher  may  serve  as  ASB  Director  if  he  holds  any  credential.  Therefore, 
Respondent  Santford  Summers  was  allowed  to  provide  services  as  ASB  Director  with  his 
PPS  Credential. 

Even  if  appropriate,  modification  of  Respondent  Santford  Summers’  seniority  date 

had  no  impact  on  the  issue  of  whether  he  should  have  received  a  layoff  notice. 

12. 

The  Board  adopted  tie-breaker  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of 

employees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  which  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subsection  (b),  related  to 

certificated  layoffs,  provides  in  relevant  part,  ‘[a]s  between  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shal] 
determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  need  of  the  district  and  the 
students  thereof;’ 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  based  upon  the  needs  of  the 
certificated  layoff  the  following 

District  and  the  students  thereof,  in  the  event of a 
criteria  shall  be  applied  in  order  based  on  information  on  file  as  of  March  11,  2008, 
one  step  at  a  time  until  the  tie  is  broken,  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  between 
certificated  employees: 

 

 

  

2. 

Highly  Qualified  status  pursuant  to  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act. 
Authorization  to  teach  English  Language  Learners  (CLAD,  BCLAD, 
SB395,  SDAIE,  etc.) 

3.  Number  of  additional  credentials  or  supplemental  authorizations. 
4. 

Credential  status  in  area  of  assignment  in  order  of  priority:  a)  clear;  b) 
preliminary;  c)  intern;  d)  provisional/other. 
Total  years  of  creditable  service  outside  the  District 
Possession  of  a  Masters  Degree  —  earliest  date  prevails. 
Ifatie  still  exists  after  applying  steps  one  through  six  (1  —  6)  above, 
seniority  shall  be  determined  based  upon  a  comparison  of  the  most  recent 
employee  evaluations  or  classroom  observations  if  there  is  no  employee 
evaluation  on  file.” 

 
y
a
7. 

13. 

Vollkommer  was  the  individual  responsible  for  implementing  the  tie-breaker 

criteria  adopted  by  the  Board.  As  described  in  the  Resolution,  the  District  applied  one  step  at 
a  time  until  the  tie  was  broken. 

After  step  six,  if  two  or  more  employees  remained  tied,  the  teachers’  most  recent 

employee  evaluation’  or  observation’  was  to  be  considered.  The  evaluation  or  observation 
was  a  written  document,  completed  by  the  principal  or  assistant  principal  who  was  included 
in  the  employee’s  permanent  personnel  file. 
enough  to  have  an  evaluation,  the  most  recent  observation  was  considered.  The  evaluation  or 
observation  subject  to  review  was  completed  in  its  entirety  prior  to  consideration  by  the 
District’s  panel  members. 

If  a  teacher  had  not  been  in  the  District  long 

When  considering  the  evaluation  or  observation,  the  District  considered/counted 
ratings  in  eight  categories;  six  are  California  Standards  for  the  Teaching  Profession,  one 
added  by  the  District  (professional  work  habits)  and  an  overall  rating.  The  District  had  three 
ratings:  (1)  “M”  -  meets  or  exceeds  acceptable  performance,  (2)  “I”  -  needs  improvement,  (3) 
“(J  unsatisfactory.  For  example,  if  one  employee  had  “M”  in  each  of  the  eight  categories 
and  another  had  “M”  in  seven  but  one  “I”,  the  employee  with  “M”  in  all  standards  was  given 
the  highest  ranking. 

After  application  of  the  seventh  step,  there  were  some  employees  who  had  the  same 
ranking.  In  these  cases,  the  District  used  a  three-member  panel?  to  review  the  evaluation  or 
observation.  Each  member  read  the  evaluation  or  observation  (including  the  conference 
summary  and  any  evaluator  comments)  and  considered  the  employees’  strengths  and 
weaknesses.  The  panel  members  were  all  former  principals.  Based  on  the  reader’s  opinion 

  

An  evaluation  is  completed  every  year  for  probationary  employees  and,  typically,  every  other  year  for 

3 
permanent  employees. 

An  observation  is  a  formative  part of  the  supervision  process  during  which  the  evaluator  considers  the 

‘ 
teacher’s  performance  at  that  time  and  preliminary  to  the  annual  evaluation. 

5 
on  assignment  to  Human  Resources. 

The  three  people  included  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  the  Director  of  Human  Resources  and  a  principal 

Each of  the  readers  had  served  as  a  principal  previously. 

5 

  

  

of  how  closely  the  individual  met  teaching  standards,  each  reader  assigned  a  numerical  value 
of  |  to  10,  for  a  total  maximum  of  30  points.  The  scores  were  tallied  and  the  employees 
ranked. 

Thereafter,  if  there  were  tied  certificated  employees,  the  District’s  Director  of 
Certificated  Resources,  reviewed  the  evaluation  or  observation  of  the  certificated  teachers  in 
the  manner  described  in  the  foregoing  paragraph.  This  process  continued  with  an  additional 
reader  until  all  ties  were  broken. 

14. 

Respondents’  argued  that  some  Respondents  were  prejudiced  by  the  District’s 

application  of  steps  one  and  seven  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria. 

Not  all  certificated  employees  were  required  to  be  No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB) 

compliant;  the  teachers  in  core  areas  were  but  counselors,  elective  and  adult  education 
teachers  were  not.  This  standard  was  applied  to  all  certificated  employees  with  the  same 
seniority  date,  irrespective  of  whether  they  were  required  to  have  the  NCLB  compliant  or 
not. 

Application  of  step  seven  involved  subjective  information;  there  is  insufficient 
evidence  in  the  record  of  objective  evaluation  of  this  information.  Each  reader  considered 
comments  made  by  the  principal  or  vice-principal  included  as  part  of  the  evaluation  or 
observation;  as  a  result,  some  teachers  were  at  an  unfair  disadvantage  if  the  principal  or  vice- 
principal  wrote  or  did  not  write  comments,  an  issue  over  which  the  evaluated  employee  had 
no  control.  In  addition,  there  are  questions  regarding  the  consistency.  and  degree  to  which 
different  readers  of  evaluations  or  observations  assigned  the  numerical  score  and/or  the 
impact  of  subjective  comments  of  evaluators  on  the  readers.  There  is  insufficient  evidence  in 
the  record  to  determine  if  the  District  scrutinized  the  process  to  assure  some  minimal  attempt 
to  calibrate  scores. 

15. 

Steps  one  and  seven  of  the  District’s  tie-breaker  criteria  were  prejudicial  to 

Respondents  whose  positions  did  not  require  them  to  be  NCLB  compliant  or  whose  ranking 
was  based  on  comparison  of  the  most  recent  evaluation  or  classroom  observation. 

16. 

According  to  the  evidence,  application  of  the  District’s  tie-breaker  criteria 

resulted  in  the  retention  of  some  employees  while  others  received  layoff notices. 

The  District  sought  to  terminate  155.0  full  time  equivalent  positions;  over  100 
Respondents  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  and/or  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  There  was  some 
general  testimony  regarding  examples  of  the  inequitable  application  of  steps  one  and  seven 
of  the  District’s  tie  breaker  criteria.  However,  no  Respondent  was  specifically  identified  as 
an  individual  who  received  a  layoff  notice  as  a  result  of  the  foregoing.  There  was 
insufficient  evidence  in  the  record  to  conclude  that  the  application  of  step  one  or  seven 
actually  impacted  ranking  for  the  purpose  of  layoff. 

17, 

The  services  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

6 

  

 

  

18. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular.  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds of services  related  to  the  welfare 

of  the  schools  and  its  pupils  and  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District,  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

19. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  are  satisfied. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  San 

Bernardino  City  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he/she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.  3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the  senior 

5. 

Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the 

junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts 
lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  Local  2393  v. 
Board  of  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

6. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.

  

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Janine  Milligan  and  Roberta  L. 
Lehfeldt  is  dismissed.  Respondents  Janine  Milligan  and  Roberta  L.  Lehfeldt  shall  be 
retained  for  the  2008  —  2009  school  year. 

2. 

Except  as  provided  in  Paragraph  1  of  this  Order,  the  Accusation  served  on 

Respondents  listed  in  Exhibit  “A”  are  sustained.  Except  as  provided  in  Paragraph  | of this 
Order,  notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: 

S 

S| 

OX 

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

      
thn GF jam —— 

     

  

 

EXHIBIT  “A” 
RESPONDENTS 

Luna,  Felicia 
Lyons,  Jessica 
Manjatrez,  Amanda 
Mao,  Elisa 

McDonough,  Matthew 

McNair,  Lisa 
Milligan,  Janine 
Mojica  Mastranzo, 
Diana 
Montez-Stine,  Monica 

Murguia,  Anna 
Myers,  Michelle 
Nahm,  Sierra 
Ohira,  Meghan 

Ortega,  Anna  Marie 

Pardus,  Sara 
Perez,  Angela  I 
Phillips,  Ramona 

Raarup,  Brigette 
Raef,  Teresa 
Rees,  Laurie 
Reyes,  Gisel 
Robinson,  John 
Rodriguez  Ill,  Santos 
Rosales,  Crystal 
Roundy,  Robin 
Salazar-Villegas, 
Mayra 

Scheuerman,  Dolores  L 
Schlagel,  Lacie 

Aguilar,  Jessica 
Aguirre,  Gabriela 
Allen,  Jamnia  Joy 

Axreola,  Fiorella 
Arroyo,  Nancy 
Back,  Tiffany 
Baird,  Nicole 

Basoco,  Kelly  J. 
Bautista,  Patricia 
Beckley,  Alica 
Bogarin,  Alexis  R 

Bracken,  Michelle 
Brink,  Jennifer 
Brown,  Norma 
Bruce,  Pamela 
Caruthers  Collins, 
Laura 

Castaneda,  Martha 
Castille,  Karen  L 

Chavez,  Karla 
Chen,  Susan 
Chermik,  Brian 

Cook,  Edward 
Cooney,  Melody 
Cooper,  John  D 
Cordova,  Erika 

Davenport,  David 

Dorame,  Eric 
Eck,  Barbara 

EXHIBIT  “A” 
RESPONDENTS 

Schmidt,  Tara 
Scott,  Jessica 
Shand,  Herbert  Olivier 

Shih,  Angela 
Shuss,  Ericka 

Simental-Gladin, 
Maribel 

Smith,  Christal 
Smith,  Kevin 
Smith,  Lauren 
Solano,  Jenai 
Sorrell,  LaTonya 
Southern,  Jennifer 
Southworth,  Rebecca 
Stephens,  Eileen 
Stone,  Gregory 
Summers,  Santford  S. 
Summers,  Shyla 
Swogger,  Wesley 
Edward 
Telphy,  Kimberly 
Tornero,  Jessica 

Tucker,  Raquel 

Verduzco,  Georgina 

Wagner,  Veronica 

Westerhaus,  Anja 

Wilson,  Danielle 
Wong,  Jessica 
Zapata,  Norma 
Angelica 

Fields,  Mary 

Garcia,  Sofia  J 
Garza,  Monica 
Girasek,  Berenise 
Godfrey,  Kenneth 

Green,  Meaghan 

Guillen,  Karla 
Gutierrez,  Mayra 

Hart,  Cassandra 

Heaton,  Brian 
Heckman,  Sheri 
Hewlett,  Albert 

Hidalgo,  Monica 
Ann 
Horta,  Naomi 

Hunter,  Marcia 
Hurtado,  Christina 
Jacka,  Robert  E 

Jensen,  Michelle 

Kennedy, 
Bridgette 
Keyser,  Laura 
Ladipo,  Ladapo 
Lehfeldt,  Roberta  L, 
Lopez,  Elizabeth 
Lopez,  Haide 

Lovett,  Wikitoria 
Lujano-Calderon,  Andrea 

 

