  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LAS  VIRGENES  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

OAH  No.  L2008030354 

The  Reduction  in  Force  of  28.5  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions  of  the  Certificated 
Employees  of  the  District, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

David  B.  Rosenman,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  14,  2008,  at  the  Las  Virgenes  Unified 
School  District,  Las  Virgenes,  California. 

Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  by  Warren  S.  Kinsler,  Attorney  at  Law, 

represented  the  Las  Virgenes  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Hathaway,  Perrett,  Webster,  Powers,  Chrisman  &  Gutierrez,  by  Robert  A.  Bartosh 
and  Jeffrey  J.  Stinnett,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  teachers:  Debbie  Haro*, 
Julie  Just,  Cathy  Latty*,  Michelle  Manning*,  Linda  Ordin*,  Marianne  Pall*,  Robin  Stidham, 
Brittany  Stone  and  Janet  Svoboda*.  The  Respondents  marked  with  “*”  were  present  at  the 
hearing. 

Evidence  was  received  by  way  of  stipulation,  testimony  and  documents.  At 

Respondents’  request,  the  record  remained  open  for  briefing. 
Respondents’  counsel  informed  the  ALJ  that  no  brief  would  be  submitted.  The  record  was 
closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May  20,  2008. 

On  May  20,  2008, 

By  agreement  of  the  parties  and  by  operation  of  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision  (b),  any  actions  to  be  taken  by  the  Governing  Board  and  the  District  are  extended 
by  28  days;  that  is,  actions  required  to  be  taken  by  May  7,  2008,  are  extended  to  June  4, 
2008,  and  actions  required  to  be  taken  by  May  14,  2008,  are  extended  to  June  11,  2008. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 
kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  teachers  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was 

 

  

not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed 
to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 

seniority  and  review  of  credentials.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code.  The  Board  may  proceed  to  give  final  layoff  notices  as 
indicated  herein. 

Jurisdiction  and  Parties 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  District  provides  educational  services  for  students  in kindergarten  through 

grade  12.  The  District  employs  approximately  682  certificated  staff  in  permanent  or 
probationary  positions. 

2.  Donald  M.  Zimring,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  Dan 
Stepenoski  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Personnel  of  the  District.  Their  actions  were 
taken  in  those  official  capacities.  Mr.  Stepenoski  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the 
technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

3.  Before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  served  on  22  teachers',  including 

Respondents,  a  written  notice  (notice)  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 
them  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation 
and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  28.5  full- 
time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

4.  Nine  certificated  employees,  referred  to  as  Respondents,  submitted  timely  written 
requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

5.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  Respondents. 

On  March  31,  2008,  the  District  served  the  Respondents  by  certified  mail  with  an  Accusation 
along  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense. 

6.  All  nine  Respondents  served  their  Notices  of  Defense  on  the  District. 

'  Exhibit  9  indicates  there  may  have  been  25  teachers:  nine  teachers  who  requested 

hearings  and  sixteen  who  did  not.  Respondents  objected  to  this  exhibit.  According  to 
Exhibit  4,  there  are  proofs  of  service  for  notices  to  22  Respondents.  There  is  a  discrepancy 
between  these  22  who  were  served  in  Exhibit  4,  and  the  inference  that  25  teachers  were 
served  as  noted  in  Exhibit  9.  The  objections  that  Exhibit  9  has  insufficient  foundation  and  is 
cumulative  are  sustained.

  

7.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  certificated  employees  of  the 

District,  except  Respondent  Robin  Stidham,  who  is  a  categorical  temporary  employee  who 
was  given  a  precautionary  layoff  notice. 

8.  The  District  dismissed  the  Accusations  against  Respondents  Robin  Stidham  and 

Janet  Svoboda. 

The  Governing  Board  and  the  Lay  Off Resolution 

9.  On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  (Board)  was  given 
notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  28.5  FTE  employees  be  given  notice  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefore. 

10.  Board  Resolution  number  33-07,  adopted  on  March  11,  2008,  proposed  a  layoff 
of  28.5  FTE  certificated  employees  (Resolution).  Specifically,  the  Resolution  provided  for 
the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

FTE  =  Services 

4.0 
3.8 
4.4 
3.0 
1.0 
0.4 
0.4 
1.0 
7.5 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

Librarian  Services 
Elementary  Counselors 
SB  1802  Counselors 
Middle  School  Dean 
Continuation  High  School  Principal 
Regional  Occupation  Program  Coordinator 
Assistant  Director  Special  Education 
Director  of  Education  Technology 
Kindergarten  through  Fifth  Grade  Classroom  Instruction 
High  School  Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
High  School  English  Teaching  Services 
Elementary  PE  Teacher 

11.  Board  Resolution  number  34-07,  adopted  on  March  11,  2008,  established  tie- 
breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be 
based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  stated 
therein.  More  specifically,  the  tie-breaker  criteria  provide  for  reference  to  be  made  for 
certain  credentials,  certificates,  authorizations,  permits,  degrees,  salary  steps,  college  credits, 
and  other  factors,  in  an  established  order  of  priority  to  determine  who  has  the  higher  seniority 
within  the  shared  date  of  first  paid  service. 

12.  Assistant  Superintendent  Stepenoski  stated  that  Resolution  33-07  was  required  by 
the  District’s  fiscal  crisis  and  need  to  reduce  services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of 
the  District  and  its  students.  More  specifically,  the  Board  received  information  about  the 

  

3 

 

  

next  state  budget  leading  the  Board  to  believe  that,  for  school  year  2008-2009,  it  would 
experience  a  budget  shortfall  of  approximately  $7  million. 

13.  The  decision  to  reduce  services  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication 

of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

The  Seniority  List  and  the  Lay  Offs 

14.  The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  credentials. 

15.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  these  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  displace,  or  “bump,”  other  employees  who  were  less  senior  to  them.  In 
determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the 
number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on 
incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of 
affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees. 

16.  The  District  used  information  from  the  seniority  list  and  personnel  files  to  apply 

the  tie-breaker  criteria  of  Resolution  34-07. 

17.  The  services  identified  in  Resolution  33-07  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 

could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s 
decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  decisions  were  based  on  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

18.  The  District  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated 
employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1,  Education  Code’  section  44945,  subdivision  (a),  states  in  pertinent  part: 

“No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 

board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written 
notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee  . 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.” 

.  that  it  has  been 

. 

?  All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

2.  Section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 

than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive, 
and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as 
specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

“(b)  Whenever  . 

. 

.  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 

. 

later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  . 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing 
board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 

. 

“(c)  ...[S]ervices  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  reverse  order  in 

which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  Sections  44844 
and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices 
and  a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order 
of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than 
five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. . . 

   

that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render... . 

  

course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 

“(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

  

specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

3.  Sections  44949  and  44955 establish  jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding. 

The  notice 

and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  sections  44949  and  44955  were  met.  (Factual 

Findings  3  through  6.) 

4.  A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision 
(b)  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

5,  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 
the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  section  44949.  (Factual  Findings  3  through  18.) 

Hf 

// 

/ 

Mt 

M 

// 

/ 

// 

 

6.  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  employees  occupying  28.5  full-time  equivalent  certificated 
positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Such  notices  may  be  given  to 
the  following  seven  employees:  Debbie  Haro,  Julie  Just,  Cathy  Latty,  Michelle  Manning, 
Linda  Ordin,  Marianne  Pall  and  Brittany  Stone. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  Each  Respondent  shall  receive 

such  a  notice. 

3.  The  Accusations  are  dismissed  as  to  Respondents  Robin  Stidham  and  Janet 

Svoboda,  and  no  final  layoff  notices  may  be  sent  to  them. 

DATED:  May  21,  2008. 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

