BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ANTIOCH  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation Against 
The  Certificated  Employees  Identified  in 
Exhibit  A, 

OAH  No.  2008030579 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  16,  2008,  in  Antioch,  California. 

Joshua  A.  Stevens  and  Roy  Combs,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Antioch 

Unified  School  District. 

Dale  Brodsky,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  16,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Deborah  Sims,  Ed.D.,  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents, 

those  individuals  listed  on  Exhibit  A  hereto,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  of 
Schools  (Superintendent)  of  the  Antioch  Unified  School  District (District). 

2. 

Respondents  are  all  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  District  adopted  Amended 

Resolution  No.  2007-2008-03  finding  it  was  necessary  to  terminate  certain  employees  due  to 
a  reduction  or  discontinuance of  the  following  particular  kinds of  services  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year: 

Administrative  Positions: 

Administrator  —-  Extended  Learning 
Assistant  Director  ~  Special  Education 
Assistant  Superintendent,  Elementary  Education 

1.0  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 

  

 

  

 

Assistant  Superintendent,  Secondary  Education 
Chief  Academic  Officer 
Coordinator  -  Educational  Technology 
Coordinator  -  EL 
Coordinator  -  Student  Support  Services 
Director  -  Assessment 
Director  -  Curriculum 
Director  -  Federal  and  State  Programs 
Director  -  Human  Resources 
Director  -  Special  Education 
Director  -  Student  Support  Service 
District  Program  Specialist 
Elementary  Vice  Principals 
High  School  Reform  Coordinator 
High  School  Vice  Principal 
Middle  School  Vice  Principal 

High  School  Teaching  Positions: 

Bilingual  Teachers 
English 
ROP:  Auto 
ROP:  Healthcare  Support  Services 

Opportunity  School: 

Guidance  Specialist 

Bridges: 

Guidance  Specialist 

Prospects: 

Teacher 

Middle  School  Teaching  Positions: 

Bilingual  Teacher 
Opportunity  Teacher 

Elementary  School  Teaching  Positions: 

Prep  Teachers:  PE  6.8  F.T.E.,  Computers:  5.8  F.T.E. 

Music  0.6  F.T.E. 

1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 

2.5  F.T.E. 
3.0  F.T.E. 
0.2  F.T.E. 
0.2  F.T.E. 

0.2  F.T.E. 

0.8  F.T.E. 

1.0  F.T.E. 

1.4  F.T.E. 
1.0  F.T.E. 

13.2  F.T.E. 

  

Categorical  Arts  and  Music  Teacher: 

5.0  F.T.E. 

Special  Education  Teaching  Positions: 

Psychologists 
Resource  Teachers 

Reform  Facilitator  Coaches 

Project  Teachers  —  Central  Office: 

EIA 
General  Fund 
PAR 
SLIP 
Teacher  Credentialing  Block  Grant 
Title  I 
Title  II 

Project  Teachers  — Site: 

Title  I 

8.0  F.T.E. 
4.0  F.T.E. 

13.0  F.T.E. 

0.25  F.T.E. 
0.30  F.T.E. 
0.20  F.T.E. 
0.20  F.T.E. 
0.40  F.” 
2.10  F. 
0.75  F.T.E. 

3.0  F.T.E. 

Total  Certificated  F.T.E.  to  be  Reduced  or  Eliminated: 

82.70  F.T.E. 

The  resolution  also  authorized  the  Superintendent  of  District  to  send  appropriate 

notices  to  all  employees  affected  by  the  reduction. 

4. 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  District  had  previously 

adopted  a  resolution  approving  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  order  of  seniority  of 
certificated  employees  with  the  same  first  date of paid  service  in  a  probationary  position 
(tiebreak  criteria). 

5. 

On  March  13,  2008,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  her  recommendation  that  notice  be 
given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  written 
notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. ! 

" 

District  also  gave  notice  to  all  118 of its  temporary  employees.

  

  
  

  

6. 

7. 

Respondents  each  made a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

All.  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

District  currently  employs  20  special  education  psychologists  (some  of  whom 
work  part-time)  in  17.85  F.T.E.  positions.  As  part  of  its  action  in  reducing  services  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  the  Governing  Board  of  District  determined  to  reduce  8.0  F.T.E. 
special  education  psychologist  positions.  At  hearing  District  indicated  that  only  five  special 
education  psychologists  will  actually  be  laid  off.  Two  special  education  psychologists  have 
been  reassigned”  and  one  was  non-reelected.  District  will  retain  9.85  F.T.E.  special 
education  psychologists  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

9. 

Certain  services  provided  by  a  psychologist  are  mandated  by  state  law. 
Mandated  services  which  require  participation  of a  school  psychologist  include  special 
education  assessments,  triennial  re-evaluations  of  special  education  students,  manifestation 
determinations,  positive  behavior  intervention  plans  and  designated  instruction  and  service 
(DIS)  counseling.  District  determined,  after  hundreds  of  hours of  data  collection  from  the 
community,  staff,  the  director  and  assistant  director  of  the  Special  Education  Department  and 
others,  that  special  education  psychologists  were  performing  duties  that  were  not  appropriate 
for  their  positions.  In  addition  to  providing  mandated  services,  the  psychologists  were 
providing  non-mandated  services  (e.g.,  counseling  to  the  general  student  population),  and 
mandated  services  that  were  not  required  to  be  performed  by  psychologists  (e.g.,  preparation 
of  504  reports  and  plan  management.) 

During  the  2008-2009  school  year  District  plans  to  reorganize  the  Special  Education 

Department  to  streamline the  job  responsibilities  of  special  education  psychologists.  The 
reorganization  will  provide  a  minimum  level  of  service  in  each  mandated  service  area.  Some 
of  the  duties  now  performed  by  psychologists  will  be  handled  by  counselors,  teachers  and 
other  District  staff.  For  example,  504  services,  which  previously  were  an  essential  part  of  the 
duties  of  special  education  psychologists,  will  be  moved  out  of  the  Special  Education 
Department  into  Student  Support  Services.  The  9.85  F.T.E.  psychologists  who  remain  after 
the  proposed  reductions  will  have  significantly  fewer  job  duties  and  will  be  expected  to  give 
priority  to  providing  mandated  services  to  special  education students. 

In  deciding  how  many  F.T.E.  to  reduce,  District  tried  to  anticipate  special  education 

enrollment  in  relation  to  the  streamlined job  responsibilities  of  the  special  education 
psychologists.  It  relied  upon  data  collected  over  the  course  of  many  months  from  the 
community  and  other  sources,  including  the  Assistant  Director  of  Special  Education,  who 
advised  that  two  fewer  special  education  classes  will  be  required  during  the  upcoming  2008- 

2  The  two  special  education  psychologists  also  had  counseling  credentials  and  were  moved  into 

vacant  counseling  positions. 

 

  

2009  school  year.  District  also  relied  upon  an  anticipated  increased  usage of  behavioral 
plans.  District  currently  hires  a  behaviorist  as  a  consultant.  Over  the  past  two  years  District 
required  all  of  its  special  education  psychologists  to  receive  behaviorist  training  and 
certification.  District  anticipates  that  behavior  plans  can  now  be  prepared  and  implemented 
much  more  quickly,  which  should  result  in  a  decreased  need  for  the  services  of special 
education  psychologists.  The  probable  decrease  in  special  education  enrollment  and 
probable  decrease  in  need  for  the  services  of  special  education  psychologists  were  factors  in 
District’s  decision  regarding  how  many  F.T.E.  to  reduce.  District  believes  that  its 
reorganized  Special  Education  Department  will  be  able  to  cover  all  mandated  service  areas 
which  require  participation of a  special  education  psychologist.  District  represents  that  if  it 
is  not  able  to  provide  the  required  services,  it  will  rehire  special  education psychologists. 

10. 

Respondents  contend  District  has  failed  to  establish  that  it  will  be  able  to 
provide  all  mandated  psychological  services if  the  proposed  reductions  are  implemented. 
Respondents  presented  evidence  that  over  2000  special  education  students  are currently 
enrolled  in  District  and  that  up  to  95  percent of  a  special  education  psychologist’s  time  is 
spent  performing  mandated  services.  Janice  Yankura,  Director  of  Special  Education  for 
District,  testified  that  District  is  able  to  maintain  compliance  with  the  state  requirements  for 
evaluation  and  support  of  special  education  students  at  the  current  staffing  level,  but  she 
expressed  doubt  that  District  would  continue  to  be  able  to  do  so  if  the  proposed  reductions 
are  implemented. 

Respondents  also  presented  evidence  that  the  current  special  education 

student/psychologist  ratio  is  already  higher  than  the  SELPA  average,  and  higher  than  the 
ratio  in  a  similar  school  district.  Respondents  argue  that  the  ratio  will  be  “even  more 
lopsided”  and  mandated  services  to  special  education  students  will  be  further  negatively 
impacted  if  the  proposed  reductions  are  implemented.  However,  respondents  conceded  that 
not  every  special  education  student’s  IEP  requires  implementation  by  a  psychologist  (many 
do  not),  that  students  do  migrate  out  of  special  education  and  that  there  is  no  legally 
mandated  student  to  psychologist  ratio. 

Respondents  also  complained  that  District  failed  to  consult  with  individual  special 

education  psychologists  or  the  Special  Education  Director  regarding  what  services  should  be 
cut  prior  to  reorganizing  the  Special  Education  Department,  and  that  District  ignored  the 
Special  Education  Director’s  recommendation  that  no  psychologist  positions  be  reduced.  In 
response,  District  correctly  noted  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  is  a 
management  decision  and  that  it  did  not  have a  legal  obligation  to  consult  with  individual 
psychologists  or  adopt  the  recommendation of the  Special  Education  Director. 

11. 

The  evidence  established  that  District’s  determination  that  it  can  comply  with 

all  statutory  mandates  with  a  reduced  psychologist  staff  was  not  arbitrary,  but  rather  was 
based  upon  reasonable  considerations.  While  it  is  clear  that  the  psychologists  who  remain  in 
District  will  have  an  increased  case  load  and  may  have  to  work  harder  due  to  the  reduction  of 
psychologist  positions,  it  was  not  established  that  the  reduction  will  prevent  the  District  from 
providing  mandated  services.  Moreover,  it  must  be  presumed  that  District  will  perform  its

  

  

official  duties  and  comply  with  legislative  mandates.  If  District  finds  it  difficult  to  provide 
mandatory  services  next  year,  it  has  the  option  of  changing  the  manner  or  method of  offering 
the  service.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796; 
Gallup  v.  Bd.  Of Trustees.  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571.)  This  can  include  rehiring  special 
education  psychologists,  which  District  has  indicated  it  will  do if it  is  unable  to  provide  those 
mandated  services  which  require  participation  of  a  special  education  psychologist. 

12. 

Respondent  Blair  Wilkins  holds  a  Single  Subject  Provisional  Intern  Permit 

Renewal  -  English:  History.  He  is  currently  employed  by  District  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  high  school 
history  teacher.  District  has  assigned  Wilkins  a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2007.  On 
March  13,  2008,  District  applied  the  tiebreak  criteria  to  six  individuals  who  were  currently  in 
ahistory  or  social  science  assignment  and  who  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2007. 
After  applying  the  tiebreak  criteria,  Blair  Wilkins  was  determined  to  be  the  least  senior 
District  employee  currently  teaching  in  a  position  requiring  a  social  service  credential. 

The  evidence  established  that  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the  ensuing 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  District 

school  year. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3  is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbot,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v. 
Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  Antioch 

Unified  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

  

 

e@ 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

DATED: 

© 

2,2 

  

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

  

  

EXHIBIT  A 
(List  of  Respondents) 

 
N
O
R

 
n
a
r
a
C

BOER,  ERIN 
BRANDT-AGUILERA,  KRISTIN 
CONIGLIO,  GIANNA 
EBERTS,  MEGAN 
ESTEPA,  MELISSA 
HARTWIG,  REGINA 
OCHOA,  RAYMOND 
PENEYRA,  JUDITH 
WILKINS,  BLAIR 

 

