e 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BLACK  OAK  MINE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations 
(Reduction  In  Force)  against: 

MINDY  AHRENS  AND  LYNN 
SCHARDT, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030552 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14,  2008,  in  Georgetown,  California. 

@ 

Heather  M.  Edwards,  Esq.,  Law  Offices  of  David  W.  Girard,  represented  the  Black 

Oak  Mine  Unified  School  District. 

Andrea  Price,  Esq.,  Langenkamp  &  Curtis,  represented  Mindy  Ahrens. 

Lynn  Schardt  represented  herself. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  14,  2008. 

   

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Rob  Schamberg  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Black  Oak  Mine  Unified  School 
District  (District).  His  actions  and  the  actions  of  the  District  Governing  Board  were  taken  in 
their  official  capacities. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District.  On  March  12,  2008, 
the  District  served  on  each  respondent  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that 
notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that 
their  services  would  be  reduced  or  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  District 
Governing  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  13.045  full-time 

e 

  

  

  

  

equivalent  (FTE)  positions.  Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 
if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.' 

3. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  respondents.  The 
Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were 
timely  served  on  respondents.  Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the 
Accusations. 

4. 

On  March  6,  2008,  at  a  regular  meeting,  the  District  Governing  Board  was 

given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  employees  holding 
13.045  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be  reduced  or  not  required  for 
the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

5. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  District  Governing  Board  determined  that  it  was 

necessary  to  decrease  programs  and  services  and  thus  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  teaching 
services  affecting  employment  of  13.045  FTE  positions.  The  District  Governing  Board 
adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-05  providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following 
particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS): 

K-5  Self-Contained  Classrooms 
4-6  Self-Contained  Classrooms 
Creekside  Prep 
6-8  Offerings 

Industrial  Technology/Math  Technology 
Mathematics 

Science/Applied  Science/Computer 
English/History  Core 

9-12  Offerings 
English 
Social  Studies 
Art 
Physical  Education 
Music 
Science 
Continuation/Independent  Study 

Total 

5.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
.0903  FTE 

1.0  FTE 
0.14  FTE 
0.56  FTE 
0.28  FTE 

0.4  FTE 
1.4  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.8  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
1.2  FTE 
0.775  FTE 

13.045 

6. 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  these  particular 

kinds  of  services  was  made  in  order  to  address  a  substantial  estimated  budget  shortfall  in  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

'  The  other  certificated  employees  noticed  did  not  appear  as  one  of  them  waived  her  right  to  a  hearing,  and 

the  District  rescinded  the  notices  for  the  other  six  employees. 

 

7. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or  temporary,  and 
credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from 
the  District’s  records  and  employees  are  given  the  opportunity  to  correct  errors  in  the 
seniority  list. 

8. 

The  Superintendent  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 

implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to 
develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
services  being  reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees 
held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees. 

Mindy  Ahrens 

9. 

Mindy  Ahrens  has  a  seniority  date  of  December  13,  2007.  She  holds  a  Clear 

Multiple  Subjects  Credential.  She  is  a  first  year  probationary  teacher,  and  no  other 
certificated  teacher  more  junior  than  she  is  being  retained  by  the  District.  Ms.  Ahrens  is 
currently  assigned  to  teach  1.0  FTE  at  Northside  Elementary  School.  Her  services  are 
reduced  by  1.0  FTE  pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  5.0  FTE  K-5S 
teaching  services  in  self  contained  classrooms.  No  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Ahrens  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  that  Ms.  Ahrens  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10. 

Ms.  Ahrens  maintains  that  at  one,  and  possibly  two,  .5  FTE  positions  are 

available  and  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill  either  position.  Her  contention  is  based 
on  an  earlier  review  of  the  Superintendent’s  spread  sheet  for  next  year’s  teaching  positions 
by  a  teachers’  association  representative.  However,  the  evidence  established  that  the  spread 
sheet  is  merely  a  “working  document”  and  not  a  reliable  indicator  of  vacant  positions  for  the 
ensuing  school  year.  One  position  identified  by  Ms.  Ahrens  depends  upon  continued  federal 
funding  or  the  District’s  ability  to  use  unexpended  funds  from  an  initial  three-year  grant. 
The  other  identified  position  is  a  .5  FTE  position  in  the  District’s  continuation  high  school. 
District  concedes  that  Ms.  Ahrens  is  certificated  and  competent  to  occupy  these  positions. 
However,  District  established  that  all  positively  assured  attrition  to  date  has  already  been 
considered  in  making  assignments  and  reassignments,  and  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  any 
future  vacancies,  including  the  two  identified  by  Ms.  Ahrens,  materialize  in  the  future.  The 
availability  of  the  two  positions  identified  by  Ms.  Ahrens,  or  other  positions,  will  also 
depend  upon  possible  reassignments  among  more  senior  certificated  employees  which  may 
or  may  not  create  positions  which  Ms.  Ahrens  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 

   
  

seniority  date  is  September  9,  1996,  and  she  is  a  permanent  certificated  teacher.  She 
currently  teaches  .5  FTE  special  education  which  is  unaffected  by  the  PKS  reduction.  She 
also  occupies  .0903  FTE  which  represents  the  approximately  45  minutes  on  each  of  four 
days  each  school  week  that  she  teaches  Creekside  middle  school  students.  Ms.  Schardt 

11.  _  Lynn  Schardt  holds  Special  Education  and  Multiple  Subjects  Credentials.  Her 

Lynn  Schardt 

volunteered  to  perform  this  work  several  years  ago  to  provide  the  required  preparatory  time 
for  two  middle  school  teachers  at  Creekside  and  her  teaching  contract  was  amended 
accordingly.  This  practice  has  been  followed  each  school  year  since  then.  Ms.  Schardt 
teaches  whatever  subject  the  regular  teachers  designate.  She  works  with  the  students 
individually  or  in  small  groups.  The  District  is  going  to  merge  the  Creekside  program  into 
another  middle  school  next  school  year.  This  will  eliminate  one  of  six  middle  school 
teachers  now  employed  by  the  District.  The  District  plans  to  have  music  and  physical 
education  teachers  provide  instruction  in  those  subjects  to  middle  school  students  during  the 
time  that  regular  middle  school  teachers  are  allocated  their  required  preparatory  time  next 
school  year.  As  a  practical  matter,  there  are  no  approximately  .10  FTE  positions  occupied  by 
more  junior  teachers  into  which  Ms.  Schardt  may  “bump.”  Ms.  Schardt  concedes  that  the 
District’s  plan  to  change  the  manner  in  which  the  middle  school  teachers  are  provided 
preparatory  time  is  at  least  feasible. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
44944  and  44945  were  met.  The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the 
reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process. 
(San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation 
of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to 
be  reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular 
kinds  of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

2. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was 
a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

3. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

4.4 

  

  

 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  whenever  a  particular 
kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  ...or 
whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the 
modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of 
the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become 
necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease 
the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more 
than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as 
otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

1-4 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated  employees  face 

6. 

Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of 
the  order  in  which  they  were  employed...  The  governing  board 
shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render... 

layoffs  due  to  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to 
reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers, 
if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The 
intent  of  the  Legislation  is  clearly  to  prevent  Districts  from  laying  off  senior  teachers  while 
retaining  junior  teachers.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (c)  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

   

District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Schardt  and  Ms.  Ahrens  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  which  either  Ms.  Schardt  or  Ms.  Ahrens  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render.  District  has  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition,  and  while  there 
may  be  positions  in  the  future  to  which  Ms.  Ahrens  may  be  assigned,  there  are  no  such 
positions  at  this  time. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  11,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions,  the 

  

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Mindy  Aherns  and  Lynn  Schardt  that  their  services  will  be 
reduced  by  1.0  FTE  and  .0903  FTE,  respectively,  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of 
the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  April  30,  2008 

    

