  

e 

| 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
RIVERSIDE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Jaimianne  Brewer,  Luis  Diaz,  Jr.,  Daniel 
Genung,  Jerry  McKinnie,  Callie  Neal, 
Tamara  Peltz,  Arlene  Rangel,  and  Janice 
Webb, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030386 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Riverside,  California  on  April  21,  2008. 

Melanie  A.  Petersen,  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  LLP,  represented  the  Riverside 

Unified  School  District. 

Marianne  Reinhold,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  21,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Susan  J.  Rainey,  Superintendent  of  the  Riverside  Unified  Schoo]  District, 

made  and  filed  the  accusations  dated  April  1,  2008  in  her  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  District  employees. 

3, 

In  March  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

the  Superintendent,  through  Glenn  King,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources, 
notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  in  writing  of  her  recommendation  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Superintendent 
stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

@ 

  

 

4, 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007/08-63, 
determining  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at 
the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  must  be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Secondary  Instructional  Coaches 
Staff  Development  Specialists 
High  School  Counselors 
School  Librarians 
English  Teachers 
Mathematics  Teachers 
Home/Hospital  Teachers 
Riverside  Against  Drugs/  TOSA 
Elementary  Music  Teachers 
English  Learner  Teachers 
Elementary  Instructional  Coaches 
Art  Teachers 
Science  Teachers 
Social  Studies  Teachers 
Spanish  Teachers 
Health  Teachers 
Physical  Education  Teachers 
French  Teacher 
District  Librarian 

7.0  FTE 
6.0  FTE 
9.2  FTE 
6.0  FTE 
15.0  FTE 
7.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
5.4  FTE 
10.6  FTE 
11.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
4.8  FTE 
8.8  FTE 
3.6  FTE 
1.6  FTE 
2.2  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

106.2  FTE’s 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  106.2  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

5. 

The  Governing  Board  further  determined  in  Resolution  No.  2007/08-63  that  it 

would  be  necessary  to  retain  certificated  employees  who  possess  special  training  and 
competency  that  other  certificated  employees  with  more  seniority  might  not  possess,  to  wit: 

a. 

Teaching  experience  within  the  past  three  years  in  one  of  the  following 

areas:  marching  band,  vocal  music,  or  instrumental  music  at  the  secondary  level;  and 

b. 

an  undergraduate  degree  in  music  performance,  vocal  performance, 

instrumental  performance,  and/or  music. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  determine 

which  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result 
of  the  reduction of the  aforementioned  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Governing  Board 
further  directed  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all 

2 

  

 

certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  on  respondents  a 

written  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  their  services  not  be  required 
for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from 
employment  was  not  related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

8. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Accusations 
were  thereafter  timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of 
Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

9. 

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  2007/08-63  were 

“particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise 
of  discretion. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board.  No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than 
those  levels  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12. 

On  August  21,  2007,  Daniel  Genung  received  and  accepted  an  offer  of 

employment  at  the  District’s  Chemawa  Middle  School.  As  discussed  below,  the  first  day of 
school  for  new  District  teachers  was  August  22,  2007.  However,  the  District  could  not  hire 
Mr,  Genung  effective  August  22,  because  Mr.  Genung  did  not  yet  have  a  tuberculosis 
clearance.  He  received  the  clearance  on  August  23,  2007,  which  thus  became  his  contract 
date.  The  contract  explicitly  stated,  “Seniority  Date:  8/23/07,”  and  bore  an  asterisk,  which 
stated  “Pending  pre-employment  clearance  (#5).”  Item  five  stated,  “Prior  to  rendering 
service  under  this  offer,  you  must  have  on  file  with  the  District  Human  Resources  Office: 
A  certificate  showing  you  are  free  from  active  tuberculosis...  .” 

1) 

August  23,  2007  was  the  first  regular  teaching  day  of  the  current  school  year. 
August  22,  2007  was  a  staff  development  day,  when  teachers  could  report  to  their  school  site, 
set  up  their  classrooms,  receive  training  and  engage  in  other  related  activities  of  a 
preparatory  nature.  Pursuant  to  the  union  contract,  participation  on  the  August  22  staff 
development  day  was  optional  for  returning  teachers.  If  teachers  chose  to  participate,  they

  

received  a  set  $285  “buy-back”  amount  for  their  work  that  day.  This  $285  did  not  represent 
a  pro  rata  fraction  of  their  annual salary.! 

Though  returning  teachers  were  not  required  to  attend  the  August  22  staff 

development  day,  new  teachers  were.  Because  Mr.  Genung  was  technically  not  yet 
employed  by  the  District  on  August  22,  he  could  not  be  required  to  report  for  duty  on 
August  22.  However,  District  staff  strongly  advised  (i.e.,  “highly,  highly  encouraged”)  him 
to  do  so,  which  he  did,  and  for  which  he  received  the  $285  buy-back  amount.  Mr.  Genung 
performed  all  duties  and  participated  in  all  activities  that  any  new  employee  was  required  to 
perform  and  participate  in  during  the  staff  development  day. 

Based  on  the  foregoing,  it  is  found  that  the  District  correctly  determined  Mr. 

Genung’s  seniority  date  to  be  August  23,  2007.  In  particular,  it  is  noted  that: 
2007  was  not  part  of  the  regular  185-day  school  year;  (b)  Mr.  Genung’s  participation  in  the 
August  22  staff  development  day,  while  was  strongly  encouraged,  was  not  required;  and  (c) 
his  contract  explicitly  specified  that  August  23,  2007  was  his  seniority  date. 

(a)  August  22, 

13. 

None  of  the  respondents  challenged  their  tiebreaker  point  determinations  at  the 

hearing.  In  return,  the  District  agreed,  pursuant  to  a  stipulation of the  parties,  that  it  would 
afford  all  respondents  on  the  District’s  updated  April  4,  2008  “credential  listing  for 
certificated  personnel”  an  opportunity  to  meet  with  District  personnel,  to  review  the 
documentation  demonstrating  how  their  tiebreaking  points  were  determined,  and  to  offer  to 
the  District  additional  information  concerning  their  status  in  this  regard. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusation.  It 
that  their  services  are  no  longer  required  by  the  District. 

is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  respondents  notice  before  May  15,  2008, 

' 
development  day  thus  did  not  represent  1/1  85th of  a  teacher’s  annual  salary. 

Pursuant  to  contract,  teachers  worked  185  days  in  the  school  year.  The  $285  payment  for  the  staff 

4 

 

  

ORDER 

The  accusation  served  on  respondents  Jaimianne  Brewer,  Luis  Diaz,  Jr.,  Daniel 

Genung,  Jerry  McKinnie,  Callie  Neal,  Tamara  Peltz,  Arlene  Rangel,  and  Janice  Webb  is 
sustained  and  notice  shall  be  given  to  respondents  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
particular  services  as  indicated. 

Dated:  Gry  4 

LM  { 

Donald  P.  Cole 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

