  

  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LA  HABRA  CITY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  The  Accusation  Against: 

CHERYL  ALLEN, 
SUMMER  CERVANTES, 
SHERRY  ENRIQUEZ, 
LYNN  GASPARELLA, 
ROSS  GOULD, 
RACHEL  GUERRERO, 
NANCY  HATSUSHI, 
ROCHELLE  LYON, 
CHARISSE  OKAMOTO,  and 
JAY  SUPPLE 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

OAH  No.  L2008030859 

Robert  S.  Eisman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2008,  at  the  offices  of  the  La  Habra  City 
School  District  in  La  Habra,  California. 

Barbara  J.  Ginsberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  La  Habra  City  School  District 

(the  District). 

Carlos  R,  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Cheryl  Allen,  Summer  Cervantes, 

Sherry  Enriquez,  Lynn  Gasparella,  Ross  Gould,  Rachel  Guerrero,  Nancy  Hatsushi,  Rochelle 
Lyon,  Charisse  Okamoto,  and  Jay  Supple  (collectively,  respondents)  who  were  present  at  the 
hearing.  Lynn  Gasparella  was  subsequently  found  to  have  waived  her  right  to  be  a  party  in 
this  proceeding  due  to  her  failure  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  22,  2006. 

//1 

/// 

  

 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  District  serves  the  local  community  by  providing  elementary  school 

education  for  students  in  kindergarten  through  third  grade  at  four  schools  and  for  students  in 
third  grade  through  fifth  grade  at  three  schools.  The  District  also  provides  middle  school 
education  for  students  in  sixth  grade  through  eighth  grade  at  two  schools. 

Richard  A.  Hermann,  Ed.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  Susan  Belenardo  is 

the  Assistant  Superintendent. 

2. 

On  March  13,  2006,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  made  a 
recommendation  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  that  certain  full- 
time  equivalent  (FTE)'  certificated  employees  be  notified  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation,  in 
accordance  with  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955 

3. 

On  March  13,  2008,  in  open  session,  the  Governing  Board  adopted,  signed, 
and  approved  the  Resolution  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  La  Habra  City  School  District 
Regarding  Layoff  of  Certificated  Employees  Due  to  a  Reduction  or  Discontinuance  of 
Particular  Kinds  of  Services,  which  provided  for  services  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  as 
follows: 

a. 

Reduce: 

1.0  FTE  Middle  School  Physical  Education 

qd) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

5.0  FTE  Middle  School  CORE” 

4.0  FTE  Middle  School  Electives 

10.0  FTE  K-6  Classroom  teachers 

"A  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  is  a  way  to  normalize  personnel  numbers  based  on 
In  general,  six  class  sections  equates  to  one  full-time  employee  position. 

staffing  ratios. 
Thus,  if  that  staffing  ratio  is  applied  to  a  planned  reduction  of  15  instructional  sections,  then 
the  result  would  be  the  need  to  reduce  2.5  FTE,  i.e.,  three  full-time  employees. 

?  CORE  pertains  to  class  sections  in  which  a  single  teacher  who  holds  multiple  cre- 

dentials  provides  instruction  to  discrete  groups  of  students  in  multiple  subjects,  e.g.,  when  a 
teacher  provides  a  group  of  students  with  an  instructional  section  in  English  followed  by  a 
section  in  Reading.  The  term  “CORE”  is  distinguished  from  reference  to  “core  subjects” 
such  as  science  and  English.

  

b. 

Discontinue: 

(1) 

(2) 

1.0  FTE  Middle  School  Staff  Specialist 

1.0  FTE  Middle  School  P.A.S.S.°  position 

4. 

The  need  for  layoffs  was  the  result  of  the  following  factors  that  would  impact 

the  District’s  budget  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  as  follows: 

a. 

A  significant  budget  shortfall  was  projected  due  to  the  California  Governor’s 

proposed  across-the-board  budget  reductions  of  10  percent. 

b. 

Reductions  in  student  enrollment  were  expected  to  continue,  based  on  trend 

projections,  which  historically  have  been  very  accurate. 

5. 

In  order  to  prepare  to  meet  the  challenges  of  reduced  funding  and  student  en- 

rollment,  the  District  restructured  the  schedules  of  its  two  middle  schools,  which  resulted  in  a 
reduction  in  the  number  of  class  sections  and  re-evaluated  staffing  needs  at  the  elementary 
school  level,  which  resulted  in  further  personnel  reductions.  The  planned  changes  would  not 
compromise  the  educational  programs  of  the  District’s  students. 

6. 

On  March  14,  2008,  by  personal  delivery,  the  District  served  affected 

certificated  employees,  including  Chery!  Allen,  Sherry  Enriquez,  Lynn  Gasparella,  Ross 
Gould,  Rachel  Guerrero,  Nancy  Hatsushi,  Rochelle  Lyon,  Charisse  Okamoto,  and  Jay 
Supple,  and  two  other  certificated  employees,  with  written  notice,  pursuant  to  Education 
Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  “it  was  determined  at  the  Board  meeting  of  March  13, 
2008,  that  notice  be  given  to  you  that  your  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2008- 
2009  school  year.”  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  layoff. 

The  notices  further  advised  the  employees  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  provided  that 

such  a  request  was  delivered  in  writing  and  was  actually  be  received  in  the  District’s  Human 
Resources  Office  no  later  than  4:00  p.m.  on  March  24,  2008.  Failure  to  request  a  hearing 
would  constitute  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

7. 

Respondents  Chery!  Allen,  Sherry  Enriquez,  Lynn  Gasparella,  Ross  Gould, 

Rachel  Guerrero,  Nancy  Hatsushi,  Rochelle  Lyon,  Charisse  Okamoto,  and  Jay  Supple,  each 
filed  a  timely  Request  for  Hearing  (i-e.,  nine  of  the  11  permanent  and  probationary 
employees  who  received  layoff  notices). 

8. 

On  March  14,  2008,  by  personal  delivery,  the  District  served  each  of  15 

temporary  employees,  including  respondent  Summer  Cervantes,  with  a  Precautionary  Layoff 
Notice.  The  notice  sent  to  respondent  Cervantes  informed  her  that  the  District’s  records 
reflect  she  is  presently  serving  as  a  temporary  employee  and  that  her  employment  will  end  at 

>  P.A.S.S.  is  a  special  intervention  program  to  assist  struggling  students. 

  

 

  

the  conclusion  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  why  her 
employment  would  end  at  that  time. 

The  notice  further  advised  respondent  Cervantes  that,  as  a  temporary  employee,  she 

was  not  entitled  to  layoff  rights.  However,  the  District  “out  of  an  abundance  of  caution” 
decided  to  provide  Ms.  Cervantes  with  a  limited  right  to  request  a  hearing  under  the 
provisions  of  Education  Code  Section  44955. 

Respondent  Cervantes  could  request  a  hearing,  provided  that  such  request  was 
delivered  in  writing  to  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Office  at  the  District  Office  no  later 
than  4:00  p.m.  on  March  24,  2008.  The  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  waiving 
the  right  to  a  hearing. 

9. 

No  evidence  was  presented  to  establish  that  respondent  Cervantes  was  other 

than  a  temporary  employee. 

10. 

|  Respondent  Cervantes  filed  a  timely  Request  for  Hearing. 

11. 

Superintendent  Hermann  filed  Accusations  which  were  timely  served  on 

respondents  as  required  by  the  Education  Code,  and  informed  them  that  a  Notice  of  Defense 
must  be  filed  within  five  days  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a)(1). 

12. 

Respondents  Chery!  Allen‘,  Sherry  Enriquez,  Ross  Gould,  Rachel  Guerrero, 

Nancy  Hatsushi,  Rochelle  Lyon,  Charisse  Okamoto,  Jay  Supple,  and  Summer  Cervantes 
each  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

Respondent  Lynn  Gasparella  failed  to  timely  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  and  thereby 

waived  her  right  to  a  hearing,  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11506. 

13. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Susan  Belenardo  testified  that  the  Governing  Board’s 

resolution  was  required  due  to  the  District’s  fiscal  crisis  and  projected  reductions  in  student 
enrollment. 

14. 

The  District  maintains  a  Roster  of  Certificated  Staff  that  identifies  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service)  and  credentials.  As  provided  in  Education  Code 
section  44845,  seniority  generally  is  measured  from  the  first  date  on  which  the  employee 
rendered  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee.  The  District  also  maintains  a  Temporary 

*  Counsel  for  the  teachers  contended  that  respondent  Allen  should  be  included  among 
the  employees  he  was  representing  at  the  hearing.  Counsel  for  the  District  objected  based  on 
her  contention  that  respondent  Allen  did  not  timely  file  a  Notice  of  Defense,  thereby  waiving 
her  right  to  participate  in  the  hearing.  After  hearing  respondents  and  a  witness  for  the  Dis- 
trict  testify  regarding  this  issue,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  overruled  the  District’s  objec- 

tion  and  allowed  respondent  Allen  to  participate  in  the  hearing  as  a  represented  party.   

  

Teacher  List  that  identifies  each  temporary  employee’s  hire  date,  the  reason  why  the 
temporary  employee  was  hired,  and  the  employee’s  credentials. 

None  of  the  respondents  represented  that  the  information  contained  in  either  the 

Roster  of  Certificated  Staff  or  Temporary  Teacher  List  was  incorrect  or  incomplete. 

15. 

Based  on  the  District’s  Roster  of  Certificated  Staff,  Middle  School  2007-2008 

Master  Schedules,  and  Middle  School  Reduction  Calculations,  the  following  is  noted: 

a. 

Rochelle  Lyon  has a  seniority  date  of  November  30,  2007,  and  has  a 

preliminary  credential  for  Middle  School  with  English  Learner  Authorization.  She  currently 
teaches  one  seventh-grade  and  five  eighth-  grade  math  sections  at  Imperial  Middle  School. 
She  also  has  one  section  for  preparation  of  lessons  and  instructor  professional  development 
(PREP). 

b. 

Nancy  Hatsushi  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2007,  and  has  a 

preliminary  credential  for  Social  Science  and  Physical  Education  with  English  Learner 
Authorization.  She  currently  teaches  one  seventh/eighth-grade,  two  seventh-grade,  and  four 
sixth-grade  physical  education  sections  at  Washington  Middle  School. 

c. 

Lynn  Gasparella  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2007,  and  has  a 

preliminary  credential  for  Middle  School,  with  supplement  in  English,  and  Cross-cultural, 
Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  Authorization.  She  currently  teaches  two 
reading,  two  English,  and  two  science  sections,  all  at  the  seventh-grade  level,  at  Washington 
Middle  School. 

d. 

Chery]  Allen  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2007,  and  has  a  preliminary 

credential  for  Social  Science  and  Science  (Biology),  with  an  Emergency  CLAD  Certificate. 
She  currently  teaches  five  eighth-grade  science  sections  and  one  seventh/eighth-grade 
technology  section  at  Imperial  Middle  School.  She  also  has  one  PREP  section. 

e. 

Jay  Supple  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2006,  and  has  a  preliminary 

credential  for  Social  Science  and  Physical  Education,  with  CLAD  Authorization.  He 
currently  teaches  two  seventh/eighth-grade  and  three  sixth-grade  physical  education  sections 
at  Washington  Middle  School.  He  also  teaches  one  modified  physical  education  section. 

f. 

Charisse  Okamoto  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2006,  with  a  professional 

clear  credential  for  Social  Science  and  Physical  Education  with  CLAD  Authorization.  She 
currently  teaches  four  seventh/eighth-grade  and  two  seventh-grade  physical  education 
sections  at  Washington  Middle  School. 

g. 

Rachel  Guerrero  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2006,  with  a  professional 
clear  credential  for  Middle  School  with  CLAD  Authorization.  The  record  does  not  contain 
further  information  regarding  her  duties  in  the  District. 

  

 

  

h. 

Ross  Gould  has a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2006,  and  has  a  preliminary 

credential  for  Social  Science  with  CLAD  Authorization  and  English  Learner  Authorization. 
He  currently  teaches  five  social  studies  sections  and  one  Avid  section,  all  of  which  are  at  the 
eighth  grade  level  at  Washington  Middle  School. 

i. 

Sherry  Enriquez  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  29,  2006,  and  has  a  preliminary 

credential  for  Middle  School  with  CLAD  Authorization.  She  currently  teaches  six  algebra 
sections  (Algebra  I  A,  1  B,  and  Honor)  at  Washington  Middle  School. 

16. 

The  following  is  noted,  based  on  the  Temporary  Teacher  List,  Middle  School 

2007-2008  Master  Schedules,  and  Middle  School  Reduction  Calculations: 

Respondent  Cervantes’  initial  hire  date  was  August  31,  2004.  She  was  hired  to  help 

the  District  participate  in  the  categorically  funded  Class  Size  Reduction  program.  Ms. 
Cervantes  is  credentialed  for  Preliminary  Middle  School  (supplemental  English)  with 
English  Learner  Authorization.  She  currently  teaches  two  English,  two  reading,  and  two 
public  speaking  sections,  all  of  which  are  at  the  seventh  grade  level  at  Imperial  Middle 
School.  She  also  has  one  PREP  section. 

17. 

Nine  certificated  employees  have  seniority  dates  below  (i.e.,  more  recent  than) 

that  of  respondent  Rochelle  Lyon.  However,  all  nine  employees  are  credentialed  in  Special 
Education  or  as  a  Speak  and  Language  Specialist.  Since  these  special  education  services 
were  not  identified  by  the  Governing  Board  as  being  subject  to  reduction  or  restructuring,  no 
layoff  notices  were  sent  to  any  of  these  nine  employees. 

The  following  list  contains  the  relevant  portion  of  the  seniority  list  sequence,  from  the 
respondent  with  the  lowest  seniority  date  (respondent  Rochelle  Lyon)  to  the  respondent  with 
highest  seniority  date  (respondent  Sherry  Enriquez).  The  status  of  each  certificated 
employee  in  that  range  is  also  listed  (i-e.,  whether  a  layoff  notice  was  issued  or  the  reason 
why  one  was  not  issued) 

Seniority  Date 

Name 

Status 

11/30/2007 
09/17/2007 
09/05/2007 
08/28/2007 
08/28/2007 
08/28/2007 
08/28/2007 
08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 

Rochelle  Lyon 
Jessica  Edgley 
Nancy  Hatsushi 
Scott  Helphand 
Jonathan  Gush 
Lynn  Gasparella 
Cheryl  Allen 
Mark  Youngquist 
Jay  Supple 
Sara  Rottweiler 
Gregory  Ornelas 
Charisse  Okamoto 

Layoff  Notice 
Special  Education 
Layoff  Notice 
Single  Subject  Math  (not  reduced) 
Special  Education 
Layoff  Notice 
Layoff  Notice 
Layoff  Notice 
Layoff  Notice 
Special  Education  (related) 
Special  Education  (related) 

Layoff  Notice   

  

  

08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 
08/29/2006 

Rachel  Guerrero 
Ross  Gould 
Erin  Gallagher 
Sherry  Enriquez 

Layoff  Notice 
Layoff  Notice 
Special  Education 
Layoff  Notice 

The  next  senior  certificated  employee  after  respondent  Enriquez  was  also  given  a 

layoff  notice. 

18. 

With  respect  to  Middle  School  assignments  under  the  District’s  restructuring 

plan,  if  a  senior  employee  holds  multiple  credentials  and  is  using  one  of  the  credentials  to 
teach  sections  that  are  eliminated  as  a  result  of  the  restructuring,  that  employee  would  be 
assigned  to  teach  classes  requiring  use  of  the  other  credential.  As  an  example,  a  very  senior 
certificated  employee  could  hold  credentials  in  both  Physical  Education  and  History,  and  be 
teaching  solely  physical  education  classes.  If  those  physical  education  classes  are  eliminated 
as  a  result  of  restructuring,  the  District  would  endeavor  to  reassign  the  employee  to  teach 
History. 

19. 

Of  the  19  certificated  temporary  employees,  15  received  precautionary  layoff 
notices,  including  Summer  Cervantes.  The  only  temporary  employees  who  did  not  receive 
notices  were  those  holding  counseling  or  nursing  credentials. 

20. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted  criteria  for  determining  the  order  of  termination 

among  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It  provided 
that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  in 
accordance  with  the  following  factors,  each  of  which  was  assigned  a  numerical  value: 

1.  Certificated  personnel  who  did  not  receive  a  notice  of  layoff. 

2.  Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  Multiple  Subject  credential  whose 
primary  teaching  assignment  for  the  2007-2008  school  year  is  at  the  K-5  level 
and  who  possess  a  CLAD  Certificate  or  CLAD  Emphasis. 

3.  Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  Multiple  Subject  credential  with  a 
CLAD  Certificate,  a  CLAD  Emphasis,  an  AB  1059  English  Learner  Content 
authorization,  or  an  SB  2042  Credential. 

4.  Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  Multiple  Subject  credential  without  a 
CLAD  Certificate,  CLAD  Emphasis,  an  AB  1059  English  Learner  Content  au- 
thorization,  or  an  SB  2042  Credential,  but  who  are  eligible  for  an  Emergency 
CLAD  Certificate. 

5.  Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  Single  Subject  authorization  with  a 
CLAD  Certificate,  a  CLAD  Emphasis,  an  AB  1059  English  Learner  Content 
authorization,  or  an  SB  2042  Credential.

6.  Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  Single  Subject  authorization  without  a 
CLAD  Certificate,  CLAD  Emphasis,  an  AB  1059  English  Learner  Content  au- 
thorization,  or  an  SB  2042  Credential,  but  who  are  eligible  for  an  Emergency 
CLAD  certificate. 

7.  If  any  further  ties  exist  with  respect  to  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of 
paid  service,  the  tie  shall  be  broken  by  using  the  last  four  digits  of  the  certifi- 
cated  employee’s  social  security  number,  with  the  higher  four-digit  number 
receiving  the  higher  ranking. 

21. 

In  identifying  the  certificated  employees  affected  by  the  layoff,  the  District’s 

superintendent  and  assistant  superintendent  were  required  to  use  the  foregoing  criteria  to 
resolve  ties  between  employees. 

22.  —  Assistant  Superintendent  Belenardo  and  other  District  staff  developed  and 
used  the  seniority  list  to  determine  which  employees  were  affected  by  Board’s  resolution 
regarding  layoff  of  certificated  employees  and  whether  the  affected  individuals  were  entitled 
to  “bump”  other  employees. 

In  this  matter,  none  of  the  respondents  who  received  a  layoff  notice  were  found  to 

have  bumping  or  skipping  rights  over  another  employee  in  the  seniority  list. 

23. 

In  determining  the  number  of  employees  who  would  receive  layoff  notices,  the 

District  considered  the  fact  that  five  certificated  employees  had  applied  for  early  retirement 
that  would  be  effective  in  July  2008,  four  certificated  employees  resigned  prior  to  March  13, 
2008,  and  one  certificated  employee  resigned  after  that  date. 

24. 

The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  projected  District  budget  reductions.  The  District  must  also  address 
projected  reductions  in  student  enrollment  at  all  grade  levels  and  undertake  restructuring,  as 
necessary,  to  insure  that  its  schools  provide,  and  students  receive,  required  instruction  in  an 
effective  and  efficient  manner.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  services  in  light 
of  its  budget  and  enrollment  projections  does  address  the  welfare  of  students,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  the  Governing  Board’s  discretion. 
proposed  reductions  in  services  would  violate  any  statutory  or  regulatory  requirement 
governing  the  District. 

Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the 

>  Generally  speaking,  a  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to 

a  position  held  by  a  junior  teacher  if  the  senior  teacher  is  properly  credentialed.  That  dis- 
placement  of  a  junior  teacher  is  known  as  “bumping.”  The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and 
a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential/skill  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more  senior  teacher 
is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by  statute  (Education  Code  section  44955,  sub- 
division  (d)(1))  and  appellate  law  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Gov- 
erning  Board of  the  Santa  Clara Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831).

  

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Education  Code  section  44944,  subdivision  (a),  states  in  pertinent  part  that: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section 
44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her 
designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent 
by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stat- 
ing  the  reasons  therefor. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907 
and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no  pro- 
bationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclu- 
sive. 

(b)  Whenever  ...  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year,  ...  ,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in 
the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of 
not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at 
the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  termi- 
nated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probation- 
ary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  dis- 
trict  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee 
whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing 
board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section

  

    

44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining 
the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in 
ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on 
request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order 
of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employ- 
ees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a 
requirement... . 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments 
in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any 
service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to 
render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not 
previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a 
teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major 
area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  gov- 
erning  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  devi- 
ate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  senior- 
ity  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the 
laws. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this  pro- 

3. 
ceeding. 
44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  3  through  21.) 

The  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

4. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services 
were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  reduc- 
tion  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and 

10

its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to 
decrease  the  expenditures  of  the  District  and  projected  reductions  in  student  enrollment,  as 
determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

5. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  ren- 

der  a  service  which  such  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Cheryl  Allen,  Summer  Cervantes,  Sherry 
Enriquez,  Lynn  Gasparella,  Ross  Gould,  Rachel  Guerrero,  Nancy  Hatsushi,  Rochelle  Lyon, 
Charisse  Okamoto,  and  Jay  Supple  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009 
School  Year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as 
provided  in  the  Resolution  of  the  Governing  board  of  the  La  Habra  City  School  District 
Regarding  Layoff  of  Certificated  Employees  Due  to  a  Reduction  or  Discontinuance  of 
Particular  Kinds  of  Services. 

DATED:  April  28,  2008. 

ROBERT  S.  EISMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

   

11 

  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LA  HABRA  CITY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  The  Accusation  Against: 

CHERYL  ALLEN, 
SUMMER  CERVANTES, 
SHERRY  ENRIQUEZ, 
LYNN  GASPARELLA, 
ROSS  GOULD, 
RACHEL  GUERRERO, 
NANCY  HATSUSHI, 
ROCHELLE  LYON, 
CHARISSE  OKAMOTO,  and 
JAY  SUPPLE 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  L2008030859 

ORDER  CORRECTING  MISTAKE  IN  PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  28,  2008,  Administrative  Law  Judge  Robert  S.  Eisman  (ALJ)  of  the  Office 
of  Administrative  Hearings  issued  the  Proposed  Decision  in  the  above-captioned  case.  The 
ALJ  and  La  Habra  City  School  District  subsequently  noticed  that  there  were  errors  in  the 
Proposed  Decision  that  needed  to  be  corrected. 

On  May  1,  2008,  the  ALJ  discovered  typographical  errors  in  the  Proposed  Decision  at 

the  last  sentence  on  page  |  and  at  line  lof  paragraph  2  on  page  2. 
should  be  changed  to  “2008”. 

In  both  instances,  “2006” 

On  May  5,  2008,  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  received  a  facsimile  message 

from  Barbara  J.  Ginsberg,  Esq.,  Parker  &  Covert  LLP,  Attorneys  for  La  Habra  City  School 
District,  which  made  reference  to  a  typographical  error  in  the  Proposed  Decision  at  page  2, 
paragraph  3.a.(1),  wherein  “1.0  FTE  Middle  School  Physical  Education”  should  be  changed 
to  “3.0  FTE  Middle  School  Physical  Education”.  The  requested  change  is  supported  by  the 
evidence  in  this  matter. 

/// 

 

  

  

1. 

2. 

a. 

b. 

c. 

WHEREFORE,  GOOD  CAUSE  appearing,  the  following  Order  is  issued: 

The  corrections  are  authorized  by  law. 

The  Proposed  Decision  is  hereby  corrected  as  follows: 

In  the  last  sentence  on  page  1,  “2006”  is  changed  to  “2008”. 

In  the  Factual  Findings  at  page  2,  paragraph  2,  line  1,  “2006”  is 
changed  to  “2008”. 

In  the  Factual  Findings  at  page  2,  paragraph  3.a.(1),  “1.0”  is  changed  to 
“3.0”, 

3. 

A  “Corrected  Proposed  Decision”  incorporating  the  foregoing  changes  is 
attached  to  this  Order. 

4, 

This  order  is  made a  part  of  the  record  in  this  case. 

IT  IS  SO  ORDERED. 

DATED:  May  5,  2008. 

ROBERT  S.  EISMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings    

