BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE  RIM  OF  WORLD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  NO.  L2008030507 

Respondents  Listed  on  Attached  Exhibit  A 

Respondents. 

  

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  29,  2008,  at  the  Board  Room  of  the  Rim  of  the 
World  Unified  School  District,  Blue  Jay,  California. 

Sherry  G.  Gordon,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Rim  of  the  World  Unified  School 

District. 

SUMMARY 

represented  at  the  hearing. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision. 

Respondents  Jeannine  Jones  and  Carrie  Renfro  did  not  appear  and  were  not 

The  Board  of  Education  of  the  Rim  of  the  World  Unified  School  District  (District) 

Carlos  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  John  Beresford  Jr.,  Stacy 

Chapman,  Jessica  De  La  Tejera,  Amanda  Farr,  Bonnie  Harris,  Caris  Leidner,  Amanda 
Markovich,  Kelly  Maynard,  Jeffrey  Moss,  Nicholas  Shalome,  Tracy  Olsen,  and  Mary  Smith. 

   

  

decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated 
personnel  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related 
to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  teachers  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be 
reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  credentials  and  seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking  ties  between  employees  with 
the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code 
requirements. 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  Joseph  Woodford,  the  Interim  Director  of  Personnel  Services  for  the  District, 

filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  and  on  behalf  of  Ronald  Peavy,  Interim 
Superintendent  of  the  Rim  of  the  World  Unified  School  District. 

2.  Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3.  On  March  6,  2008,  Mr.  Seymour  recommended  that  the  Board  of  Education  adopt 

a  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  elementary  classroom  teacher  services  and  particular 
kinds  of  services  (PKS)  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Mr.  Seymour  recommended  the 
reduction  and/or  elimination  of  25  full-time-equivalency  (FTE)  certificated  employees  as 
follows: 

(1)  Elementary  Classroom  Teachers 

(2)  PKS 

TOTAL  CERTICATED  POSITIONS 

15  FTE 

10  FTE 

25  FTE 

  

4.  On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-14,  to  discontinue  or 

reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  wit:  elementary  classroom  teachers  representing 
15  FTE  certificated  employees.'  The  Board  further  determined  that  based  on  the 
discontinuance  or  reduction  of  services,  it  would  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certified  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full- 
time  equivalent  positions. 

5.  On  March  13,  2008,  the  Mr.  Woodford  notified  respondents  in  writing  that  he  had 

recommended  to  the  governing  board  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next 
school  year.  The  mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification.  The  Notice  stated  that 
“Your  request  for  a  hearing  must  be  in  writing  and  delivered  by  March  28,  2008.  ..  .  If  you 
fail  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  this  date,  your  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  a  waiver 
of  your  right  to  a  hearing.”  All  but  two  of  the  respondents  (Jeannine  Jones  and  Carrie 
Renfro)  requested  a  hearing. 

6.  On  March  13,  2008,  Mr.  Woodford  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

named  respondents. 

7.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in 

Factual  Finding  4,  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

'  The  Board  decided  not  to  reduce  PKS  by  the  10  FTE  at  the  high  school  level  as  originally 
recommended  by  Mr.  Seymour  in  section  (2)  of  his  March  6,  2008  recommendation  to  the 
Board. 

 

8.  The  Board  considered  attrition,  including  resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for 

leave,  in  determining  the  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  employees. 

9.  The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 
(the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  current  assignments  and  locations, 
advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations. 

10.  The  District  established  tie  breaker  nine  criteria  for  employees  with  the  same  first 

date  of  paid  service  who  were  affected  by  the  proposed  layoff.  The  first  eight  criteria  were 
based  on  objective  standards  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 
Criterion  number  nine  was  based  on  a  comparison  of  the  most  recent  employee  evaluations. 
This  criterion  has  a  certain  amount  of  subjectivity  because  of  potentially  different  individual 
standards  of  the  various  supervisors  who  performed  the  evaluations.  However,  the  District 
did  not  have  to  apply  this  criterion  here  since  all  of  the  named  respondents  who  would  be 
affected  by  the  application  of  this  criterion  are  subject  to  lay  off. 

11.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12.  Prior  to  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  and  made  a  motion  to  dismiss  the 
accusations  against  respondent  Bonnie  Harris.  During  the  hearing,  the  District  made  a 
motion  to  dismiss  the  accusations  against  respondents  Mary  Smith,  Amanda  Markovich  and 
Jeffrey  Moss.  The  motions  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  respondents  Harris,  Smith 
Markovich  and  Moss  were  granted. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
were  met.  Therefore,  jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all  Respondents. 

2.  Cause  was  established  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce  the 
number  of  certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds 
of  services,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  4.  The  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decisions  relate  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949, 

3.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more 

senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

4.  Cause  exists  to  layoff  respondents  John  Beresford  Jr.,  Stacy  Chapman,  Candice 

Coffey,  Jessica  De  La  Tejera,  Amanda  Farr,  Jeannine  Jones,  Caris  Leidner,  Kelly  Maynard, 
Nicholas  Shalome,  Tracy  Olsen,  and  Carrie  Renfro.

  

  

5.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  employees  Bonnie  Harris,  Mary 

Smith,  Amanda  Markovich  and  Jeffrey  Moss,  pursuant  to  Factual  Finding  12. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  John  Beresford  Jr.,  Stacy  Chapman,  Candice 
Coffey,  Jessica  De  La  Tejera,  Amanda  Farr,  Jeannine  Jones,  Caris  Leidner,  Kelly  Maynard, 
Nicholas  Shalome,  Tracy  Olsen,  and  Carrie  Renfro,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

2.  The  Accusations  against  respondents  Bonnie  Harris,  Mary  Smith,  Amanda 

Markovich  and  Jeffrey  Moss  are  dismissed. 

Dated: 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

RIM  OF  THE  WORLD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

  

EXHIBIT  “A” 

BERESFORD,  JR. 
CHAPMAN 
COFFEY 
DE  LA  TEJERA 
FARR 
HARRIS 
JONES 
LEIDNER 
MARKOVICH 
MAYNARD 
MOSS, 
NICHOLAS 
OLSEN 
RENFRO 
SMITH 

JOHN 
STACY 
CANDICE 
JESSICA 
AMANDA 
BONNIE 
JEANNINE 
CARIS 
AMANDA 
KELLY 
JEFFREY 
SHALOME 
TRACY 
CARIE 
MARY 

 

