BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
RIALTO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

All  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Rialto 
Unified  School  District  Who  Received 
Preliminary  Layoff  Notices  for  the  2008- 
2009  School  Year, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008020556 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Etiwanda,  California,  on  April  22,  2008. 

Mark  W.  Thompson  and  William  Diedrich,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Rialto 

Unified  School  District. 

Glen  Rothner  and  Robert  Lindquist,  Attorneys  at  Laws,  represented  the  certificated 
teachers  employed  by  the  Rialto  Unified  School  District  who  received  preliminary  layoff 
notices  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  22,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Rialto  Unified  School  District 

  

1. 

The  Rialto  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  Rialto,  between 

the  cities  of  Fontana  and  San  Bernardino.  It  serves  the  community  of  Rialto  and  other 
communities  and  unincorporated  areas  within  the  area. 

The  District  is  the  35"  largest  school  district  in  California.  The  District  serves  the 

educational  needs  of  about  28,000  students  from  Kindergarten  through  12"  Grade  at  17 
elementary  schools,  five  middle  schools,  three  comprehensive  high  schools,  an  adult 

  

  

1

continuation  school  and  an  independent  studies  program.  The  student  body  is  approximately 
75  percent  Hispanic,  16  percent  African-American,  with  the  remainder  Anglo-American. 
Approximately  25  percent  of  the  students  are  English  language  learners. 

The  District  employs  approximately  2,800  persons,  about  1,400  of  whom  are 
certificated  employees  providing  direct  services  and  supports  to  students.  The  District  has  an 
annual  budget  of  approximately  $240  million. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five-member  Board  of  Education  (the 

Board). 

Edna  E.  Davis-Herring  (Superintendent  Herring)  is  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  and 

the  Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer.  Anna  Maria  Rodriguez  (Assistant  Superintendent 
Rodriguez)  is  an  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Schools  and  serves  as  the  District’s  Personnel 
Officer.  Rhonda  D.  Kramer  (Ms.  Kramer)  is  the  District’s  Coordinator  of  Personnel 
Services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  -  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  the 
passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of 
California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  must  maintain  a  balanced  budget.  A  school  district  cannot  determine 

the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the  state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually 
occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school  district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to 
make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case  financial  scenario  develops.  California’s 
current  economic  crisis  has  made  budgeting  problems  far  more  complicated  than  before. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  no  later  than 
March  15. 

  
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess.  

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority,  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 

The  District’s  Response 

4. 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget  in  response  to  it.  As  a  result  of  the  financial 
crisis,  the  District  projected  a  budget  deficit  of  about  $20  million  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  deal  with  its  projected  budget  shortfall. 

Under  the  direction  of  Superintendent  Herring,  Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez 
and  the  District’s  administrative  staff  considered  methods  to  meet  the  budgetary  problems. 
On  February  13,  2008,  Superintendent  Herring  recommended  to  the  Board  that  the  District 
reduce  or  eliminate  305  Full  Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

5. 

On  February  13,  2008,  the  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  07-08-39  (Reduction 

of  Particular  Kinds  of  Services).  That  resolution  stated: 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education of  the  Rialto  Unified  School  District  has 

determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  herein  must  be  reduced  or 
discontinued;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the  aforementioned 

reason,  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  that  the  number  of  regular  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  services  of  regular 
certificated  employees  based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily  attendance  during  the  past 
two  years;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  has  determined  that  due  to  a  significant  population  of 

English  language  learners  with  specialized  educational  needs,  a  specific  and  compelling 
need  exists  to  employ  and  retain  certificated  employees  who  have  authorization  to  teach 
English  Learner  (“EL”)  students,  as  determined  by  the  California  Commission  on 
Teacher  Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience  that  comes  therewith;  and 
WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955(d)  authorizes  this  Board  to  deviate 

from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of  seniority  for  the  above  reason,  if 
necessary;  and 

~—-WHEREAS;  State  law  mandates  that  cach  failure  to  staff  a  classroom  containing 

one  or  more  EL  students  with  a  certificated  employee  possessing  an  appropriate  EL 
authorization  is  a  “misassignment”  subject  to  sanction  by  the  County  Superintendent  of 
Schools;  and 

WHEREAS,  compliance  with  the  provisions of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act 

and  the  Williams  Settlement  require  that  EL  students  be  served  by  certificated  employees 
with  appropriate  EL  authorizations;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof  should  not  and 
cannot  be  adequately  served  by  concentrating  EL  students  in  particular  classrooms  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  lessen  the  need  for  certificated  employees  with  EL  authorizations. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 

Rialto  Unified  School  District  as  follows:

  

That  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  below  be  reduced  or 

A. 
eliminated  commencing  in  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

  

AB1802  Counselors 

  

Anger  Management/Crisis  Intervention  Counselor 

  

Behavior  Specialist 

BTSA  Support  Providers 

EL  Intervention  Teacher 

Elementary  Music  Teachers 

Elementary  Teachers 

  

  

  

  

9| 

RTE. 

1  |  FTE. 

1  |  FTE. 

7  |  FTE. 

1| 

4) 

FTE. 

FTE. 

200 |  F.T.E. 

  Elementary  VAPA  Teacher 

1 

  English  Intervention  Teacher 

1 

  High  Priority  Schools  Grant  Teacher 

1 

  High  Priority  Schools  Grant  Coach 

1 

  High  School  SED  Teacher 

] 

  Literacy  Coaches 

8 

  

12 

Math  Coaches 

1 

1 

1 

3 

3 

3 

2 

13 

Technology  Coach 

  

  Math  Intervention  Teachers 

  Special  Education  Instruction  Specialists 

  SLC  Coordinator 

  Reading  First  Coaches 

  Middle  School  SED  Teacher 

  QEIA  Grant  Teachers 

  Middle  Schoo!  Communicative  Handicapped  Teacher 

  Middle  School  Librarians 

  Preschool  Teachers 

  
  
  
    
    

B. 
corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  of 
terminated  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 

  

Teachers  on  Special  Assignments-EL  Support 

Title  1/Title  I]  Reading  Support  Teachers 

TOTAL  CERTIFICATED  POSITIONS 

Teachers  on  Special  Assignments 

  

  

  

District 

305 

the 

21 

4 

2 

2 

1 

That  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  a 
be 

shall 

 

  

That  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  be  achieved  by  the  termination  of 

Cc. 
regular  employees  and  not  by  terminating  temporary  or  substitute  employees. 

That  “competency”  as  described  in  Education  Code  sections  44955(b), 
Dz. 
shall 
44956,  and  44957,  for 
valid  credential  and  compliance  and/or 
necessarily  include  possession  of  a 
Highly  Qualified  status  under  NCLB  in  the  relevant  subject  matter  area,  and  an 
appropriate  EL  authorization. 

the  purposes  of  bumping  and 

rights, 

rehire 

That,  as  between  certificated  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  the 

E. 
order of  termination  shall  be  determined  solely  by  Board-adopted  criteria. 

That  the  District  Superintendent  or  designee  is  directed  to  initiate  layoff 
Code 

Education 

pursuant 

appropriate 

notice 

to 

F. 
procedures 
sections  44955  and  44949, 

give 

and 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  this  13th  day  of  February,  2008,  in  the  County  of  San 
Bernardino,  California. 

/Signed/ 

President,  Board  of  Education. 

I,  Edna  E.  Davis-Herring,  Superintendent  of  Rialto  Unified 

School  District  of  San  Bernardino  County,  California,  do  hereby  certify  that  the 
foregoing  is  a  full,  true  and  correct  copy  of  a  Resolution  adopted  by  the District’s 
Board  of  Education  at  a  duly  scheduled  meeting  thereof. 

Dated  February  13,  2008 
/Signed/ 

Edna  E.  Davis-Herring,  Superintendent 

6. 

The  resolution  called  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  305  FTEs,  which  was 

necessary  to  meet  the  budget  shortfall.  The  resolution  also  defined  “competency”  for  the 
purposes  of  bumping"  rights  to  necessarily  include  possession  of  a  valid  credential  and 
compliance  and/or  Highly  Qualified  status  under  NCLB  in  the  relevant  subject  matter  area, 
and  an  appropriate  EL  authorization.  Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez  established  that 
the  District’s  failure  to  retain  employees  falling  within  the  Board’s  definition  of 
“competency”  might  result  in  the  loss  of  state  or  federal  funding  or  the  imposition  of  other 
sanctions.  On  this  basis,  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the  welfare  of 
the  schools  and  the  pupils. 

7. 

+ 

The  resolution  called  for  the  reduction  of  200  FTEs  for  “Elementary 

Teachers,”  by  far  the  largest  category of certificated  employees  scheduled  for  layoff. 

“Bumping”  is 

' 
to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  displaces  or  “bumps”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position. 

a  term  used  to  describe  the  right  of a  senior  employee  whose  position  has  been  discontinued 
In  doing  so,  the 

5 

 

Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez  testified  that  the  resolution  did  not  provide  a  more 
particular  description  of  the  services  provided  by  elementary  school  teachers.  No  evidence 
established  that  any  employee,  including  any  elementary  school  teacher,  who  was  served 
with  a  preliminary  notice  was  unaware  of  the  probability  that  his  or  her  services  might  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year  to  the  extent  that  he  or  she  was  prevented  from  looking 
elsewhere  for  employment. 

8. 

Ms.  Kramer,  the  District’s  Coordinator  of  Personnel  Services,  prepared  a 

District-wide  certificated  seniority  list.  The  seniority  list  contained  the  names  of  all 
certificated  employees,  descending  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior,  the 
hire  date  of  each  employee  (first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  capacity),  the  school 
site  where  each  employee  provided  services,  each  employee’s  school  site  assignment,  each 
employee’s  tenured  status  (tenured,  probationary  1,  or  probationary  2),  and  each  employee’s 
service  credential(s)  and  certification(s).  Temporary  and  substitute  teachers  were  not 
included  in  the  certificated  seniority  list. 

A  separate  list  was  prepared  for  pre-school  teachers,  since  the  pre-school  program 

required  different  credentials  and  had  to  be  handled  differently  by  the  District. 

The  seniority  list  was  circulated  throughout  the  District,  and  certificated  employees 
were  invited  to  make  any  corrections  or  changes  to  their  hire  dates  and  to  their  credential(s) 
and  certification(s)  status.  The  corrected  lists  were  returned  to  the  District  office  and 
appropriate  revisions  were  made. 

2. 

“1. 

9. 

3. 

additional  subject  areas; 

areas  the  person  is  presently  teaching); 

English  Language  Learners  (i.e.,  BCLAD,  CLAD,  etc.); 

Possession  of  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  authorization  to  teach 

No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB)  compliant  (i.e.,  highly  qualified  in  the  subject 

Possession  of  additional  NCLB  compliant  credentials  or  authorizations  to  teach 

For  persons  hired  on  the  same  date,  Ms.  Kramer  applied  the  Board’s  tie- 
breaking  criteria,  a  procedure  authorized  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  tie- 
breaking  procedure  was  based  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  schools  and  the  students  thereof. 
Ms.  Kramer  applied  the  following  criteria  in  order,  one  step  at  a  time,  to  resolve  ties  in 
seniority  between  credentialed  employees: 

   

verified  by  documents  on  file  with  the  Personnel  office  (highest  number of verified  years 
prevails);  and 

Possession of  a  Master’s  Degree  in  subject  area  being  taught  (earliest  degree 

Prior  full  time  teaching  experience  outside  the  district  (not  substitute  teaching)  as 

Current  assignment  includes  GATE  classes  or  Advanced  Placement  classes. 

Possession  of a  University  Certificate  in  teaching  GATE  students; 

Teaching  experience  in  different  grades  or  subject  areas.” 

4. 
prevails); 

6. 

8. 

7. 

5. 

6 

  

10. 

Some  certificated  employees  held  positions  which  did  not  require  NCLB 

compliance.  There  were  14  separate  categories  of  particular  kinds  of  services  listed  within 
the  Board’s  resolution  which  did  not  require  an  employee  to  be  NCLB  compliant.  For 
example,  administrators,  teachers  on  special  assignment  (TOSA),  and  literary  coaches  held 
positions  that  did  not  provide  or  require  NCLB  compliance.  But,  an  employee’s  failure  to 
hold  a  position  requiring  NCLB  compliance  or  the  employee’s  failure  to  be  NCLB  compliant 
came  into  play  in  the  layoff  only if  the  employee  fell  within  a  particular  kind  of  service  that 
was  being  eliminated  and  was  involved  in  a  tie-breaking  process  with  another  employee 
hired  the  same  date  after  bumping.  It  was  not  established  that  the  actual  application  of  the 
tie-breaking  criteria  operated  unfairly  for  any  specific  employee  although  that  possibility  was 
argued. 

11. 

Using  all  the  documents  in  the  District’s  possession,  including  the  updated 

seniority  list  and  the  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria,  Ms.  Kramer  carefully  prepared  a 
“certificated  layoff-bump  analysis”  to  determine  which  employees  should  receive 
preliminary  layoff  notices.  The  concept  of  “detail-oriented”  understates  the  manner  and 
extent  to  which  the  certificated  layoff-  bump  analysis  was  prepared. 

In  determining  how  many  preliminary  layoff  notices  needed  to  be  served,  Ms.  Kramer 
considered  positive  attrition  including  retirements,  resignations,  and  non-renewals.  Her  goal 
in  creating  the  layoff-bump  analysis  was  to  ensure  that  no  junior  employee  was  retained  to 
render  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  was  qualified  and  competent  to  provide.  That 
goal  was  met. 

12. 

Onand  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  sent  preliminary  layoff  notices  to 

the  273  certificated  employees  whose  positions  were  impacted  by  the  Board’s  resolution, 
based  on  the  layoff-bump  analysis.  In  the  process,  the  District  failed  to  send  a  preliminary 
layoff notice  to  Shari  Yoshimitsu,  who  should  have  received  such  a  notice  but  did  not.  Of 
those  who  were  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices,  252  certificated  employees  requested 
a  hearing. 

13. 

 Onor  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  a  party  to  this 

proceeding  (i.e.,  a  respondent)  was  given  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended 
that  his  or  her  services  with  the  District  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school 
year  and  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  upcoming  2008- 
2009  school  year.  Each  employee  was  notified  of  the  right  to  a  hearing.  Numerous 
employees  filed  timely  requests  for  a  hearing.  The  accusation  and  other  required 
jurisdictional  documents  were  timely  served  on  those  employees,  most  of  whom  filed  a 
notice  of  defense  thereafter.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

14. 

On  April  22,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  The 
parties  stipulated  that  the  caption  could  be  amended.  The  District  gave  an  opening  statement 
and  filed  a  pre-hearing  brief.  Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  sworn  testimony  and 
documentary  evidence  was  received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed 
and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

7

Documentary  Evidence 

15. 

The  District  provided  numerous  exhibits  including  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  for  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  service  under  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44950,  a  recommendation  that  305  FTE  services  would  not  be  required, 
Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-39,  a  non-exclusive  delegation  of  authority  authorizing 
Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez  to  act  on  the  Superintendent’s  behalf  during  the  layoff 
proceeding,  the  accusation  packet  (notice  of  recommendation,  notice  of  accusation, 
accusation,  blank  notices  of  defense,  relevant  code  sections),  proof  of  service  of  those 
documents,  notices  of  defense  and  requests  for  hearing,  the  notice  of  hearing  and  proof  of 
service  of  the  notice  of  hearing,  the  certificated  seniority  list,  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  the 
2007  certificated  layoff-bump  analysis,  and  the  final  layoff  list  (proposed). 

Stipulation 

Testimony 

16. 

It  was  stipulated  that  the  District  failed  to  send  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  to 

Shari  Yoshimitsu,  who  should  have  received  such  a  notice,  but  properly  served  all  other 
respondents.  Ms.  Yoshimitsu  did  not  testify,  although  it  was  represented  that  she  was 
present  at  the  hearing. 

17. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez  and  Ms.  Kramer  testified  in  the  District’s 

case  in  chief.  Each  was a  highly  credible  witness. 

18. 

Stephen  White,  an  assistant  to  Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez,  testified 

that  the  District  recently  experienced  some  declining  enrollment,  with  the  student  body 
dropping  from  approximately  31,000  students  to  28,500  students  within  the  past  year  or  so. 
He  met  with  some  teachers  on  at  least  one  occasion  to  discuss  this  matter.  White  testified 
that  Assistant  Superintendent  Rodriguez  was  more  familiar  than  he  with  the  layoff 
procedure,  and  that  Ms.  Kramer  was  far  more  familiar  than  he  with  the  preparation  of  the 
seniority  list  and  the  layoff-bump  analysis.  Respondents’  offer  of  proof  that  White  could 
establish  the  Board’s  actual  motivation  in  initiating  the  layoff  proceedings  was  due,  in  whole 
or  in  part,  to  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance  was  rejected  as  being  irrelevant  and 
immaterial. 

19. 

|  While  respondents  argued  that  the  decline  in  average  daily  attendance,  rather 

than  the  budget  deficit,  was  the  real  motivation  for  the  Board’s  decision  to  layoff  certificated 
employees,  the  decline  in  the  size  of  the  student  body  was  ultimately  irrelevant  and  was  not 
material  to  these  proceedings  since  the  Board  specifically  chose  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 
services  (see  Legal  Conclusion  5).  Further,  the  argument  about  the  Board’s  “real” 
motivation  was  particularly  suspect  given  the  massive  nature  of  the  projected  budget  shortfall 
compared  to  the  relatively  minor  reduction  in  the  student  population. 

 

  

The  Board’s  reduction  in  services  was  reasonable  and  was  not  based  on  fraudulent, 

arbitrary  or  capricious  action. 

20. 

Ann  Snavely  began  working  for  the  District  in  1996.  She  taught  at  Trapp 

Elementary  Schoo!  and  was  one  of  the  200  elementary  school  teacher  given  a  preliminary 
layoff  notice  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Ms.  Snavely  credibly  testified  that  she  began 
her  career  at  Trapp  in  1996,  and  then  transferred  to  another  elementary  schoo!  within  the 
District.  She  worked  at  the  other  school  for  several  years.  Ms.  Snavely  wanted  to  return  to 
Trapp,  and  she  let  her  wishes  be  known  to  (then)  Assistant  Superintendent  Joe  Davis 
(Assistant  Superintendent  Davis),  who  asked  Trapp  to  submit  a  resignation  so  he  could  fill 
her  position  at  the  school  site  where  she  was  currently  teaching. 

Ms.  Snavely  was  led  to  believe  that  if  she  were  to  resign,  she  would  receive  a 
teaching  assignment  at  Trapp  in  short  order,  and  that  Assistant  Superintendent  Davis  needed 
her  resignation. 

Ms.  Snavely  spécifically  asked  Assistant  Superintendent  Davis,  “So  what  difference 

will  this  [submitting  a  resignation]  make  to  me?” 

Assistant  Superintendent  Davis  told  Ms.  Snavely,  “You'll  pick  up  right  where  you  left 

off.” 

On  June  25,  2002,  Ms.  Snavely  signed  a  resignation  from  employment  with  the 

District.  Assistant  Superintendent  Davis’s  stamped  signature  is  on  that  document. 

On  July  21,  2002,  Ms.  Snavely  was  rehired  and  was  assigned  to  teach  at  Trapp.  Ms. 

Kramer  was  present  when  the  new  employment  contract  was  signed.  Ms.  Kramer  did  not 
testify  about  the  circumstances  under  which  Ms.  Snavely  continued  her  employment.  Ms. 
Snavely  did  not  miss  teaching  a  single  day  of  school.  She  had  no  idea  that  she  had  severed 
her  employment  relationship  with  the  District,  much  less  given  up  her  seniority  date.  Had 
she  known  that,  she  would  not  have  signed  the  resignation. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Davis  -did-not-testify--Ms.-Snavely’s  testimony-was.clear, 

consistent,  uncontroverted,  and  credible. 

21. 

Employee  1066  testified  that  she  began  working  for  the  District  in  the  1998- 
1999  school  year  and  that  she  received  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  before  March  15,  2003. 
Employee  1066  testified  that  her  services  were  terminated  as  a  result  of  the  2003  layoff 
proceeding,  but  that  she  was  rehired  by  the  District  about  six  months  after  her  services  were 

‘The  District  asserted  this  statement  was  hearsay.  It  was  not.  Assistant  Superintendent  Davis’s  statement 

2 
was  not  offered  to  prove  the  truth of  the  matter  stated,  but  instead  was  offered  to  show  the  basis  on  which  Ms. 

Snavely  reasonably  submitted  a  resignation.  

terminated,  on  January  26,  2004.  At  the  time  Employee  1066  held  a  pre-intern  credential. 
Employee  1066  claimed  that  her  2003  termination  was  the  result  of  a  reduction  in  force,  that 
her  rights  were  formally  adjudicated  in  the  layoff  proceeding  that  followed,  and  that  as  a 
certificated  employee  who  had  been  laid  off,  the  District  was  required  to  rehire  her  in 
January  2004. 

Employee  1066  claimed  her  seniority  date  related  back  to  1998,  and  that  her  seniority 

date  was  not  January  26,  2004,  as  was  set  forth  in  the  District’s  seniority  list.  On  cross- 
examination,  it  was  established  that  in  addition  to  receiving  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  in 
2003,  Employee  1066  also  received  from  the  District  a  notice  of  non-renewal of her 
probationary  employment,  a  notice  that  automatically  terminated  employment  without  the 
necessity  of  the  District  showing  any  cause  and  an  event  independent  of  the  2003  layoff 
proceeding. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  rehired  Employee  1066  because  she  had 
previously  been  laid  off,  as  argued.  Further,  no  documentation  was  offered  to  establish  that 
her  “rights  were  formally  adjudicated”  in  a  layoff  proceeding  occurring  in  2003.  Employee 
1066  did  not  contest  her  seniority  date  when  the  District’s  seniority  list  was  circulated  in 
2004,  which  set  forth  the  District’s  position  that  she  had  a  seniority  date  of  January  26,  2004, 
when  she  was  rehired. 

Employee  1066  was  a  credible  witness,  but  she  did  not  have  sufficient  expertise  to 

establish  her  right  to  an  earlier  seniority  date.  No  documentation  was  offered  to  support  her 
claim  that  she  was  rehired  because  she  was  laid  off.  The  documentary  evidence  —  the 
District’s  certified  employee  seniority  list  -  was  to  the  contrary.  Both  Assistant 
Superintendent  Rodriguez  and  Ms.  Kramer  were  present  and  could  have  been  examined  on 
this  issue,  but  they  were  not. 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  the  District  elected  not  to  renew 
Employee  1066’s  contract,  that  Employee  1066  was  rehired  by  the  District  in  the  middle  of 
the  2003-2004  school  year,  and  that  her  proper  seniority  date  was  January  26,  2004. 

22. 

Employee  1240  was  hired  on  September  6,  2005.  In  the  2007-2008  school 

year,  Employee  1204  served  as  a  Coach  in  the  Reading  First  Program  in  Kindergarten 
through  third  grades.  Employee  1240  helped  other  teachers  and  many  students  to  develop 
reading  effective  strategies.  Employee  1240  held  a  multiple  subject  clear  credential,  a 
supplemental  authorization  in  introduction  to  Music,  and  a  CLAD  certification.  As  a  Coach, 
Employee  1240  did  not  hold  a  position  for  which  NCLB  compliance  was  possible,  and  she 
claimed  her  inability  to  be  NCLB  compliant  in  her  current  position  resulted  in  the 
deprivation of her  right  to  retain  employment  because  in  any  tie-breaking  situation  she  would 
almost  always  lose  because  the  first  criteria  is  “No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB)  compliant 
(i.e.,  highly  qualified  in  the  subject  areas  the  person  is  presently  teaching).” 

Employee  1240  did  not  establish  how  she  was  prejudiced  specifically.  She  did  not 

show  that  a  more  junior  employee  was  being  retained  by  the  District  to  provide  services 
which  she  was  qualified  and  competent  to  provide. 

10 

 

23. 

No  employee  testified  that  his  or  her  right  to  a  fair  hearing  was  prejudiced  by 

the  District’s  failure  to  properly  serve  Ms.  Yoshimitsu  with  required  jurisdictional 
documents. 

24. 

Leona  Whitley  established  that  she  was  entitled  to  participate  in  the  layoff 

proceeding  as a  result  of  having  been  served  with  all  required  jurisdictional  documents  and 
having  requested  a  hearing  in  a  timely  fashion.  Leona  Whitley  is  a  proper  party  to  this  action 
and  she  should  be  given  notice  of  termination. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Statutory  Authority 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44944  provides  in  part: 

“No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 
board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the 
case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the 
governing  board,  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the 
employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor . 

. 

. 

(b) 
|  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year...  If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a 
hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his 
or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing... 

Inthe  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the  proceeding  shall  be 

(c) 
conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with 
Section  11500)-of  Part-1-of  Division  3-of  Title  2-of  the  Government-Code  andthe 
governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all 
of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1) 

The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within  five 
days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she  shall  be  notified  of 
this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(3) 

The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge  who 

shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a  determination  as 
to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision  shall  be  prepared  for  the 

11 

 

governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause 
and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition.  However,  the  governing  board  shall  make 
the  final  determination  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition.  None  of  the 
findings,  recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in  the  proposed  decision 
prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge 
shall  be  binding  on  the  governing  board. 
Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or  governing  board 
of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing  the  charges  unless  the 
errors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies of the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the 
governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or  before  May 7  of  the  year  in  which  the 
proceeding  is  commenced.  All  expenses  of  the  hearing,  including  the  cost  of  the 
administrative  law  judge,  shall  be  paid  by  the  governing  board  from  the  district  funds. 

Any  notice  or  request  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  when  it  is  delivered  in  person 

(d) 
to  the  employee  to  whom  it  is  directed,  or  when  it  is  deposited  in  the  United  States 
registered  mail,  postage  prepaid  and  addressed  to  the  last  known  address  of  the 
employee...” 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  in  part: 

No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes 

“(a) 
other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947, 
inclusive,  and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

(b)  |  Whenever  in  any  school  year  the  average  daily  attendance  in  all  of  the  schools 
of  a  district  for  the  first  six  months  in  which  school  is  in  session  shal!  have  declined 
below  the  corresponding  period  of  either  of  the  previous  two  school  years,  whenever 
the  governing  board  determines  that  attendance  in  a  district  will  decline  in  the 
following  year  as  a  result  of  the  termination  of  an  interdistrict  tuition  agreement  as 
defined  in  Section  46304,  whenever a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or  whenever 
the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the 
opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by 
reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in 
the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a 
corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as 
well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee 
with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12 

  

 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee 
whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in 
writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in 
accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each 
employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the 
governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining 
the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal 
right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the  15th  of  May  in 

(c) 
the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such  employees  shall  be 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by 
the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the 
event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right 
to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed 
for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught, 
and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the 
employee’s  major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 
governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test 
in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  —  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 
reasons: 

(1)  _  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 

specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2) 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

  

13

Jurisdiction 

3. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  all  respondent  employees  identified  in  the  seniority  lists,  except  as  to  respondent  Shari 
Yoshimitsu. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  1-19  and  on  Legal  Conclusions  |  and  2. 

The  Reduction  of Particular  Kinds  of Services 

4. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  District’s  proposed  reduction  of  approximately  24 

percent  of  its  present  certificated  staff  was  arbitrary  and  capricious,  particularly  in  light  of 
the  asserted  ten  percent  budget  shortfall.  Respondents  argued  that  the  resolution  and  notice 
describing  the  reduction  in  force  of  200  “Elementary  Teachers”  was  insufficient  because  the 
actual  services  that  were  being  reduced  were  not  described  with  more  specificity,  merely  the 
position  that  was  being  eliminated.  Further,  respondents  argued  that  the  Board’s  real 
motivation  for  the  termination  (a  reduction  in  attendance  and/or  the  elimination of  the  class 
size  reduction  program)  was  not  included  in  the  resolution  or  notice  and  that  it  should  have 
been.  Finally,  respondents  argued  that  the  statutory  formula  required  to  calculate  a 
corresponding  reduction  in  employees  should  have  been  used  but  was  not.  For  these  and 
other  reasons,  respondents  argued  the  proposed  terminations  were  illegal. 

5. 

The  purpose  of  the  initial  termination  notice  provision  is  to  notify  an  employee 

of  the  probability  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  so  that  he 
or  she  may  consider  looking  elsewhere  for  employment.  Nothing  in  the  statute  relating  to  the 
termination  of  teachers  due  to  a  reduction  in  daily  average  attendance  or,  in  the  alternative,  a 
reduction  of  services  (Ed.  Code,  §  44955)  prohibits  the  statement  of  more  than  one  ground  in 
putting  employees  on  notice  that  their  jobs  are  in  jeopardy.  (Moreland  Teachers  Association 
v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  653.)  However,  where  just  one  statutory  ground  is 
raised,  a  school  district  cannot  introduce  evidence  at  a  hearing  to  support  termination  on 
another  statutory  ground  that  was  not  originally  raised.  (Karbach  v.  Board  of Education 
(1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355,  363.) 

A  service  which  can  be  reduced  but  not  eliminated  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  as 
long  as  the  service  is  not  reduced  below a  level  required  by  law.  The  Legislature  intended 
that  the  term  “particular  kind  of  service”  refer  to  a  kind  of  service  a  school  district  may 
discontinue  as  well  as  reduce.  To  this  end,  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association.,  Inc. 
v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  811  found  the  following  were  particular  kinds  of 
services  which  could  be  eliminated:  “Reading  specialists,  consultants,  nurses,  counselors, 
instrumental  music  teachers,  master  teachers,  traveling  librarians,  learning  assistance 
teachers,  psychologists,  speech  therapists  and  title  I  specialists.” 

14 

 

  

Since  high  school  offerings,  such  as  mathematics,  science,  history  and  art,  are 

particular  kinds  of  service,  logically  elementary  grade  classes  which  teach  the  same 
offerings,  although  with  a  single  teacher,  are  also  particular  kinds  of  service.  Neither  the 
statute  nor  case  law  dictate  that  elementary  school  districts  should  be  precluded  from 
reducing  services  on  an  equal  basis  as  high  school  districts  merely  because  the  former 
organize  their  curriculum  in  a  multidisciplinary  manner.  A  school  board  may  reduce  services 
by  making  fewer  employees  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.  A  reduction  of  11 
kindergarten  through  sixth  grade  classes  was  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service,  and 
the  termination  of  the  teachers  who  provided  those  services  was  permitted  under  Education 
Code  section  44955.  (California  Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (Goleta)  (1982) 
132  Cal.App.3d  32,  34-37.) 

At  the  elementary  school  level,  reduction  of  classroom  teaching  can  be  a  reduction  of 

a  particular  kind  of  service.  A  school  district  may  consider  its  financial  circumstances  in 
deciding  whether  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers 
Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  631.) 

6. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  —  AB  1802  Counselors,  Anger 

Management/Crisis  Intervention  Counselor,  Behavior  Specialist,  BTSA  Support  Providers, 
EL  Intervention  Teacher,  Elementary  Music  Teachers,  Elementary  Teachers,  Elementary 
VAPA  Teacher,  English  Intervention  Teacher,  High  Priority  Schools  Grant  Teacher,  High 
Priority  Schools  Grant  Coach,  High  School  SED  Teacher,  Literacy  Coaches,  Math  Coaches, 
Math  Intervention  Teachers,  Middle  School  Communicative  Handicapped  Teacher,  Middle 
School  Librarians,  Middle  School  SED  Teacher,  Preschool  Teachers,  QEIA  Grant  Teachers, 
Reading  First  Coaches,  SLC  Coordinator,  Special  Education  Instruction Specialists, 
Technology  Coach,  Title  I/Title  II  Reading  Support  Teachers,  Teachers  on  Special 
Assignments,  and  Teachers  on  Special  Assignments-EL  Support—were  “particular  kinds  of 
service”  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b). 

The  Board’s  resolution  delineated  these  services  and  the  District  provided  a  chart 
tracing  the  layoffs  to  the  services,  establishing  that  seniority  was  used  to  determine which 
competent  and  qualified  personnel  should  be  retained.  The  District  was  facing  a  budget 
deficit,  and  it  established  that  the  programs .cut-were-those  least  likely.to  hurt  the  District 
while  complying  with  the  Education  Code.  The  reduction  was  not  based  on  fraudulent, 
arbitrary,  or  capricious  motivation.  Indeed,  the  District  was  not  permitted  to  point  to  decline 
in  attendance  as  a  basis  for  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  so  that  was  not  an 
issue  and  was  irrelevant.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  certificated  employee  was  unable 
to  determine  if  his  or  her  job  was  in  jeopardy  by  reason  of  the  Board’s  use  of  “Elementary 
Teachers”  in  the  resolution  and  notices. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  1-19  and  on  Legal  Conclusions  1,  2  and 

 

  

15 

  

Shari  Yoshimitsu 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15  of  the  year  preceding  dismissal  of  a  certificated  school 
district  employee,  the  employee  must  be  notified  of  the  district’s  decision.  The  employee  is 
then  entitled  to  a  hearing  before  an  administrative  law  judge,  who  prepares  a  proposed 
decision  that  may  or  may  not  be  accepted  by  the  board.  If  the  employee  is  not  given  the 
notice  and  right  to  a  hearing  as  required  by  statute,  the  employee  is  deemed  reemployed  for 
the  following  school  year.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44955,  44949;  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers 
Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  803.) 

8. 

It  was  stipulated  that  Shari  Yoshimitsu,  a  certificated  employee,  did  not 

receive  the  March  15  notice  required  by  statute.  Under  those  circumstances,  Ms.  Yoshimitsu 
must  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

This  conclusion  is  based  Factual  Findings  1-19and  on  Legal  Conclusions  1,  2  and  7. 

The  Domino  Theory 

9. 

Respondents  argued  that  because  Ms.  Yoshimitsu  must  be  retained,  the  clear 

language  of  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  required  that  all  employees 
senior  to  Ms.  Yoshimitsu  be  retained  as  well  because  “Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of 
.  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
this  section  while  . 
which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.” 

. 

Respondents’  argument  is  frequently  made  in  these  kinds  of  proceedings  and  is 

known  as  “the  domino  theory.” 

10. 

The  layoff  statutes  authorize  a  reduction  in  force  when,  in  the  opinion  of  the 

governing  board,  it  becomes  “necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the 
number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district...  .”  (Ed.  Code,  §  44955,  subd.  (b),) 

The  fundamental  task  in  construing a statute  is  to  ascertain  the  intent  of  the 
lawmakers  so  as  to  effectuate  the  purpose  of  the  statute.  Courts  begin  by  examining  the 
statutory  language,  giving  the  words  their  usual  and  ordinary  meaning.  If  there  is  no 
ambiguity,  then  courts  presume  the  lawmakers  meant  what  they  said,  and  the  plain  meaning 
of  the  language  governs.  If,  however,  the  statutory  terms  are  ambiguous,  then  courts  resort 
to  extrinsic  sources,  including  the  ostensible  objects  to  be  achieved  and  the  legislative 
history.  In  such  circumstances,  courts  select  the  construction  that  comports  most  closely 
with  the  apparent  intent  of  the  Legislature,  with  a  view  to  promoting  rather  than  defeating  the 
general  purpose  of  the  statute,  and  avoid  an  interpretation  that  would  lead  to  absurd 
consequences.  (Day  v.  City of Fontana  (2001)  25  Cal.4th  268,  272.) 

11. 

Here,  the  District’s  reason  for  the  reduction  in  force  was  the  probable 

reduction  in  funding  from  the  State  of  California,  most  likely  in  a  substantial  amount.  It 
would  make  no  sense  to  conclude  that  the  District’s  inadvertent  failure  to  serve  Ms. 

16 

 

  

Yoshimitsu  with  required  process  thereby  insulated  all  senior  employees  who  were  properly 
served  with  such  notice  from  being  laid  off  and  prevented  the  District  from  being  able  to  lay 
off  these  employees.  Reaching  such  a  conclusion  would  defeat  the  very  purpose  of  the  layoff 
statutes,  which  is  to  permit  a  school  district  to  terminate  the  services  of  employees  when 
economically  necessary. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  1-19  and  on  Legal  Conclusions  1-3  and 

7-10. 

Ann  Snavely’s  Seniority  Date 

12. 

Promissory  estoppel  applies  whenever  a  promise  induces  action  that  would 
(1)  A 

result  in  an  injustice  if  the  promise  were  not  enforced.  The  required  elements  are: 
promise  clear  and  unambiguous  in  its  terms;  (2)  reliance  by  the  party  to  whom  the  promise  is 
made;  (3)  the  promisee’s  reliance  must  be  both  reasonable  and  foreseeable;  and  (4)  the 
promisee  must  be  injured  by  his  or  her  reliance.  (Lange  v.  TIG  Insurance  Co.  (1998)  68 
Cal.App.4th  1179,  1185.) 

13. 

The  District  is  estopped  from  asserting  that  Ann  Snavely’s  seniority  date  is 
any  date  other  than  when  she  was  first  employed  by  the  District  on  a  probationary  basis  in 
1996.  Ms.  Snavely  reasonably  relied  on  what  (then)  Assistant  Superintendent  Davis  told  her 
would  and  would  not  occur  if  she  were  to  resign  as  he  requested.  To  allow  Ms.  Snavely  to 
be  laid  off  on  the  basis  of  a  July  25,  2002,  seniority  date  would  be  unjust. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  1-20  and  on  Legal  Conclusion  12. 

Leona  Whitley 

14. 

Respondent  Leona  Whitley  was  properly  served  with  all  notices  in  this 

proceeding  and  she  responded  to  them  in  a  timely  fashion  by  requesting  a  hearing.  A  default 
cannot  be  taken  against  Ms.  Whitley. 

However,  Ms.  Whitley’s proper  participation  in  this  proceeding  didnot  result  ina 
different  seniority  date,  and  as  a  junior  employee,  she  must  be  given  notice  that  her  services 
will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Finding  24. 

Employee  1066 

15. 

|  Employee  1066  did  not  establish  that  her  seniority  date  related  back  to  her 
1998  employment,  or  that  her  seniority  date  was  not  January  26,  2004,  as  set  forth  in  the 
District’s  seniority  list.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  the  District 
elected  not  to  renew  Employee  1066’s  contract,  and  that  Employee  1066  was  rehired  by  the 
District  in  the  middle  of  the  2003-2004  school  year,  and  that  her  proper  seniority  date  was 
January  26,  2004. 

17

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Finding  21. 

Employee  1240 

16. 

Employee  1240  was  hired  on  September  6,  2005.  She  did  not  hold  a  position 

for  which  NCLB  compliance  was  possible,  such  that  the  application  of  the  tie-breaker  was 
unfair.  Employee  1240  did  not  establish  actual  prejudice  with  regard  to  the  application  of  the 
tie-breaker.  More  specifically,  she  did  not  show  that  a  more  junior  employee  was  being 
retained  by  the  District  to  provide  services  which  she  was  qualified  and  competent  to 
provide. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  9,  10,  11,  and  22. 

The  District's  Tie-Breaker 

17. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  District’s  adoption  of  the  tie-breaker  and  its 

application  in  this  proceeding  established  the  arbitrary  and  capricious  nature  of  the  District’s 
reduction  in  force  proceeding.  Respondents  argued  that  the  District’s  use of  a  criterion  that 
was  not  available  to  all  credentialed  employees  (i.e.,  that  the  employee  be  NCLB  compliant 
in  the  current  position,  when  that  was  not  always  possible)  was  unfair  and  improper. 
Respondents  did  not  offer  a  specific  example  of  how  the  use  of  the  District’s  tie-breaker 
resulted  in  an  improper  layoff  of  any  employee  or  the  improper  retention of  a  junior 
employee  over  a  more  senior  employee.  No  specific  remedy  was  proposed. 

Respondents  expressed  a  legitimate  concern.  The  Board  should  review  the  tie- 

breaker  criteria  to  make  certain  that  its  actual  application  will  not  unfairly  affect  any 
individual  whose  current  position  does  not  require  that  the  employee  be  NCLB  compliant 
when  considering  the  retention  of  another  employee  hired  on  the  same  date. 

18

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  review  the  tie-breaker  criteria  and  make  appropriate 

modifications  to  it  to  make  certain  that  its  application  will  not  unfairly  discriminate  against 
any  individual  whose  current  position  does  not  require  that  employee  be  NCLB  compliant. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  dismiss  the  accusation  against  Ann  Snavely. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously  served 

with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
except  as  recommended  otherwise. 

   

fas AE  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

19

  

