 
y
“

BEFORE  THE 
SAN  BERNARDINO  COUNTY 
SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008040235 

CHJENE  CHHOR, 

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Bernardino,  California  on  May  5,  2008. 

Sharon  J.  Ormond,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

represented  the  San  Bernardino  Superintendent  of  Schools. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  respondent  Chjene  Chhor. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  5,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Herbert  R.  Fischer,  Ph.D.,  San  Bernardino  County  Superintendent  of  Schools, 

made  and filed  the  accusation  dated  April  14,  2008  in  his  official  capacity. 

: 

Respondent!  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  Superintendent. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  10,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  Walter  D.  Schwartz,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  notified  the 
Superintendent  in  writing  of  his  recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 

for the  upcoming  school year. The  Assistant  Superintendent stated  the  reasons  Tor 

the  recommendation. 

  

Other  individuals  besides  respondent  were  served  with  layoff notices.  However,  at  this  point  respondent  is 

' 
the  only  individual  whose  layoff  remains  to  be  adjudicated  in  this  proceeding. 

1   

  

  

4. 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Superintendent  adopted  a  Resolution,  determining  that 

it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the 
current  school  year.  The  Superintendent  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that 
were  required  to  be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Juvenile  Court  School  classroom  teaching  services 
Community  Day  School  classroom  teaching  services 
Teacher:  Adapted  Physical  Education 
Teacher:  Orientation  and  Mobility 
Pre-Kindergarten  classroom  teaching  services 
Teacher:  Mild/Moderate  disabilities 
Teacher:  Moderate/Severe  disabilities 
Teacher:  Emotionally  Disturbed 

3.0  FTE 
11.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
8.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
4.0  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  33  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

5. 

The  Superintendent  directed  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources 

or  his  designee  to  determine  which  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  the  foregoing  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  Superintendent  further  directed  the  Assistant  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send 
appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  of  the  Superintendent  who  would  be  laid  off 
as  a  result  of the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  Superintendent  timely  served  on  respondent 

a  written  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  her  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  Superintendent’s  reasons  for 
the  recommendation.  The  notice  advised  respondent  of  her  right  to  a  hearing,  that  she  had  to 
deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  by  the  date 
specified  in  the  notice,  a  date  which  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  was  served, 
and  that  her  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

The  recommendation  that  respondent  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related 

to  her  competency  as  a  teacher. 

7. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if there  was 
cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  accusation  was  thereafter 
timely  served  on  respondent.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  notice  of  defense.  All  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8. 

The  services  the  Superintendent  addressed  in  the  Resolution  were  “particular 

kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44955.  The  Superintendent’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  and  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of 

 
-

2 

 

discretion.  No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels 
mandated  by  state  or  federal  law. 

9. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  pupils  of  the  Superintendent.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the 
Superintendent  as  determined  by  the  Superintendent. 

10. 

The  Superintendent  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

11. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Superintendent  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set 
forth  in  the  accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Superintendent  give  respondent  notice 
before  May  15,  2008,  that  her  services  are  no  longer  required  by  the  Superintendent. 

2 
to_provide  orientatian  and  mohility  services 

Respondent’s  testimony  reflected  her  belief  that  the  Superintendent  needs  more,  rather  than  fewer,  teachers 

of  which  her  caseload  is 

to  the  blind  and  visually 
2: 

idi 

bh 

impaired  students 
5, 

is 

iprised= 

d-mobilit 

  ampie=that-oth 
nn 
p 
(i.e.,  numbers of students)  far  in  excess of  certain  recommended  guidelines  specified  by  the  California  Department 
of  Education.  No  evidence  or  authority  was  presented,  however,  that  such  guidelines  constituted  legally-mandated 
levels  of  service.  Further,  respondent  was  unable  to  state  the  actual  level  of  service  (e.g.,  the  number  of  minutes  or 
hours  per  day,  week  or  month)  that  other  orientation  and  mobility  teachers  provided  to  each of  the  students  in  their 
caseload.  The  District’s  testimony  established  that  no  reductions  in  services  below  levels  required  by  law  would 
result  from  the  proposed  elimination  of  one  FTE  orientation  and  mobility  teacher  position.

  

iees-had 

Joads. 

ORDER 

The  accusation  served  on  respondent  Chjene  Chhor  is  sustained.  Notice  shall  be 

given  to  respondent  Chjene  Chhor  before  May  15,  2008,  that  her  services  will  not  be 
required  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

patep:  S—  7- 

eG 

O MaAGe- 

DONALD  P.  COLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

