BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
OF  THE 
MIDDLETOWN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
LAKE  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

HILARY  DEVINE, 
JANICE  EBERT, 
JAIME  FORSLUND,  and 
KARA  MORGAN, 

  

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030760 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  David  L.  Benjamin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Middletown,  California,  on  April  17,  2008. 

Joseph  C.  Kinkade,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  complainant  Korby  Olson, 

Superintendent,  Middletown  Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Hilary  Devine,  Janice 

Ebert,  Jaime  Forslund,  and  Kara  Morgan,  who  were  present. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  17,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Korby  Olson  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as 

Superintendent  of  the  Middletown  Unified  School  District. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  district’s  Board  of  Trustees  adopted  Resolution  No. 

05-07-08  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  superintendent  to  give 
appropriate  notices  to  certificated  employees  whose  positions  will  be  affected  by  the  action. 

4. 

On  or  about  March  13,  2008,  Superintendent  Olson  gave  written  notice  to  10 

certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  will 

 

  

not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

5. 

Each of  the  four  respondents  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  is  cause  for  terminating  her  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

6. 

An  Accusation  was  served  on  each of the  four  respondents.  All  prehearing 

jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  as  to  each  respondent. 

7. 

Respondents  Devine  and  Forslund  filed  notices  of  defense;  respondents  Ebert 

and  Morgan  did  not.  Superintendent  Olson  acknowledged  that  the  failure  of  respondents 
Ebert  and  Morgan  to  file  notices  of  defense  did  not  prejudice  the  district  in  the  preparation  of 
its  case  for  hearing.  Respondents  Ebert  and  Morgan  were  granted  a  hearing. 

8. 

In  its  resolution,  the  board  took  action  to  reduce  the  following  particular  kinds 

of  services  for  the  2008-2008  school  year: 

Services 

ETE!  Reduction 

Director  of  Educational  Services 
Secondary  Alternative  Education  Program 
ROP/Work  Experience  Program 
Secondary  Departmentalized  Math 
Secondary  Departmentalized  English 
Secondary  Departmentalized  Special  Education 
Secondary  Intervention  Program  (MAPS) 
Elementary  School  Instructional  Services 
Elementary  Intervention  Teacher 
Elementary  Title  I  Teacher 

1.0 
1.0 
0.86 
0.28 
1.0 
1.6 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
2.0 

9. 

Respondents  Ebert  and  Morgan,  and  two  other  certificated  employees,  share 
the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  district,  August  27,  2007.  The  district  has  adopted 
tie-breaking  criteria  to  determine  the  relative  seniority  of  employees  with  the  same  first  date 
of  paid  service,  but  did  not  apply  them  in  this  case  because  it  found  that  all  four  employees 
are  subject  to  layoff.  Superintendent  Olson  stated  that  the  district  will  apply  its  tie-breaking 
criteria  in  the  event  it  is  able  to  reemploy  one  or  more  of  the  employees.  Neither  Ebert  nor 
Morgan  submitted  a  request,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  that  the  district 
furnish  a  statement  of  its  tie-breaking  criteria. 

Respondents  contend  that,  even  though  it  makes  no  difference  to  the  elimination  of 
their  services,  Education  Code  section  44955  required  the  district  to  apply  its  tie-breaking 
criteria.  Their  contention  lacks  merit.  Under  Education  Code  section  44955,  the  district 

"  Full-time  equivalent  positions. 

  

 

must  apply  tie-breaking  criteria  when  it  affects  the  order  of  termination,  and  in  this  case  it 
did  not. 

. 

10. 

Respondents  question  whether  the  district  will  be  able  to  provide  adequate 

foreign  language  services  after  it  eliminates  the  services  of  respondent  Morgan  who,  in 
addition  to  a  multi-subject  credential,  holds  a  supplemental  credential  in  French.  The 
evidence  established,  however,  that  the  layoff  will  not  prevent  the  district  from  providing  all 
mandated  services. 

11. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  for  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent. 

12. 

The  cause  for  the  layoff  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

DATED:  Awl  Zl,  200% 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Hilary  Devine,  Janice  Ebert,  Jaime  Forslund,  and 

Kara  Morgan  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because 
of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

    

DAVID  L.  BENJAMIN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

    

