  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
HOPE  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SANTA  BARBARA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Kate  Barker  and  Other  Certificated 

Employees  of  the  Hope  School  District, 

      

Respondents. 

   
   

OAH  Case  No.  L2008040131 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  23,  2008,  in  Santa  Barbara,  California. 

Mary  L.  Dowell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Gerrie  Fausett  (Fausett),  Superintendent 

of  the  Hope  School  District  (District). 

Paul  D.  Powers  and  Tareq  M.  Hishmeh,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  Kate  Barker, 
Timothy  Barker,  Nathan  Evans,  Cynthia  Everman,  Cynthia  Featherstone,  Amanda  Graybill,  Jill 
Holmes,  Claire  Krock,  Connie  Maday,  Lisa  Monson,  Melissa  Rice,  Heather  Robbins,  Elizabeth 
Russell,  Elizabeth  Scott,  Sarah  Suden,  and  Adrian  Talley  (Respondents). 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Respondents  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
not 
Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists 

for 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

2. 

Superintendent  Fausett  filed  the  Accusation  in  her  official  capacity. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  number  07/08-06,  reducing  elementary  teaching  services  by  15  full-time 
equivalent  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.

  

     

4. 

Superintendent  Fausett  thereafter  notified  the  Governing  Board  that  she  had 
recommended  that  notice  be  provided  to  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

On  or  about  March  10,  2008,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

Respondents  thereafter  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 

reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  All  hearing  requests  were  timely  filed. 

7. 

On  or  about  March  19,  2008,  the  District  issued  the  Accusation,  and  served  it  on 

Respondents. 

8. 

9. 

Respondents  filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

10. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.! 

11. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  factual  finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  future  funding. 
The  District  estimates  a  revenue  shortfall  of  approximately  $300,000  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  The  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious 
but  is  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3 is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

13. 

The  District  retained  four  employees  junior  to  Respondents:  Superintendent 
Fausett  and  three  certificated  employees  who  teach  special  education  classes.  Respondents  do 
not  possess  administrative  services  or  special  education  credentials.  No  objection  was  raised  to 
the  retention  of  any  of  the  four  individuals.  In  any  event,  retaining  the  four  certificated 
employees  is  appropriate  as  the  District  demonstrated  the  specific  need  for  their  services  and 
the  individuals  in  question  have  the  requisite  training  and  experience. 

'  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

  

   

  

14. 

On  March  4,  2008,  as  part  of  resolution  number  07/08-06,  the  Governing  Board 
adopted  “Tie-breaking  criteria  for  re-employment.”  The  following  criteria  are  contained  in  the 
resolution  in  order  of  preference  or  weight:  “CLAD  or  EL  certification  [{]  Meets  Highly 
Qualified  Teacher  requirements  as  per  No  Child  Left  Behind  [{]  Number  of  hours  completed 
beyond  those  required  for  credential  [{]  Possession  of  Clear  Multiple  Subject  Credential  [{] 
Possession  of  additional  credential(s)  [§]  Experience  working  in  different  grade  levels  within 
the  district  [{]  Experience  working  in  more  than  one  school  within  the  district  [{]  Lottery.”  The 
tie-breaking  criteria  are  reasonable  as  they  relate  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated 
employees  and  to  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

15. 

Superintendent  Fausett  and  her  staff  applied  the  criteria  contained  in  Resolution 
number  07/08-06  to  break  any  seniority  ties  between  Respondents  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date.  After  breaking  all  necessary  ties,  the  District  ranked 
Respondents  in  their  anticipated  date  of  re-hire.  Application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  did  not 
result  in  any  Respondent  being  selected  for  layoff  over  a  retained  certificated  employee. 

16. 

|  Respondent  Nathan  Evans  was  hired  on  September  7,  2004,  and  teaches  first 
grade.  In  terms  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  he  expects  to  complete  all  the  requirements  of  a 
clear  multiple  subject  credential  by  May  2008;  holds  a  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic 
Development  (CLAD)  or  English  Learner  (EL)  certification;  has  been  designated  as  a  highly 
qualified  teacher;  holds  a  Master’s  degree;  has  completed  all  Tier 
units  toward  an 
administrative  credential;  has  experience  in  different  grade  levels;  and  has  experience  in 
different  schools.  He  argues  that  the  District  had  not  properly  counted  all  his  post-credential 
hours.  However,  even  if  the  tie-breaking  criteria  are  applied  as  he  suggests,  Respondent  Nathan 
Evans  would  only  move  ahead  of  one  other  person  hired  on  September  7,  2004,  Respondent  Jill 
Holmes,  but  will  still  have  less  seniority  than  the  retained  certificated  employees  not  skipped. 

1 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  9. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  determined  to  be  particular 
kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3 
and  10. 

17. 

    

2. 

1. 

 

  

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  |  through  17. 

4. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  District  failed  to  properly  apply  the  tie-breaking 
criteria  and  urge  that  the  District  be  ordered  to  correctly  apply  it.  The  District  counters  that  it 
reasonably  exercised  its  discretion  in  creating  the  rehire  list.  Despite  their  differing  positions, 
both  parties  urge  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  to  address  the  correctness  of  the  derived  rehire 
list.  This  invitation  is  declined,  as  it  not  necessary  to  address  the  matter  in  order  to  resolve  the 
issues  presented  in  this  case. 

The  instant  proceeding,  to  determine  whether  cause  exists  to  reemploy  certificated 
employees  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  is  authorized  by  sections  44949  and  44955.  Section 
44955  provides:  “As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date,  the 
governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of termination 
a  statement  of  the  specific 
is  so  determined,  the  governing  body  shall  furnish  in  writing  . 
criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in 
ranking  each  employee  relative  to  other  employees  in  the  group.  . 
.  .”  (Emphasis  added.)  Thus, 
the  plain  meaning  of  the  statute  directs  review  of  the  order  of  termination,  not  the  order  of 
reemployment.  Preferential  rehiring  is  the  subject  of  other  statutory  provision,  such  as,  for 
instance,  sections  44956  and  44957.  Inasmuch  as  the  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  did 
not  impact  the  order  of  termination  of  any  Respondent,  it  is  not  necessary  to  modify,  create,  or 
direct  the  creation  or  modification  of  the  derived  rehire  list. 

. 

. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondents  Kate  Barker,  Timothy 
Barker,  Nathan  Evans,  Cynthia  Everman,  Cynthia  Featherstone,  Amanda  Graybill,  Jill  Holmes, 
Claire  Krock,  Connie  Maday,  Lisa  Monson,  Melissa  Rice,  Heather  Robbins,  Elizabeth  Russell, 
Elizabeth  Scott,  Sarah  Suden,  and  Adrian  Talley,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1 
through  17,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  |  through  4. 

/ 
M 
MI 
/ 
M 
M 
/ 
// 
/ 
MW 

 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  Katie  Barker, 
Timothy  Barker,  Nathan  Evans,  Cynthia  Everman,  Cynthia  Featherstone,  Amanda  Graybill,  Jill 
Holmes,  Claire  Krock,  Connie  Maday,  Lisa  Monson,  Melissa  Rice,  Heather  Robbins,  Elizabeth 
Russell,  Elizabeth  Scott,  Sarah  Suden,  and  Adrian  Talley  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed 
during  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

   
    

   

    

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

