  

 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
OCEANSIDE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  for  Lay-Off 
of  Certificated  Employees  against: 

37  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  OF  THE 
OCEANSIDE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 

  

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030438  - 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Greer  D.  Knopf,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Oceanside,  California,  on  April  8,  2008. 

Kelly  R.  Minnehan,  attorney  at  law,  represented  complainant  Oceanside  Unified 

School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  attorney  at  law,  represented  all  37  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  8,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Luis  Ibarra,  the  Associate  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  (the  Associate 

Superintendent)  of  the  Oceanside  Unified  District,  made  and  filed  the  accusations  dated 
March  21,  2008  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Associate  Superintendent,  Human  Resources, 
Oceanside  Unified  School  District.  The  accusations  were  filed  against  the  37  respondents 
(respondents)  identified  in  Attachment  A  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein. 

2. 

The  respondents  are  all  certificated  employees  of  the  Oceanside  Unified 

School  District  (the  District). 

3. 

In  March  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
the  Associate  Superintendent,  acting  on  behalf  of  the  Superintendent,  notified  the  Governing 

1 

Board  of  the  District  (the  Governing  Board)  in  writing  of  his  recommendation  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Associate  Superintendent  stated  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  Associate  Superintendent  recommended  the  reduction 
of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

4. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  18 

determining  that  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the  current 
school  year.  The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must 
be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full-time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

Teacher-Kindergarten 
(Class  size  Reduction/Option  2) 

Teacher-Elementary 
(Grades  1-6) 

Teacher-Middle  School  Core 
(Grades  6  and  7) 

: 

Teacher-Art 

Teacher-EL  Coaches 

Teacher-Physical  Education 

Teacher-English 
(Secondary  Grades) 

Teacher-History 
(Secondary  Grades) 

Teacher-Business 

Teacher-Science 
(9""  Grade) 

Program  Specialist 

Principal 

28  FTE’s 

14  FTE’s 

8  FTE’s 

1  FTE 

7  FTE’s 

5  FTE’s 

6  FTE’s 

4  FTE’s 

2  FTE’s 

1  FTE’s 

3  FTE’s 

2  FTE’s 

1  FTE’s 

Elementary  Assistant  Principal 

The  reductions  adopted  by  the  governing  Board’s  resolution  totaled  82  FTE  positions. 

2 

 

  

5. 

The  Board  further  determined  in  Resolution  No.  18  that  it  would  be  necessary 

to  retain  certificated  employees  who  possess  special  training  and  competency  that  other 
certificated  employees  with  more  seniority  might  not  posses.  Those  specialized  teachers 
include  those  with  a  Supplemental  Authorization  in  Dance  issued  by  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  and  those  who  are  designated  as  “Highly  Qualified” 
in  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  program  for  three  or  more  of  the  core  subjects  of  science, 
English,  math  or  social  studies. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  determine 

which  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result 
of  the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Board  further  directed  the 
Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  the  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  of 
the  District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of 

services. 

7. 

Subsequent  to  the  action,  the  Board  took  on  March  11,  2008  to  reduce  services 
by  82  FTE  positions,  the  District  continued  to  evaluate  personnel  needs  in  the  District.  Since 
the  Board’s  action,  after  taking  into  consideration  upcoming  positively  assured  attrition, 
resignations,  and  retirements,  the  District  has  now  determined  it  can  meet  its  fiscal  needs  by 
reducing  services  by  a  total  of  72  FTE  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  To 
accomplish  this  reduction  of  services,  the  District  needed  to  give  final  notices  of  termination 
to  the  72  certificated  employees,  37  of  whom  are  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

8. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  a  written  notice  on 

each  of  the  respondents  herein  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  had  recommended  not 
to  re-employ  them  in  the  upcoming  2008-2009  school  year.  The  written  notice  notified 
respondents  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  2008-2009 
school  year.  The  written  notice  to  respondents  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
The  recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
their  competency  as  teachers. 

9. 

Some  certificated  employees  given  written  notice  that  they  would  not  be  re- 

employed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing.  However,  each  of 
the  37  respondents  named  herein  timely  filed  a  written  Request  for  Hearing  to  determine  if 
there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

10. 

|  Subsequently,  the  District  filed  and  then  timely  served  the  Accusation  for  Lay- 
Off  of  Certificated  Employees,  a  Notice  to  Respondent,  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and 
relevant  Education  Code  and  Government  Code  sections,  upon  each  of  the  37  respondents 
herein  who  had  timely  requested  a  hearing  in  this  matter.  Each  of  the  37  respondents  herein 
filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  Some  individual  certificated  employees  failed  to  file  a 
timely  Notice  of  Defense  and  the  District  declined  to  waive  this  time  requirement  as  to  those 
employees.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

 

11. 

The  services  the  Governing  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  18  are 

“particular  kinds  of  services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  and 
reasonable  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  action  was  taken  after  extensive  input  and 
evaluation  from  administrative  staff,  members  of  the  public,  and  the  teachers  in  the  District. 
The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  make  these  cuts  was  the  result  of  long  and  difficult 
deliberation  and  consideration  of  the  necessary  cuts  in  the  District’s  budget  for  the  ensuing 
school  year.  The  Board’s  action  to  reduce  services  is  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion  to 
address  the  need  for  budget  cuts  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

12. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  clearly  recognizes  the  high  level  of 
dedication  and  service  these  respondents  have  given  to  the  District,  but  it  faces  extremely 
difficult  financial  times  due  to  proposed  state  budget  cuts.  While  it  may  not  be  desirable  to 
cut  back  staff  and  in  some  cases  increase  class  size,  if  the  District  does  not  make  these 
reductions,  it  is  facing  the  possibility  of  financial  ruin.  In  no  event  will  these  reductions 
result  in  an  increase  in  class  size  that  is  more  than  is  permitted  by  law.  The  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board.  The  Board  considered  all 
known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual 
number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

13. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Oceanside  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the 
pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusations  herein.  Therefore,  cause  exists  for  the  Board  to  give  respondents  notice  before 
May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

 

  

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  respondents  herein  are  sustained  and  notice  shall  be  given 
to  the  37  respondents  listed  in  Attachment  A  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  in  the  next  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  services  as 
indicated. 

DATED: 

. 

6 

Law  SA.  hoop  — 

GREER D.  KNOPF 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

Teacher  —  Sign  In 
Oceanside  Unified  School  District  -March  2008 

  

  

  

  

  

  

RESPONDENT  SIGN-IN 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

JEFFREY  T. 

FIRST 
[MYA 
|  CARLY 

LAST 
ANDERSON 
BOULAN 
BRANDOW 
CALVERT 
COSCUNA 
EWALD 
HALLER 
HERNANDEZ 
KOESTER 
LINDGREN 
LYON 
MOEN 
MONROE 
MOORE 
NELSON 
OLEA 
PARKHURST 
REESE 
REESE 
RICHARDS 
ROCHE 
RUIZ 
SALGADO 
SCHILLER 
SCHLOSSER 
SISSON 
STAFFORD 
SWELLAND 
THOMAS 

1. 
2. 
3.__| 
4,  __| LISA  MARIE. 
|  CYNTHIA 
5. 
KELSEY 
6.__| 
7.__| 
WILLIAM 
8. 
|  CASEY 
9,  | ATHENA 
10.  | ROBERTA 
11,  | PATRICIA 
12.  | CHRISTIANNE 
13. 
|  MELISSA 
14.  | MELISSA 
15._| 
JENNIFER 
16.  | AMANDA 
17. 
|  RASHELL 
18.  | DAVID 
19,  |  MARA 
20.  _|  PATRICIA 
21.  | JANICE 
22.  |  CALLIE 
23.  | TRACY 
24.  | LANI 
25.  | MARJORIE 
26.  | ELLIE 
27.  | KORTNI 
28.  _| CHRISTINA 
29.  | EVELYN 
30.  | THERESA  MARIE  _| THOMPSON 
31._| 
32._| 
33.  | SARAH 
34.  | SHAUNA 
35._| 
JEANELL 
36,  | KENNETH 
JENNA 
37._| 

VOCI 
WHITE 
WILEY 
WILSON 
WORRELL 
WRIGHT,  Il 
YEZARSKI 

JENNIFER 
KATHLEEN 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

 
    
    
  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  Respondent  Sign-In 

