BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
CULVER  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  LOS  ANGELES 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  Of: 

Candice  Baker,  and  Other 

Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Culver  City  Unified  School  District, 

      

Respondents. 

   
    

OAH  Case  No.:  12008030144 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Samuel  D.  Reyes,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  heard 

this  matter  on  April  10,  2008,  in  Culver  City,  California. 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Culver  City  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

Lawrence  Rosenzweig,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Kelly  Nolan  (Nolan). 

Candice 

Baker 

(Baker), 

Kathleen 

Griffin 

(Griffin), 

and 

Martin 

Miramontes 

(Miramontes)  represented  themselves.  Eunice  Vines  (Vines)  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing. 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational  services  and  has 
given  Baker,  Griffin,  Miramontes,  Nolan,  and  Vines  (Respondents)  and  other  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  Respondents  requested  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing  and  the  matter  was 

submitted  for  decision. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Myrna  Rivera  Coté  (Coté),  Superintendent  of  the  District,  filed  the  Accusation  in 

her  official  capacity. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

  

 

  

3. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board) 
adopted  Resolution  number  21,  reducing  or  discontinuing  the  following  services  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year: 

@ 

Service 

Full-Time-Equivalent  Positions 

AB  1802  academic  counseling  services 
At-risk  behavioral  counseling  services 
Child  welfare  and  attendance  counseling  services 
Elementary  school  counseling  services 
School  psychologist  services 
Elementary  school  assistant  principal  services 
Assistant  high  school  principal  on  special  assignment  services 
Teacher  on  special  assignment  services 
Elementary  school  intervention  specialist  services 
Middle  school  reading  specialist  services 
Middle  school  algebra  readiness  services 
Middle  school  math  intervention  services 
Middle  school  reading  intervention  services 
Middle  school  English  language  development  teaching  services 
Middle  school  language  arts  teaching  services 
Middle  school  physical  education  teaching  services 
Middle  school  social  science  teaching  services 
Middle  school  physical  science  teaching  services 
Middle  school  biological  science  teaching  services 
Middle  school  math  teaching  services 
Middle  school  home  economics  teaching  services 
High  school  English  teaching  services 
High  school  physical  education  teaching  services 
High  school  Spanish  teaching  services 
High  school  social  science  teaching  services 
High  school  geological  science  teaching  services 
Elementary  classroom  teaching  services 

5 

6 
5 

 
y
N
e

 
e
e

 
e
e
r
S

 
 
H
E
N
 
H
E
E
N
D
N
e
e

 
e
n
I

Total 

 
h
f

 
s
b

 
n
a

4. 

On  March  12,  2008,  Superintendent  Coté  notified  the  Governing  Board  that  she 
had  recommended  that  notice  be  provided  to  49  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  including 
Respondents,  that  their  services  will  not,  and  in  the  case  of  Julie  Groya,  Scott  Monroe,  Jenny 
Ta,  and  Aaron  Tano  may  not,  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services.

  

5. 

On  March  13,  2008,  the  District  provided  notice  to  Respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services. 

6. 

Respondents  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  All  hearing  requests  were  timely  filed. 

is  cause 

for 

not 

7. 

On  March  27,  2008,  the  District  issued  the  Accusation,  and  served  it  on 

Respondents  on  or  about  March  28,  2008. 

8. 

Respondents  Nolan  and  Miramontes  filed  notices  of  defense,  and  the  District 
treated  the  other  Respondents  as  having  filed  notices  of  defense.  All  notices  of  defense  were 
timely  filed  or  treated  as  if  timely  filed. 

9. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

10. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.! 

11. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  the  services  set  forth  in  factual 
finding  number  3  primarily  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  State  funding.  The  District 
believes  that  it  may  lose  as  much  as  $3.3  Million  for  2008-2009  school  year.  The  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is 
rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3 
is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease 
the  number  of  certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

13. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  22,  setting 
forth  the  criteria  to  determine  seniority  among  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date  (tie-breaking  criteria).  On  April  1,  2008,  the  Governing 
Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  28,  to  provide  additional  tie-breaking  criteria.  The  tie-breaking 
criteria  are  reasonable  as  they  relate  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  certificated  employees. 
Neither  the  criteria  nor  their  application  were  challenged  by  Respondents. 

'  All  further  references  are  to  the  Education  Code.

  

  

14.  |  Respondents  Baker  and  Vines  hold  pupil  personnel  services  credentials  and 
work  as  counselors  in  the  middle  school.  Their  seniority  dates  are  October  1,  2007,  and 
September  13,  2006,  respectively.  Although  middle  school  counseling  services  were  not 
reduced  or  discontinued,  the  jobs  of  these  two  Respondents  will  be  performed  by  more  senior 
counselors  being  displaced  by  reductions  in  other  counseling  services.  The  more  senior 
counselors  are  certificated  and  competent  to  perform  the  jobs  of  Respondents  Baker  and  Vines. 

15. 

Respondent  Griffin  is  also  a  counselor  of  the  middle  school,  except  that  the 
funding  for  her  position  is  provided  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Assembly  Bill  (AB)  1802. 
The  program  is  intended  to  provide  additional  counseling  services,  not  to  supplant  local  district 
resources.  The  District  has  not  received  AB  1802  funding  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and 
decided  to  discontinue  the  services  until  funding  becomes  available.  Respondent  Griffin  has  a 
seniority  date  of  August  13,  2007,  and  among  those  credentialed  to  provide  counseling  services 
she  is  senior  only  to  Respondent  Baker. 

16.  |  Respondent  Miramontes  holds  a  school  psychologist  credential.  He  performs 
required  psychoeducational  assessments,  and  is  the  District’s  behavior  specialist.  He  also 
discharges  the  functions  of  District  Behavior  Case  Intervention  Manager,  which  services  were 
performed  by  an  outside  vendor  before  Respondent  Miramontes  was  hired,  and  will  likely  again 
be  performed  by  such  vendor.  The  District  reduced  school  psychologist  services  by  one  FTE 
position  and  Respondent  Miramontes  was  the  last  school  psychologist  hired,  on  November  14, 
2007. 

17. 

Respondent  Nolan  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2007,  and  holds  a single 
in  the  middle  school,  services  that 

subject  credential  (English).  She  teaches  language  arts 
suffered  a  two  full-time-equivalent  position  reduction. 

18. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  of  Respondents  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  |  through  9. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  3  and  10. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  |  through  18.

  

  

4. 

Respondent  Miramontes  argues  that  the  District  will  end  up  paying  more  to 
provide  the  behavior  case  intervention  services.  He  did  not  contend,  nor  was  it  established,  that 
his  layoff  will  result  in  the  District’s  failure  to  fulfill  any  State-mandated  obligations.  Courts 
have  permitted  districts  to  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  those  of  school 
psychologists,  as  long  as  the  mandated  services  continue  to  be  performed.  (See,  e.g.,  Gallup  v. 
Alta  Loma  School  District  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  289  (Gallup);  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  639-640.)  In  Gallup,  the  court 
upheld  the  district’s  layoff  of  its  certificated  school  psychologists,  where  the  district  had  re- 
hired  one  of  them  as  an  administrative  psychologist  to  oversee  the  hiring  of  contract 
psychologists  and  other  program  details,  and  where  it  planned  to  use  contract  psychologists  to 
provide  the  mandated  services.  Similarly,  the  District  previously  utilized  private  vendors  to 
perform  the  functions  required  by  State  law,  and  is  likely  to  do  so  again  if  Respondent 
Miramontes  is  ultimately  laid  off. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondents  Candice  Baker,  Kathleen 
Griffin,  Martin  Miramontes,  Kelly  Nolan,  and  Eunice  Vines  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due 
to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual  finding 
numbers  |  through  18  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  |  through  4. 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  and  the  District  may  notify  Respondents  Candice  Baker, 
Kathleen  Griffin,  Martin  Miramontes,  Kelly  Nolan,  and  Eunice  Vines  that  their  services  will 
not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

DATED: 

SAMUEL  D.  REYES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

