  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
HESPERIA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
the  Certificated  Employees  of  the  Hesperia 
Unified  School  District  Who  Were  Served 
with  a  Preliminary  Layoff  Notice, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030518 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  E.  Hjelt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Hesperia,  California,  on  April  25,  2008. 

Tristan  G.  Pelayes,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Hesperia  Unified  School 

District. 

Carlos  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents,  certificated  employees, 

Cheryl  Ferrato,  Kimberly  Franklin,  Cynthia  Gonzalez,  Brenda  Guillen,  Sarah  Hale,  Aiko 
Thomas,  Teri  Muzquiz,  Shannon  Erath,  Kelley  Farnham,  Heidi  Martinez,  and  Jonna  Eyre. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  other  certificated  employees  of  the 

Hesperia  Unified  School  District  who  were  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  25,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Hesperia  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Hesperia  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  the  largest  school  district 

in  California’s  high  desert,  providing  educational  services  and  supports  to  nearly  22,000 
students  who  live  within  the  District’s  boundaries,  an  area  covering  141  square  miles.  The 
District  operates  15  elementary  schools,  three  middle  schools,  two  comprehensive  high 
schools,  two  continuation  high  schools,  and  various  educational  programs  for  learners  of  all

  

ages.  The  District  recently  broke  ground  for  a  third  high  school  (Oak  Hills  High  School), 
which  is  scheduled  to  open  in  the  2009/2010  school  year. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five-member  Board  of  Governors.  The 

Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Mark  A.  McKinney,  who  is  the  Superintendent  of 
Schools.  Superintendent  McKinney  is  ably  supported  by  an  administrative  staff  which 
includes  Assistant  Superintendant  Karen  Kelly,  who  is  responsible  for  personnel  services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major 
source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  Proposition  13 
was  passed,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to 
other  governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet if  a  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  a  governing 
board’s  budgeting  problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  district’s  legal  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 
teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  preliminary layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  affected 
certificated  employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4, 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems.  As a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget,  the  District 
projected  an  estimated  budget  deficit  of  about  $6  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The 
District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  meet  the  projected  deficit. 

Under  the  Superintendent’s  direction,  budgetary  cuts  were  considered  across  the 

board  including  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds of services  being  provided 
by  the  District’s  certificated  employees.  On  March  10,  2008,  Superintendent  McKinney 

2 

 

presented  to  the  Board  a  recommendation  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  approximate  amount  of  54.5  full  time  equivalent  positions. 

5. 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  07/08-46  (set  forth  below 

in  Factual  Finding  6)  recommending  a  reduction  in  54.5  full  time  equivalents  (FTEs)  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  that  were  previously  scheduled  to  be  provided  by  District  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  The  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  07/08-48  (set  forth  below  in 
Factual  Finding  7)  setting  the  criteria  of  discontinuing  the  service  of  the  most  recently  hired 
employees  and  adopting  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  applied  in  the  event  that  two  or  more 
employees  shared  the  same  date  of  service.  The  adoption  of  these  resolutions  was  based  on 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

6. 

HESPERIA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESOLUTION  No. 

_07/08-46 

REDUCTION  OF  SERVICES 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Hesperia  Unified  School  District  has 
determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  herein  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued; 
and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the  aforementioned  reason  it  is 
in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  that  the  number  of  regular  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  this  Board  does  not  desire  to  reduce  the  services  of  regular  certificated 

employees  based  upon  reduction  of  average  daily  attendance  during  the  past  two  years. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Hesperia 

Unified  School  District  as  follows: 

A. 

‘That  the-particular  kinds  of  services  set-forth  below  be  reduced  or-eliminated 
commencing  in  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

  

Elementary  Classroom  Teachers 

  

Elementary  Kindergarten  Class  Size  Reduction 

  

Elementary  Music  Teachers 

12.5) 

FTE. 

24) 

FTE. 

4| 

3) 

FTE. 

FTE. 

  

Middle  School  Math/Sci  Core 

  

  

Middle  Schoo]  Home  Ec 

    
  
  

Middle  School  English/P.E. 

Middle  School  P.E. 

 

FTE. 

FTE. 

ETE. 

  

  

2| 

1| 

1| 

1) 

1| 

1| 

1) 

FTE. 

FTE. 

ETE. 

FTE. 

  

Middle  School  Social  Science 

  

Middle  School  Language  Arts/Soc.  Sci.  Core 

  

Middle  School  Success 

High  School  ROTC 

  

1] 

1| 

  

FTE. 

FTE. 

HS  Piano 

HS  Consumer  Science 

  

  

  

High  School  Work  Experience 

    
  
    

Elementary 

  

Eliminate 
Reduce 

FTE 

Secondary 

sis) 

TOTAL 

E.T.E, 

F.T.E. 

FTE. 

54.5 | 

14.0 

  

  

  

1] 

B. 

C. 

D. 

That  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  the  legal 
number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  be  terminated  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44955. 

That  the  reduction  of  certificated  staff  be  affected  by  the  termination  of  regular 
employees  and  not  by  terminating  temporary  and  substitute  employees. 

That  the  District  Superintendent  (or  legal  designee)  is  directed  to  initiate  layoff 
procedures  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44955  and  44949. 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  at  the  regular  meeting of the  Board  of  Education  held  on 

March  10,  2008. 

AYES: 
NOES: 
ABSENT: 

President 
Board  of  Education 

I  certify  under  penalty  of  perjury,  that  this  is  a  true  and  correct  copy  of  the  Board 

Resolution,  adopted  by  the  Board  of  Education,  March  10,  2008. 

  

 

  

  

Mark  McKinney 
Interim  Superintendent 

7. 

Resolution  07/08-48  set  forth  the  criteria  for  workforce  reduction  as  follows: 

HESPERIA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESOLUTION  NO.  2007/08-48 

RESOLUTION  TO  SET  CRITERIA  FOR  WORKFORCE  REDUCTION 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Hesperia  Unified  School  District 

has  determined  that  particular  kinds  of  services  within  the  District  must  be  reduced  or 
discontinued;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  that  because  of  the  aforementioned 
reason  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  district  that  the  number  of  regular  certificated  employees 
of  the  District  must  be  reduced;  and 

WHEREAS,  in  determining a  seniority  list  an  order  of  workforce  reduction  tie 

breaking  system  and  criteria  must  be  developed. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 

Hesperia  Unified  School  District  as  follows: 

In  the  event  of  a  District  wide  reduction  in  force,  layoffs  shall  be  conducted  in 

the  order  of  reverse  seniority  (least  senior  laid  off  first).  The  following  specific  criteria, 
between  employees  who  first  render  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  based 
solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  student’s  thereof,  listed  in  order  of  importance, 
shall  be  applied  in  the  order  listed; 

A.  Possession  of  a  credential  authorizing  service  in  the  assignment  to  be 

 
@

 
a
o
m
z
=
Q

named; 
District  teaching  experience  within  the  last  three  (3)  years  in  the 
assignment  to  be  made; 
Teaching  experience  at  different  grade  levels; 
.  Teaching  experience  in  different  subject  areas; 

Teaching  experience  at  more  than  one  school  site; 
Multiplicity  of  credentials; 

.  Possession  of: 

1)  a  graduate  degree,  2)  a  major,  3)  a  minor  in  the  field  to 

be  assigned.  Majors  and  minors  are  defined  as  those  listed  on  the 
credential  and  recorded  at  the  County  Office  of  Education; 

 

H.  Special  training  in  the  area  to  be  assigned; 
I. 

Persons  engaged  in  authorized  student,  professional,  and/or  leadership 
activities;  both  school  and  District  (beyond  the  classroom),  will  be 
considered  the  more  valuable  to  the  District; 

J.  Number  of  majors,  minors  or  graduate  degrees  in  subject  areas  within  the 
District  curriculum  out  of  the  area  to  be  assigned.  Majors  and  minors  are 
defined  as  those  listed  on  the  credential  and  recorded  at  the  County  Office 
of  Education; 

K.  Receipt  of  a  satisfactory  rating  on  the  latest  evaluation  subject  to  the  1990- 

1991  school  year. 
satisfactory  rating  will  be  presumed; 

If  no  evaluation  has  occurred  since  1990-1991,  then  a 

L.  Number  of  days  of  absence  (other  than  industrial  accident  and  pregnancy 

disability)  during  three  years  prior  to  March  1. 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  at  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Education  held  on 
March  10,  2008. 

8. 

Before  preliminary  layoff  notices  were  served,  the  District’s  staff  circulated  a 
certificated  seniority  list  that  contained  the  names  of  all  credentialed  employees,  ordered  in 
longevity  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior  employee.  The  seniority  list 
contained  each  employee’s  original  date  of  hire;  the  employee’s  status  (permanent, 
probationary  2,  probationary  1,  emergency);  the  employee’s  assignment,  the  employee’s 
credential(s);  and  the  employee’s  English  learner  authorization.  Certificated  employees  had 
the  opportunity  to  review  the  seniority  list  and  to  provide  the  administrative  staff  with  any 
changes  or  corrections. 

9. 

The  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  about  54 

FTEs  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  Using  the  Board’s  resolution  and  the  District’s  seniority 
list,  Assistant  Superintendent  Kelly,  Cindy  Fortin,  Michelle  Rush,  and  others  identified  the 
most  recently  hired  certificated  employees  providing  the  kinds  of  services  that  were 
scheduled  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated.  The  administrative  staff  considered  positive  attrition 
including  retirements  and  resignations.  The  District’s  financial  situation  required  the  service 
of  the  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

10. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  with  the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year. 
The  notice  stated  the  reason  for  the  reduction  in  the  District’s  workforce.  The  notice  advised 
each  respondent  that  his  or  her  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school 
year,  that  the  reasons  for  the  termination  were  set  forth  in  the  Board’s  resolution  (which  was 
enclosed),  that  the  employee  had  the  right  to  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was 
cause  for  termination,  and  specified  dates  on  which  the  request  for  hearing  had  to  be  filed. 

Twenty-two  of  the  certificated  employees  served  with  the  preliminary  layoff  notice 

requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation  packet  was  thereafter  served  on  the  22  certificated 
employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  Nineteen  of  those  employees  filed  a  Notice  of Defense. 

6 

 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  for  respondents  appearing  in  this  proceeding. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

11. 

On  April  25,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

A  stipulation  of jurisdictional  facts  was  filed  —  it  was  stipulated  that  all  respondents 
were  certificated  employees  of  the  District;  that  the  Board  adopted  the  resolutions  related  to 
the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  criteria  for  workforce  reduction;  that  all 
identified  respondents  received  written  notice  before  March  15,  2008,  of  the  superintendent’s 
recommendation  that  their  employment  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school 
year;  that  each  respondent  received a true  and  correct  copy  of  the  accusation  packet  (with  the 
required  jurisdictional  documents);  that  each  respondent  received  a  notice  of  hearing;  and 
that  the  identified  respondents  filed  a  notice  of  hearing. 

The  Accusations  filed  against  Katherine  Accomazzo,  Angela  Barber,  Lucinda 
Barrington,  Heather  Childress,  Kinsi  Downard,  Joann  Hageman,  Kera  McLaughlin, Christine 
Menge,  Sherry  Morean,  BreAnna  Ott,  Christina  Parker,  Cami  Self,  Ann  Shirk,  Christie 
Smith,  Kristi  Stirling,  Maria  Zapata-Galvan,  Donald  French,  Melissa  Long,  Christopher 
Seybert,  Larry  Williams,  and  Joan  Ferris  were withdrawn. 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented.  The  District  gave  an  opening  statement. 

Respondents  who  were  represented  by  counsel  waived  an  opening  statement.  Sworn 
testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record 
was  closed,  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

12. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  were 

particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and  discontinued.  The  reduction 
and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  the  reduction  or 
elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the 
Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District,  the  schools,  and  the 
students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by  federal  and  state  law. 

The  Seniority  List 

13. 

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  any  certificated 

employee  was  improperly  classified.  Nevertheless,  the  District  staff  should  be  available  to 
make  corrections  to  the  seniority  list  as  may  be  appropriate  following  this  hearing  based 
upon  new  verifiable  information.

  

The  District’s  Layoff Procedure 

14. 

After  the  Board’s  resolution  was  adopted,  the  District’s  staff  reviewed  the 

Board’s  resolution  and  determined  the  most  junior  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  were  identified  in  the  Board’s  resolution  by  referring  to  the  seniority  list.  For 
those  employees  who  were  displaced,  the  staff  attempted  to  determine  if  the  displaced 
employee  could  “bump”  a  more  junior  employee  who  was  providing a  particular  kind  of 
service  that  the  displaced  employee  was  credentialed  and  competent  to  provide.'  The 
Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  established  the  method  by  which  employees  having  the  same 
seniority  date  could  be  ranked  for  layoff  purposes.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  based  on 
the  welfare  and  needs  of  the  students.  However,  the  use  of  the  tie-breaking  procedure  was 
not  necessary  to  resolve  any  dispute  related  to  the  layoffs  in  this  matter. 

Through  this  tedious  step-by-step  elimination  process,  the  District  correctly 
determined  which  certificated  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices.  No 
permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to  render  a  service 
any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

lL. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  respondent  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  A  board  may  consider  the  school  district’s 
economic  circumstances  in  making  the  determination  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  a  school 
board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has the right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  holds  that  position. 

 

  

  

e 

must  be  based  on  statute.  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (d)  provides: 

“(d)  | Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 

reasons: 

(1) 

The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 

specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2) 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

4. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if  junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  render  services  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

e@ 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

5. 

As  aresult  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  previously  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their 
of the current  school  year and that  their  services 
employment  will  be  terminated at  the  close 
will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  those  respondents  identified  in 
the  stipulation  resulting  in  the  dismissal  of  the  Accusations. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

e 

It 

is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously  served 

with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
with  the  exception  of  Katherine  Accomazzo,  Angela  Barber,  Lucinda  Barrington,  Heather 
Childress,  Kinsi  Downard,  Joan  Ferris,  Donald  French,  Joann  Hageman,  Melissa  Long,  Kera 

9 

 

McLaughlin,  Christine  Menge,  Sherry  Morean,  BreAnna  Ott,  Christina  Parker,  Camie  Self, 
Chris  Seybert,  Ann  Shirk,  Christie  Smith,  Kristi  Stirling,  Larry  Williams  and  Maria  Zapata- 
Galvan. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  serve  final  notices  on  the  following  respondents  that 

their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  as  indicated:  Kristy  Ashlock,  Tiffany  Broussard,  Surojeet 
Chatterji,  Jason  Cole,  Rafael  Cordero,  Michele  Cutler,  Nathaniel  Davis,  Inez  Denson,  Amber 
Derrick,  Nancy  Enriquez,  Shannon  Erath,  Jonna  Eyre,  Kelley  Farnham,  Cheryl  Ferrato, 
Kimberly  Franklin,  Cynthia  Gonzalez,  Robert  Gore,  Timothy  Gray,  Brenda  Guillen,  Sarah 
Hale,  Gregory  Hammond,  Katherine  Johnson,  Heidi  Martinez,  Stefenie  McKean,  Melissa 
McPherson,  Teri  Muzquiz,  Marissa  Padilla,  Nacina  Russo  Harris,  Jeremy  Sauer,  John 
Schoch,  Thomas  Steed,  Aiko  Thomas,  Judson  Washburn. 

DATED:  5-S-06 

    

STEPHEN  E.  HJEL 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

10 

