BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
RIO  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2008040385 

William  Almstrom;  Amanda  Bruski;  Irene 
Carranza;  Mireya  Chavez;  Sylvia  Contreras; 
Jacqueline  Coronado;  Maria  De  Los  Ange- 
les  Mauricio;  Andres  Duran;  Lisette  Garcia- 
Mora;  Veronica  Gonzalez;  Angela  Handley; 
Pablo  Hernandez;  Heather  Knauer;  Annette 
Magana;  Hernan  Martinez;  Fred  Messecar; 
Robert  Mitchell;  Cheryl  Molina;  Margaret 
O’Sullivan;  Nancy  Pearson;  Mariela  Plas- 
cencia;  Erica  Rodriguez;  Roberto  Rodri- 
guez;  Heriberto  Rojas,  Jr.;  Cesar  Rosales; 
Vanesa  (Ruth)  Salas;  Andres  Sanchez;  Mar- 
tha  Sheppard;  Jay  Sorensen;  Stephanie  Ter- 
razas;  Kristin  Theis;  Erin  Trujillo;  Richard 
Valdiva;  and  Kristen  Whitehead, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Julie  Cabos-Owen,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2008,  at  the  Rio  School  District  Offices  in 
Oxnard,  California. 

Pamela  Dempsey,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Rio  School  District.  Paul  D. 

Powers,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  Respondents. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  the  following  Respondents  were  dismissed  from  the 
Accusation  (and  are  therefore  not  included  in  the  caption,  above):  Deborah  Antrim;  Elsa 
Hernandez;  Danell  Lagmarsino;  Kimberlee  Lopez;  Susana  Loughman;  John  Martinez;  Lisa 
Martinez-Casta;  Adelina  Mendez;  Erin  Mooney;  Carole  Olsen-Bryan;  Heather  Parks;  and 
Darin  Spencer. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  22,  2008. 

Mit 
Ml

  

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Complainant,  Sherianne  Cotterell,  filed  the  Accusation  while  acting  in  her 

official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  of  the  Rio  School  District  (District). 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  8,  2005,  the  Governing  Board  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted  a 

resolution  to  reduce  and  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by 
the  District  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Service  or  Program 

Number  of  FTE!  Positions 

Principal  —  Elementary  K-5 
Reading  First  (Coordinator) 
K-3  Classroom  Teaching  Services 
4-5  Classroom  Teaching  Services 
6-8  Classroom  Teaching  Services 

Social  Science 
English 
Science 
Physical  Education 

Electives  (Life  Skills) 
Reading  First  (Coaches) 
Total  FTE 

1.00 
1.00 
36.65 
4.15 
3.80 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
2.00 
3.00 
55.60 

4. 

The  Board  further  determined  that  the  reduction in  services  necessitated  a  de- 
crease  in  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  the  close  of  the  present  school  year  (2007- 
2008)  by  a  corresponding  number  of  FTE  positions,  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  notify 
the  appropriate  employees  to  implement  the  Board's  determination. 

5. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  gave  notice  to  each  Respondent  of 

the  potential  elimination  of  his/her  position  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  On  April  15, 
2008,  the  District  served  the  Accusation  on  each  Respondent. 

6. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense  and  requests  for  a  hearing  to  de- 

termine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

7. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

'  Full  Time  Equivalent 

 

  

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  related 

solely  to  the  needs  and  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

9. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

10. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (See 
discussion  in  Factual  Findings  13  through  17,  below.) 

11. 

The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  tenure  status,  and 
credential  and  certificate  information. 

12. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District 
determined  that  nobody  less  senior  than  Respondents  was  being  retained  to  render  services 
Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

13. 

The  District  retained  Aurora  Zamudio  (Zamudio),  Number  186  on  the 

seniority  list,  to  continue  teaching  her  current  assignment,  which  is  a  first  grade  primary  dual 
immersion  program  at  Rio  Real  Elementary  School.  She  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Multiple 
Subject  Credential  and  a  Bilingual,  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development 
(BCLAD)  Certificate.  She  also  has  extensive  training  through  California  Association  of 
Bilingual  Educators  (CABE),  and  experience  teaching  in  the  District’s  dual  immersion 
program.  She  was  hired  on  August  23,  2006,  and  has a  total  of  three  years  of  teaching 
experience. 

14. 

The  District’s  dual  immersion  program  is  a  two-language  program,  instituted 

in  approximately  2004,  with  the  goal  that  all  students  exiting  the  program  master  two 
languages,  English  and  Spanish  (i.e.  Spanish  speakers  learn  English  and  English  speakers 
learn  Spanish).  Teaching  the  dual  immersion  program  is  a  special  skill. 
It  requires  a 
BCLAD  Certificate,  an  English  Language  Learner  (EL)  Certificate,  extensive  training 
through  CABE,  and  experience  which  can  only  be  gained  by  having  worked  in  a  dual 
immersion  program. 

15. 

The  District  examined  its  records  to  determine  if  other  employees  had  the 
qualifications  and  experience  to  fill  Zamudio’s  assignment  and  determined  that  no  more 
senior  teacher  was  entitled  to  bump  her,  since  no  other  teacher  had  the  specialized  training 
and  experience  needed  for  the  dual  immersion  program  position.  While  there  are  teachers 
more  senior  than  Zamudio  who  have  BCLAD  and  EL  certificates,  there  was  no  evidence  in 
their  personnel  files  that  they  had  the  requisite  training  and  experience  to  teach  the  District’s 
dual  immersion  program.  Therefore,  although  Zamudio  is  less  senior  than  other  similarly 

  

 

  

credentialed  teachers,  she  was  skipped  and  retained  to  continue  teaching  the  dual  immersion 
class.  However,  she  did  receive  a  precautionary  layoff  notice. 

16(a).  Respondent  Pablo  Hernandez  (Respondent  Hernandez)  currently  teaches 
fourth  grade  at  Rio  Real  Elementary  School.  He  holds  a  Professional  Clear  Multiple  Subject 
Credential  and  a  BCLAD  Certificate.  He  was  hired  on  the  same  day  as  Zamudio.  However, 
Hernandez  is  higher  on  seniority  list  with  eight  years  of  total  teaching  experience. 

16(b)  Respondent  Hernandez  argued  that  he  is  equally  competent  to  teach  Zamudio’s 
dual  immersion  class  and  that  he  should  bump  her  by  reason  of  his  seniority.  This  argument 
is  not  persuasive. 

16(c).  Respondent  Hernandez  testified  that  he  is  a  member  of  CABE,  and  has 

attended  CABE  conferences  for  bilingual  educators  in  2004  and  2007.  The  conferences 
include  workshops  and  networking  for  bilingual  teachers.  Respondent  Hernandez  further 
testified  that,  while  he  was  employed  by  Voorhies  Elementary  School  in  Bakersfield, 
California,  he  taught  a  fifth  and  six  grade  dual  immersion  program  for  two  years,  in  2004  and 
2005.  This  dual  immersion  teaching  experience  was  not  included  on  his  application  for 
employment  with  the  District,  nor  was  it  listed  on  his  extensive  resume. 

16(d).  Respondent  Hernandez  explained  that  he  did  not  include  this  specialized 

teaching  on  his  application  and  resume  because  he  was  “not  applying  for  a  dual  immersion 
job,  but  just  a  regular  teaching  job.”  He  noted  that,  when  he  applied  to  the  District,  there  was 
no  dual  immersion  program,  so  he  did  not  feel  the  need  to  include  his  dual  immersion 
experience.  This  testimony  was  not  convincing.  His  resume  included  detailed  achievements 
and  specials  skills  such  as  serving  as  teacher  liaison  between  school  and  district,  serving  on  a 
school  tutoring  program,  serving  as  a  fifth  year  pentathlon  coach.  None  of  these 
achievements  and  skills  related  to  the  “regular  teaching  job”  for  which  he  was  applying,  but 
they  were  included  on  the  resume  anyway.  Respondent  Hernandez  provided  no  explanation 
for  inclusion  of  these  skills  and  achievements  on  his  resume,  but  the  omission  of  his  CABE 
membership  and  two-year  dual  immersion  program  experience.  The  omission  suggests  that 
Respondent  Hernandez’s  CABE  membership  and  dual  immersion  experience  were  not 
significant  enough  to  put  on  his  resume.  Additionally,  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  dual 
immersion  experience  he  acquired  in  Bakersfield  rendered  him  currently  competent  to  teach 
in  this  District’s  dual  immersion  program. 
Therefore,  Respondent  Hernandez’s  testimony 
did  not  establish  that  he  has  the  special  training  and  experience  needed  to  provide  teaching 
services  in  the  District’s  dual  immersion  program. 

17(a).  Respondent  Andres  Sanchez  (Respondent  Sanchez)  was  hired  on  July  1,  2004. 
He  has  a  Bilingual  Cross  Cultural  Credential  (an  older  version  of  the  BCLAD),  and  has  been 
an  administrator  for  10  years. 

17(b).  Respondent  Sanchez  contends  that  he  is  equally  competent  to  teach  Zamudio’s 
dual  immersion  class  and  that  he  should  bump  her  by  reason  of  his  seniority.  This  argument 
is  not  persuasive.

   17(c).  Respondent  Sanchez  testified  credibly  that  he  is  a  member  of  CABE  and  has 

attended  CABE  conventions  in  the  past.  He  previously  taught  in  a  kindergarten  dual 
language  immersion  classroom  in  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School  District  for  two  years, 
some  time  between  1999  and  1994.  He  has  not  attended  any  dual  immersion  conventions  in 
the  last  five  years,  nor  has  he  read  any  books  with  guiding  principles  for  dual  language 
education.  He  has  not  taught  for  years,  and  is  unfamiliar  with  current  practices  in  EL 
education.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  dual  immersion  experience  he  acquired  over  a 
decade  ago  rendered  him  currently  competent  to  teach  in  this  District’s  dual  immersion 
program. 
Therefore,  Respondent  Sanchez’s  testimony  did  not  establish  that  he  has  the 
special  training  and  experience  needed  to  provide  teaching  services  in  the  District’s  dual 
immersion  program. 

18. 

Just  prior  to  the  administrative  hearing,  while  reviewing  the  seniority  list  to 

ensure  that  there  were  no  junior  teachers  being  retained  while  senior  teachers  were  laid  off, 
the  District  found  that  Respondent  Kristin  Theis  (Respondent  Theis),  Seniority  Number  139, 
would  displace  a  math  teacher,  Jessica  Serrano  (Serrano),  Seniority  Number  201,  who  was 
skipped,  but  received  a  layoff  notice.  Although  Respondent  Theis’s  current  assignment  is 
sixth  grade,  she  has  a  math  credential,  and  would  bump  Serrano  for  a  math  assignment. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

All  notice and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  6.) 

2.’ 

The  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  5  are  each  determined  to  be  particular 

kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  (Factual  Findings  3 
and  7.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44955.  (Factual  Finding  8.) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

[t]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  . 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render. 

.  while  any 

. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  allows  the  District  to  devi- 

ate  from  terminating a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority,  if  the  District  demonstrates 
that  there  is  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  and

   

5. 

  

  

that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  or  course  of  study  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

6. 

Zamudio  was  hired  after  Respondents  Hernandez  and  Sanchez.  The  District 
demonstrated  that  there  was  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  dual  immersion  class, 
and  that  Zamudio  had  the  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  which  others  with  more  seniority  did  not  possess.  More  specifically, 
Zamudio  had  special  training  and  experience  in  teaching  a  current  dual  immersion  program. 
Respondents  Hernandez  and  Sanchez  sought  to,“bump”  Zamudio  from  her  current  position 
as  a  dual  immersion  teacher.  However,  the  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  Respondents 
Hernandez  and  Sanchez  were  competent  to  fill  Zamudio’s  position.  Therefore,  Respondents 
Hernandez  and  Sanchez  cannot  “bump”  Zamudio. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

8. 

Respondent  Theis  was  hired  by  the  District  before  Serrano.  Respondent  Theis 

is  certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  as  a  math  teacher  that  Serrano  is  providing. 
By  virtue  of  seniority,  Respondent  Theis  has  the  right  to  “bump”  the  junior  employee  and 
retain  employment  with  the  District. 

9. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which 

any  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  for 

terminating  or  reducing  Respondents’  employment,  except  for  Respondent  Theis,  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  18. 

MI 
MI 
MI 
M1 
// 
M/ 
M1 
MI 
/I/ 
// 
MI 
M1 
// 
M1 

 

  

ORDERS 

1. 

The  Accusations  served  on  Respondents  William  Almstrom;  Amanda  Bruski; 

Irene  Carranza;  Mireya  Chavez;  Sylvia  Contreras;  Jacqueline  Coronado;  Maria  De  Los 
Angeles  Mauricio;  Andres  Duran;  Lisette  Garcia-Mora;  Veronica  Gonzalez;  Angela  Hand- 
ley;  Pablo  Hernandez;  Heather  Knauer;  Annette  Magana;  Hernan  Martinez;  Fred  Messecar; 
Robert  Mitchell;  Cheryl  Molina;  Margaret  O’ Sullivan;  Nancy  Pearson;  Mariela  Plascencia; 
Erica  Rodriguez;  Roberto  Rodriguez;  Heriberto  Rojas,  Jr.;  Cesar  Rosales;  Vanesa  (Ruth) 
Salas;  Andres  Sanchez;  Martha  Sheppard;  Jay  Sorensen;  Stephanie  Terrazas;  Erin  Trujillo; 
Richard  Valdiva;  and  Kristen  Whitehead  are  sustained.  Notice  may  be  given  to  those 
Respondents  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  terminated  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  as  indicated. 

2. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondent  Kristin  Theis  is  not  sustained,  and  the 

Accusation  related  to  Respondent  Theis  is  dismissed. 

3. 

The  Accusations  served  on  Respondents  Deborah  Antrim;  Elsa  Hernandez; 
Danell  Lagmarsino;  Kimberlee  Lopez;  Susana  Loughman;  John  Martinez;  Lisa  Martinez- 
Casta;  Adelina  Mendez;  Erin  Mooney;  Carole  Olsen-Bryan;  Heather  Parks;  and  Darin 
Spencer  are  dismissed. 

Dated:  May  6,  2008 

JULIE  CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   

