BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CENTRALIA  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  The  Accusation  Against: 

SHELLY  COVENEY, 
JANET  GRANCH,  and 
OLIVIA  SWINTH, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  L2008030911 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Robert  S.  Eisman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  1,  2008,  at  the  offices  of  the  Centralia  School 
District  in  Buena  Park,  California. 

Sharon  J.  Ormond,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Centralia  School  District  (the 

District). 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Shelly  Coveney,  Janet  Granch,  and 

Olivia  Swinth  (collectively,  respondents)  who  were  present  at  the  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  1,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

The  District  (a  public  school  district  operating  under  the  California  Education 
Code)  serves  the  Buena  Park  and  neighboring  communities  by  providing  elementary  school 
education  at  nine  schools  for  students  in  kindergarten  through  sixth  grade. 

Diane  Scheerhorn,  Ph.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  Douglas  Staine, 

Ed.D.,  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources. 

2. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  made  a  recommendation 

to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  that  certain  full-time  equivalent

  

  

  

a. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

g. 

(FTE)'  certificated  employees  not  be  reemployed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  that  the 
Governing  Board  give  the  employees  notice  as  required  by  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  following  school  year. 

3. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  number  1268  - 

Reduction  or  Discontinuance  of  Particular  Kinds  of  Services,  which  provided  for  services  to 
be  reduced  or  discontinued  by  16.8  certificated  positions,  as  follows: 

Reduce  Kindergarten  through  6th  Grade  Classroom  Teaching  Services  — 
6.0  FTE 

b. 

Reduce  Deaf  and  Hard  of  Hearing  Teaching  Services  -  1.0  FTE 

Reduce  Resource  Specialist  Teaching  Services  -  3.0  FTE 

Reduce  Counseling  Services  -  3.0  FTE 

Reduce  Social  Worker  Services  -  1.8  FTE 

Reduce  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  in  Administration  Services  -  1.0  FTE 

Discontinue  Program  Improvement  Coordinator  I  —  Special  Education 
Services  -  1.0  FTE 

The  Governing  Board  further  determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  by  reason  of  said 
reductions  or  discontinuances  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  the  close 
of  the  2007-2008  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions, 
and  directed  the  Superintendent,  or  her  designees,  to  proceed  accordingly  by  notifying  the 
appropriate  employees  to  implement  the  Governing  Board’s  determination. 

4. 

The  need  for  layoffs  was  the  result  of  District  expectation  of  a  $1.8  million 

budget  shortfall  due  to  proposed  State  budget  cuts  imposed  on  the  District,  deficit  spending, 
and  declining  enrollment  of  two  to  four  percent  per  year. 

5. 

In  order  to  prepare  to  meet  the  challenges  of  reduced  funding  and  student  en- 
rollment,  the  District  is  planning  to  restructure  its  educational  services  to  accommodate  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  such  that  the  planned  changes 
would  not  compromise  the  educational  programs  of  the  District. 

'  A  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  is  a  way  to  normalize  personnel  numbers  based  on 
staffing  ratios.  In  general,  six  class  sections  equates  to  one  full-time  employee  position. 
Thus,  if  that  staffing  ratio  is  applied  to  a  planned  reduction  of  15  instructional  sections,  then 
the  result  would  be  the  need  to  reduce  2.5  FTE,  i.e.,  two  full-time  employees  and  one  par- 
time  employee. 

 

6. 

On  March  7  and  March  10,  2008  (i.e.,  on  or  before  March  15,  2008),  and  after 
notification  to  the  Governing  Board,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
the  District  served  each  of  21  affected  certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  with  a 
“Notice  of  Recommendation  That  Services  Will  Not  Be  Required  for  the  Ensuing  2008-09 
School  Year.”  The  notices  informed  the  employees,  “the  undersigned  [Dr.  Douglas  Staine] 
has  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Centralia  School  District  that  you  be  given 
notice  that  your  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year.” 

The  notice  set  forth  the  reason  for  the  layoff  as  being  the  necessity  to  reduce  or 

discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  District  beginning  not  later  than  the 
commencement  of  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  notices  further  advised  the  employees,  in  part,  of  their  right  to  a  hearing  and  that 

that  a  hearing  must  be  requested  in  writing  and  delivered  to  the  District,  c/o  Dr.  Douglas 
Staine,  no  later  than  4:30  p.m.  on  March  18,  2008.  Individuals  who  failed  to  timely  return 
the  Request  for  Hearing  form  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing.  Accordingly,  these  individuals 
are  without  standing  to  participate  in  this  proceeding  and  without  the  right  to  contest  the 
recommendation  of  non-reemployment,  and  the  Governing  Board  possesses  no  jurisdiction 
other  than  to  support  their  dismissal  from  employment. 

7. 

Respondents  Shelly  Coveney,  Janet  Granch,  and  Olivia  Swinth,  each  filed  a 

timely  Request  for  Hearing  (i.e.,  three  of  the  13  certificated  employees  who  filed  requests  for 
hearing).  One  of  the  21  certificated  employees  who  received  layoff  notices  elected  to  resign. 

8. 

On  March  31,  2008,  the  District  sent  “Rescission  of  Notice”  letters  to  11  of  the 

20  remaining  certificated  employees  who  originally  received  layoff  notices.  The  letter 
informed  these  employees,  “the  District  has  determined  that  the  termination  of  your  services 
is  not  necessary  to  accomplish  these  reductions  and  discontinuances,  and  that  the  March  7, 
2008  notice  therefore  is  rescinded.”  None  of  the  respondents  received  a  Rescission  of  Notice 
letter. 

9. 

Superintendent  Scheerhorn  filed  Accusations  which  were  timely  served  on 
respondents  and  one  other  certificated  employee,  as  required  by  the  Education  Code,  and 
informed  them  that  unless  a  written  request  for  a  hearing,  signed  by  the  certificated  employee 
or  on  that  employee’s  behalf,  and  received  by  the  Governing  Board  on  or  before  4:30  p.m.  on 
Monday,  April  7,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  may  proceed  on  the  Accusation  without  a 
hearing.  The  request  for  a  hearing  was  to  be  made  by  delivering  or  mailing  a  Notice  of 
Defense,  as  provided  in  Government  Code  section  11506,  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Centralia  School  District,  c/o  Dr.  Douglas  Staine.  The  certificated  employees  were  also 
informed  that  failure  to  request  a  hearing  by  filing  a  Notice  of  Defense  within  the  specified 
period  will  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

10. 

Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  A  fourth  certificated 

employee  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  but  subsequently  rescinded  it. 

  

 

  

11. 

The  District  maintains  a  “Seniority  List  for  All  Certificated  Employees”  that 

identifies  employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  assigned  school,  status, 
position,  and  credentials.  The  District  also  maintains  a  separate  list  of  temporary  employees. 

As  provided  in  Education  Code  section  44845,  seniority  generally  is  measured  from 

the  first  date  on  which  the  employee  rendered  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee. 

By  stipulation,  the  parties  agreed  that  Janet  Granch’s  seniority  date  should  be 
corrected  to  August  27,  2007.  However,  respondent  Granch  argued  that  her  seniority  date 
should  be  even  earlier  because,  based  on  the  advice  of  District  staff  member  Theresa  Hawk, 
she  missed  optional  training  for  new  teachers  provided  by  the  District  on  August  20-21, 
2007.  New  probationary  teachers  who  attended  that  training,  including  Shelly  Coveney  and 
Olivia  Swinth,  received  seniority  dates  of  August  20,  2007,  because  they  were  paid  under 
their  employment  contract  for  attending  the  District’s  training. 

In  rebuttal,  Theresa  Hawk  testified  that  when  she  spoke  with  Ms.  Granch  regarding 

the  training  in  August  2007,  she  informed  Ms.  Granch  that  it  was  her  choice  whether  she  at- 
tended  the  training  or  took  her  pre-planned  vacation  and  did  not  address  any  adverse  affect 
non-attendance  would  have  on  Ms.  Granch’s  seniority  date. 

Teachers  who  are  required,  as  part  of  their  regular  assignment,  to  report  earlier  than 

the  start  of  the  school  year  may  be  entitled  to  an  earlier  seniority  date.  The  key  questions  are 
whether  the  early  appearance  was  mandatory  or  voluntary  and  whether  the  employee  was 
paid  for  the  early  appearance  or  docked  for  non-attendance,  or  whether  the  employee  was 
paid  a  separate  stipend  for  attendance.  In  this  instance,  attendance  at  the  training  was  volun- 
tary  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  respondent  Granch  was  docked  for  non-attendance. 

The  administrative  law  judge 

finds  that  even  if  her  seniority  date  was  adjusted  to  Au- 

gust  20,  2007,  it  would  have  no  affect  on  her  being  subject  to  layoff. 

None  of  the  respondents  represented  that  other  information  contained  in  the  Seniority 

List  for  All  Certificated  Employees  was  incorrect  or  incomplete. 

12. 
following  is  noted: 

Based  on  the  District’s  Seniority  List  for  All  Certificated  Employees,  the 

a. 

Janet  Granch  has a  corrected  seniority  date  of  August  27,  2007.  She  has  a 

preliminary  level  I  credential  as  an  Education  Specialist  -  mild/moderate  with  English 
Learner  Authorization.  Ms.  Granch  is  currently  a  probationary  Resource  Specialist  - 
Mild/Moderate  assigned  to  the  District’s  Student  Services. 

b. 

Shelly  Coveney  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  20,  2007.  She  has  a 

preliminary  level  I  credential  as  an  Education  Specialist  -  mild/moderate  with  English 

 

     

Learner  Authorization.  Ms.  Coveney  is  currently  a  probationary  Resource  Specialist  - 
Mild/Moderate  assigned  to  Walter  Knott  Elementary  School. 

c. 

Olivia  Swinth  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  20,  2007.  She  has  a  preliminary 

level  I  credential  as  an  Education  Specialist  -  mild/moderate  and  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject 
credential  with  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD) 
Authorization.  Ms.  Swinth  is  currently  a  probationary  Special  Education  Teacher  who 
teaches  Special  Day  Class  -  Mild/Moderate  at  Glen  H.  Dysinger  Elementary  School. 

13. 

Eight  certificated  employees  have  seniority  dates  below  (i.e.,  more  recent 

than)  that  of  respondent  Shelly  Coveney  and  Olivia  Swinth.  However,  all  eight  employees, 
except  Janet  Granch,  are  credentialed  in  areas  that  are  not  subject  to  reduction  or 
discontinuance  under  Governing  Board  Resolution  1268. 

The  following  list  contains  the  relevant  portion  of  the  seniority  list  sequence,  from  the 

respondent  with  the  lowest  seniority  date  (Mika  Winkle)  to  the  respondent  with  highest 
seniority  date  (respondent  Olivia  Swinth).  The  status  of  each  certificated  employee  in  that 
range  is  also  listed  (i.e.,  whether  a  layoff  notice  was  issued  or  the  reason  why  one  was  not 
issued) 

Seniority  Date 

Name 

Status 

Audiologist  (not  reduced) 

notice  that  was  not  subsequently  rescinded  has  a  seniority  date  of  08/28/2006. 

After  respondent  Swinth,  the  next  senior  certificated  employee  who  received  a  layoff 

10/16/2007 
10/08/2007 
08/30/2007 
08/27/2007 
08/28/2007 
08/20/2007 
08/20/2007 
08/20/2007 
08/20/2007 
08/20/2007 

Preschool  Special  Ed.  (not  reduced) 
Preschool  Special  Ed.  (not  reduced) 
Layoff  Notice 
Layoff  Notice 

Mika  Winkle 
Crestina  Quesada  =  Speech-Language  Therapist  (not  reduced) 
Nurse  (not  reduced) 
Catherine  White 
Layoff  Notice 
Janet  Granch 
Juan  Gil 
Speech-Language  Therapist  (not  reduced) 
Christopher  Hoyt  |  Speech-Language  Therapist  (not  reduced) 
Stephanie  Golden 
Renee  Wallace 
Shelly  Coveney 
Olivia  Swinth 

    

Resolution  number  1276,  Determination  of  Seniority  among  Certificated  Employees  with  the 
Same  Seniority  Date.  Resolution  1276  provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based 
solely  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students.  The  resolution  included  the  specific 
criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  among  certificated  employees,  i.e., 
how  a  particular  employee  is  ranked,  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.

No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained  to  render 

a  service  for  which  a  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

-  On  March  6,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  introduced,  passed,  and  adopted 

14. 

  

In  identifying  the  certificated  employees  affected  by  the  layoff,  the  District’s 
superintendent  and  assistant  superintendent  were  required  to  use  the  “tie-breaking”  criteria  to 
resolve  seniority  rankings  between  employees. 

15. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Staine  used  the  seniority  list  to  determine  which 

employees  were  affected  by  Board’s  resolution  regarding  layoff  of  certificated  employees 
and  whether  the  affected  individuals  were  entitled  to  “bump”?  other  employees. 

In  this  matter,  none  of  the  respondents  who  received  a  layoff  notice  were  found  to 

have  bumping  or  skipping  rights  over  another  employee  in  the  seniority  list.  However,  as  a 
result  of  the  1.0  FTE  discontinuance  of  Program  Improvement  Coordinator  I 
Education  Services,  respondent  Swift  was  bumped  by  Theresa  Hawk,  who  has  a  seniority 
date  of  August  1,  2004,  and  has  preliminary  credentials  in  both  Administration  Services  and 
Education  Specialist  —  mild/moderate 

-  Special 

16. 

In  determining  the  number  of  employees  who  would  receive  layoff  notices,  the 

District  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition  (i.e.,  all  deaths,  resignations,  retirements, 
non-reelection  unrelated  to  the  reductions  and  other  permanent  vacancies)  that  had  occurred 
prior  to  and/or  was  known  on  March  6,  2008,  when  the  Governing  Board  adopted  the 
Resolution  1268. 

17. 

The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  projected  District  budget  reductions.  The  District  must  also  address 
projected  reductions  in  student  enrollment  at  all  grade  levels  and  undertake  restructuring,  as 
necessary,  to  insure  that  its  schools  provide,  and  students  receive,  required  instruction  in  an 
effective  and  efficient  manner.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  services  in  light 
of  its  budget  and  enrollment  projections  does  address  the  welfare  of  students,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  the  Governing  Board’s  discretion.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the 
proposed  reductions  in  services  would  violate  any  statutory  or  regulatory  requirement 
governing  the  District. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

?  Generally  speaking,  a  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to 

a  position  held  by  a  junior  teacher  if  the  senior  teacher  is  properly  credentialed.  That  dis- 
placement  of  a  junior  teacher  is  known  as  “bumping.”  The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and 
a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential/skill  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more  senior  teacher 
is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by  statute  (Education  Code  section  44955,  sub- 
division  (d)(1))  and  appellate  law  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Gov- 
erning  Board of  the  Santa  Clara Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831). 

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a),  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section 
44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her 
designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent 
by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stat- 
ing  the  reasons  therefor. 

Education  Code  section  44955  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  posi- 
tion  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and 
44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no  proba- 
tionary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclu- 

Sive. 

. 

. 

.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the 

(b)  Whenever  . 
.  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school 
year  . 
district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in 
the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of 
not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at 
the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by 
statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  termi- 
nated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probation- 
ary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  re- 
tained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

    

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  dis- 
trict  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee 
whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing 
board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section

  

44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining 
the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in 
ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on 
request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order 
of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employ- 
ees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a 
requirement.  ... 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments 
in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any 
service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to 
render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not 
previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a 
teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major 
area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  gov- 
erning  board’shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  devi- 
ate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  senior- 
ity  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the 
laws. 

3. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 establish  jurisdiction  for  this  pro- 

ceeding.  The  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  3  through  17.) 

4. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  are 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  are  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Causes  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  are  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

 

District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is 
necessary  to  address  a  decrease  the  expenditures  of  the  District  and  projected  reductions  in 
student  enrollment,  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

5. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  respondents  Shelly  Coveney,  Janet 

Granch,  and  Olivia  Swinth  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Shelly  Coveney,  Janet  Granch,  and  Olivia  Swinth 

that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  School  Year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  as  provided  in  Governing  Board 
of  Centralia  School  District  Resolution  number  1268  -  Reduction  or  Discontinuance  of 
Particular  Kinds  of  Services. 

DATED:  May  6,  2008. 

ROBERT  S.  EISMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

    

