BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  APPLE  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  Case  No.:  2008030328 

   
    

OLIVIA  ALLALA,  and  other  Certificated 
Employees  of  the  Apple  Valley  Unified 
School  District, 

      

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  hearing  in  the  above-captioned  matter  was  held  on  April  10,  2008,  at  Apple 

Valley,  California.  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  presided.  Complainant  was  represented  by  Margaret 
Chidester  and  Alexandria  Davidson.  Respondents  were  represented  by  Carlos  R.  Perez, 
Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing,  the  case  was  argued,  and 
the  matter  submitted  for  decision  on  the  hearing  date.  The  Administrative  Law  Judge  hereby 
makes  his  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follow. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1,  Complainant  Dan  Leary  filed  the  accusations!  in  this  proceeding  in  his  official 

capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  of  the  Apple  Valley  Unified  School 
District  (District). 

2.  The  following  persons  (Respondents)  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District: 

Olivia  Allala,  Carrie  Talataina,  Aurora  Mendoza,  Kyla  Gonzales, 
Cheryl  Denny,  Nichole  Cateneso,  Martell  Olson,  Debra  Boyd,  Angelica 
Munoz,  Tanesha  Collins,  Elisabeth  Bailey,  Linda  Cordova,  Kittie  Yonamine, 
Erica  Luke,  Nicole  Portillo,  Rhobley  Montelongo,  Bramlett  Browne, 
Alicia  Weber,  Ashley  Guadino,  Paul  Verduzco,  Rebekah  Michelson. 

'  The  term  “accusation”  refers  to  a  type  of  pleading  utilized  under  the  Administrative 
Procedure  Act,  Government  Code  sections  11500  and  11503.  As  noted  by  the  District  letters 
to  its  teachers,  and  by  the  ALJ  during  the  hearing,  it  should  be  made  clear  that  the 
Respondents  are  not  “accused”  in  the  every-day  sense  of  that  word;  they  have  done  nothing 
wrong.  Instead,  it  might  be  said  they  are  accused  of  not  having  enough  seniority  to  retain 
their  positions  with  the  District  in  the  face  of  a  resolution  to  reduce  positions. 

  

 

  

3. 

(A)  On  March  5,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  (Board)  of  the  District  adopted 

resolution  number  28-29,  entitled  “Reduction  or  Discontinuance  of  Particular  Types  of 
Services”  (Reduction  Resolution).  The  purpose  of  the  Reduction  Resolution  was  to  reduce 
and  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  no  later  than  the  close  of  the  2007- 
2008  school  year,  in  light  of  budgetary  projections  and  other  factors,  such  as  decreased 
enrollment.  Specifically,  the  resolution  requires  the  reduction  of  44  “FTE”—Full  Time 
Equivalents—by  reducing  classroom  teaching  in  both  the  elementary  school  grades  and  the 
junior  high  school  and  high  school  grades.  The  Board,  in  making  the  resolution,  was  acting 
on  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

(B)  The  FTE’s  that  the  Board  determined  to  reduce  are  described  in  the 

Reduction  Resolution,  as  follows: 

Preschool  Teachers,  1  FTE 
K-6  Elementary  Class  Teachers,  34  FTE 
Elementary  Instrumental  Music  Teacher,  1  FTE 
Middle  School  7/8  Core  Classroom  Teacher,  1  FTE 
Alternative  Education  Teacher,  1  FTE 
School  Psychologists,  2  FTE 
Coordinator,  Career  Education/Curriculum,  1  FTE 
Coordinator,  School  Readiness,  1  FTE 
High  School  Classroom  English  Teachers,  2  FTE 

4. 

(A)  In  its  Reduction  Resolution  the  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  of  the 

District,  or  a  designee  of  the  Superintendent,  to  give  notice  of  termination  to  certificated 
employees  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,”  informing  them 
that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  following  school  year  (2007-2008). 

(B)  When  the  Board  adopted  the  Reduction  Resolution,  it  also  adopted  criteria 
to  identify  those  permanent,  probationary,  and  temporary  personnel  who  would  be  exempted 
from  the  order  of  layoffs  by  virtue  of  their  credentials,  competence,  assignment,  experience, 
or  certification.  That  criteria  was  set  out  in  Exhibit  A  to  the  Reduction  Resolution. 

(C)  Further,  when  the  Board  adopted  the  Reduction  Resolution,  it  also 

identified  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  used  when  employees  shared  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service.  That  criteria  was  set  forth  on  Exhibit  B  to  the  Reduction  Resolution.  The  tie- 
breaking  language  was  based  on  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in  Article  6  of  the  contract 
agreement  between  the  District  and  the  Apple  Valley  Unified  Teachers’  Association,  which 
represents  certificated  employees  of  the  District  in  collective  bargaining. 

All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

 

  

5.  The  services  which  the  District  seeks  to  discontinue  or  reduce  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955. 

6..  The  decision  by  the  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  but  rather  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion  given  uncertainty 
regarding  the  state  budget  and  the  District’s  financial  resources,  and  other  factors  considered 
by  the  Board.  The  record  establishes  that  District  management  attempted  to  consider  a  wide 
array  of  information  regarding  the  District’s  needs,  including  the  need  to  remain  solvent,  in 
determining  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services. 

7.  The  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

8.  Prior  to  March  15,  2008,  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the 

District  were  given  a  preliminary  written  notice,  to  the  effect  that  that  pursuant  to  sections 
44949  and  44955,  their  services  would  not  be  required  in  the  2007-2008  school  year. 
However,  a  number  of  the  notices  stated,  to  the  particular  recipient,  that  the  District  would 
attempt  to  “exempt”  that  employee  from  lay  off  in  light  of  their  credentials,  expertise,  and 
then-current  assignment.’ 

9.  Fifty-four  certificated  employees,  including  Respondents,  requested  a  hearing  to 
determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Those 
requests  for  hearing  were  timely  filed,  or  the  Board  waived  objection  to  any  late  filing.’ 

10.  Thereafter,  on  or  about  March  18,  2008,  an  Accusation  was  served  upon  those 

persons  who  requested  a  hearing.  That  Accusation  was  accompanied  by  a  notice  which 
stated  that  failure  to  deliver  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Board  within  seven  days  of  service  of 
the  Accusation  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing,  and  that  the  Board  might 
then  proceed  against  the  Respondents  without  a  hearing.  The  majority  of  the  persons  served 
with  an  accusation—46—filed  a  Notice  of  Defense,  including  the  Respondents. 

11.  Since  the  Reduction  Resolution  was  passed  some  circumstances  have  changed, 
such  that  reduction  of  only  28  FTE  of  K  through  6  elementary  teachers  was  necessary  as  of 
the  time  of  the  hearing. 
school  psychologists,  the  one  FTE  of  Coordinator,  Career  Education,  and  the  one  FTE  of 
Coordinator,  School  Readiness.  Thus,  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  only  34  FTE  were  subject  to 
reduction. 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  reduce  the  two  FTE  of 

>  Exhibit  6  indicates  that  91  certificated  employees  received  layoff  notices. 

* 

It  appears  that  notices  were  withdrawn  as  to  a  number  of  the  employees  before  the 

time  that  a  request  for  hearing  was  necessary. 

   

  

  

12.  Since  the  Reduction  Resolution  was  made  there  has  been  attrition  among  the 

Districts’  certificated  employees,  through  retirement,  resignation,  or  non-reelection.  As  a 
result,  the  proceedings  against  some  personnel  were  withdrawn.  For  example,  on  the  day  of 
the  hearing,  Complainant  dismissed  the  Accusation  against  Toni  Peterson,  number  669  on 
the  seniority  list. 

13. 

In  the  course  of  the  reduction  in  force  process,  the  District  created  a  seniority  list. 

That  seniority  list  took  into  account  a  number  of  factors,  including  first  date  of  paid  service 
and  various  tie-breaking  criteria  that  were  developed  by  the  District  and  adopted  by  it.  (See 
Factual  Finding  4.)  As  to  tie  breaking,  in  many  cases  the  District  was  obligated  to  resort  to 
the  last  criteria,  a  lottery,  which  was  conducted  under  the  eyes  of  teacher  association 
representatives,  and  with  their  assistance  in  the  drawing  of  names  or  numbers  at  random.  The 
tie-breaking  criteria  were  appropriately  applied  to  the  teachers  listed  on  the  final  seniority 
list. 

14. 

(A)  The  District  reviewed  its  records  and  the  seniority  list  to  determine  which 
employees  might  “bump”  other  employees,  because  they  held  credentials  in  another  area  and 
were  entitled  to  displace  a  more  junior  employee.  No  employee  was  found  eligible  to  bump 
another  employee. 

(B)  The  District  determined  that  certain  junior  teachers  possessed  superior 

skills,  training,  or  capabilities  which  more  senior  teachers  did  not  possess,  which  would 
allow  the  more  junior  teachers  to  be  exempted  from  lay  off  or  “skipped.”  Such  teachers  were 
needed  by  the  District  to  teach  particular  courses  or  to  provide  particular  services,  and  could 
do  so  in  light  of  their  credentials  and  qualifications.  The  lay  off  notices  were  withdrawn  as 
to  such  teachers. 

(C)  During  the  hearing,  no  Respondents  were  able  to  show  that  they  could 

bump  or  skip  another  teacher. 

15. 

(A)  An  issue  was  raised  as  to  the  proper  seniority  date  for  Respondent  Rhobly 

Montelongo.  She  is  shown  on  the  seniority  list  at  number  677,  with  a  seniority  date  of 
August  27,  2007.  Her  contract  status  is  shown  as  “prob[ationary]  2”,  that  is,  as  a  teacher  in 
her  second  year  of  probation,  and  eligible  for  tenure  in  one  more  year.  Respondent 
Montelongo  had  first  worked  for  the  District  on  August  3,  2006,  as  a  fourth-grade  teacher. 

(B)  In  June  2007,  Respondent  Montelongo  desired  to  start  work  after  the 
beginning  of  the  next  school  year,  because  she  had  been  invited  to  a  wedding  of  family 
members  which  was  to  take  place  out  of  the  country.  She  spoke  to  her  school’s  principal, 
Ms.  Schmitt,  about  the  problem  this  posed  for  her. 
wanted  to  retain  Respondent’s  services  at  her  campus,  because  she  told  Respondent  she 
would  speak  to  the  District  staff  about  the  matter,  and  she  did  so.  And,  Respondent  wanted 
to  retain her  job.

It  is  reasonably  inferred  that  Ms.  Schmitt 

  

(C)  After  conferring  with  District  staff,  Ms.  Schmitt  told  Respondent  that  the 

way  to  proceed  was  for  Respondent  to  resign,  and  that  Schmitt  would  re-hire  her 
immediately  upon  the  teacher’s  return.  The  two  discussed  the  status  of  Respondent’s  tenure 
credit,  and  the  principal  told  Respondent  that  she  would  remain  a  second  year  probationary 
teacher,  or  “prob  2.”  The  two  did  not  discuss  the  issue  of  a  seniority  date,  and  there  is  no 
evidence  that  the  parties  discussed  the  option  of  a  short  leave  of  absence,  which  would  not 
have  caused  a  break  in  service.’  (See  §  44975.) 

(D)  On  June  15,  2007,  Respondent  submitted  a  letter  to  the  District  which 

stated:  “I  [Respondent]  resign  from  the  position  of  teacher  with  Apple  Valley  Unified 
School  District  due  to  the  fact  that  I  will  be  absent  for  the  beginning  of  the  school  year 
2007/2008.”  (Exhibit  9.) 

(E)  Thereafter,  Respondent  Montelongo  took  her  extended  vacation,  and 

returned  to  her  fourth  grade  classroom  on  August  27,  2007.  Since  that  time  she  has  been 
paid  as  a  “prob  2”  teacher. 

(F)  As  a result  of  the  transaction  described  herein,  Respondent  Montelongo  is 

the  sixth  most  junior  person  exposed  to  lay  off,  rather  than  being  senior  to  all  the  person’s 
still  subject  to  lay  off.® 

16.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  by  the  District  to 

render  a  service  for  which  a  Respondent  was  certificated  and  qualified  to  render. 

2. 

_  LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

44949  and  44955,  based  on  Factual  Findings  1  through  4,  and  8  through  10. 

1.  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Code  sections 

(A)  A  District  may  reduce a  particular  kind  of  services  (PKS)  within  the 
meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of 
service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce 
services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer 
employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.)  The  Court  of  Appeal  has  made  clear  that  a 
PKS  reduction  does  not  have  to  lead  to  less  classrooms  or  classes;  laying  off  some  teachers 

   

  

°  All  the  other  teachers  with  a  seniority  date  of  August  3,  2006,  have  had  their  lay-off 
notices  withdrawn.  The  most  senior  person  still  subject  to  layoff,  Ms.  Allala,  has  a  seniority 
date  of  August  16,  2006. 

Section  44962  authorizes  school  districts  to  grant  leaves  of  absence  to  certificated 
employees,  and  section  44975  makes  it  clear  that  where  a  probationary  teacher  is  granted  a 
leave  of  absence,  there  is  no  break  in  service. 

> 

  

amounts  to  a  proper  reduction.  (Zalec  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist. 
(2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  853-854.  See  also  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  631,  637  [Reduction  of  classroom  teaching  can  be  a  reduction  of  a  PKS;  as 
long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching  or  in  a  particular  kind  of  service  in 
teaching  a  particular  subject  any  amount  in  excess  of  the  statutory  minimum  may  be 
reduced];  California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32.) 

(B)  The  services  to  be  discontinued  by  the  District  in  this  case  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949,  (See  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  808.)  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  3  through  7  and  the 
foregoing  authorities. 

3. 

(A)  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to 

a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  to  fill.  In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee 
may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond 
Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  At  the  same  time,  junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers—may  “skip”  that  senior  employee—if  the  junior 
teacher  possesses  superior  skills  or  capabilities  not  possessed  by  their  more  senior 
colleagues.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399; 
Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Santa  Clara  Unified 
School  Dist.  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

(B)  The  District  properly  skipped  a  number  of  employees  based  on  their 
qualifications.  No  Respondent  established  the  right  to  displace  a  senior  employee.  This 
Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  14(B). 

(C)  No  Respondent  established  at  the  hearing  that  they  had  the  right  to  bump 

a  junior  employee. 

4.  No junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  based  on  Factual 
Finding  14  (C)  and  16. 

5. 

(A)  As  to  the  matter  of  Respondent  Montelongo’s  seniority  date,  the  starting 

point  for  measuring  seniority  is  section  44845.  It  provides  that  “Every  probationary  or 
permanent  employee  employed  after  June  30,  1947,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  employed 
on  the  date  upon  which  he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.” 

(B)  However,  section  44848  also  speaks  to  this  issue,  because  it  controls  the 
seniority  date  of  persons  who  resign  and  are  then  rehired.  It  states  that  when a  certificated 

 

  

  

employee  has  resigned,  and  is  thereafter  reemployed,  his  or  her  date  of  employment  is 
deemed  to  be  the  date  when  he  “rendered  paid  service  . 

.  after  his  reemployment.” 

. 

(C)  The  parties  have  argued  the  effect  of  section  44931,  which  speaks  to 
breaks  in  service  of  less  than  39  months  as  not  adversely  affecting  the  teacher’s  rights. 
However,  that  statute  on  its  face  applies  to  permanent,  and  not  necessarily  to  probationary, 
employees.  In  any  event,  as  pointed  out  by  the  District,  section  44931  has  been  interpreted 
as  not  reviving  an  earlier  seniority  date  for  a  teacher  who  returns  to  service,  because  seniority 
placement  effects,  potentially,  the  rights  of  other  employees.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  641.) 

(D)  Ultimately,  section  44848  and  the  San  Jose  Teachers  case  are  not 

controlling,  because  it  must  be  concluded  that  the  resignation  was  not  effective.  It  is  not 
effective  because  it  is  clear  that  Respondent  Montelongo  did  not  intend  to  terminate  or  end 
her  employee  relationship  with  the  District,  and  the  District  did  not  intend  for  that  either. 
Indeed,  the  District’s  intent  is  signaled  not  just  by  Ms.  Schmitt’s  statements  but  by  the  fact 
that  Respondent  went  right  back  to  her  assignment,  as  Ms.  Schmitt  said  she  would,  and 
Respondent  kept  her  probationary  status,  as  she  desired.  The  parties’  real  purpose  was  to 
“finagle”  a  short  vacation  for  a  valuable  employee,  and  not  to  terminate  the  employer- 
employee  relationship.  In  such  circumstances,  the  resignation  is  not  effective.  (Sherman  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  (1935)  9  Cal.App.  2d  262,  265-266.) 

In  Sherman  v.  Board  of  Trustee,  supra,  the  teacher  had  worked  for  the  district 
for  three  years.  Her  employer  did  not  approve  of  the  then-new  tenure  law,  and  persuaded  her 
to  resign,  promising  her  continued  employment.  She  resigned,  which  resignation  was 
accepted  by  the  district  board,  and  went  back  to  work  for  another  three  years  after  having 
applied  for  reappointment.  After  her  sixth  year  of  service,  there  was  a  dispute  over  whether 
or  not  she  was  tenured,  and  the  district  asserted  the  resignation  as  a  break  in  her  contract  that 
barred  tenure  at  that  point.  The  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the  board’s  position,  holding  that 

   

  

“the  purported  resignation  was  ineffectual  for  the  reason  that  it  was  not 
made  with  the  purpose  of  terminating  [the  teacher’s]  employment,  but 
on  the  contrary  was  presented  with  the  understanding  that  it  was  not  to 
terminate  her  service,  but  was  offered  for  the  mere  purpose  of  avoiding 
the  effect  of  the  tenure  law  and  upon  the  definite  promise  that  she 
would  be  reemployed.  ..  .  A  resignation  is  in  the  nature  of  a  notice  of 
the  termination  of  a  contract  of  employment  and  is  contractual  in 
nature.  It  is  ineffectual  without  the  intent  of  the  incumbent  to  sever  the 
relationship  of  employer  and  employee.” 
(9  Cal.App.  3d  at  265-266.) 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Court  did  not  find  an  estoppel,  or  conclude  that  the 

  

agreement  was  illegal  because  designed  to  circumvent  the  tenure  law,  both  possible  avenues 
of  attack  on  the  resignation  in  that  case.”  Instead,  the  Court  looked  to  the  rather  fundamental 
issue  of  contract. 

In  this  case  is  it  clear  that  Respondent  and  the  District  did  not  intend  to  sever  the 

employer-employee  relationship,  as  evidenced  by  their  conduct  and  the  testimony  of 
Respondent.  Thus,  Respondent  Montelongo  should  be  deemed  to  have  a  seniority  date  of 
August  3,  2006,  and  she  should  not  be  laid  off. 

ORDER 

1.  The  Accusations  are  sustained,  except  as  to  Respondent  Rhobly  Montelongo. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  following  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 

required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services: 

Olivia  Allala,  Carrie  Talataina,  Aurora  Mendoza,  Kyla  Gonzales, 
Cheryl  Denny,  Nichole  Cateneso,  Martell  Olson,  Debra  Boyd,  Angelica 
Munoz,  Tanesha  Collins,  Elisabeth  Bailey,  Linda  Cordova,  Kittie  Yonamine, 
Erica  Luke,  Nicole  Portillo,  Bramlett  Browne,  Alicia  Weber,  Ashley  Guadino, 
Paul  Verduzco,  Rebekah  Michelson. 

3.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority,  with  Ms.  Allala 

being  the  most  senior  of  the  Respondents,  and  Ms.  Michelson  being  the  most  junior  of  the 
Respondents. 

May  __,  2008 

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

7 

To  be  sure,  there  are  elements  of  an  estoppel  in  this  case,  as  Respondent  appears  to 
have  relied  on  her  supervisor  to  help  solve  her  problem  of  starting  work  two  weeks  late,  but 
still  keeping  her  job;  and  she  appears  to  have  relied  to  her  detriment.  An  estoppel  may  arise 
from  the  silence  of  the  party  who  is  to  be  estopped;  an  affirmative  representation  is  not 
required.  (Elliano  v.  Assurance  Co.  of America  (1970)  3  Cal.App.3d  446.)  However,  such  a 
finding  or  conclusion  need  not  be  reached  in  this  case. 

  

 

