  

 

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ALHAMBRA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusations  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2008030580 

Janice  Abbey  Parker,  Jennifer  Rivera  and 
Jose  Vara, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Julie  Cabos-Owen,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  23,  2008,  at  the  Alhambra  Unified  School  Dis- 
trict  Offices  in  Alhambra,  California. 

James  B.  Fernow  of  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  L.L.P.,  represented  the  Alhambra 
Unified  School  District  (District).  Emma  Leheny  of  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone  repre- 
sented  all  Respondents. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  and  argument  was  heard.  The  record 

was  left  open  to  allow  the  parties  to  respond  in  writing  to  evidence  which  was  not  exchanged 
prior  to  the  hearing  (Complainant’s  Exhibits  23  and  24,  and  Respondents’  Exhibit  A).  On 
April  25,  2008,  Respondents’  counsel  timely  filed  the  Declaration  of  Janice  Abbey  Parker, 
which  was  marked  as  Respondents’  Exhibit  B.  Respondents  did  not  file  any  written  objec- 
tion  to  Complainant’s  Exhibits  23  and  24.  Therefore,  Complainant’s  Exhibits  23  and  24 
were  admitted  into  evidence.  On  April  29,  2008,  the  District  timely  filed  its  Response  to  Re- 
spondents’  Submission  of  Authorities,  which  was  marked  as  Complainant’s  Exhibit  26  and 
lodged.  Complainant’s  Exhibit  26  contained  no  objection  to  Respondent’s  Exhibit  B.  There- 
fore,  Respondent’s  Exhibit  B  was  admitted  into  evidence.  The  record  was  closed  and  the 
matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  30,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  to  a  Statement  of  Facts 

(Complainant’s  Exhibit  22),  which  is  set  forth  verbatim  below: 

Janice  Abbey  Parker,  Jennifer  Rivera  and  Jose  Vara 

1. 
(Respondents)  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

On  February  19,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District 

2. 
adopted  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-22  recommending  a  reduction  in 

  

1 

  

  

particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  said  Resolution  is  attached  as 
“Exhibit  1.” 

e 

3. 
On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board of  the  District 
adopted  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-27  recommending  a  reduction  in 
particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  said  Resolution  is  attached  as 
“Exhibit  2.” 

The  District’s  Board  Resolutions  recommended  a  reduction  in 
4. 
particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  including  the  reduction  of  physical  education  (PE)  teachers 
by  5  full  time  equivalents. 

5.  On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  was 
informed  of  the  names  of  the  employees  who  would  be  noticed  that  the 
Superintendent  had  recommended  not  to  re-employ  them  in  the 
upcoming  2008-2009  school  year.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  a 
memorandum  from  Superintendent  Donna  Perez  to  the  Governing 
Board  of  the  District  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  3.” 

On  or  about  February  20  and  March  12,  2008,  the  District 

6. 
timely  served  Respondents  with  Notice  that  the  Superintendent  of  the 
District  had  recommended  not  to  re-employ  them  in  the  upcoming 
2008-2009  school  year.  True  and  correct  copies  of  the Notices  and 
Proofs  of  Service  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  4.” 

e 

All  of  the  District  PE  teachers  who  did  not  have  Cross  Cultural 

7. 
Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  certification  as  of 
March  15,  2008  were  served  with  a  Notice  that  the  Superintendent  of 
the  District  had  recommended  not  to  re-employ  them  in  the  upcoming 
2008-2009  school  year.  True  and  correct  copies  of  the  Notices  and 
Proofs  of  Service  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  4.”  As  of  this  date, 
Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  is  the  only  remaining  PE  teacher 
without  CLAD  certification  who  received  a  lay-off  Notice  that  has 
demanded  a  hearing  and  remains  in  the  lay-off  termination  hearing. 

    

The  Respondents  timely  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  concerning 
8. 
the  recommendation  not  to  re-employ  them  in  the  upcoming  2008-2009 
school  year.  True  and  correct  copies  of  the  Respondents’  Request  for 
Hearing  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  5.” 

for  Lay-Off  of  Certificated  Employees,  Notice  to  Respondent,  and

The  District  timely  served  each  Respondent  with  an  Accusation 

@ 

9. 

blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  accompanied  by  relevant  sections  of  the 
Education  Code  and  Government  Code.  These  Accusations  and  related 
documents  were  served  and  filed  by  the  District’s  Superintendent  in  her 
official  capacity.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  said  Accusations  and 
related  documents  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  6.” 

10. 
The  District  timely  served  a  Notice  of  Hearing  on  the 
Respondents  setting  the  hearing  date  for  April  23,  2008.  A  true  and 
correct  copy  of  said  Notice  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  7.” 

11. 
Respondents  Jose  Vara,  Jennifer  Rivera  and  Janice  Abbey 
Parker,  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense.  True  and  correct  copies  of  said 
Notices  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  8.”  District  agrees  that  all  three  (3) 
Respondents  have  timely  requested  an  opportunity  to  be  heard. 

12. 
Respondent  Jose  Vara’s  first  date  of  paid  probationary  service 
with  the  District  was  September  5,  2006.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of 
the  District’s  seniority  list  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  9.” 

13. 
Respondent  Jose  Vara  does  contest  his  hire  date,  arguing  that  he 
was  first  hired  as  an  athletic  director  during  the  summer  of  2006.  Even 
if  this  is  accurate,  a  fact  that  the  District  disputes,  Mr.  Vara’s  seniority 
date  would  be  no  sooner  than  July  1,  2006.  Thus,  he  would  remain  the 
most  junior  of  all  of  the  District’s  PE  teachers. 

14. 
Respondent  Jennifer  Rivera’s  first  date  of  paid  probationary 
service  with  the  District  was  September  6,  2005.  (See  “Exhibit  9.”) 

Respondent  Jennifer  Rivera  does  contest  her  hire  date,  arguing 

15. 
that  she  was  first  hired  as  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  during  the 
2004-2005  school  year.  Even  if  this  is  accurate,  a  fact  that  the  District 
disputes,  Ms.  Rivera’s  seniority  date  would  be  no  sooner  than 
September  7,  2004.  Thus,  she  would  remain  the  second-most  junior  of 
the  District’s  PE  teachers. 

Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker’s  first  date  of  paid 
16. 
probationary  service  with  the  District  was  September  10,  1990.  (See 
“Exhibit  9.”) 

17. 
Respondent  Jose  Vara  currently  holds  a  Preliminary  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  PE,  which  is  valid  from  March  18,  2006 
through  April  1,  2011.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  Respondent  Jose 
Vara’s  Preliminary  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  is  attached  as 
“Exhibit  10.” 

 

  

Respondent  Jennifer  Rivera  currently  holds  a  Professional  Clear 
18. 
Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  PE,  which  is  valid  from  June  21, 
2004  through  July  1,  2009.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  Respondent 
Jennifer  Rivera’s  Professional  Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching 
Credential  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  11.” 

@ 

Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  currently  holds  a  Professional 

19. 
Clear  Single  Subject  Teaching  Credential  in  PE,  which  is  valid  from 
September  1,  2004  through  September  1,  2009.  A  true  and  correct 
copy  of  Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker’s  Professional  Clear  Single 
Subject  Teaching  Credential  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  12.” 

In  or  about  May,  2006,  and  May  2007,  the  District  provided 

20. 
certain  certificated  teachers  in  the  District  with  notice  that  “it  is 
mandatory  that  all  teachers  obtain  EL  [English  Learners]  certification 
to  work  in  the  Alhambra  Unified  School  District.”  These  notices  were 
not  sent  to  Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker.  True  and  correct  copies 
of  the  District’s  May  2006  and  May  2007  notices  are  attached  as 
“Exhibit  13.” 

21. 
In  or  about  September  2006,  District  Human  Resources 
Technician,  Anne  M.  Gonzales,  met  with  Respondent  Janice  Abbey 
Parker.  At  Ms.  Parker’s  request,  Ms.  Gonzales  submitted  to  [C]CTC 
[California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing]  the  Application  for 
Credential  Authorizing  Public  School  Service,  for  CLAD  authorization. 
A  true  and  correct  copy  of  the  [sic]  Ms.  Parker’s  Application  for 
Credential  Authorizing  Public  School  Service  is  attached  as  “Exhibit 
14.” 

22. 
On,  [sic]  January  3,  2007,  the  CTC  did  not  issue  Respondent 
Janice  Abbey  Parker  a  CLAD  Certification  and  instead  retuned  [sic] 
her  Application  for  Credential  Authorizing  Public  School  Service  since 
only  courses  in  which  Ms.  Parker  received  a  grade  of  “C”  or  higher, 
“Pass,”  or  “credit”  may  be  used  to  qualify  for  CLAD  Certificate.  A 
true  and  correct  copy  of  the  [C]CTC’s  return  letter  and  Ms.  Parker’s 
transcript  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  15.” 

@ 

On  March  22,  2007,  and  as  a  result  of  the  [C]CTC’s  return  of 

23. 
Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker’s  Application  for  Credential 
Authorizing  Public  School  Service,  the  District  assisted  Ms.  Parker 
with  submitting  an  Application  for  Temporary  County  Certificate.  Ms. 
Parker  sought  a  Temporary  County  Certificate,  effective  September  1, 
2006.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  Ms.  Parker’s  Application  or 
Temporary  County  Certificate  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  16.” 

    

@

  

Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  received  an  Emergency 

24. 
Crosscultural,  Language,  and  Academic  Development  Permit  from 
September  1,  2006  to  October  1,  2007.  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  Ms. 
Parker’s  emergency  CLAD  expiration  is  attached  as  “Exhibit  17.” 

In  or  about  September  2007,  the  Alhambra  Teacher’s 

25. 
Association  (ATA)  issued  its  September  2007  newsbrief.  A  paragraph 
on  the  first  pate  notes  the  impending  CLAD  authorization  deadline, 
stating,  “[flor  those  teachers  who  still  have  not  completed  their 
certification  for  CLAD,  they  need  to  do  so  by  the  end  of  January,  2008. 
If  you  are  not  sure  of  your  status  contact  Anne  Gonzales,  Human 
Resources,  at  308-2232  to  find  out.  Time  is  of  the  essence  and  classes 
are  quickly  filling  up.  Don’t  wait  or  it  will  be  too  late!  Without  the 
CLAD,  you  are  not  certified  to  teach  students  who  are  ELD.  In  our 
district  that  translates  to  loss  of  seniority  and  possibly  your  job.  Good 
luck  and  hurry!”  A  true  and  correct  copy  of  the  ATA’s  September 
2007  newsbrief  is  attached  at  “Exhibit  18.” 

Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  does  not  recall  seeing  ATA’s 

26. 
September  2007  newsbrief. 

The  District  student  body  consists  of  approximately  34%  EL 
27. 
[English  Language  Learner]  students.  Specifically,  the  schools  were 
Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  works,  Fremont  Elementary  and 
William  Northrup  Elementary,  have  29%  and  50%  EL  students 
respectively.  True  and  correct  copies  of  the  District’s  Enrollment 
Summary  and  Language  Census  2008,  are  attached  as  “Exhibit  19.” 

In  or  about  January  2008,  the  District  posted  the  certificated 

28. 
teacher  seniority  list  in  the  teacher’s  lounge  at  each  school  site  within 
the  District.  The  District  instructed  certificated  teachers  to  review  the 
seniority  list  for  possible  errors,  and  report  these  possible  errors  to  the 
District  for  further  review.  Respondents  did  not  notify  the  District  of 
potential  errors  in  the  District  certificated  teacher  seniority  list.  (See 
“Exhibit  9.”) 

2. 

The  May  2006  and  May  2007  notices  (see  Factual  Finding  1,  paragraph  20) 
were  sent  to  teachers  who  had  taken  no  action  to  obtain  CLAD  certification.  At  that  time, 
the  District  had  evidence  that  Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  (Respondent  Parker)  was 
working  on  obtaining  CLAD  certification,  so  she  did  not  receive  these  notices. 

3. 

Every  summer  since  the  summer  of  2000,  the  District’s  English  Language 
Development  Office  has  offered  District  teachers  several  training  courses  to  prepare  for 
Bilingual,  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD)  and  CLAD 
certification  examinations.  Each  summer,  several  of  the  courses  were  offered  at  no  cost  to 

 

  

the  teachers.  Written  notification  regarding  these  training  courses  was  distributed  to  the 
mailboxes  of  all  teachers  in  the  District.  Respondent  Parker  does  not  recall  seeing  the 
written  notification  in  2000,  or  any  similar  notification  in  subsequent  years. 

4, 

On  June  16,  2006,  a  memorandum  was  issued  by  the  District,  and  distributed 

to  the  mailboxes  of  all  teachers  in  the  District,  even  those  who  had  already  obtained  their 
California  Teacher  of  English  Learners  (CTEL)  or  CLAD  certifications.  The  memorandum 
reminded  the  recipients  that  teachers  serving  EL  students  in  California  were  required  to  hold 
certificates  issued  by  the  CCTC  authorizing  them  to  provide  such  specialized  instruction. 
The  memorandum  announced  the  opportunity  to  register  for  a  July  2006  CTEL  Examination 
Preparation  Program.  Respondent  Parker  did  not  see  this  document. 

5. 

In  the  Fall  of  2006,  the  President  of  the  Alhambra  Teachers’  Association  and 

the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  visited  every  District  site,  in- 
cluding  Respondent  Parker’s  two  school  sites,  to  meet  with  teachers  who  did  not  have  CLAD 
certification  and  to  answer  questions  regarding  the  importance  of  obtaining  CLAD  certifica- 
tion.  Respondent  Parker  does  not  recall  these  visits. 

6. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  1,  specifically  PE  instruction,  are 
particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  constituted  a  proper 
exercise  of  discretion. 

7. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  was  related 

solely  to  the  needs  and  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

8. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

9. 

The  District  used  the  Seniority  List  with  seniority  dates  to  develop  a  proposed 

layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  also  considered  each  teacher’s  credentials  and  certifications.  The 
District  determined  that  nobody  less  senior  than  Respondents  was  being  retained  to  render 
services  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

10. 

In  formulating  the  layoff  list,  the  District  decided  to  skip  junior  teachers  with 

CLAD  certification  and  lay  off  more  senior  teachers  without  CLAD  certification. 

11. 

The  credible  testimony  of  Laura  Tellez,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  the 

District  established  the  following: 

(a) 

ACLAD  certificate  is  required  for  teachers  who  work  with  EL  students. 

Teachers  without  CLAD  certification  are  not  trained  in  the  strategies  utilized  in  working  with

  

e@ 

EL  students.  Moreover,  there  is  no  specific  number  of  EL  students  required  in  order  for  the 
teacher  to  need  a  CLAD  certificate.  If  a  class  contains  even  one  EL  student,  the  teacher  must 
have  a  CLAD  certificate  or  he/she  is  not  fully  certified  to  teach  the  class  and  would  be 
considered  “misassigned.”  The  District  has  gotten  documentation  from  the  CCTC  informing 
the  District  that  it  must  inform  parents  when  their  child  is  being  taught  by  teacher  who  is  not 
fully  certified. 

(b) 

EL  students  are  represented  in  every  classroom  in  the  district.  Therefore,  it  is 

impossible  to  place  a  teacher  in  a  class  without  at  least  one  EL  student. 

12. 

Respondent  Janice  Abbey  Parker  (Respondent  Parker)  is  not  currently  CLAD 

certified.  District  demographics  make  it  impossible  to  assign  Respondent  Parker  to  a  PE 
class  that  does  not  have  at  least  one  EL  student.  She  is  therefore  not  fully  certificated  to 
teach  any  PE  class  in  the  District. 

13. 

At  the  administrative  hearing,  the  District  asserted  that  the  sole  issue 

remaining  was  whether  Respondent  Parker  or  Respondent  Jennifer  Rivera  (Respondent 
Rivera)  should  be  laid  off,  since  Respondent  Jose  Vara  was  the  most  junior  of  the  three.  The 
District  maintains  that  Respondent  Parker  is  the  appropriate  person  to  be  laid  off,  due  to  her 
lack  of  CLAD  certification.' 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

@ 

1. 

All  notice  and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met.  (Factual  Finding  1.) 

2. 

The  PE  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  1  are  determined  to  be  particular 

kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  (Factual  Findings  1 
and  6.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44955.  (Factual  Finding  7.) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

[t]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  . 
.  while 
any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority, 
is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certi- 
ficated  and  competent  to  render. 

. 

e@ 

'  Based  on  District  counsel’s  statements  at  the  administrative  hearing,  only  two  of  the 

Respondents  would  be  laid  off,  and  one  would  be  retained. 

   

  

(i---( 

@ 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termi- 
nation  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  allows  the  District  to  devi- 

ate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority,  if  the  District  demonstrates 
that  there  is  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  and 
that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  or  course  of  study  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

6(a). 

Respondent  Parker  submitted  a  copy  of  the  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 

the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567  to  support  her 
assertion  that  she  should  bump  Respondent  Rivera.  The  Delano  case  is  not  applicable  to  the 
case  at  hand.  In  this  case,  unlike  Delano,  the  District  based  its  decision  on  Education  Code 
section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1).  Additionally,  the  facts  of  Delano  are  distinguishable  from 
those  in  this  case. 

6(b)(1).  Delano  involved  the  layoff  of  several  certificated  employees  of  the  Delano 

e@ 

Joint  Union  High  School  District  (Delano  District).  More  than  half  of  the  student  population 
in  the  Delano  District  was  of  either  Hispanic  or  Philippine  descent.  Although  the  Delano 
District  had  established  a  bilingual  education  program,  no  accurate  statistics  were  presented 
at  the  hearing  regarding  the  degree  to  which  students  were  deficient  in  English,  and  there  was 
no  evidence  that  students  with  limited  English  abilities  were  assigned  to  bilingual  teachers. 

6(b)(2).  In  order  to  assist  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  governing  board  for  the  Delano 
District  adopted  tie-breaking  criteria  which  included  “language  needs”  and  “competency.” 
(Id.  at  569.)  Regarding  teachers  with  different  seniority  dates,  the  Delano  District  also 
applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  of  “language  needs,”  contrary  to  its  resolution  to  apply  such 
criteria  only  to  employees  with  the  same  seniority  dates.  The  Delano  District  first  looked  at 
whether  an  employee  had a  certificate  of  competency  in  Spanish.  Then,  for  employees 
without  such  certificates,  the  Delano  District  determined  bilingual  ability  through 
assessments  of  each  employee  made  by  other  bilingual  personnel.  “At  the  hearing,  several 
employees  who  had  received  notices  presented  evidence  that  they  were  bilingual;  as  a  result 
they  were  retained,  even  though  not  assigned  to  teach  courses  in  the  bilingual  program.”  (Id. 
A  mathematics  teacher  with  an  emergency  credential,  at  the  bottom  of  the  seniority 
at  570.) 
list,  was  skipped  because  he  was  bilingual,  and  more  senior  teachers  were  discharged 
because  they  were  not  bilingual.  The  Court  of  Appeal  found  that  this  was  an  abuse  of 
discretion,  holding  that  the  Delano  District  did  not  use  proper  criteria  in  terminating  the 
senior  teachers.

    

6(b)(3).  Citing  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  the  Court  of  Appeal 

. 

.  [referred]  to  retention  of 

noted,  “Teachers  having  the  same  seniority  date  might  properly  be  retained  or  discharged 
depending  upon  their  ability  to  communicate  in  Spanish,  a  generally  applicable  ‘need  of  the 
district  and  students.’””  (Jd.  at  573.)  The  Court  further  noted  that  the  “specific  statutory 
language  applicable  to  teachers  with  different  seniority  dates  . 
senior  permanent  employees  to  render  ‘service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render.’”  (/d.)  The  Delano  Court  pointed  out,  “To  maintain 
the  separate  treatment  of  teachers  with  different  seniority  dates,  we  perceive  the  problem  to 
be  one  of  identifying  ‘competency’  in  a  traditional  manner,  which  is  concerned  with  course 
and  programs  generally  listed  in  job  descriptions  or  course  outlines.  For  example,  within 
physical  education  may  be  found  particular  teaching  requirements  and  competency  which 
could  vary  from  general  sports  to  special  classes  for  handicapped  or  retarded  students. 
[Citation.].”  (/d.  at  574.)  In  focusing  on  program  requirements  in  this  manner,  the  Court 
noted,  “Those  most  often  skipped  in  elementary  schools  are  special  education  teachers, 
teachers  with  bilingual  certificates  or  credentials,  counselors,  speech  therapists,  art  and  music 
teachers,  and  administrators.  ...  [However,]  a  bilingual  machine-shop  instructor  was  not 
entitled  to  preference  over  more  senior  instructors  lacking  bilingual  competency  because 
bilingualism  was  not  a  requirement  for  the  position.”  (/d.,  fn.  2.) 

6(c). 

The  case  at  hand,  unlike  Delano,  involves  the  presence  of  EL  students  in  every 

class  in  the  District,  the  resulting  District-wide  requirement  of  a  CLAD  (or  similar) 
certificate  for  all  teachers,  and  the  numerous  opportunities  afforded  District  teachers  to 
achieve  the  appropriate  certification  and  competency  to  teach  EL  students.  Unlike  Delano, 
where  teachers  without  EL  certification  were  laid  off  even  if  they  did  not  need  EL 
certification  to  teach  their  particular  class,  in  this  case,  a  CLAD  certificate  is  required  to 
teach  every  class  in  the  District,  based  on  the  presence  of  an  EL  student  in  every  class. 
Given  this  distribution  of  EL  students,  the  District  demonstrated  the  need  for  every  teacher  to 
have  CLAD  (or  similar)  certification,  in  order  to  avoid  being  deemed  “misassigned.”  Unlike 
Delano,  in  this  case,  the  CLAD  requirement  is  used  to  determine  if  a  senior  teacher  is 
“certified  and  competent”  to  teach  his/her  class.  Given  the  foregoing,  PE  teachers  need  to 
have  CLAD  (or  similar)  certification  to  teach  PE  classes  in  the  District.  Therefore,  in 
determining  which  PE  teachers  to  retain,  the  District  may  properly  retain  a  junior  teacher 
with  CLAD  certification,  while  terminating  the  services  of  a  senior  teacher  without  CLAD 
certification. 

7. 

Respondent  Rivera  was  hired  after  Respondent  Parker.  The  District 

demonstrated  that  there  was  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  EL  students  in  every  class 
in  the  District  and  that  Respondent  Rivera  had  the  special  training  and  certification  necessary 
to  teach  EL  students  which  Respondent  Parker,  with  more  seniority,  did  not  possess.  More 
specifically,  Respondent  Rivera  had  special  training  and  CLAD  certification  to  teaching  EL 
students  in  any  PE  class  in  the  District.  Given  Respondent  Parker’s  lack  of  CLAD 
certification,  the  evidence  failed  to  establish  that  Respondent  Parker  was  competent  to  fill 
Respondent  Rivera’s  position.  Therefore,  Respondent  Parker  cannot  “bump”  Respondent 
Rivera. 

  

 

  

8. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

perform  any  services  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955  for 

terminating  or  reducing  Respondent  Vara’s  and  Respondent  Parker’s  employment  for  the 
2005-2006  school  year,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  13  and  Legal  Conclusions 
1  through  8. 

ORDERS 

1. 

The  Accusations  served  on  Respondents  Janice  Abbey  Parker  and  Jose 

Vara  are  sustained.  Notice  may  be  given  to  Respondents  Janice  Abbey  Parker  and  Jose 
Vara  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  terminated  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  services  as  indi- 
cated. 

2. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondent  Jennifer  Rivera  is  not  sustained,  and  the 

Accusation  related  to  Respondent  Jennifer  Rivera  is  dismissed. 

Dated:  May  7,  2008 

JULIE  CABOS-OWEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

10 

