@ 

BEFORE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
GOLDEN  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
MADERA  COUNTY 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

DANIEL  ALLAN  and 
JILL  DERKALOUSDIAN, 

OAH  No.  2008031030 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

r 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Madera,  California,  on  April  28,  2008. 

Robert  Walker,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Robert  Piacente,  Legal  Counsel,  Fresno  County  Office  of  Education,  represented  the 

complainant,  Sarah  Koligian,  Superintendent,  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District, 
Madera  County,  California. 

Ernest  H.  Tuttle,  Il,  Attorney  at  Law,'  represented  the  respondents,  Daniel  Allan  and 

Jill  Derkalousdian. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  28,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondents,  Daniel  Allan  and  Jill  Derkalousdian,  are  certificated  district 

employees. 

2. 

Not  later  than  March  15,  2006,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,’  the  superintendent  of  the  school  district  caused  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  and  respondents  to  be  notified  in  writing  that  it  was  recommended  that  respondents 

e 

|  Ermest  H.  Tuttle,  III,  Attorney  at  Law,  750  East  Bullard  Avenue,  Suite  101,  Fresno,  California  93710. 

?  All  references  to  the  Code  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified. 

 

  

be  notified  that  the  district  would  not  require  their  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 
notice  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to 
respondents’  competency. 

3. 

A  notice  was  delivered  to  each  respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by 

depositing  the  notice  in  the  United  States  mail,  registered,  postage  prepaid,  and  addressed  to 
respondent’s  last  known  address. 

4. 

The  notice  advised  each  respondent  of  the  following:  He  or  she  had a  right  to  a 

hearing.  In  order  to  obtain  a  hearing,  he  or  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in 
writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice.  The  request  had  to  be  delivered  by  March  25,  2008, 
which  was  not  less  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served.  And  the 
failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  filed  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 
there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  accusation  was  timely 
served  on  respondents.  Respondents  were  given  notice  that,  if  they  were  going  to  request  a 
hearing,  they  were  required  to  file  a  notice  of  defense  within  five  days  after  being  served 
with  the  accusation.  Respondents  filed  timely  notices  of  defense.  All  prehearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

6. 

The  governing  board  of  the  district  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 

7. 

8. 

The  governing  board  of  the  district  determined  that,  because  particular  kinds 

The  district  is  not  retaining  any  employee  with  less  seniority  than  respondents 

have  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

of  services  are  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued,  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
permanent  employees  in  the  district. 

kinds  of  services.  Within  the  meaning  of  Code  section  44955,  the  services  are  “particular 
kinds  of  services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  recommendation  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of 
discretion. 

     

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  and  to  give  notices  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils. 

notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  All 

Within  the  terms  of  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  district  has  cause  to 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

  

The  district  may  give  notice  to  the  respondents  that  the  district  will  not  require  their 

ORDER 

services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Dated:  May  1,  2008 

ROBERT  WALKER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

