BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ATWATER  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

PATRICIA  STROMING, 

OAH  No.  2008030568 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Robert  Walker,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Atwater,  California,  on  April  24,  2008. 

David  A.  Soldani,  Attorney  at  Law,'  represented  the  complainant,  Melinda  Hennes, 

Superintendent,  Atwater  Elementary  School  District. 

1. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24,  2008. 

PREHEARING  AND  JURISDICTIONAL  REQUIREMENTS 

nutrition  and  wellness.  She  also  teaches  study  skills. 

Ernest  Tuttle,  III,  Attorney  at  Law,”  represented  the  respondent,  Patricia  Stroming. 

Respondent,  Patricia  Stroming,  is  a  certificated  district  employee.  She  teaches 

   

44949  and  44955,°  the  superintendent  of  the  school  district  caused  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  and  respondent  to  be  notified  in  writing  that  it  was  recommended  that  respondent  be 
notified  that  the  district  would  not  require  her  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The 

Not  later  than  March  15,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections 

'  David  A.  Soldani,  Attorney  at  Law,  5776  Stoneridge  Mall,  Suite  200,  Pleasanton,  California  94588. 

?  Emest  Tuttle,  III,  Attorney  at  Law,  750  East  Bullard  Avenue,  Suite  101,  Fresno,  California  93710. 

*  All  references  to  the  Code  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  specified. 

2. 

notice  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendation  was  not  related  to 
respondent’s  competency. 

3. 

A  notice  was  delivered  to  respondent,  either  by  personal  delivery  or  by 

depositing  the  notice  in  the  United  States  mail,  registered,  postage  prepaid,  and  addressed  to 
respondent’s  last  known  address. 

4. 

The  notice  advised  respondent  of  the  following:  She  had a  right  to  a  hearing. 

In  order  to  obtain  a  hearing,  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person 
sending  the  notice.  The  request  had  to  be  delivered  by  March  21,  2008,  which  was  not  less 
than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served.  And  the  failure  to  request  a 
hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to  determine  whether 

there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  accusation  was  timely 
served  on  respondent.  Respondent  was  given  notice  that,  if  she  was  going  to  request  a 
hearing,  she  was  required  to  file  a  notice  of  defense  within  five  days  after  being  served  with 
the  accusation.  Respondent  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  were  met. 

6. 

The  governing  board  resolved  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 

services.  Within  the  meaning  of  Code  section  44955,  the  services  are  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
these  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

7. 

The  governing  board  resolved  to  discontinue  one  full  time  equivalent  nutrition 

and  wellness  teacher. 

8. 

The  governing  board  determined  that,  because  particular  kinds  of  services  are 

to  be  reduced  or  discontinued,  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent 
employees  in  the  district. 

RESPONDENT'S  CONTENTION  THAT  THE  DISTRICT  MAY  NOT  TERMINATE  HER  WHILE  RETAINING  A 
TEACHER  WITH  LESS  SENIORITY  TO  TEACH  STUDY  SKILLS 

9. 

The  district  has  failed  the  national  indicator  for  language  arts  and  mathematics. 

As  part  of  an  improvement  program,  the  district  agreed  to  provide  “intervention”  classes  for 
students  who  have  low  scores  in  core  subjects.  The  intervention  classes  are  commonly 
referred  to  as  “study  skills”  classes.  Teachers  can  teach  study  skills  without  any  particular 
credential  or  competency.  The  teacher  assists  students  with  whatever  subjects  the  students 
need  help.  The  teacher  communicates  with  the  regular  subject-matter  teachers  regarding  the 
students  and  whatever  transpires  in  the  study  skills  class. 

10. 

Also  as  part  of  the  district’s  improvement  program,  the  district  agreed  to 

change  language  arts  and  mathematics  classes  to  double-period  classes. 

  

 

' 

@ 

11. 

There  are  seven  periods  in  a  day.  Thus,  language  arts  and  mathematics 

teachers  have  three  classes  a  day  —  each  lasting  two  periods.  Some  of  them,  in  order  to  fill 
out  their  full-time  positions,  teach  one  period  of  study  skills. 

12. 

This  year  the  district  has  11  study  skills  classes.  Because  there  is  not  a  large 
demand  for  nutrition  and  wellness  classes,  respondent  teaches  three  sessions  of  study  skills. 
An  industrial  technology  teacher  also  teaches  three  sessions  of  study  skills  because  there  is 
not  a  large  demand  for  industrial  technology  classes.  The  remaining  five  study  skills  classes 
are  taught  by  language  arts  or  mathematics  teachers. 

The  district  intends  to  have  11  study  skills  classes  again  next  year. 

There  was  no  evidence  as  to  whether  the  industrial  technology  teacher  has  less 

seniority  than  respondent  has.  All  of  the  language  arts  and  mathematics  teachers  who  teach 
study  skills  have  less  seniority  than  respondent  has. 

13. 

14. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  All 

notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

e@ 

2. 

By  reason  of  the  matters  set  forth  in  Findings  1,  9,  and  12,  it  is  determined  that 

respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  study  skills. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  prohibits  the  district  from 

terminating  respondent’s  services  while  retaining  an  employee  with  less  seniority  to  render  a 
service  that  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  The  district  may  not 
terminate  respondent  while  retaining  people  with  less  seniority  to  teach  study  skills. 

4. 

If  there  will  be  at  least  seven  periods  of  study  skills  that  are  not  to  be  taught  by 
people  who  have  more  seniority  than  respondent  has,  she  has a  right  to  be  retained  full  time. 
If  there  will  be  between  one  and  six  periods  of  study  skills  that  are  not  to  be  taught  by  people 
who  have  more  seniority  than  respondent  has,  she  has a  right  to  be  retained  part  time. 

 

The  district  shall  not  terminate  the  services  of  Patricia  Stroming  while  any  other 

employee  with  less  seniority  is  retained  to  teach  study  skills. 

ORDER 

e@ 

Dated:  April  30,  2008 

ROBERT  WALKER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

