BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
UKIAH  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

OAH  No.  2008030959 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

JESSICA  BROWN,  SHARON  CREW, 
DENISE  DOERING,  CHRIS  DOUTHIT, 
AARON  FORD,  BOYD  GRIMSHAW, 
DIANE  JOHNSON,  KRISTINE  KANEY, 
LESLIE  LIND,  LINDA  LOGAN, 
CARMEN  MATUS,  DARRIN  MICHAELS, 
BRET  MORTON,  DAVID  SPAIN, 
BOBBY  TAYLOR,  TAMI  TURNER, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  21,  2008,  within  a  conference  room  of  the  Mendocino  County  Office  of 
Education  at  2240  Old  River  Road,  Ukiah,  California,  Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative 
Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Margaret  M.  Merchat,  Associate  General  Counsel,  School  and  College  Legal 

Services  of  California,  5350  Skylane  Boulevard,  Santa  Rosa,  California  95403, 
represented  Dr.  Lois  Nash,  Superintendent,  Ukiah  Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  726  College  Avenue,  Santa  Rosa,  California 
95404,  represented  respondents  in  this  matter.  All  respondents  were  present,  except  for 
Jessica  Brown,  who  was  represented  by  Mr.  Allen.  (Complainant’s  motion  for  an  order 
under  Government  Code  section  11520  to  treat  Jessica  Brown  as  being  in  default,  and 
thereby  to  cause  her  exclusion  from  the  proceeding,  was  denied.) 

On  April  21,  2008,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

1. 

On  or  before  March  6,  2008,  the  District’s  Superintendent  presented  the 
District’s  Governing  Board  with  a  recommendation  that  the  District  grant  authority  to 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

-1- 

  

 

re 

the  Superintendent  to  give  notice  that  particular  kinds of  services,  then  offered  through 
the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2008-2009). 

@ 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

District  Resolution  No.  23,  2007-08,  which  adopted  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation. 

2. 

The  resolution  recites  that  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or 
to  discontinue,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year,  particular  kinds 
of  services  in  the  form  of  22.76  FTE  (full  time  equivalent)  certificated  positions  as 
follows: 

High  School  Services 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.8  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.4  FTE 

Social  Studies 
English 
Math 
Spanish 
French  (one  period) 
Science 
Journalism  (one  period) 
Drivers’  Education  (one  period) 
Health  (one  period) 
Creative  Writing  (one  period) 
Intramural  (one  period) 
Excel  (four  periods) 
Jewelry  (one  period) 
Ceramics  (one  period) 
ICE  (In-School  Suspension  Instructional  Services) 

1.0  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 
0.2  FTE 

(two  periods) 

Certificated  Dean  Services 
High  School  Chorus  (one  period) 
High  School  Band  (one  period) 
High  School  Guitar  (one  period) 

9.4FTE 

Subtotal 

Elementary  School  Services 

4.5FTE 

Subtotal 

1.5  FTE 
3.0  FTE 

Elementary  Music  instructional  services 
Elementary  Instruction 

-2- 

@ 

 

Other  Services 
1.0  FTE 
0.5  FTE 

Counselor  II  Services 
SPACE  (Independent  Study) 

: 

1.5  FTE  —  Subtotal 

Continuation  High  School 
0.14  FTE 
0.14  FTE 
0.14  FTE 
0.14  FTE 
0.14  FTE 
0.28  FTE 

0.98'  FTE  Subtotal 

Science  (one  period) 
World  History  (one  period) 
Math  (one  period) 
PE  (one  period) 
Ag  Science  (one  period) 
English  (two  periods) 

Special  Education 

1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

SH  Instructional  Services 
RSP  Instructional  Services 

2.0FTE  —  Subtotal 

Middle  School  Instructional  Services 

34  FTE 
-17  FTE 
34  FTE 
.17  FTE 
-17  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.17  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

P.E.  (two  periods) 
English/Language  Arts  (one  period) 
Math  (two  periods) 
Science  (one  period) 
Social  Studies  (one  period) 
English  Language  Development  Instructional  Services 
Careers  and  Technology  (7  periods) 
Math  (6  periods) 

4.36  FTE 

Subtotal 

The  grand  total  equals  22.747  FTE  as  the  designated  teacher  positions  selected 
for  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  as  provided  by  the  District’s  certificated 
employees  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school year. 

. 

  

'  The  resolution  sets  out  under  “Continuation  High  School:”  “Total  instructional  periods  = 

1.0  FTE.” 

*  The  resolution  prescribes  a total of full-time  equivalent  employee  positions  to  be 

eliminated  or  reduced  to  stand  at  22.76.

  

  

3, 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  12,  2008,  the  District’s  Superintendent 

dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to 
discontinue  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice. 
Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction of  the  particular  Kind  of  service 
now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not 
reemploy  the  named  individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  that  each  had  respectively 
worked. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  12,  2008,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  District’s 
resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  a  right  to  file 
a  request  for  hearing  “to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  [the  named 
respondent]  in  the  ensuing  school  year.” 

4. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  District’s 

Superintendent  and  the  District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the 
District’s  Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  courses  as  taught  by  respondents. 

5. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

6. 

On  April  3,  2008,  the  District’s  Superintendent,  through  her  designee, 
signed  the  accusation,  which  included  an  attachment  (marked  as  “Exhibit  B”  to  the 
document)  that  listed  the  names  of  27  individuals,  including  the  16  respondents  herein. 
Then  the  District’s  Superintendent,  through  her  designee,  timely  served  upon  each 
respondent  the  Accusation  and  related  documents.  Each  respondent  filed  timely  an 
executed  Notice  of  Defense. 

7. 

8. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

Mr.  Bryan  Barrett,  in  his  capacity  as  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent 

for  Personnel  (Human  Resources)  and  Student  Services,  appeared  at  the  hearing.  He 
provided  competent,  credible  and  persuasive  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

The  prospective  elimination of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s  quest 
for  a  balanced  budget.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable 
budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Governing 
Board  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  funds. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted a resolution  that  identified  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  next  year  as  a  means  to  handle  the  pressing  financial 
difficulties  faced  by  the  District. 

a 

e@ 

e 

 

9. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Barrett  further  established  that  upon  learning 

that  the  District  was  required  to  initiate  layoff  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the 
District,  the  assistant  superintendent  with  his  staff  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to 
develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers.  He  caused  news  to  be 
disseminated  among  certificated  employees  of  the  District  regarding  the  existence  of  a 
draft  of  the  seniority  list  so  that  each  employee  could  exercise  an  opportunity  to  verify 
the  accuracy  of  the  data  that  pertained  to  each  certificated  employee.  And  Assistant 
Superintendent  Barrett  required  each  certificated  teacher  to  confirm  the  credential  or 
credentials  held  by  the  teacher. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Barrett  accurately  attended  to  identifying  the  District’s 
teachers  who  were  properly  designated  as  temporary-employee  teachers.  He  studied  and 
set  forth  on  the  District’s  2007-2008  seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or 
first  date  of  paid  service  for  all  teachers  to  the  District, 

The  Superintendent,  with  the  aid  of  Assistant  Superintendent  Barrett, 
recommended  that  the  District  eliminate  22.76  (or  22.74)  full-time  equivalent  positions 
for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  decision  was  reached  through  the  study  and  analysis 
of  a  variety  of  professional  personnel  in  consultation  with  the  Superintendent. 

10. 

Before  March  6,  2008,  the  Superintendent’s  office  established  criteria  for 

11. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  District  adopted  Resolution  25,  2007-08, 

regarding  criteria  in  establishing  which  certificated  employees  would  be  exempt  from 
the  order of  layoff,  which  was  otherwise  called  the  District’s  “skipping”  methodology. 

tie-breaking  mechanism  for  teachers  who  had  same  dates  of  paid  service  to  the  District  so 
as  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the  year  2008-2009.  On  March  6,  2008,  the 
Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  22,  2007-08  that  sets  forth  criteria  for  tie-breaking  for 
contests  regarding  seniority  where  teachers  had  identical  first  days  of  paid  service  to  the 
District.  The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  were  grounded  upon  purely  objective  criteria 
to  address  pressing  needs  of  the  District.  The  system  developed  in  executing  tie-breaking 
criteria  involved  a  point  system  that  weighed  ten  categories  that  measured  employees 
hired  respectively  on  August  26,  2003;  August  24,  2004;  August  23,  2005;  and 
August  22,  2006. 

    

Ms.  Ornelas  is  employed  by  the  District  as  the  Executive  Assistant  to  the 
Superintendent  and  the  Governing  Board.  In  the  past  she  acted  as  administrative 
assistant  in  the  District’s  Personnel  Department.

Ms.  Debbie  Ornelas  (Ms.  Ornelas)  offered  evidence  in  support  of 

Complainant. 

12. 

Ms,  Ornelas  participated  in  aiding  the  Superintendent  to  develop  the  District’s 
current  “2007-08  Certificated  [Employees]  Seniority  Report  [with]  Credentials.”  She 
became  familiar  with  the  teaching  assignments  of  teachers  with  the  District  through  her 
work  of  monitoring  assignments  of  teachers. 

Ms.  Ornelas  described  the  methods  used  by  Complainant  in  applying  in  a 

consistent  and  rational  fashion  the  tie-breaking  criteria  in  determining  the  order  of 
termination  among  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  paid  service  to  the 
District.  Ms.  Ornelas  offered  persuasive  evidence  regarding  the  distribution  of  points 
to  various  teachers  based  upon  analysis  of  such  person’s  record  of  credentials  and 
certificates. 

Ms.  Ornelas  further  offered  compelling  evidence  regarding  the  District’s 
objective  development,  and  execution,  of  criteria  to  determine  certificated  personnel 
whom  the  District  seeks  to  exempt  from  the  order  of  layoff  by  reason  of  credentials, 
competence,  or  experience  in  the  process  called  “skipping.”  Ms.  Ornelas  showed  that 
the  District’s  criteria  were  reasonably  applied  in  all  instances  germane  to  the  hearing  in 
this  matter. 

Application  of  Tie-Breaking  Criteria  as  Among  Various  Teachers 

a. 

Bobby  Taylor  versus  Pilar  Crooks 

13. 

For  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District  rationally  implemented  a 

Resolution  Number  25,  2007-2008  specifies,  among  other  things: 

mechanism  for  determination  of  whether  to  retain  either  the  services  of  Mr.  Bobby 
Taylor  or  the  services  of  Ms.  Pilar  Crooks,  who  both  possess a first  date  of  paid  service 
to  the  District  of  August  22,  2006.  Each  teacher  is  a  high  school  teacher  and  holds  a 
multiple  subject  credential.  Each  holds  a  CLAD  and  other  credentials  identified  as 
“CC/Lang/Acad/Dev/cert.”  In  its  execution  of  a  tie-breaking  formula  as  between 
Ms.  Crooks  and  Mr.  Taylor,  the  District  will  retain  the  services  of  Mr.  Bobby  Taylor 
who  has  conversational  Spanish  skills  that  enables  him  to  communicate  with  Spanish 
speaking  students  and  parents. 

-6-    

The  Board  of  Trustees  finds  that  to  make  effective... 
employment  decisions,  objective  criteria  must  be  established. 
This  will  ensure  that  District  and  its  students  are  treated  fairly 
and  equitably.  To  this  end,  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its 
students  will  be  best  served  by  using  the  following  criteria  in 
establishing  which  certificated  employees  will  be  exempt 
from  the  order  of  layoff:  ...  d.  Certificated  personnel  who 
possess  conversational  Spanish  skills  that  are  used  in  the 
course  of  their  work  day  to  assist  students  and  families.  . 

. 

. 

The  District  is  reasonable  in  its  determination  that  Mr.  Bobby  Taylor  has  such 
competency  in  speaking  conversational  Spanish  that  he  may  be  retained  as  a  District 
certificated  employee  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  while  Ms.  Pilar  Crooks  may  be  given 
a final  notice  of  the  District’s  administrative  action  for  the  reduction  of  its  certificated 
personnel  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

b. 

Chris  Douthit  versus  David  Spain 

14, 

In  contemplation  of  a  prospective  retention  of  a  teacher  for  the  provision 

of  instruction  in  English  at  the  high  school  level  during  the  coming  school  year,  the 
District  has  applied  tie-breaking  criteria  as  between  to  Mr.  Chris  Douthit  and  Mr. David 
Spain.  Each  of  the  certificated  employees  occupies a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the 
District  of  August  22,  2006. 

The  District’s  use  of  its  point  distribution  tie-breaking  scheme  reasonably 

resulted  in  five  points  being  ascribed  to  Mr.  Douthit,  while  eight  points  were  granted 
to  Mr.  Spain.  Mr.  Spain’s  points  exceed  the  points  of  Mr.  Douthit  for  the  purpose  of 
retaining  teacher  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  District  is  reasonable  in  its  determination  that  Mr.  Spain  has  such 
competency  in  amassing  points  under  tie-breaking  criteria  that  he  may  be  retained  in 
an  English  teacher’s  position  at  the  high  school  while  Mr.  Douthit  may  be  given  final 
document  of  the  layoff  action  that  impacts  him. 

: 

15. 

Ms.  Jessica  Brown  versus  Ms.  Tami  Turner 

District’s  Exercise  of Skipping  Procedures  after  Application  of  Tie-Breaking 

In  the  area  of  teachers  who  are  competent  to  instruct  in  chemistry,  two 
teachers  were  affected  by  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  namely  Jessica  Brown  and  Tami 
Turner.  Each  teacher  has a  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  23,  2005. 
Ms.  Brown  has a  single  subject  credential  in  geosciences,  while  Ms.  Turner  has  a  single 
subject  credential  in  biological  sciences.  Although  both  teachers  earned  seven  points  on 
the  tie-breaking  point  system,  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  views  Ms.  Turner  as 
being  more  competent  to  teach  chemistry  in  the  District  during  the  ensuing  year  as 
opposed  to  Ms.  Brown. 

    

Despite  her  credential  in  biological  sciences,  Ms.  Turner  has  taught  chemistry  to 

student  of  the  District  within  three  years. 

-7-

Resolution  No.  25,  2007-2008  specifies,  among  other  things: 

) 

. 

. 

The  Board of Trustees  finds  that  to  make  effective . 
employment  decisions,  objective  criteria  must  be  established. 
This  will  ensure  that  District  and  its  students  are  treated  fairly 
and  equitably.  To  this  end,  the  needs of the  District  and  its 
students  will  be  best  served  by  using  the  following  criteria  in 
establishing  which  certificated  employees  will  be  exempt 
from  the  order  of  layoff:  ...  f.  Certificated  personnel  who 
have  actual  and  recent  experience  (within  3  years)  in  teaching 
the  particular  skill  or  domain  within  a  broad  subject  area  and 
the  skill/domain  is  a  service  being  retained  by  the  District. 

The  District  is  reasonable  in  its  determination  that  Ms.  Turner  has  such 
competency  in  teaching  chemistry  that  she  may  be  retained  while  Ms.  Brown  may  be 
given a final  notice  of  the  District’s  administrative  action  for  the  reduction  of  its 
certificated  personnel  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Reasonable  Basis  to  Skip  a  Choral/Voice  Teacher 

16. 

The  vocal  music  teacher  for  the  District’s  high  school  is  Ms.  Denise 

Doering,  who  has  a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  23,  2005.  Among 
other  things  she  teaches  chorus,  but  her  position  is  to  be  reduced  by  0.2  FTE  from  a 
current  level  of  1.0  FTE.  The  District  plans  to  retain  Ms.  Doering  for  the  next  year  to 
teach  0.8  FTE  in  high  school  chorus  due  to  her  education,  training,  and  experience  in 
teaching  chorus  and  vocal  lessons  that  demonstrate  her  competency  in  that  academic 
area. 

e 

Resolution  No.  25,  2007-2008  specifies,  among  other  things: 

The  Board  of  Trustees  finds  that  to  make  effective  ..  . 
employment  decisions,  objective  criteria  must  be  established. 
This  will  ensure  that  District  and  its  students  are  treated  fairly 
and  equitably.  To  this  end,  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its 
students  will’be  best  served  by  using  the  following  criteria  in 
establishing  which  certificated  employees  will  be  exempt 
f.  Certificated  personnel  who 
. 
from  the  order  of  layoff:  . 
have  actual  and  recent  experience  (within  3  years)  in  teaching 
the  particular  skill  or  domain  within  a  broad  subject  area  and 
the  skill/domain  is  a  service  being  retained  by  the  District. 

. 

Currently,  Ms.  Doering  teaches  vocal  lessons  and  chorus  at  both  the  high  school 

and  middle  school  level.  But,  there  are  respondent  music  teachers  who  are  subject  to 
the  layoff  and  who  are  more  senior  than  Ms.  Doering.  Those  other  music  teachers,  who 

  

-8-

e 

ae 

  

have  greater  seniority  than  Ms.  Doering  but  are  subject  to  the  layoff  action,  are  Mr.  Boyd 
Grimshaw,  Ms.  Leslie  Lind,  and  Mr.  Darrin  Michaels. 

Also,  he  teaches  one  period of  high  school  band  that  amounts  to  a  0.2  FTE 

Mr.  Grimshaw  has a first  date of paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  29,  2000. 
For  the  present  school  year,  Mr.  Grimshaw  teaches  in  a  0.6  FTE  of  high  school  teacher 
position. 
position.  During  this  year,  Mr.  Grimshaw  possesses  a  0.4  FTE  position  in  the  provision 
of  services  for  the  ICE  (In-School  Suspension  Instructional  Services)  program:  All  of 
those  positions  are  to  be  eliminated.  Mr.  Grimshaw  has  a  single  subject  credential  in 
music;  but,  he  has  never  taught  chorus  for  the  District, 

Ms.  Leslie  Lind  is  another  music  teacher,  who  has  a  higher  position  on  the 

District’s  seniority  list  than  Ms.  Doering.  Ms.  Lind  has a first  day  of  paid  service  of 
August  21,  1997.  She  has  a  single  subject  credential  in  music,  and  she  teaches  at  the 
sixth  grade  of  the  elementary  school  level  on  a  district-wide  basis.  However,  there  is  no 
evidence  that  she  is  competent  to  teach  vocal  or  choral  music. 

Mr.  Darrin  Michaels  has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  31, 

1995.  He  holds  a single  subject  credential  in  music,  and  he  serves  as  middle  school 
teacher  at  Pomolita  Middle  School.  However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  is  competent 
to  teach  vocal  or  choral  music. 

17. 

Ennis  James  Willeford  offered  evidence  on  behalf  of  Complainant. 

Mr.  Willeford  is  employed  by  the  District  as  principal  of  Ukiah  High  School.  He 
holds  an  “administrator’s  clear”  credential  and  a  teacher’s  credential  in  music.  (He  taught 
music  for  14  years  before  becoming  an  administrator.) 

Mr.  Willeford  persuasively  opined  that  teaching  vocal  music  necessitates  a 

teacher  to  possess  particular  experience,  education  and  training  that  are  not  held  by  a 
teacher  of  only  instrumental  music. 

Mr.  Willeford  established  that  Ms.  Doering  has  a  master’s  degree  in  music 
education.  And,  Ms.  Doering  has  taught  vocal  music  at  the  college  level  as  well  as  the 
high  school  level  for  many  years. 

Mr.  Willeford  provided  credible  evidence  that  Ms.  Doering  currently  teaches,  in  a 

highly  commendable  manner,  the  choirs  at  the  District’s  high  school. 

And  Mr.  Willeford  acknowledged  that  the  District  will  offer  a  reduced  scope  of 
vocal  music  at  the  high  school  during  the  coming  school  year.  The  principal  for  Ukiah 
High  School  noted  that  although  both  Ms.  Docring  and  Mr.  Grimshaw  hold  a  credential 
to  teach  music,  Ms.  Doering  has  competency  based  upon  her  experience,  training  and 
knowledge  that  Mr.  Grimshaw  lacks  to  competently  teach  vocal  music  at  the  high  school 

-9- 

  

   

  

level  because  he  has  neither  taught  vocal  music  to  students  of  the  District  nor  taught  any 
vocal  or  choral  music  to  any  student  within  the  recent  past,  that  is  within  three  years. 

And,  he  observes  that  Mr.  Grimshaw  teaches  guitar  at  the  high  school  level  under 
a  single  subject  credential  in  music.  A  reasonable  inference  is  drawn  from  the  evidence 
presented  by  Mr.  Willeford  that  he  has  a  view  that  Mr.  Grimshaw  is  not  competent  to 
teach  vocal  music. 

Mr.  Willeford  has  never  observed  either  Mr.  Michaels  or  Ms.  Lind  teach  vocal 

music. 

18. 

Ms.  Ornelas,  the  Superintendent’s  Executive  Assistant,  established  that 

Ms.  Lind  has  never  taught  vocal  music  at  the  District’s  high  school.  Ms.  Ornelas 
expressed  her  personal  knowledge  that  Mr.  Grimshaw  has  not  taught  vocal  music  in 
any  teaching  assignments  with  the  District.  And,  Ms.  Ornelas  showed  that  Mr. Michaels 
has  not  taught  vocal  music  at  the  District’s  high  school. 

19. 

The  Superintendent,  or  her  designee,  was  reasonable  in  her  determination 

that  three  teachers,  who  have  higher  placement  on  the  seniority  list  than  Ms.  Doering, 
do  not  possess  her  competency  to  teach  high  school  chorus.  The  Superintendent,  or  her 
designee,  reasonably  determined  that  Ms.  Doering  has  particularly  keen  expertise  in 
teaching  vocal  music,  while  three  other  music  teachers,  although  senior  to  Ms.  Doering, 
have  not  shown  the  District  evidence  of  having  such  experience  or  qualification  as  to 
establish  competency  to  teach  vocal  music.  Hence,  there  is  sufficient  reason  to  warrant 
the  District  exercising  its  “skipping”  prerogative  to  retain  Ms.  Doering  while  the  layoff 
action  may  operate  against  the  three  other  music  teachers. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

20. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  proposed  action  is  procedurally 

defective  and  improper  insofar  as  the  application of tie-breaking  criteria  for  the  purpose 
of  rating  those  certificated  employees  who  share  identical  first-date-of-paid  service  in 
probationary  positions  with  the  District.  Respondents  assert  that  the  prospective  layoff 
of  the  subject  credentialed  respondents,  as  well  as  teachers  deemed  to  be  temporary, 
does  not  fully  account  for  future  standing  of  recently  hired  teachers  on  the  District’s 
prospective  seniority  list. 

On  the  matter  of  tie-breaking  criteria,  Respondents  contend  that  the  resolution 
promulgated  by  the  Governing  Board  is  misleading  or  fatally  ambiguous  as  the  criteria 
assigns  points  for  credentials  for  certain  “hard  to  find”  positions  or  program services 
and  then  gives  points  for  credentials  to  teach  “in  a  particular  program  of  need”  by  the 
District. 

-10- 

   

Also  Respondents  contend  that  the  Governing  Board  has  “over-noticed”  for 
layoff  a  number  of  music  teachers  whose  services  should  be  retained,  And  respondents 
contend  that  the  District  is  not  acting  lawfully  by  retaining  the  services  next  year  of 
Ms.  Doering,  who  is  a  music  teacher,  although  she  has a junior  position  on  the  District's 
seniority  list  as  measured  against  three  other  music  teachers,  namely  Mr.  Grimshaw, 
Ms.  Lind  and  Mr.  Michaels. 

Respondents  aver  that  the  District  incorrectly  applied  or  ranked  seniority  dates 

for  certain  respondents  who  actually  shared  the  same  date  of  first  paid  service  to  the 
District.  Respondents  argue  that  ten  teachers,  who  have  August  22,  2006,  asthe  first 
date  of  paid  service,  were  not  afforded  due  process  protections  when  the  District  failed 
to  timely  circulate  or  widely  broadcast  tie-breaking  criteria  for  review  and  input  from 
the  affected  teachers. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  prospective  layoff  of  credentialed 
teachers  is  unlawful  because  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  services  falls  below  a 
minimum  mandated  array  of  services  allowed  by  law. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District  employs  a  number  of  certificated  teachers 
in  categorically  funded  positions  and  that  those  teachers,  in  being  improperly  classified 
by  the  District  as  temporary  employees,  have  been  summarily  terminated  without 
due  process  of  law  in  violation of principles  highlighted  in  Bakersfield  Elementary 
Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260, 
1287.  Respondents’  argument  further  advances  that  the  exclusion  from  the proceeding 
of  about  12  teachers,  who  are  supposedly  deemed  as  temporary  employees,  distorts  the 
District’s  seniority  list  relative  to  the  named  respondents  so  as  to  render  the  entire 
layoff  action  fatally  flawed  as  being  arbitrary  and  capricious.  Respondents  also  aver 
that  such  exclusion  of  teachers  designated  as  temporary  interferes  with  a  fair  process 
for  prospective  application  of  the  rehiring  order  of  teachers  who  are  subject  to  layoff 
action. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are rejected. 

Teachers  in  Categorically  Funded  Programs  and  Teachers  Classified  as  Temporary 
Employees 

21. 

Complainant,  through  Assistant  Superintendent  Barrett,  demonstrated  that 

the  Districts  determination  regarding  the  classification  of  individual  teachers  as  being 
temporary  certificated  employees,  although  about  a  dozen of  those  individuals  performed 
work  in  categorically  funded  programs,  was  lawful  and  correct. 

  

-ll- 

 

  

Individual  Respondents 

evidence  at  the  hearing. 

22. 

Respondent  Boyd  Evans  Grimshaw,  Jr.  (Respondent  Grimshaw)  offered 

Respondent  Grimshaw  is  employed  by  the  District  at  Ukiah  High  School  as  a 

music  teacher  and.as  an  ICE  (in-school  suspension)  supervising teacher. 

Since  August  2000,  which  marked  his  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 

Respondent  Grimshaw  has  taught  music.  During  the  current  school  year,  he  teaches  one 
guitar  class,  two  concert  band  classes  and  two  periods  of  ICE.  In  the  past, Respondent 
But,  Respondent  Grimshaw  has  never  taught 
Grimshaw  has  taught  jazz  band  classes. 
classes  involving  vocal  music  or  a  chorus  class  over  the  eight  school  years  that  the 
District  has  employed  him  as  a  teacher. 

Respondent  Grimshaw  noted  that  his  clear  credential  “came  through”  during  the 

past  year,  namely  2007.  (He  held  a  credential,  which  dated  to  1998,  in  the  State  of 
Nevada  in  music  for  students  in  “K  through  12.”  In  Nevada,  he  taught  vocal  music 
over  four  semesters  at  the  high  school  level.) 

However,  Respondent  Grimshaw  provided  insufficient,  credible  evidence  that 

the  District  has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Grimshaw  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Grimshaw  establish 
that  the  Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action 
that  adversely  affects  his  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

23. 

Respondent  Christopher  Douthit  (Respondent  Douthit)  provided  evidence 

at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

The  District  employs  Respondent  Douthit  as  an  English  teacher  at  Ukiah  High 

School.  He  has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  of  August  22,  2006.  He 
holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  English. 

However,  Respondent  Douthit  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 

has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Douthit  possesses  a  credential 
and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Douthit  establish  that  the 
Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that 
adversely  affects  his  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

24, 

Respondent  Linda  Logan  (Respondent  Logan)  offered  evidence  at  the 

hearing  of  this  matter. 

-12- 

  

 

Respondent  Logan  is  employed  by  the  District  at  Frank  Zeek  Elementary  School. 
She  is  an  ELD  teacher  as  she  provides  instruction  in  the  English  language  to  “non-native 
speakers.”  Respondent  Logan  is  a  part-time  teacher  as  she  holds  a  0.4  FTE  position. 

Respondent  Logan  holds a  life  special  studies  specialist  credential  as  a  reading 

specialist  as  well  as  a  life  standard  elementary  credential  of  self-contained  subjects 
instruction  with  emphasis  in  social  science.  And  Respondent  Logan  possesses  a 
certificate  in  staff  development.  She  is  capable  of  offering  subjects  under  the 
“SDAIE/ELD”  authorization. 

Respondent  Logan  has a  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  22, 
2006.  For  the  current  school  year,  she  holds  the  0.40  FTE  position  as  a  “categorically 
funded”  resource  teacher  at  the  Frank  Zeek  School.  She  operates  on  a  “pull-out” 
arrangement  whereby  she  pulls  students  from  other  classrooms  to  provide  instruction 
as  she  does  not  have a  fixed  group of students  who  are  assigned  to  her. 

However,  Respondent  Logan  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 

has  retained  any teacher  junior 
currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Logan  establish  that  the  Superintendent 
committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that  adversely  affects  her 
teacher  position  with  the  District. 

to  her  for  which  Ms.  Logan  possesses  a  credential  and  is 

25. 

Respondent  Sharon  Lou  Crew  (Respondent  Crew)  provided  evidence  at 

the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

The  District  employs  Respondent  Crew  in  its  ELD  program  at  Frank  Zeek 
Elementary  School.  She  currently  works  in  a  0.4  FTE  position,  which  she  has  had 
since  December  6,  2006. 

Respondent  Crew  persuasively  offered  that  her  correct  first  date  of  paid  service 

to  the  District  is  December  6,  2006,  rather  than  December  16,  2006,  as  shown  on  the 
District’s  Seniority  List.  But,  on  cross-examination,  Respondent  Crew  noted  that  she 
had  “signed  off”  on  the  information  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  when  a  draft  was 
circulated  among  teachers;  however,  when  she  examined  her  personal  records  she 
telephoned  the  District’s  office  to  ask  for  a  change  to  the  seniority  list.  Respondent 
Crew  acknowledged  that  correcting  her  seniority  date  would  not  bestow  on  her  an 
ability  to  bump  any  person  who  might be  junior  to  her  on  the  seniority  list  whose 
services  are  being  retained  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Respondent  Crew  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has  retained 

any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Crew  possesses a  credential  and  is  currently 
competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Crew  establish  that  the  Superintendent 
committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  layoff  action  that  adversely  affects 
her  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

-13- 

  

 

  

The  District's  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

e 

26. 

For  the  respondent  certificated  teachers  subject  to  the  layoff  action,  no 

competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of  the  proposed  elimination 
of  the  full-time  equivalent  positions  the  District  will  retain  any  teacher  who is  junior 
to  such  affected  respondents  to  perform  services  for  which  respondents  have  been 
certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach  in  such  FTE  positions  that  are  subject  to 
elimination  or  reduction  for  the  next  school  year. 

27. 

The  recommendation  by  the  District’s  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s 

decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  a  total  of  22.76  FTE  positions,  including  the 
positions  held  by  respondents  who  are  affected,  were  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious. 
Rather,  Complainant’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s  decision  were  within  the 
proper  exercise of the  District’s  discretion. 

28. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of a number  of  FTE 

positions,  including  the  positions  respectively  held  by  most of  the  respondents,  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  overall  student 
population. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44944  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

e@ 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44944  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  |  through  7,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or 

official  duties  of a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 
regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
District  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the 
non-reemployment  of  respondents. 

4. 

San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627 

establishes  that  a  school  district  need  not  consider  positively  assured  attrition  that  occurs 
between  the  date  of  issuance  of  the  preliminary  notice  of a  Board  determination  that 
certificated  employees  not  be  reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  by  reason  of a 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  date  for  dispatch of  the  final  notice  that 
determines  the  number  of  certificated  employees  that  are  to  be  terminated.  “In  PKS  cases 
the  determination of  the  amount  by  which a  service  is  to  be  reduced  is  the  determination 
of  the  number  of  positions  to  be  eliminated.”  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra, 
144  Cal.App.3d  at  636.) 

-14- 

 

e 

  

At  the  hearing,  Complainant  offered  evidence  that  the  District  has  received  19 
or  more  letters  from  certificated  teachers  who  plan  to  retire  from  employment  for  the 
ensuing  year.  Complainant  provided  evidence  regarding  the  District’s  needs  to  identify 
junior  teachers,  who  are  named  as  respondents  herein,  as  certificated  employees  who 
may  be  offered  contracts  in  being  retained  for  the  ensuing  year. 

5. 

Among  other  things,  Complainant  noted  that  music  teacher  Ms.  Doering 

has  competency  that  prompted  the  Superintendent  to  recommend  retaining  her  rather 
than  three  other  music  teachers  who  have  earlier  first  date  of  service  (Mr.  Grimshaw, 
Ms.  Lind  and  Mr.  Michaels)  because  Ms.  Doering  has  experience,  training  and  skills  that 
establish  her  competency  as  a  vocal  lesson  or  chorus  teacher. 

The  Superintendent,  or  her  designees,  reasonably  employed  skipping  procedures 

by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  11,  12,  and  16  through  19. 

6. 

As  to  the  tie-breaking  formula,  the  Superintendent  concluded  that  due  to 

Mr.  Bobby  Taylor’s  competency  to  engage  in  conversational  Spanish,  the  Superintendent 
recommends  under  a  tie-breaking  analysis  that  Mr.  Taylor  offers  the  District  the  ability  for 
greater  service  to  the  District’s  mission  than  Ms.  Pilar  Crooks.  And,  the  Superintendent 
was  reasonable  in  her  use of tie-breaking  to  determine  that  Mr.  David  Spain  has 
competency  that  Mr.  Douthit  lacks. 

7. 

With  the  retirement  of  a  teacher  of  chemistry,  the  Superintendent 

criteria  resolution  by  reason  of  Factual  Findings  12  through  15  inclusive. 

The  Superintendent,  or  her  designees,  rationally  implemented  the  tie-breaking 

applied  its  tie-breaking  criteria  as  to  two  teachers  of  sciences  classes  that  were  subject  to 
reduction.  After  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied,  the  subject  teachers  had  the  same 
number  of  points.  The  Superintendent  was  compelled  to  assess  which  of  the  two  teachers 
had  the  requisite  competency  to  teach  chemistry.  Ms.  Tami  Turner,  a  biology  teacher, 
who  has  actual  and  recent  experience  in  teaching  chemistry,  has  competency  in  that 
subject.  The  Superintendent  reasonably  determined  that  Ms.  Turner  may  be  retained 
rather  than  Ms.  Jessica  Brown,  a  teacher  of  geoscience,  who  may  be  given  final  notice 
of  her  layoff. 

    

Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  the  District  is  not  required  to  consider  positively  assured 
attrition  through  the  dates  statutorily  required  for  the  execution  of  the  teacher  layoff 
administrative  actions.  The  District  may  exercise  prudence  in  marshalling  its  limited 
financial  resources  in  making  a  determination  for  the  retaining  of  important  teacher 
resources.  Hence,  the  District  is  not  engaged  in  an  unlawful  exercise  of  “over  noticing” 
layoffs  of  certificated  employees. 

As  Complainant  advanced  in  its  reasonable  interpretation  of  San  Jose 

-15-

8. 

  

Ruling  on  Respondents’  Motion  to  Dismiss  Accusation  of  Certain  Certificated  English 
Teachers 

r ) 

9. 

In  their  motion  for  dismissal  of  the  accusation  herein,  Respondents  cite 

Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006) 
145  Cal.App.4th  1260,  1287.  The  argument  was  made  that  the  District’s  failure  to 
include  35  certificated  teachers  who  occupy  positions  as  temporary  employees, 
especially  those  in  categorically  funded  programs,  was  unlawful.  But,  respondents 
did  not  offer  adequate  evidence  that  the  District  erred  in  designating  certain  teachers  as 
temporary  employees.  Moreover,  teachers,  who  are  classified  as  temporary  employees, 
have  no  standing  in  the  instant  proceeding.  As  Complainant  noted,  should  any  teacher 
who  was  not  included  in  the  instant  layoff  action  have  further  grievance  in  being 
designated  as  a  “temporary”  employee,  such  individual  has  recourse  to  an  action  in 
the  California  Superior  Court. 

Respondents*  motion  to  dismiss  the  accusation  on  the  ground  that  certain 

temporary  teachers  were  excluded  from  the  hearing  process  is  denied,  by  reason  of 
Factual  Finding  21. 

Ultimate  Determinations 

10. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44944  and  44955,  cause  exists  for 

the  District  to  eliminate  or  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  year  where 
such  services  are  now  offered  in  District  schools.  And  cause  exists  to  give  certain 
respondents  notice  that  for  the  ensuing  school  year  they  will  not  be  reemployed  to 
provide  services  now  rendered  by  such  respondents.  These  determinations  are  made 
by  reason of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  8  to  12  inclusive,  26  and  27. 

e@ 

11. 

The  discontinuation  of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by 

each  respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in 
Factual  Finding  28. 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondents  David  Spain,  Bobby 

Taylor,  Tami  Turner,  and  Denise  Doering. 

2. 

‘The  final  notice  may  be  given  to  Jessica  Brown,  Sharon  Crew, 

Chris  Douthit,  Aaron  Ford,  Boyd  Grimshaw,  Diane  Johnson,  Kristine  Kaney,  Leslie 
Lind,  Linda  Logan,  Carmen  Matus,  Darrin  Michaels,  and  Bret  Morton,  that  their 
respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

ORDER 

-16- 

q 

 

  

e@ 

December  6,  2006. 

3. 

Respondent  Sharon  Lou  Crew  is  granted  a  date  on  the  seniority  list  of 

DATED:  May  6,  2008 

PERRY  O.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

-17- 

