BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  CURTIS  CREEK  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  TUOLUMNE 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  for 
Reduction  in  Services  from  1.0  FTE  to  .14 
FTE  Against: 

KEN  HUBEL, a full-time  certificated 
employee, 

Respondent. 

OAH  No.  2008030025 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Office  of  Administrative 

Merv  Cancio. 

Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  1,  2008,  in  Sonora, 
California. 

Respondent  Ken  Hubel  represented  himself,  with  assistance  from  teacher 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  presented.  After  the  parties’  closing 

Curtis  Creek  School  District  was  represented  by  Byron  C.  Smith  of  the  Law 

arguments,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April 
1,  2008. 

Office  of  Byron  C.  Smith.  District  superintendent  Britta  Skavdahl  was  present  on  the 
District’s  behalf. 

    

District  (District).  Ms.  Skavdahl’s  actions  and  the  actions  of  the  District  Governing 
Board  (Board)  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

grade  students  at  its  two  campuses:  Curtis  Creek  (K-8)  and  Sullivan  Creek  (K-5).

  

The  District  serves  approximately  650  kindergarten  (K)  through  eighth 

Britta  Skavdahl  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Curtis  Creek  School 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

2. 

1. 

The  Sullivan  campus  also  houses  the  District’s  Community  Day  School  (CDS),  which 
is  an  alternative  school,  and  two  state-funded  preschools. 

e@ 

3. 

Respondent  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  who  was  hired  by  the 

District  as  a  math  and  computer  science  teacher  on  August  25,  1997.  Respondent  is 
the  least  senior  of  the  District’s  two  math  teachers. 

During  his  11  years  as  a  District  employee,  respondent  has  typically  taught  in 
the  seventh  and  eighth  grades.  In  the  2007-2008  school  year,  respondent  taught  three 
periods  of  sixth  grade  math,  one  period  of  teacher  preparation  (prep),  and  three  partial 
periods  of  “computers/physical  education.”  During  his  tenure  at  the  District, 
respondent  has  made  himself  available  for  other  assignments  according  to  the 
District’s  needs.  Respondent  taught  courses  in  basic  skills  and  art,  and  he  taught  for 
three  years  at  the  District’s  Community  Day  School. 

4. 

On  February  22,  2008,  the  District  served  respondent  with  a  written 

statement  which  advised  him  it  had  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  him, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  his  services  would  be 
reduced  or  not  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and  that  an  Accusation  to  this 
effect  would  be  filed  with  the  Board  on  March  11,  2008.  A  copy  of  the  Accusation 
with  required  accompanying  documents  and  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense,  was  served 
on  respondent. 

@ 

On  February  28,  2008,  respondent  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  Accusation 

and  filed  his  notice  of  defense. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2008,  at  a  regular  meeting,  the  Board  was  given  notice  of 

the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  certificated  employees  holding  a  total  of 
9.13  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be 
reduced  or  not  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that 
recommendation.  On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  2007-2008-15 
to  this  effect. 

6. 

On  March  13,  2008,  the  Superintendent  served  respondent  with  a 

second  revised  preliminary  notice  of  reduction  in  services  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44949  and  44955.  Respondent  was  advised  of  the  Board’s  Resolution  for  the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  at  the  end  of  the  school  year,  and  that 
his  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  would  be  reduced  from  1.0  FTE  to  .14 
FTE.  Respondent  was  notified  that,  in  reducing  his  services,  the  Board  was 
“skipping”  a  less  senior  certificated  employee  because  respondent  did  not  have  the 
requisite  credential  or  certificate  necessary  to  bump a less  senior  certificated 

 

employee.  Respondent  was  advised  of  his  right  to  request  a  hearing.  There  is  no 
dispute  that  respondent  timely  requested  a  hearing.  ! 

Resolution  to  Reduce  Particular  Kinds  of Services  (PKS): 

7. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to 

reduce  and/or  eliminate  programs  and  services  and  that  it  was  therefore  necessary  to 
reduce  teaching  services  affecting  the  employment  of  9.13  FTE  positions.  The 
District  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-2008-15,  which  provided  for 
the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  PKS: 

Services  or  Programs” 

Equivalent  Positions 

Elementary  Level  Teaching  Services  [1  Vacancy]  4.0 

FTE 

Title  I 

Math 

Computer  Science 

Full-Time  Teacher’s  Prep  Period 

Spanish  [Categorically  funded] 

Physical  Education 

History/Social  Studies 

English  Language  Blocks 

10 

43 

29 

.14. 

-14 

14 

14. 

14 

-14. 

.29 

FTE 

FTE  [3  Sections] 

FTE  [2  sections] 

FTE  [1  section] 

FTE  [1  section] 

FTE  [I  section] 

FTE  [1  section] 

FTE  [2  sections] 

Classroom  Music  [Categorically  funded] 

FTE  [I  section] 

Science  [Classification  Correction] 

1.29 

FTE  [9  sections] 

Yearbook  [Classification  Correction] 

FTE[I  section]  . 

Fine  Arts  [Vacant] 

57 

FTE  [4  sections] 

"In  addition  to  respondent,  the  District  gave  layoff  notices  to  six  certificated  staff  members.  The  District 
also  eliminated  the  position  of  its  Superintendent  Ms.  Skavdahl  and  its  business  manager,  Ms.  Blessing. 

?  The  vacancies  in  the  PKS  services  to  be  reduced  were  due  to  the  retirements  of  two  teachers:  Ms. 
McPeeters  (fine  arts,  primary  music,  drama)  and  Ms.  Emmons  (1  FTE  elementary  teacher).  Ms.  Skavdahl 
testified  that  the  District  has  not  been  advised  of  any  further  attrition  since  March  15,  2008.

  

  

“SPrimary  Music  [Vacant] 

Drama  [Vacant] 

Band 

CDS 

-14 

14. 

FTE[I  section] 

FTE  [I  section] 

14. 

FTE  [1  section] 

[Change  in  the  Manner  the 
Service  is  Provided] 

The  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  these  PKS  was  made  after 
considering  financial  reports  and  information  regarding  the  District’s  current  and 
projected  income  from  state  and  federal  sources  and  its  expenditures  for  the  current 
school  year  and  the  next  two  school  years.  The  reduction  in  PKS  was  necessary  to 
reduce  costs  and  to  address  a  loss  of  revenue  that  places  the  District  at  risk  of  fiscal 
oversight/intervention  by  the  County  Office  of  Education  if  the  layoffs  do  not  occur. 

8. 

The  Resolution  provided  that  due  to  a  reduction  in  one  of  the  District’s 

Junior  High  School  services,  the  District  is  reducing  the  services  of  a  more  senior 
certificated  employee  while  retaining  the  services of  a  less  junior  employee  because 
the  more  senior  certificated  employee  does  not  have  the  credentials  or  competency  to 
bump  a  junior  employee.  The  Resolution  did  not  define  “competency.”? 

9. 

PKS  Staff Reduction  at  Curtis  Creek:  The  Board’s  resolution  was 

based  upon  recommendations  made  by  Superintendent  Skavdahl,  who  began  working 
with  the  District  in  July  of  2007.  Shortly  after  her  arrival,  Ms.  Skavdahl  became 
aware  of  the  District’s  budget  problems.  After  reviewing  the  staffing  ratios  in  the 
District’s  seventh  and  eighth  grades  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  Ms.  Skavdahl 
concluded  that  these  grades  could  be  staffed  by  the  standard  ratio  of  one  teacher  to 
thirty  students.  As  a  consequence,  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  were  overstaffed  by 
two  teachers.  Ms.  Skavdahl  concluded  that  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students 
for  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  could  be  met  in  the  2008-2009  school  year  by  four 
rather  than  six  FTE  teachers. 

During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  sixth  grade  teaching  services  were 
provided  in  a  departmental  (subject-based)  approach.  Ms.  Skavdahl  concluded  that 
the  District  would  still  need  two  teachers  for  the  sixth  grade  in  the  2008-2009  school 
year;  however,  the  manner  of  providing  these  services  was  changed  from  a 
departmental  model  to  a  self-contained  classroom  model.  A  multiple  subject 
credential  is  required  to  teach  a  self-contained  classroom. 

*  The  Board  previously  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-2008  -9,  a  tie  breaker  resolution  with  criteria 
applicable  only  for  ranking  seniority  between  employees  with  the  same  dates  of  initial  paid  service  with  the 
District. 

 

  

10. 

Change  in  Manner  of Providing  Service  at  CDS:  The  District  also 

determined  it  was  the  best  interest  of  itself  and  its  students  to  change  the  manner  of 
providing  services  in  its  CDS  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  Board’s  Resolution 
did  not  describe  the  specific  manner  of  change  in  services  to  be  provided  at  the  CDS. 

During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  the  CDS  was  a  combined  seventh-eighth 

grade,  self-contained  classroom  taught  by  a  single  teacher  with  a  multiple  subject 
credential  (S.  Keefe:  8/25/97).  For  the  2008-2009  school  year,  the  District  changed 
the  manner  of  delivering  services  in  the  CDS  from a  self-contained  classroom  model 
to  a  departmental  model.  Ms.  Skavdahl  articulated  two  reasons  for  this  change.  First, 
the  single  teacher  at  the  CDS  was  very  isolated  on  the  K-5  campus  and  she  believed 
this  was  detrimental  to  the  needs  of  the  District.  Second,  the  CDS  was  intended  to  be 
a  temporary,  alternative  educational  placement  from  which  students  would  be  able  to 
reenter  the  regular  educational  program  (mainstream)  at  Curtis  Creek.  To  ensure  that 
students  could  return  to  the  mainstream,  the  District  changed  its  CDC  curriculum  to 
dovetail  with  that  at  Curtis  Creek,  and  determined  it  was  necessary  to  provide 
specialist  teachers.  Teachers  will  be  assigned  to  CDS  classes  in  areas  according  to 
their  seniority  and  credential.  In  particular,  Ms.  Skavdahl  emphasized  the  need  for 
CDS  students  to  be  able  to  meet  regular  math  standards.  For  this  reason,  the  District 
added  a  special  CDS  math  class  which  respondent  will  teach  in  2008-2009. 

ll. 

Teaching  Assignments for  2008-2009  school  year:  As  of  the  date  of 

12, 

Asaresult  of  the  Board’s  resolution,  respondent’s  FTE  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  has  been  reduced  from a  full  time  position  (1  FTE)  to  teaching  one 
math  class  (.14  FTE)  at  the  CDS.’  Ms.  Skavdahl  testified  that  this  is  the  “worst  case 
scenario,”  and  that  the  District  would  offer  respondent  any  additional  classes  for 
which  he  is  credentialed  and  competent  if  they  become  available  next  year. 

the  hearing,  the  District  had  not  finalized  its  teaching  assignments  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  A  tentative  class  schedule  that  included  CDS  classes  was  prepared  by 
Ms.  Skavdahl  and  reviewed  by  District  teaching  staff.  The  schedule  has  not  been 
finalized,  in  part,  because  the  District  is  involved  in  pending  negotiations  with  the 
teachers’  union. 

    

eighth  grade  math  at  Curtis  Creek  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  These  two  sections 
of  math  were  previously  taught  by  respondent.  During  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
Mr.  Parker  will  teach  all  sixth  through  eighth  grade  math  classes  at  Curtis  (six 
classes).  It  is  undisputed  that  Mr.  Parker  has  more  seniority  than  respondent  (date  of 
first  paid  service  in  1991).  The  District  has  no  obligation  to  reassign  Mr.  Parker  to 
enable  respondent  to  retain  additional  classes.  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College 
District  (1987)  196  Cal.  App.  3d  555,  568-9.)  Consequently,  the  District 

|  Math:  The  Board’s  resolution  eliminated  .29  FTE  in  sixth  through 

4A  FTE  of  .14  is  given  for  a  subject  that  is  taught  one  period  a  day,  five  days  a  week.

13. 

  

appropriately  implemented  the  reduction  of  FTE  in  math  in  the  inverse  order  of 
seniority  by  reducing  respondent’s  FTE,  as  the  less  senior  math  teacher. 

14. 

Respondent’s  Teaching  Authorization:  Respondent  holds a  clear  single 

subject  teaching  credential  in  mathematics,  with  a  supplementary  authorization  to 
teach  photography.  As  a  holder  of  a  single  subject  math  teaching  credential, 
respondent  may  teach  grades  twelve  and  below,  including  preschool,  and  in  classes 
organized  primarily  for  adults.  With  this  credential,  respondent  may  be  assigned  to 
teach  any  of  the  following  subjects:  basic  or  general  mathematics,  algebra,  calculus, 
computer  science,  consumer  mathematics,  geometry,  mathematical  analysis,  statistics 
and  probability,  and  trigonometry.  (Educ.  Code  §  35160,  subd.  (a)(9).)  A  teacher 
with  a  single  subject  credential  based  on  a  baccalaureate  degree  and  a  teacher 
preparation  program  may  be  assigned,  with  his  or  her  consent,  to  teach  subject-matter 
classes  which  do  not  fall  within  or  are  not  directly  related  to  the  broad  subject  areas 
listed,  including,  but  are  not  limited  to,  life  skills,  conflict  management,  study  skills, 
leadership,  teen  skills,  and  study  hall.  (Educ.Code  §  35160,  subd.  (b).) 

15. 

Respondent  does  not  have  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  and 
cannot  teach a  self-contained  class  at  Curtis  Creek  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
Respondent  has  passed  only  one  of  the  three  subtests  of  the  California  Subject 
Examination  for  Teachers  (CSET),  passage  of  which  is  necessary  to  obtain  a  multiple 
subject  credential.  In  December  2007,  months  prior  to  implementing  the  layoff, 
Superintendent  Skavdahl  encouraged  respondent  to  complete  the  CSET  and  obtain  his 
multiple  subject  credential  to  avoid  any  layoff  or  reduction  in  his  services.  Without  a 
multiple  subject  credential,  respondent  was  informed  that  he  would  be  likely  to  be 
laid  off.  Respondent  indicated  he  would  complete  the  credential;  however,  in 
February  2008,  he  advised  Ms.  Skavdahl  that  he  had  decided  not  to  pursue  a  multiple 
subject  credential.  Respondent  testified  that  he  did  not  feel  qualified  to  teach 
elementary-aged  school  children,  and  he  could  not  get  an  assurance  from  the  District 
self  contained  class  for  sixth  graders  if  he  had  a  multiple 
that  he  would  be  placed  in a 
subject  credential. 

Respondent’s  argument  that  the  District  should  have  applied  for  a  waiver  on 
his  behalf  to  authorize  him  to  continue  teaching  at  Curtis  Creek  pending  completion 
of  his  multiple  subject  credential  is  without  merit.  As  indicated  in  Education  Code 
sections  44225,  subdivision  (m),  and  44225.7,  subdivision  (a),  the  granting  of  a 
waiver  for  a  teaching  credential  is  within  the  discretion  of  both  the  District  and  the 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentials  (Commission).  It  is  also  conditioned  on  specific 
findings  by  the  Commission,  and  requires  the  passage  of  a  resolution  by  the  Board 
that  it  has  made  reasonable  efforts  to  recruit  a  fully  prepared  teacher  for  the 
assignment. 

   

  

Furthermore,  respondent  was  aware  that  he  was  at  great  risk  of  layoff  due  to 

his  lack  of  a  multiple  subject  credential;  however,  he  took  no  action  to  request  such  a 
waiver  from  the  District  and/or  Commission.*  In  making  its  layoff  decisions  for 
reduction  in  services,  the  District  is  entitled  to  rely  on  respondent’s  credentials  as  of 
March  15,  2008.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.,  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal. 
App.3d  796,  814-5.) 

Did  the  District  Appropriately  Skip  Less  Senior  Teachers  at  Curtis  Creek? 

16. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  layoffs  must  take  place  in 

the  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  has  the  burden  to  prove,  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence,  that  its  decision  to  layoff  or  reduce  the  services  of  a 
more  senior  teacher,  while  retaining  the  services  of  a  less  senior  teacher,  is 
appropriate.  In  pertinent  part,  the  statute  provides  that: 

(b) 
...  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services 
of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions 
of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other 
employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which 
said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

(W.-- [9 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate 
from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either 
of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study,  . 
,  and  that  the  certificated 
. 
employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach 
that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

. 

" 

(2) 
For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 
constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated  employees  face 

layoffs  due  to  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS,  the  District  has  an  affirmative 
obligation  to  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held 
by  junior  teachers,  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to 
occupy  such  positions.  The  intent  of  the  Legislation  is  clearly  to  prevent  school 

*  Under  Education  Code  section  44225,  individual  applicants  may  also  request  a  waiver  from  the 
Commission. 

  

   

  

districts  from  reducing  or  eliminating  the  services  of  senior  teachers  while  retaining 
junior  teachers.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse 
of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed...  The  governing 
board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a 
manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service 
which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render. 
However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated 
employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously 
taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential 
or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require 
the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the 
appropriate  subject. 

17. 

Self-Contained  Class:  Respondent  taught  sixth  grade  during  the  2007- 
2008  school  year.  With  the  retirement  of  sixth  grade  teacher  Ms.  Spizak,  respondent 
hoped  to  continue  teaching  sixth  grade. 

As  a  result  of  the  reduction  of 1  FTE  in  Title  I  teaching  services,  former  Title  I 
teacher  Beth  Mcllroy  was  assigned  to  teach  a  self-contained  K-  6th  grade  class  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  Ms.  Mcllroy’s  first  day  of  paid  service  with  the  District  was 
August  26,  1998;  consequently,  she  has  one  year  less  seniority  than  respondent. 
Unlike  respondent,  however,  Ms.  McIlroy  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  which 
authorizes  her  to  teach  in  a  self-contained  classroom.  Consequently,  the  District 
appropriately  retained  (“skipped”)  a  more  junior  employee,  Ms.  Mcllroy,  to  teach 
self-contained  classes  that  respondent,  although  a  more  senior  teacher,  is  not 
certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

18. 

Computer  Science/Physical  Education  (PE):  During  the  2007-2008 
school  year,  respondent  taught  three  class  periods  of  computer  science/PE  a  week. 
Within  those  periods,  respondent’s  students  had  a  computer  science  class  with 
alternating  days  dedicated  to  PE  instruction.  The  Board’s  resolution  eliminated 
respondent’s  three  sections  (.43  FTE)  of  computer  science  for  the  2008-2009  school 
Asa  result  of  this  PKS  reduction,  each  teacher  will  be  responsible  for 
year. 
incorporating  computer  science  into  their  class  curriculum.  Individual  computer 
classes  are  a  PKS  that  the  District  may  appropriately  eliminate  and  implementation  of 
this  reduction  did  not  involve  the  skipping  of  any  less  senior  employee  over 
respondent. 

The  Resolution  also  reduced  .14  FTE  in  PE.  While  respondent  taught  PE  for 

most  of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  he  does  not  have  a  credential  in  PE.  In  late 
February  2008,  Ms.  Skavdahl  became  aware  that  respondent  did  not  have  a  PE 
credential  and  had  been  incorrectly  assigned  to  teach  three  partial  sections  of  PE.  On 

 

March  14,  2008,  Ms.  Skavdahl  reassigned  respondent’s  PE  students  to  the  class  roster 
of  Paul  Mcllroy,  who  has a  single  subject  credential  in  PE.  Respondent  was  then 
authorized  to  implement  PE  activities  planned  and  supervised  by  Mr.  Mcllroy  for  the 
balance  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  Mr.  Mcllroy’s  first  day  of  paid  service  with 
the  District  was  August  26,  1998;  consequently,  he  has  one  year  less  seniority  than 
respondent.  However,  respondent  does  not  have  the  credential  necessary  to  teach  PE 
classes  at  Curtis  Creek.  As  a  result,  the  District  appropriately  retained  a  more  junior 
employee,  Mr.  Mcllroy,  to  teach  PE  classes  at  Curtis  Creek  that  respondent  is  not 
certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

19. 

Teacher  Prep:  During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  respondent  taught 

one  section  (.14  FTE)  of  teacher  preparation  period.  The  Governing  Board’s 
resolution  eliminated  one  section  (.14)  FTE  of  teacher  preparation  period  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  This  reduction  was  effectuated  by  having  all  teacher 
preparation  periods  at  the  end  of  the  day  in  a  similar  manner  as  in  K-3.  This  action 
allows  more  time  for  teachers  to  interact  across  all  grade  levels  and  results  in  cost 
savings  for  the  District  of  approximately  1  FTE.  This  change  is  currently  under 
negotiation  with  the  teacher’s  union. 

Did  the  District  Appropriately  Skip  Less  Senior  Teachers  at  the  CDS? 

20. 

|  Once  he  was  aware  of  his  potential  layoff,  respondent  asked  Ms. 

Skavdahl  if  he  could  teach  at  the  CDS  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  but  was  told  he 
could  not  do  so.  He  was  later  offered  a  single  .14  FTE  math  class  at  the  CDS. 

To  avoid  the  reduction  of  his  services,  respondent  prepared  various  alternative 

teaching  assignments  for  2008-2009  school  year  for  junior  high  school  certificated 
staff  at  Curtis  and  the  CDS.  Ms.  Skavdahl  testified  that  she  reviewed  those 
assignments  and  did  not  find  them  to  be  appropriate  alternatives  in  light  of 
respondent’s  current  credential  and  the  District’s  needs.  Respondent  may  be  asked  to 
teach  an  elective  for  an  additional  .14  FTE  during  the  2008-2009  school  year; 
however,  this  will  not  be  determined  until  the  schedule  is  finalized  following  the 
conclusion  of  union  negotiations. 

21. 

By  virtue  of  his  single  subject  credential,  respondent  is  also  authorized 

to  teach  in  the  District’s  CDS,  an  alternative  school,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
section  44865,  which  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  a  “valid  teaching  credential 
issued  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  the  Commission  for  Teacher  Preparation 
and  Licensing,  based  on  a  bachelor’s  degree,  student  teaching,  and  special  fitness  to 
perform,  shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for  assignment  as  a  teacher  in  the  following 
assignments,  provided  that  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  to  a  position  for  which 
qualifications  are  prescribed  by  this  section  shall  be  made  only  with  the  consent  of  the 
teacher:  ... 

.”  Respondent  consents  to  such  assignment. 

(f)  Alternative  schools.  . 

  

 

22. 

The  District  may  change  the  manner  of  providing  services  at  the  CDS 

e@ 

from  a  self-contained  class  to  a  specific  subject  model  taught  by  multiple  teachers. 
However,  as  articulated  by  Ms.  Skavdahl,  the  District’s  change  in  the  manner  of 
providing  services  at  the  CDS  contemplates  the  assignment  of  certificated  staff  in  a 
manner  that  is  contrary  to  Education  Code  sections  44955  and  44865.  The  District 
cannot  reduce  respondent’s  FTE,  while  retaining  less  senior  teachers  at  the  CDS,  by 
requiring  that  he  hold  subject  specific  crédentials  for  CDS  classes  he  is  competent  to 
teach. 

The  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of  proof  that  respondent’s  FTE  should  be 

reduced  while  it  retains  less  senior  employees  to  teach  distinct  classes  in  the  CSD. 
For  example,  PE  teacher  Paul  Mcllroy,  who  has  one  year  less  seniority  than 
respondent,  is  tentatively  assigned  to  teach  one  session  (.14  FTE)  of  CDS  PE. 
Respondent  has  more  seniority  than  Mr.  Mcllroy.  In  addition,  respondent  has 
experience  in  teaching  PE  throughout  the  2007-2008  school  year,  and  he  did  so 
competently  and  with  the  District’s  consent.  A  PE  credential  is  not  required  to  teach 
CDS  PE;  accordingly,  respondent  is  competent  and  credentialed  to  teach  CDS  PE  and 
the  District  cannot  skip  Mr.  Mcllroy  for  this  .14  FTE.  In  addition,  Carol  Smith  has  a 
single  subject  credential  in  social  science  with  a  supplementary  authorization  in 
English.  Ms.  Smith  is  scheduled  to  provide  an  elective  at  the  CDS  for  .14  FTE. 
Respondent  has  more  seniority  than  Ms.  Smith,  whose  initial  date  of  paid  service  with 
the  District  was  on  January  6,  2003.  Respondent  has  taught  electives  and  the  District 
cannot  skip  Ms.  Smith  for  this  .14  FTE. 

Moreover,  respondent’s  undisputed  testimony  established  that  he  taught  at  the 

District’s  CDS  for  three  years.  It  was  during  this  time  period  that  respondent  took 
and  passed  the  CSET  subtest  that  covered  reading,  language/literature,  history  and 
social  science.  Respondent  undertook  and  passed  this  examination  at  the  request  of 
the  CDS  principal  to  enable  him  to  better  teach  these  subjects  at  the  CDS.  No 
evidence  was  offered  that  respondent  is  not  competent  to  teach  these  subjects  at  the 
CDS.  The  District  has  approved  of  his  competence  to  do  so  in  the  past  and 
respondent  has  extensive  experience  teaching  the  CDS  population.  Nevertheless, 
these  subjects  are  currently  assigned  to  Alice  Leonardo  (first  paid  service:  September 
1,  1979),  a  teacher  who  is  more  senior  than  respondent.  If  Ms.  Leonardo’s  CDS 
assignment  is  changed;  however,  the  District  must  assign  respondent  to  these  classes 
before  it  assigns  them  to  a  less  senior  teacher. 

23. 

In  summary,  the  District  has  met  its  burden  of  proof  regarding  the 

reduction  of  respondent’s  FTE  at  Curtis  Creek  due  to  his  seniority  and  lack  of 
appropriate  credentialing.  However,  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
provide  an  additional  .28  FTE  in  PE  and  electives  at  the  CDS  that  are  currently 
assigned  to  less  senior  teachers  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  With  his  currently 

kK 

10 

e@ 

e@ 

| 

 

  

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  6,  all  notice  and 

jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  44944  and  44945 
were  met.  The  notices  sent  to  respondent  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the 
reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  him  due 
process.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The 
description  of  services  to  be  reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices, 
adequately  describe  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

2. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular 

kind  of  service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another 
manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571;  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Goleta  Union  School  Dist.  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.)  A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  the 
statute  either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all 
or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services. 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole 
as  a  whole,  and  particularly  in  Factual  Findings  7  through  10,  the  services  identified 
in  Resolution  No.  2007-208-15  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
these  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  was  a  proper  exercise  of 
its  discretion,  and  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

4. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole 

as  a  whole,  and  particularly  in  Factual  Findings  16  through  19  and  23,  the  District  has 
established  that  no  employee  junior  to  respondent  is  being  retained  to  perform  the 
services  at  Curtis  Creek  which  respondent  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 
Accordingly,  cause  exists  to  reduce  respondent’s  FTE  to  the  extent  that  it  is 
attributable  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  PKS  at  Curtis  Creek. 

5. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  and  particularly  in  Factual 
Findings  16  and  20  through  23,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to  reassign 
senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers,  if 
the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions. 
The  District  may  not  skip  less  senior  teachers  by  assigning  them  to  teach  classes  at 
the  CDS  that  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach.  Accordingly,  the 
reduction  in  respondent’s  FTE  is  modified  from  the  recommended  reduction  (from  1 
FTE  to  .14  FTE)  to  a  reduction  from  1  FTE  to  .42  FTE.  As  set  forth  in  Factual 

11 

 

  

  

Finding  22,  the  District  is  obligated  to  increase  respondent’s  FTE  consistent  with  this 
decision  after  the  finalization  of  the  2008-2009  teaching  assignments. 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Ken  Hubel  that  his  services  will  be  reduced 

from  1.0  FTE  to  .42  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Respondent’s  .42  FTE  is  subject  to 
increase  as  outlined  in  Order  No.  2. 

2. 

No  certificated  employees  junior  to  respondent  shall  be  retained  to 
teach  classes  in  the  Community  Day  School  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The 
District  shall  assign  respondent  to  teach  any  classes  in  the  Community  Day  School 
not  taught  by  teachers  with  more  seniority,  with  a  corresponding  increase  in  FTE. 

DATED:  May  1,  2008 

      

ariwn  A.  Woollard 

Adghinistrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 
  

12 

