  

BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
UPPER  LAKE  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

STEVE  KESLING, 

OAH  No.  2008020552 

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  15,  2008,  in  Lakeport,  California. 

John  A.  Drummond,  Schools  Attorney,  Lake  County  Office  of  Education,  represented 

the  Upper  Lake  Union  High  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Steve  Kesling,  who  was 

present. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  15,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Pat  Iaccino  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as 

Superintendent  of the  Upper  Lake  Union  High  School  District. 

Respondent  Steve  Kesling  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  district. 

2. 

3. 

On  February  27,  2008,  the  district’s  Board  of  Trustees  adopted  Resolution  No. 

02-08-02  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  superintendent  to  give 
appropriate  notices  to  certificated  employees  whose  positions  will  be  affected  by  the  action. 

4. 

On  or  about  February  28,  2008,  Superintendent  Iaccino  gave  written  notice  to 
six  certificated  employees,  including  respondent,  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services 
will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

5. 

Respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine if  there  is  cause  for 
terminating  his  services  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  (The  other  five  employees  did  not  file

  

  

  

requests  for  hearing.)  An  accusation  was  served  on  respondent,  and  he  filed  a  timely  notice 
of  defense.  All  prehearing jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

The  board  took  action  to  reduce  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for 

the  2008-09  school  year: 

Services 
3  periods  of  Beginning  Woodshop 
2  periods  of  ROP  Woodshop 
3  periods  of  World  History 
3  periods  of  Health 
5  periods  of  Spanish 
4  periods  of  Earth  Science 
1  period  of  Chemistry 
4  periods  of  English 
5  periods  of  counseling 

: 

FTE!  Reduction 

0.6 
0.4 
0.6 
0.6 
1.0 
0.8 
0.2 
0.8 
1.0 

7. 

Respondent  holds  a  Life  Standard  Secondary  —  Industrial  Arts  (Academic) 

teaching  credential.  and  he  teaches  the  three  periods  of  Beginning  Woodshop  and  two  periods 
of  ROP  Woodshop  that  will  be  eliminated  next  year.  He  believes  the  classes  he  teaches  are 
particularly  important  in  this  district,  where  many  students  do  not  go  on  to  college. 
Respondent’s  classes  give  students  an  opportunity  to  think  and  problem-solve  in  a  real  world 
setting. 

8. 

The  board  is  not  reducing  services  in  Agricultural  Science,  Agricultural 

Mechanics  or  ROP  Forestry.  These  classes,  which  respondent  is  not  credentialed  to  teach, 
are  taught  by  Erica  Boomer,  a  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than  respondent. 

9. 

Education  Code  section  51220  sets  forth  the  areas  of  study  that  shall  be 
included  in  the  adopted  course  of  study  for  grades  7  to  12.  Subdivision  (h)  specifies: 
“Applied  arts,  including  instruction  in  the  areas  of  consumer  and  homemaking  education, 
industrial  arts,  general  business  education,  or  general  agriculture.”  Respondent  contends  that 
if  the  district  continues  to  offer  courses  in  applied  arts,  the  board  should  consider  employee 
seniority in  deciding  which  courses  to  keep  and  which  courses  to  eliminate.  This  principle 
would  dictate  that  the  board  eliminate  the  agriculture  classes  taught  by  Erica  Boomer  rather 
than  the  industrial  arts  classes  taught  by  respondent,  because  respondent  has  more  seniority 
than  Boomer. 

Respondent’s  contention  is  without  merit.  In  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular 

kinds  of  services,  the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  has  broad  discretion  to  determine 
which  services  will  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  Employee  seniority  must  be  considered  only 
in  determining  which  employees  will  be  laid  off  to  implement  the  service  cuts. 

'  Full-time  equivalent  positions. 

2- 

 

10. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  respondent  is  being  retained  by 

the  district  to  perform  services  that  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955, 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant 

to  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondent  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-09  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils 
thereof  within  the  meaning of  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondent  Steve  Kesling  that  his  services  will  not  be  required 

for  the  2008-09  school  year  because of the  reduction  of  particular  kinds of  services. 

DATED:  Dgoat  22,  208 

“Ly 

YK  [Crate 

NANCY  L.(RASMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

-3- 

 

