  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BERRYESSA  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

DOREEN  CARTER,  et  al., 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030453 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Cheryl  R.  Tompkin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  heard  this  matter  on  April  17,  2008,  in  San  Jose,  California. 

Janet  Cory  Sommer,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Berryessa  Union  School 

District. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  17,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Marc  Liebman  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against  respondents  in  his 
official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  Berryessa  Union  School 
District  (District). 

2. 

Respondents  Doreen  Carter,  Michelle  Flores,  Celeste  Galvan,  Kaaren  Hack, 

Harninder  Mehat,  Lisa  Moulthrop  and  Cecilia  Torres-Ruvalcaba  are  all  certificated 
employees  of  the  District. 

3. 

On  February  25  and  March  4,  2008,  the  Superintendent  recommended  to  the 

Governing  Board  (Board) of District  that  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  be 
reduced  or  discontinued  for  the  2008-2009  school year: 

  

Adaptive  Physical  Education  Teacher 
School  Counselor 
Elementary  Music  Teacher 
Elementary  Physical  Education  Teacher 

1.0  F.T.E. 

 

  

1.0  F.T-E. 
School  Nurse 
2.0  F.T.E. 
School  Psychologist 
1.5  F.T.E. 
Special  Education  Program  Specialist 
3.0  F.T.E 
New  Teacher  Advisor 
0.2  F.T.E. 
Truancy  Abatement  Counselor 
0.5  F.T.E 
Elementary  School  Assistant  Principal 
1.0  F.T.E. 
Middle  School  Assistant  Principal 
Administrative  Services  —  Coordinator  Student  Services  0.5  F.T.E. 
2.2  F.T.E. 
English  Language  Development  Support  Teacher 
Administrative  Services  —  Coordinator  English 

Language  Development 
Elementary  Reading  Instruction  Teacher 
Special  Day  Class  Teacher 

1.0  F.T.E. 
1.5  F.T.E. 
2.0  F.T.E. 

Total  Certificated  F.T.E.  to  be  Reduced  or  Eliminated: 

32.9  F.T.E. 

4. 

On  February  25,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-25,  reducing  or 
discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  directing  the 
Superintendent  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  affected  by  the  reduction. 

5. 

On  March  28,  2008,  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents, 

pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be 
given  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  written 
notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

6. 

Respondents  each  made  a  timely  request  in  writing  for  a  hearing  to  determine 

if  cause  existed  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  However, 
respondents  Michelle  Flores,  Celeste  Galvan  and  Cecilia  Torres-Ruvalcaba  failed  to  return  a 
timely  Notice  of  Defense.  Prior  to  hearing,  the  layoff  notice  was  rescinded  as  to  respondents 
Michelle  Flores  and  Celeste  Galvan.  At  hearing  District  agreed  to  allow  testimony  by 
Torres-Ruvalcaba  (who  ultimately  did  not  testify),  but  reserved  the  right  to  argue  in  any 
subsequent  writ  proceeding  that  she  was  not  a  proper  party  to  the  subject  proceeding. 

7. 

8. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

District  currently  employs  8.5  F.T.E.  school  counselors.  The  February  25, 

2008,  Board  resolution  authorized  release  of  all  8.5  F.T.E.  counselors.  However,.at  hearing 
District  indicated  that  only  4.5  F.T.E.  school  counselor  positions  will  actually  be  reduced. 
In  deciding 
District  will  retain  4.0  F.T.E.  school  counselors  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
how  many  F.T.E.  to  reduce,  District  considered  an  anticipated  $3.7  million  budget  decrease. 
It  also  met  with  counselors  to  assess  counseling  duties  in  District  and  to  determine  how  to 
meet  all  requirements  while  maintaining  consistency  in  services  across  District. 

Currently,  one  counselor  is  assigned  to  three  District  elementary  schools  and  the 

remaining  7.5  counselors  are  assigned  to  ten  District  middle  schools.  The  proposed 

  

 

  

reduction  in  the  counseling  program  will  result  in  the  elimination  of  4.5  middle  school 
counselors.  Counseling  services  will  necessarily  be  reduced  because  there  will  be  fewer 
counselors  available  to  provide  services  to  students. 

Some  of  the  duties  now  performed  by  the  middle  school  counselors  will  be  handled 
by  administrators,  teachers  and  parents  and/or  will  only  be  performed  by  counselors  to  the 
extent  they  have  time  after  performing  required  counseling  duties.  Other  services  currently 
provided  by  counselors  will  be  eliminated  completely  (e.g.,  conflict  mediation:  student 
training,  program  management  and  meetings).  While  some  of  the  tasks  undertaken  by 
counselors  are  mandated,  counselors  themselves  are  generally  not  a  mandated  service. 
However,  counselors  are  a  mandated  service  under  AB  1802.  AB  1802  is  a  grant  funding 
program  that  requires  that  certain  mandated  services  be  performed  by  counselors. 
Participation  in  the  AB  1802  program  is  voluntary.  District  participates  in  the  AB  1802 
program  and  plans  to  continue  its  participation  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  But  for  the  AB 
1802  grant  funding,  District  would  have  reduced  its  counseling  services  to  2.5  F.T.E. 
Currently,  1.5  F.T.E.  counselors  perform  most  of  the  AB  1802  counseling  services,  along 
with  additional  counseling  services.  District  expects  the  three  middle  school  counselors  that 
remain  after  the  reduction  in  services  to  perform  all  of  the  AB  1802  services,  but  may  assign 
the  elementary  school  counselor  to  perform  AB  1802  services  or  other  middle  school  duties 
if  necessary. 

9. 

Respondents  contend  that  under  Daniels  v.  Shasta-Tehama-Trinity  J. 

Community  College  District  (1989)  212  Cal.App.3d  909,  District  is  required  to  have  a  plan 
that  is  sufficiently  concrete  to  permit  a  determination  of  whether  services  are  actually  being 
reduced  or  simply  shifted  to  other  employees.  Respondents  argue  that  District’s  plan  is  not 
sufficiently  concrete  to  permit  such  a  determination  and/or  that  services  are  not  actually  be 
reduced  because  only  a  few  of  the  services  currently  provided  by  counselors  are  being 
eliminated. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  not  persuasive.  In  Shasta,  the  court  simply  noted  that 
the  “hearing  procedure  presupposes  some  sort of plan  on  the  part  of  the  District  as  to  which 
employees  are  to  be  retained.”  Here  District  has  a  plan  to  reduce  4.5  F.T.E.  counselor 
positions.  The  remaining  counselors  will  have  fewer  duties  and  will  provide  a  reduced  level 
of  services.  Certain  services  previously  provided  by  counselors  will  be  shifted  to  others  or 
eliminated,  The  reduction  will  not  cause  any  District  program  to  fall  below  mandated  levels. 
Case  law  has  made  clear  that  as  long  as  mandated  levels  are  met,  a  board  may  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services  by  maintaining  the  same  or a  lesser  level  of  services  using  fewer 
employees.  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  of the  Goleta  Union  School  Dist. 
(1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32;  and  see  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbot  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  811  [changing  the  manner  in  which a service  is  to  be  performed  constitutes 
a  reduction  in  services];  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Bellflower  Unified  School 
District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179  [board  may  reduce  services  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduce  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved];  Zulac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of  the  Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist. 

  

 

  

(2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.)  The  reduction  of  4.5  F.T.E.  positions  by  District  constitutes  a 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  under  existing  law. 

Respondents  also  suggest  that  District  will  not  be  able  to  comply  with  its  obligation 
under  the  Negotiated  Agreement  with  the  California  Teachers’  Association  of  Berryessa  to 
not  require  counselors  to  work  more  that  1.0  F.T.E.  Even  if  the  District’s  action  in  assigning 
counseling  duties  were  to  violate  the  collective  bargaining  agreement,  such  a  violation  would 
not  prevent  the  District  from  exercising  its  authority  und  the  Education  Code  to  reduce 
services.  Respondents’  remedy  for  a  contract  violation  lies  in  another  forum. 

10. 

The  evidence  established  that  District’s  determination  that  it  can  comply  with 
all  statutory  mandates  with  a  reduced  counseling  staff  was  not  arbitrary,  but  rather  was  based 
upon  reasonable  considerations.  While  it  is  clear  that  the  counselors  who  remain  in  District 
will  have  an  increased  case  load  and  may  have  to  work  harder  due  to  the  reduction  of 
counseling  positions,  it  was  not  established  that  the  reduction  will  prevent  the  District  from 
providing  mandated  services.  Moreover,  it  must  be  presumed  that  District  will  perform  its 
official  duties  and  comply  with  legislative  mandates.  If  District  finds  it  difficult  to  provide 
mandatory  services  next  year,  it  has  the  option  of  changing  the  manner  or  method  of  offering 
the  service.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbott,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796; 
Gallup  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571.) 

11. 

Respondent  Doreen  Carter  holds  a  Pupil  Personnel  Services  credential  in 

counseling  and  an  Administrative  Services  certificate.  The  certificate  allows  Carter  to  obtain 
an  administrative  credential  if  she  performs  administrative  services  for  a  district. 
Administrators  are  chosen  through  a  competitive  screening  and  selection  process.  Carter  has 
not  applied  to  become  or  gone  through  the  process  to  become  an  administrator  at  District. 
She  is  currently  employed  by  District  as  a  1.0  F.T.E.  middle  school  counselor  in  one of  the 
counseling  positions  that  is  being  reduced.  Carter  argues,  without  any  citation  to  legal 
authority,  that  she  is  entitled  to  bump  into  an  administrative  position.  It  is  undisputed  that 
bumping  into  an  administrative  position  would  be  a  promotion  for  Carter. 

Carter’s  contention  is  unpersuasive.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  legislative  ntent  to 

remove  a  District’s  discretion  in  hiring  administrators  and/or  permit  a  district  employee  who 
is  facing  layoff  to  use  the  layoff  statutes  to  promote  into  an  administrative  position.  And 
Carter  cites  no  legal  authority  that  would  support  such a  result.  Carter  has  failed  to  establish 
she  is  entitled  to  bump  into  an  administrative  position. 

12. 

The  evidence  established  that  District  will  be  reducing  services  for  the  ensuing 

school  year. 

13. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  respondents  is  being  retained  to  perform 

services  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

  

 

  

14. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of District 

and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  3 

is  a  kind  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law.  (See  Ed.  Code  §  44955; 
Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Abbot,  supra,  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v. 
Governing  Bd.  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s 
discretion. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  at  Berryessa 

Union  School  District  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services. 

DATED: 

/5/0%      

ARCOM 

OMPKIN 

UN 

p 

N 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

