    BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
  

OF  THE  CAMINO  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
EL  DORADO  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction  in 
Force)  Against: 

HELEN  GRAY  and 
GINA  DE  SANTIS, 

OAH  No.  2008030642 

Respondents. 

  

| 
| 
| 
| 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Camino,  California,  on 
April  10,  2008. 

Camino  Union  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Ann  Murray,  of 
Kronick,  Moskovitz,  Tiedemann  &  Girard.  District  Superintendent  Elizabeth  Haines 
was  also  present  on  the  District’s  behalf. 

Respondents  Helen  Gray  and  Gina  De  Santis  were  present  and  represented 
themselves  regarding  specific  seniority  issues.  Margaret  Geddes,  Beeson,  Tayer  & 
Bodine,  represented  respondents  regarding  common  issues. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  presented  and  the  parties  offered  oral 
closing  arguments.  The  record  was  then  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for 
decision  on  April  10,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1, 

   

2. 
of  the  District.

Elizabeth  Haines  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Camino  Union  School 

District  (District),  which  has  a  student  population  of  455.  Ms.  Haines’s  actions  and 
the  actions  of  the  District  Governing  Board  (Board)  were  taken  in  their  official 
capacities. 

Respondents  Helen  Gray  and  Gina  De  Santis  are  certificated  employees 

  

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07/08-07, 

authorizing  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  service  (PKS)  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  the 
PKS  itemized  below  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

Reduction  of  the  Primary  School  Teaching  Program,  resulting 

1. 
in  the  elimination  of  2.0  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  teacher 
positions; 

2. 

Elimination  of  the  Supplemental  Instructional  Reading  Program, 

resulting  in  the  elimination  of  .86  FTE  certificated  teacher  position. 

Elimination  of  the  Computer  and  the  Physical  Education  (PE) 

3. 
Preparation  Program,  resulting  in  the  elimination  of  1.14  FTE 
certificated  teacher  positions. 

Not  Adopted.  ! 

4. 

5. 

Reduction  of  the  Resource  Specialist  Program  resulting  in 

the  elimination  of  a  .7  FTE  certificated  teacher  position. 

Reduction  of  the  Administration  Program  resulting  in  the 

6. 
elimination  of  a  .14  FTE  certificated  administrator  position. 

The  reduction  of  these  PKS  resulted  in  the  decrease  of  certificated  employee 

positions  by  4.18  at  the  close  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  After  considering 
attrition,  the  Board  resolved  that  it  was  necessary  to  terminate  3.7  FTE  certificated 
employees  as  a  result  of  this  reduction  in  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and 
pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

As  part  of  its  Resolution,  the  Board  adopted  “tie-breaker”  criteria,  to  be  used 
to  establish  who  should  not  be  laid  off  when  two  or  more  employees  have  the  same 
first  date  of  paid  service  as  probationary  certificated  employees.  The  Board  directed 
the  Superintendent  to  take  all  appropriate  action  needed  to  implement  the  resolution, 
including  the  sending  of  appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  positions  would 
be  affected  by  the  Resolution. 

4. 

On  March  12,  2008,  Superintendent  Haines  personally  delivered a  letter 

to  respondents  advising  them  of  her  recommendation  to  the  Board  that  they  be  given 
notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

'  The  Board  did  not  adopt  the  District’s  recommended  item  4,  which  called  for  the  PKS  reduction  of  the 
GATE  Program,  resulting  in  the  elimination  of  a  .5  F.T.E.  Certificated  Teacher  position. 

 

Respondents  were  advised  of  their  right  to  request  a  hearing.  Respondents  were 
provided  copies  of  Resolution  07/08-07,  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
and  a  blank  Request  for  Hearing  Form. 

5. 

On  March  14,  2008,  Superintendent  Haines  advised  the  Board  that 

notice  had  been  given  to  the  following  six  certificated  employees  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year:  Dolores  Zombory  (.7  FTE); 
Kathleen  Trilevski  (.5  FTE),  Helen  Gray  (.5  FTE),  Tammy  Fraser  (1.0  FTE)  and  Gina 
DeSantis  (1.0  FTE). 

Respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

On  March  27,  2008,  Superintendent  Haines  signed  an  Accusation 

to  reduce  or  eliminate  PKS  pursuant  to  the  Resolution  and  to  eliminate  respondents’ 
services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  were  served  with  the 
Accusation,  and  a  statement  advising  them  of  the  need  to  file  a  Notice  of  Defense  to 
request  a  hearing,  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  the  Resolution,  and  pertinent 
statutes. 

Respondents  timely  filed  their  Notices  of  Defense  and  requests  for 

6. 

7. 

8. 
hearing. 

Respondents  raised  no  challenges  to  the  manner  in  which  they  were  noticed  by 

the  District  of  their  layoffs  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

Implementing  the  Resolution 

9. 

In  implementing  the  Resolution,  the  District  determined  that  it  was 

necessary  to  reduce  a  smaller  FTE  within  two  PKS  reductions  than  those  approved  by 
the  Board.  Specifically,  the  Supplemental  Instruction  Reading  Program  was  reduced 
by  only  by  .67,  rather  than  the  .86  FTE  approved  in  the  Resolution,  and  the  Computer 
and  PE  Preparation  Program  was  reduced  by  only  by  .67,  rather  than  the  1.14  FTE 
approved  in  the  Resolution.  Superintendent  Haines  testified  that  the  elimination  of 
PE  Preparation,  which  is  required  by  the  collective  bargaining  agreement,  was  an 
error  in  the  Resolution,  and  that  the  reduction  only  affected  the  computer  program. 
These  changed  figures  had  no  impact  on  the  District’s  overall  need  to  reduce  the  total 
of  3.7  FTE  certificated  employees  as  authorized  by  the  Board’s  Resolution  and  did 
not  prejudice  respondents. 

10. 

Seniority  List:  Prior  to  implementing  the  Resolution,  the  District 

created  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  (Seniority  List)  that  listed  each  employee’s  name, 
start  date,  FTE  entitlement,  status  as  permanent  or  probationary,  2007-2008 
assignments,  and  credentials,  including  master’s  degrees  and  special  certificates.  The 
Seniority  List  was  made  available  to  District  certificated  employees  on  two  occasions, 

 

and  was  revised  by  the  District  in  consultation  with  its  attorney.   

  

Pursuant  to  the  Seniority  List,  seven  certificated  employees,  including 
respondents,  shared  the  same  start  date,  or  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District.  In 
implementing  the  Resolution  and  determining  which  certificated  employees  would 
receive  layoff  notices,  the  District  used  the  Resolution’s  tie  breaker  criteria  for  these 
employees.  An  integrated  seniority  list  was  not  created  after  the  tie  breaker  was 
implemented;  however,  a  separate  list  indicated  the  relative  positions  of  the  affected 
employees. 

ll. 

Tie  Breaker  Criteria:  As  set  forth  in  Resolution  07/08-07,  the  Board 

adopted  the  following  tie  breaker  criteria,  based  upon  its  determination  of  the  needs  of 
the  District  and  its  students: 

1. 
Individuals  with  full  time  employment  at  [the  . 
during  the  2007-08  school  year  will  be  given  preference  over 
those  with  part-time  employment.  If  these  factors  are  identical,  then 

.]  District 

. 

Individuals  with  more  than  one  year’s  experience  (that  is, 

2. 
experience  beyond  the  current  school  year)  serving  students  in 
the  . 
identical,  then 

.  District  will  be  given  preference.  If  these  factors  are 

. 

Individuals  credentialed  to  teach  a  departmentalized  science 

3. 
program  to  seventh  and  eighth  grade  students  will  be  given  preference. 
If  these  factors  are  identical,  then 

4. 

Individuals  with  the  most  extra-duty/coaching  experience  at 

Camino  School  will  be  given  preference.  If  these  factors  are  identical, 
then 

5. 

Individuals  holding  a  Master’s  Degree  will  be  given  preference. 

12. 

Gina  DeSantis:  Respondent  DeSantis  is  a  probationary  employee 

whose  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  was  August  13,  2007.  Ms.  DeSantis 
has  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  a  single  subject  (English)  credential.  She  has  a 
master’s  degree  and  a  CLAD  certificate.  During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  Ms. 
DeSantis  was  employed  full  time  (1.0  FTE)  and  assigned  to  teach  in  the  second  grade. 
She  is  affected  by  the  reduction  in  PKS  in  the  District’s  Primary  School  Teaching 
Program. 

13. 

Helen  Gray:  Respondent  Helen  Gray  is  a  probationary  employee.  Ms. 

Gray  first  began  to  work  with  the  District  in  2005.  According  to  the  Seniority  List, 
Ms.  Gray  was a  probationary  I  employee  with a  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the 
District  of  August  13,  2007.  Ms.  Gray  has  a  multiple  subject  credential,  a  CLAD 
certificate,  and  a  master’s  degree  in  curriculum  instruction  with  emphasis  in  language 
development  and  early  learning  programs.  During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  Ms. 

 

Gray  was  employed  part  time  (.5  FTE)  and  assigned  to  teach  in  kindergarten/first 
grade.  She  is  also  affected  by  the  reduction  in  PKS  in  the  District’s  Primary  School 
Teaching  Program. 

As  discussed  below,  Ms.  Gray  asserts  that  the  District  failed  to  give  her  a 

written  notice  that  she  was  hired  as  a  temporary  employee  before  she  began  working 
in  this  capacity  in  September  2005.  She  argues  that,  as  a  consequence,  her  seniority 
date  is  incorrect  and  she  cannot  be  laid  off. 

14. 

Under  the  approved  tie  breaker  criteria,  respondent  Ms.  Gray  was 

eliminated  on  the  first  criteria,  as  a  part-time  .5  FTE  teacher.  Even  though  Ms.  Gray 
had  worked  with  the  District  in  various  capacities  since  2005  and  therefore  satisfied 
the  second  criteria,  no  subsequent  tie  breaker  criteria  were  applied  to  her.  Respondent 
Ms.  DeSantis  was  eliminated  on  the  second  criteria  because  she  had  not  worked  in 
previous  years  with  the  District.  Even  though  Ms.  DeSantis  met  the  fifth  criteria  by 
having  a  master’s  degree,  no  subsequent  tie  breaker  criteria  were  applied  to  her. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District’s  selection  and  application  of  the  tie 

breaker  criteria  did  not  meet  the  legal  standard  because  the  criteria  adopted  did  not 
meet  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students.  Specifically,  respondents  contend  that 
use  of  the  “drop  down”  method  of  applying  the  criteria  [i.e.,  elimination  of  the 
employee  by  the  first  criteria  he/she  does  not  meet],  demands  that  the  most  important 
criteria  be  placed  first.  Respondents  argue  that  having  master’s  degrees  should  be 
considered  to  be  of  greater  importance  to  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  its 
students  than  teaching  full  time  or  previously  with  the  District.  Respondents  further 
assert  that,  because  the  District  has  occasionally  authorized  part  time  teaching  in  the 
past,  the  criteria  preferring  full-time  over  part-time  teachers  is  arbitrary  and 
capricious. 

15. 

Education  Code  section  44955  establishes  the  primacy  of  seniority  in 

implementing  layoffs,  and  mandates  that  the  “services  of  such  employees  shall  be 
terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed.  .  .”  (Educ.  Code 
44955,  subd.  (c).) 
To  determine  relative  seniority  between  certificated  employees 
who  began  rendering  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  subdivision  (c) 
provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service 
to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall 
determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  . 

. 

16. 

|  Respondents’  argument  is  not  persuasive.  The  selection  of  tie  breaker 
criteria  is  within  the  sound  discretion  of  the  Board  and  will  not  be  disturbed  absent  a 
showing  that  the  Board  failed  to  follow  proper  procedures,  or  that  its  exercise  of 
discretion  was  fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of

  

  

Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116 
Cal.App.3d  831,  845.)  The  Resolution  expressly  provides  that  the  Board  considered 
and  determined  that  the  criteria  adopted  are  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  its 
students.  The  criteria  are  objective  and  reflect  the  considered  opinion  of  the  Board. 
Prior  to  adopting  the  proposed  tie  breaker  criteria,  the  Board  amended  the  criteria  to 
expand  extra  duty  that  would  be  considered  [i.e.,  from  “extra-duty  coaching 
experience”  to  “extra-duty/coaching  experience”].  While  respondents’  concerns  are 
understandable,  reasonable  minds  can  differ  on  what  is  within  the  best  interests  of  the 
District  and  its  students.  The  Board  is  the  policy  making  body.  The  evidence  does 
not  support  a  finding  that  the  tie  breaker  criteria,  either  as  adopted  or  as  applied,  are 
fraudulent,  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

17. 

Class  Size  Reduction  Program  The  effect  of  the  Resolution  was  to 
reduce  the  number  of  teachers  in  the  District’s  Primary  School  Teaching  Program 
from  ten  FTE  in  2007-2008  to  eight  FTE  in  2008-2009.  Respondents  argue  that  the 
District’s  Primary  School  Teaching  Program  is  not  a  PKS  that  can  be  reduced  because 
the  District  currently  participates  in  the  Class  Size  Reduction  Program  (CSRP)  and 
cannot  maintain  the  required  class  size  ratio  if  2  FTE  teachers  are  eliminated. 

There  is  no  merit  to  this  argument.  First,  the  CSRP  is  a  categorical  program. 

18. 

Status  of Sarah  Schreiber:  Ms.  Schreiber  is  a  probationary  employee 

Although  the  District  currently  participates  in  the  CSRP  for  kindergarten  through 
third  grade,  the  CSRP  is  not  a  state  or  federally  mandated  program.  Second,  the 
District  will  rehire  primary  school  teachers  as  necessary  during  the  2008-2009  school 
year  to  maintain  its  eligibility  for  the  CSRP.  The  testimony  of  District’s  Chief 
Financial  Officer  (CFO)  Vanessa  Constancio  established  that  the  District  has  careful 
mechanisms  in  place  to  monitor  and  maintain  the  CSRP  ratio  (20.44  pupils  to  1 
teacher  by  April  15"),  including  hiring  additional  teachers  as  necessary. 

who  shares  the  August  13,  2007  first  date  of  paid  service.  Ms.  Schreiber  has  a 
multiple  subject  credential  and  a  supplementary  authorization  to  teach  introduction  to 
science.  She  also  has  a  CLAD  certificate  and  a  master’s  degree  in  environmental 
policy  and  science.  Based  upon  her  coursework,  the  District  determined  that  Ms. 
Schreiber  met  the  “highly  qualified”  criteria  for  NCLB.  After  application  of  tie 
breaker  No.  3  (individuals  credentialed  to  teach  a  departmentalized  science  program 
to  seventh  and  eighth  grade  students),  Ms.  Schreiber  was  not  issued a  lay  off  notice. 

   

Ms.  Schreiber’s  supplementary  authorization  status  was  subject  to  questioning. 
The  weight  of  the  evidence  establishes  that  Ms.  Schreiber  currently  has  an  application 
for  credential  authorizing  her  to  teach  introductory  science  pending  evaluation  with 
the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (Commission).  In  reliance  on 
her  completion  of  required  coursework,  the  El  Dorado  County  Office  of  Education 
issued  Ms.  Schreiber  a  supplementary  authorization  to  teach  this  subject  that  is  valid 
through  September  15,  2008,  “or  until  the  credential  applied  for  is  either  granted  or 
.,  or  the  application  is  withdrawn  by  the  applicant.” 
denied  by  the.  ..Commission  . 

. 

  

Consequently,  the  District  appropriately  applied  this  criterion  to  Ms.  Schreiber  to 
remove  her  from  the  layoff  process. 

Status  of Respondent  Helen  Gray 

19. 

Before  the  2007-2008  school  year,  Ms.  Gray’s  relevant  work  history 
with  the  District  is  as  follows:  During  the  2005-2006  school  year,  Ms.  Gray  taught 
sixth  grade  full  time  at  the  District  as  a  temporary  employee.  Ms.  Gray  applied  for 
but  was  not  hired  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  In  January  2007,  she  was  rehired  as 
a  temporary,  part-time,  multiple  subject  teacher  and  a  temporary  hourly-programs 
teacher.  Ms.  Gray  remained  on  the  District’s  substitute  list  and  was  hired  to  teach 
summer  school  in  June  2007. 

Pursuant  to  the  Seniority  List,  Ms.  Gray’s  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a  District 

probationary  certificated  employee  was  August  13,  2007,  when  she  began  working  a 
.5  FTE  for  the  2007-2008  school  year.  On  August  24,  2007,  Ms.  Gray  signed  an 
“Understanding  of  Employment  for  Certificated  Personnel”  for  fiscal  year  07/08, 
which  showed  her  employment  status  as  “Prob.  I.”  Prior  to  the  2007-2008  school 
year,  the  District  did  not  have a  practice  of  having  their  employees  sign  a  document 
outlining  the  understanding  of  employment. 

20. 

 Atissue  is  whether  Ms.  Gray  became  a  probationary  employee  in 

September  2005,  as  a  matter  of  law,  because  the  District  failed  to  provide  her  with 
written  notice  of  her  status  as  a  temporary  employee  at  the  initial  time  of  her 
employment,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44916,  which  provides  that: 

The  classification  shall  be  made  at  the  time  of  employment 
and  thereafter  in  the  month  of  July  of  each  school  year.  At 
the  time  of  initial  employment  during  each  academic  year, 
each  new  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district  shall 
receive  a  written  statement  indicating  his  employment  status 
and  the  salary  that  he  is  to  be  paid.  If  a  school  district  hires  a 
certificated  person  as  a  temporary  employee,  the  written 
statement  shall  clearly  indicate  the  temporary  nature  of  the 
employment  and  the  length  of  time  for  which  the  person  is 
being  employed.  If  a  written  statement  does  not  indicate  the 
temporary  nature  of  the  employment,  the  certificated  employee 
shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  probationary  employee  of  the  school 
district,  unless  employed  with  permanent  status. 

21. 

On  August  10,  2005,  before  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school 
year,  the  District  posted  a  Certificated  Vacancy  Notice  for  a  one  year  position  of 
“full-time  sixth  grade  teacher  (Temporary).”  On  August  11,  2005,  Ms.  Gray  saw  the 
notice.  She  was  interested  and  immediately  wrote  a  handwritten  letter  of  application 

  

 

  

to  Ms.  Haines.  Ms.  Gray  testified  that  she  understood  that  the  position  was 
temporary. 

22. 

Ms.  Gray’s  initial  employment  for  the  2005-2006  school  year  was  as  a 
substitute  sixth  grade  teacher.  She  worked  as  a  substitute  teacher  for  the  last  15  days 
of  August  while  waiting  response  to  her  application. 

23. 

On  September  14,  2005,  the  Board  approved  the  District’s 

“Recommendation  for  Certificated  Employment”  of  Ms.  Gray  as  a  temporary  sixth 
grade  teacher,  by  changing  her  position  from  that  of  substitute  to  temporary 
employee.  The  “starting  date”  indicated  on  the  document  was  September  1,  2005. 
District  CFO  Ms.  Constancio  testified  that,  typically,  the  hiring  date  would  be 
prospective  from  the  date  of  Board  approval.  The  Board  made  Ms.  Gray’s  hiring  as  a 
temporary  employee  retroactive  to  September  1,  2005,  as  a  benefit  to  ensure  she 
received  a  full  month’s  credit  for  retirement  purposes  with  CalSTRS. 

24. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  make  Ms.  Gray  a  temporary  employee  was 

confirmed  in  a  September  19,  2005  memorandum  to  her  from  administrative  secretary 
Jody  Westfall. 

25. 

Superintendent  Haines  acknowledged  that  Ms.  Gray  did  not  receive  a 

26. 

Ms.  Gray  was  reemployed  by  the  District  for  the  2006-2007  school 

year  on  a  temporary  status  beginning  in  January  2007.  No  written  documentation  of 
Ms.  Gray’s  employment  status  with  the  District  for  the  2006-2007  school  year  was 
offered. 

written  notice  from  the  District  advising  her  of  her  temporary  status  before  she  began 
to  serve  in  the  temporary  position.  During  the  2005-2006  school  year,  Superintendent 
Haines  learned  that  an  employee  hired  in  a  temporary  status  was  entitled  to  written 
notice  before  beginning  such  employment.  On  February  28,  2006,  Superintendent 
Haines  sent  Ms.  Gray  a  memorandum  “to  confirm  in  writing  that  you  and  I  discussed 
your  temporary  status  for  the  2005-06  school  year.”  At  the  superintendent’s  request, 
Ms.  Gray  signed  the  memo  “to  indicate  that  we  have  had  this  conversation  to  confirm 
your  temporary  status  for  the  2005-06  school  year.” 

   

staff,  including  Ms.  Gray,  with  a  Seniority  List  that  the  employees  were  asked  to 
review,  sign  and  return  to  District  administrative  secretary  Ms.  Westfall.  At  the  time 
this  Seniority  List  was  compiled,  the  District’s  practice  was  to  use  the  first  date  after 
the  Board  approved  a  hiring  as  the  employee’s  “date  hired.”  This  Seniority  List 

District  of  any  changes  or  corrections  to  be  made  to  her  seniority  date  on  either  of  the 
two  occasions  the  District  provided  a  Seniority  List. 

On  January  25,  2008,  Superintendent  Haines  sent  a  memo  to  all  certificated 

Prior  to  the  reductions  in  force  at  issue,  Ms.  Gray  did  not  advise  the 

27. 

  

identified  Ms.  Gray’s  “date  hired”  as  June  5,  2007.  Ms.  Gray  signed  and  returned  the 
Seniority  List,  without  correction,  on  January  25,  2008. 

On  February  6,  2008,  Superintendent  Haines  sent  a  memo  to  all  certificated 
employees,  including  Ms.  Gray,  regarding  their  “date  of  hire.”  The  superintendent 
advised  that,  after  meeting  with  legal  counsel,  the  “hire  date  for  certificated  personnel 
is  the  first  day  that  the  employee  is  in  paid  status  as  a  district  employee.”  The 
Superintendent  provided  a  revised  Seniority  List  to  reflect  this  change.  Employees 
were  asked  to  sign  and  return  the  new  Seniority  List  and  to  see  the  Superintendent 
with  any  questions  or  concerns.  Ms.  Gray’s  revised  “date  hired”  was  listed  as  August 
13,  2007.  Ms.  Gray  signed  this  form,  without  correction,  on  February  7,  2008  and 
returned  it  to  the  District. 

28. 

In  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  District 

a  teacher  filed  a  petition  for  a  writ  of  mandate,  alleging  that 

(2003)  29  Cal.  4th  911, 
the  District  had  a  duty  to  classify  her  as  a  probationary  employee  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44916  because  it  had  failed  to  provide  her  with  timely 
written  notice  that  she  was  only  a  temporary  employee.  The  Supreme  Court 
determined  that: 

Section  44916  thus  mandates  that  a  school  district  comply 
with  three  requirements  if  it  desires  to  hire  a  “new  certificated 
employee”  . 
.  as  a  temporary  employee:  it  must  (a)  notify  the 
employee  of  his  or  her  salary  and  status  as  a  temporary  employee; 
(b)  do  so  in  a  written  notice;  and  (c)  give  such  notice  “[a]t  the 
time  of  initial  employment.” 

. 

The  Court  determined  that  the  time  the  notice  was  provided  to  a  new  certificated 
employee  was  crucial: 

As  we  have  seen,  the  time  of  classification  is  important  in 
determining a  teacher’s  rights  to  reelection  and  promotion, 
if  any,  and  to  determining  the  level  of  procedural  protections 
to  which  a  teacher  is  entitled  should  he  or  she  be  dismissed  or 
nonreelected.  Because  section  44916 
places  the  burden  on  the 
governing  boards  of  school  districts  to  inform  teachers  of  their 
classification  and  salary,  and  enforces  this  burden  with  a  default 
classification  that  benefits  teachers,  we  conclude  the  Legislature’s 
intent  and  purpose  in  enacting  section  44916  was  to  benefit  teachers. 
Stated  differently,  section  44916  reveals  the  Legislature’s  intent 
that  certificated  teachers  be  informed  of  their  classification  at  a  time 
that  is  sufficiently  early  in  the  process  to  enable  them  to  make 
informed  decisions  regarding  their  future  employment.

  

The  Court  held  that,  because  she  did  not  receive  such  notice  on  or  before  her  first  day 
of  paid  service,  Ms.  Kavanaugh  was  not  given  written  notice  of  her  status  as  a 
temporary  employee  “at  the  time  of  [her]  initial  employment.”  Accordingly,  the  Court 
determined  that,  pursuant  to  section  44916,  she  must  be  considered  a  probationary 
employee  as  a  matter  of  law. 

29. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44916,  Ms.  Gray  became  a  probationary 

employee  by  operation  of  law  no  later  than  the  Board’s  approval  of  her  change  in 
status  to  temporary  on  September  14,  2005.  Although  Ms.  Gray  was  aware  that  the 
position  for  which  she  was  hired  was  temporary,  and  subsequently  signed  documents 
at  the  superintendent’s  request  confirming  that  this  had  been  discussed, 

any  contractual  provision  purporting  to  waive  the  protections 
accorded  certificated  school  employees  by  the  Code,  including 
the  provisions  governing  their  classification  and  termination,  is 
“null  and  void.”  (ctations  omitted).  . 
.  “The  statutory  provisions 
in  the  Education  Code,  governing  the  rights  of  teachers,  are  an 
expression  of  public  policy;  they  cannot  be  bargained  away 
either  expressly  or  impliedly.”  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers 
Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.  App. 
4th  1260,  1275,  quoting  Hart  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  William  S. 
Hart  Union  High  Sch.  Dist.  (1977)  73  Cal.  App.  3d  211,  214.) 

30. 

Because  Ms.  Gray  became  a  probationary  employee  on  September  14, 

2005,  the  District  did  not  establish  that  no  employee  junior  to  Helen  Gray  is  being 
retained  to  perform  the  services  which  she  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

Similarly,  given  the  complexity  of  the  Education  Code’s  classification  system 
for  certificated  employees,  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  Ms.  Gray  to  have  understood 
the  effect  of  the  lack  of  notice  in  2005,  when  presented  with  the  District’s  Seniority 
Lists  in  2008.  Her  layperson’s  understanding  of  her  classification  status  was 
reinforced  by  the  fact  that  she  signed  an  understanding  of  employment  making  her  a 
probationary  employee  in  2007,  and  the  revised  Seniority  List  was  consistent  with 
this  agreement. 

   

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in 
Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be 
given  written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  as  follows: 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

10 

or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no 
superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board, 
that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the 
employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

(i. 

The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
(b) 
is  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  . 
If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date 
specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her 
waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided  for 
in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the  provisions  of 
this  subdivision. 

. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

. 

.  a  particular  kind  of  service 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year.  . 
is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  . 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing 
board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any 
of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees 
in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not 
more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees 
of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services.of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this 
section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with 
less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

(W).-- {9 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district 
on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of 
termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination 
is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no 
later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held 
in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria 
used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of 
the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees 
in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on 
request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of 
termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any 

  

ll

  

legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c) 
Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the 
15th  of  May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services 
of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in 
which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a 
permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a 
right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be 
deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

3. 

Jurisdiction in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955.  As  set  forth in  Factual  Findings  1  through  8,  all  notices  and  jurisdictional 
requirements  contained in  those  sections  were  satisfied.  The  District  has  the  burden 
of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  proposed  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  served 
on  respondents  are  factually  and  legally  appropriate. 

4. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular 

kind  of  service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another 
manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571;  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of  Goleta  Union  School  Dist.  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.)  A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  the 
statute  either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all 
or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services. 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167.) 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  3  and  17,  the  services  set  forth  in  Board 

Resolution  07/08-07  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s 
schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

5. 

In  the  course  of  reducing,  discontinuing  or  eliminating  a  particular  kind 

of  service,  the  Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to 
respondents  to  perform  services  which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.  (Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kruse  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648.) 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole, 

the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Gina  DeSantis  is  being  retained 
to  perform  the  services  which  Ms.  DeSantis  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole, 

and  particularly  in  Factual  Findings  No.  19  through  30,  the  District  has  not 

12 

 

  

established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Helen  Gray  is  being  retained  to  perform  the 
services  which  Ms.  Gray  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  respondent  Gina  DeSantis  that  her  services  will 

be  reduced  by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

The  Accusation  for  layoff  against  respondent  Helen  Gray  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  5,  2008 

    
   
A.  WOOLLARD 

   WYN 
Adminjstrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

13 

