 
f
o

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CORNING  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

OAH  No.  N2008031006 

JASON  ARMSTRONG 
LOUIS  BURAN 
JARED  CAYLOR 
MICHAEL  COSTANZA 
ROBERT  H.  DAVIS 
FLOYD  GREEN 
BRADLEY  MARTIN 
JEFF  N.  NELSON 
MARCI  L.  O’SHEA 
LINDSAY  REIMERS 
ARMANDO  ROMO 
CLEMENTINA  TORRES, 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Trevor  Skarda,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  24,  2008,  in  Corning,  California. 

Roman  J.  Mufioz,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Kronick,  Moskovitz,  Tiedemann  &  Girard, 

represented  the  Corning  Union  High  School  District. 

All  named  respondents,  excluding  Louis  Buran,  were  present  and  represented 
themselves.  Donald  A.  Selke,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  was  present  but  did  not  represent 
respondents  because  of  undisclosed  potential  and  actual  conflicts. 

The  matter  proceeded  in  respect  to  the  Lay  Off  Notices  issued  to  all  named 
respondents,  as  these  employees  had  filed  Requests  For  Hearing,  been  issued  Accusations, 
and  had  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

During  the  Hearing,  the  District  dismissed  the  Accusation  against  Louis  Buran. 

 

  

  

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  24,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Corning  Union  High  School  District  (District)  operates  three  high 
schools,  Corning  High  School,  Centennial  High  School,  and  the  Center  of  Alternative 
Learning  (C-CAL).  Of  the  three  high  schools  in  the  District,  only  Corning  High  School  is  a 
“comprehensive”  high  school.  Centennial  is  a  “continuation”  high  school  and  C-CAL  is  the 
District’s  community  day  school  (serving  students  who  cannot  attend  the  comprehensive 
high  school  for  various  reasons,  including  behavioral  problems). 

‘2, 

Bruce  Cole  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions,  and  the  actions 

of  the  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and 
noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  5.5  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

4, 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

5. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  served  on  those  employees  in  a  timely 
manner. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 

7. 

employees  of  the  District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

8. 

On  March  11,  2008,  at  a  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  5.5  FTE 
positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

9. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  293,  providing  for  the 

reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  to  decrease  a 
corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District,  as  follows: 

  

 

  

 
>
w
o
p
m
a

Reduce  0.5  FTE  Physical  Education. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  Social  Science. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  Special  Education. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  Mathematics. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  Industrial  &  Technology  Education. 
Reduce  1.0  FTE  English. 

10. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  295,  in  which  the 

Governing  Board  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The  criteria 
include: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 
6. 

Total  years  of  teaching  experience  in  the  profession.  If  these  factors  are 
identical  then; 
Fulfillment  of  the  requirements  under  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  to  be 
deemed  “highly  qualified.”  If  these  factors  are  identical  then; 
Multiple  credentials/authorizations  allowing  for  staffing  flexibility  and 
versatility  in  the  Grades  9-12  teaching  positions.  If  these  factors  are 
identical  then; 
Post-graduate  degrees.  If  these  factors  are  identical  then; 
BCLAD/CLAD  Certification.  If  these  factors  are  identical  then; 
In  the  event  that  any  employees  having  the  same  seniority  date  are 
equal  after  the  application  of  the  above-mentioned  criteria,  the  District 
will  then  break  ties  by  lot. 

11. 

The  District  is  in  a  state  of  financial  crisis  caused  by  the  State  budget 
proposal.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  teaching  services,  affecting 
employment  of  5.5  FTE  teaching  positions  and a  total  of  12  employees.  The  Board’s 
resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  in  order  to  balance  its  budget 
for  the  welfare  of  students. 

12. 

Superintendent  Cole  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 

implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

13. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains 

employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or 
temporary,  credentials  and  authorizations.  The  District  circulated  a  seniority  list  in 
anticipation  of  issuing  layoff  notices. 

14. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The 
District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area 
and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for 
each  kind  of  affected  service,  the  District  determined  the  impact  on  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority.  The  District  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  to  determine  whether 

 

  

they  could  “bump”  other  employees  who  were  junior  to  them.  The  District  then  looked  at 
employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as  opposed  to  other  positions. 

15. 

Thirteen  people  received  layoff  notices:  Jason  Armstrong,  Louis  Buran, 

Jared  Caylor,  Michael  Costanza,  Robert  Davis,  Floyd  Green,  Bradley  Martin,  Jeff  Nelson, 
Marci  O’Shea,  Lindsay  Reimers,  Armando  Romo,  Clementina  Torres  and  Larry  Gimble 
(who  was  not  named  in  the  Accusation). 

Larry  Gimble  did  not  request  a  hearing. 

The  District  determined  after  the  layoff  notices  were  sent  out  that  it  would  not  reduce 

1.0  FTE  English  as  it  had  previously  determined.  As  a  result,  Louis  Buran’s  layoff  notice 
was  rescinded  by  the  District. 

Jason  Armstrong,  Jared  Caylor,  Michael  Costanza,  Bradley  Martin,  Jeff  Nelson,  and 

Clementina  Torres  received  what  the  District  characterized  as  “precautionary  layoff  notices” 
because  they  are  junior  teachers/counselors  to  Robert  Davis;  the  District  seeks  to  “skip”  all 
of  these  named  respondents  because  it  maintains  that  Mr.  Davis  does  not  meet  the  District’s 
competency  criteria  and  as  such,  he  lacks  “bumping”  rights  as  to  these  junior  employees. 

The  remaining  respondents,  Davis,  Green,  O’Shea,  Reimers  and  Romo  are  all 
individuals  whom  the  District  seeks  to  layoff  due  to  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of 
services.  They  represent  the  remaining  4.5  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services  the  District 
seeks  to  reduce. 

16. 

|  The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

WAS  THE  BOARD’S  DECISION  TO  GIVE  ROBERT  DAVIS  A  LAYOFF  NOTICE 
ARBITRARY AND/OR  CAPRICIOUS? 

17. 

Robert  Davis  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  at  C-CAL.  He  has  taught  there 
since  the  2001-2002  school  year  in  a  self-contained  classroom,  teaching  multiple  subjects. 
Prior  to  that,  he  taught  at  Centennial  during  the  1999-2000,  and  2000-2001  school  years. 
He  has  never  taught  at  Corning  High  School. 

18. 

|  Mr.  Davis’  seniority  date  for  layoff  purposes  is  August  1,  1989.  He  holds  a 

Pupil  Personnel  Services  (PPS),  Physical  Education  (PE),  and  a  Biological  Sciences 
credential. 

19. 

|  Mr.  Davis  is  currently  involved  in  a  lawsuit  with  the  District  now  pending 
before  the  Superior  Court  of  the  State  of  California,  County  of  Tehama,  Davis  v.  Corning 
Union  High  School  District,  Case  No.  59863.  The  lawsuit  involves  a  writ  of  mandate

  

related  to  Mr.  Davis’  assignment  to  teach  at  C-CAL  from  2001-2002  to  the  present.  He 
maintains  that  he  never  consented  to  such  an  assignment  and  as  such,  it  was  unlawful. 

20. 

The  District’s  decision  to  give  Mr.  Davis  a  layoff  notice  was  not  arbitrary  or 

capricious.  As  previously  determined,  the  District’s  decision  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services  affecting  numerous  employees  was  made  for  the  welfare  of  the  students  due  to  the 
State  budget  crisis.  There  was  no  contrary  evidence. 

IS  ROBERT  DAVIS  COMPETENT  TO  TEACH  SCIENCE  OR  PHYSICAL  EDUCATION,  OR 
TO  PROVIDE  COUNSELING  SERVICES  TO  STUDENTS  AT  CORNING  HIGH  SCHOOL? 

21. 

The  Governing  Board  adopted  “competency  criteria”  on  March  11,  2008,  in 

Resolution  294.  The  criteria  are  as  follows: 

For  purposes  of  making  assignments  and  reassignments  of  certificated 
employees  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  competency  shall 
mean,  at  a  minimum,  possession  of  a  preliminary,  clear,  professional 
clear,  lifetime,  or  other  full  credential,  and  at  least  one  complete  school 
year  actual  teaching  experience  in  a  comprehensive  high  school 
assignment  within  the  last  five  years.  [Emphasis  in  the  original.] 

22. 

Superintendent  Cole  testified  persuasively  that  the  second  “competency” 

criteria,  that  an  employee  have  at  least  one  complete  year  actual  teaching  experience  in  a 
comprehensive  high  school  assignment  within  the  last  five  years,  is  essential  because  the 
District  has  moved  to  a  “standards-based”  model  in  the  last  five  years.  He  explained  that 
academics,  physical  education  and  counseling  services  are  all  standards-based  and  that  an 
individual  who  lacks  the  requisite  one-year  of  experience  will  not  be  able  to  provide 
standards-based  instruction  to  students.  The  continuation  high  school  (Centennial)  and  day 
school  (C-CAL)  do  not  provide  standards-based  services;  as  such,  an  individual  who  has 
only  provided  services  in  those  environments  in  the  past  five  years  is  not  competent  to  teach 
at  Corning  High  School. 

23. 

The  District’s  competency  criteria  are  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  They 

represent  a  rational  response  to  the  increasing  pressure  to  align  all  high  school  curriculum, 
including  supportive  services  such  as  counseling  services,  to  State  standards  in  an  effort  to 
ensure  that  the  maximum  number  of  students  pass  the  California  State  High  School  Exit 
Exam  (CASHEE). 

24. 

Robert  Davis  does  not  meet  the  District’s  competency  criteria  to  teach 

biological  sciences,  PE,  or  to  provide  counseling  services  at  Corning  High  School  because 
he  has  not  provided  those  services  for  one  complete  year  in  the  past  five  years.  He  may  not 
“bump”  more  junior  teachers  who  teach  those  subjects  at  Corning  High  School.

  

  

APPLICATION  OF  THE  TIE  BREAKER  CRITERIA  FOR  TEACHERS  WHO  FIRST 
SERVED  THE  DISTRICT  ON  AUGUST 21,  2007 

25. 

—  The  District  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  for  employees  whose  first  date  of 

services  was  August  21,  2007.  After  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  the  District 
determined  that  seniority  of  those  teachers  was  as  follows:  (1)  Jared  Caylor,  (2)  Armando 
Romo. 

26. 

There  was  no  persuasive  evidence  that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied 

inappropriately  as  to  the  above-listed  individuals. 

OTHER  MATTERS 

27. 

Armando  Romo  testified  that  his  services  are  essential  to  the  District  because 

he  has  a  Bilingual,  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic  (BCLAD)  certificate,  and  the 
District  has  a  significant  number  of  English  Language  Learner  (ELL)  students. 

28. 

While  Mr.  Romo  presented  as  an  impassioned,  competent  and  caring  social 
science  teacher,  he  is  the  most  junior  teacher  teaching  that  subject  in  the  District,  and  the 
District  properly  gave  him  a  layoff  notice. 

29. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  9  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

30. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  9  will  cause  it  to  reduce  its  offerings  in 
code  mandated  courses  below  the  level  required  by  law. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  were  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

 

  

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  No.  293,  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was 
a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4, 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838;  see,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

6. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

8. 

The  District  may  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of 

seniority,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d).'  The  District  must 

'  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)  states: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating 
a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 

 

  

prove  that  it  has  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  and  that  certificated 
employees  it  seeks  to  retain  have  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  of  study,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

9. 

The  District  did  not  have  to  demonstrate  a  specific  need  to  retain  the  teachers 

junior  to  Mr.  Davis  because  Mr.  Davis  was  not  competent  to  teach  any  of  the  subjects  for 
which  he  possesses  credentials  at  the  comprehensive  high  school. 

10. 

Services  reduced  below  the  level  mandated  by  law  are  not  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  So  long  as  a  school  district  does  not  reduce 
its  offerings  in  a  code  mandated  course  below  the  level  required  by  law,  that  reduction 
should  be  considered  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

11. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  will  reduce  its  course  offerings  below 
mandated  levels  by  reducing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  Factual  Finding  9. 

12. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  states,  in  relevant  part,  as 

follows: 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any 
employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance 
with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing 
board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to 
give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 
not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

13. 

The  District’s  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  as  to  all  affected 

respondents  was  appropriate. 

  

experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 
(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

  

 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  4.5  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the 
following  respondents:  Robert  Davis,  Floyd  Green,  Marci  O’Shea,  Lindsay  Reimers,  and 
Armando  Romo. 

2. 

The  Accusation  against  Louis  Buran  is  dismissed  as  the  District  rescinded  its 

layoff  notice  to  Mr.  Buran,  representing  1.0  full-time  equivalent  certificated  position. 

3. 

The  Accusations  against  all  remaining  respondents  are  dismissed. 

DATED:  April  30,  2008 

  

Anuar  Statde_ 

TREVOR  SKARDA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

     

  

