  

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES  OF  THE 
ANAHEIM  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Re: 

OAH  No.  L2008030466 

The  Reduction  in  Force  of  99  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

David  B.  Rosenman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14,  2008,  in  Anaheim,  California. 

Stutz  Artiano  Shinoff  &  Holtz,  by  Jack  M.  Sleeth,  Jr.  and  Jeanne  Blumenfield, 

Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Anaheim  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  by  Marianne  Reinhold  and  Carlos  Perez,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

The  record  remained  open  for  the  submission  of  briefs,  as  follows:  Respondents’ 

The  following  respondents  appeared  at  the  hearing:  Demmi  Aphidean,  Michelle  E. 

represented  the  respondent  teachers  on  the  list  attached  as  Exhibit  A,  incorporated  by 
reference. 

Charboneau,  Lara  Ashley  Cruchley,  Robert  M.  Flores,  Erica  S.  Goodman,  Brandie  Noel 
Hayungs,  Monique  Marie  Hernandez,  Pamela  P.  Kung,  Caylin  J.  Ledterman,  Pei  C.  Lee, 
Garrett  R.  Long,  Tuyen  Kim  Ly,  Cynthia  Joan  Miceli,  Dale  Everett  Miller,  Heenen  Pramukh 
Patel,  Ann  Meredith  Rice,  Maria  A.  Ruvalcaba,  Lena  Mara  Shupper,  Pamela  Ann  Stegall- 
Chant,  Craig  Alan  Tagler,  and  Katalin  Zsuzsanna  Voragen. 

   

Brief  was  received  April  15,  2008,  and  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  F;  and  the 
District’s  Brief  was  received  April  17,  2008,  and  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  41.  In 
its  brief,  the  District  requested  that  the  record  be  reopened  to  add  evidence  relating  to 
respondent  Daniel  Kleinschrodt.  Respondents  objected  to  that  motion  on  grounds,  among 
others,  that  there  is  no  explicit  authority  to  reopen  the  record  and  no  reason  was  given  for  the 
failure  to  include  the  evidence  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.  Complainant  replied  that,  in  the 
rush  to  prepare  the  evidence  for  hearing,  this  information  was  overlooked,  and  that  there  is 
other  evidence  in  the  record  relating  to  the  same  facts.  The  objections  are  overruled  and  the 
record  is  reopened.  The  additional  evidence  is  marked  for  identification  and  received  in 
evidence  as  Exhibit  42.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  17, 
2008. 

  

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  of  the  District  determined  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 

services  provided  by  teachers  and  other  certificated  employees  for  budgetary  reasons.  The 
decision  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services 
are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  seniority.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
Education  Code. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

. 

Jurisdictional  Facts 

taken  in  that  official  capacity. 

1.  Joseph  M.  Farley,  Ed.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  his  actions  were 

2.  Before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 
written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year  (notice).  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and 
noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  99  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

3.  Notices  were  properly  served  and/or  respondents  signed  acknowledgments  that  the 

notices  had  been  received.  Thirty  eight  certificated  employees  each  timely  requested  in 
writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

4.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  respondents. 

The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were 
timely  served  on  the  responding  employees. 

5.  Twenty  four  employees  who  filed  written  Requests  for  a  Hearing  also  filed  a 

Notice  of  Defense. 

Facts  Relating  to  Reduction  in  Services 

6.  The  District  provides  educational  services  for  its  students  in  junior  high  schools 

and  high  schools. 

7.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  certificated  employees  of  the 

District  employed  as  school  teachers. 

  

 

8.  On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 

Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  99  FTE  employee  teachers  be  given  notice  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore.' 

9.  Board  Resolution  No.  2007/08-HR-05,  adopted  on  March  6,  2008,  proposed  a 

layoff  of  99  FTE  certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following 
particular  kinds  of  services:  99  classroom  teachers. 

10.  Tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date  are  established  by  the  following: 
the  teachers’  Collective  Bargaining  Agreement,  Article  9  (Exhibit  2);  Board  policy  6316.01 
(Exhibit  3);  and  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Board  and  the  teachers’ 
association  (Exhibit  4). 
be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  stated 
therein. 

In  total,  these  documents  provide  that  the  order  of  termination  shall 

11.  Denise  Selby,  Ed.D.,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  established 

that  the  Board  Resolution  was  required  by  the  District’s  fiscal  crisis  and  need  to  reduce 
services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students.  More  specifically,  the  Board 
received  information  about  the  next  state  budget  leading  the  Board  to  believe  that  it  was 
possible  that  its  revenues  would  be  reduced  by  approximately  $17  million. 

_ 

12.  The  Board  considered  eliminating  or  reducing  educational  subject  matter  courses 
to  meet  its  expected  financial  shortfall.  However,  commensurate  with  the  District’s  intent  to 
offer  a  strong  instructional  program  with  as  many  elective  and  other  courses  as  possible  for 
the  coming  school  year,  it  decided  instead  to  reduce  teaching  services  in  general  by 
eliminating  block  scheduling,  reorganizing  alternative  education  sites,  reducing  the 
Community  Day  School  Physical  Education  Program,  and  reducing  certificated  staffing  due 
to  “more  appropriate  staffing  ratios,”  as  set  forth  in  the  Resolution.  The  District  is  increasing 
the  staffing  ratios  in  its  schools.  In  junior  high  schools,  where  the  ratio  had  been  1  teacher  to 
31.5  students,  the  ratio  would  now  be  1  to  32.5.  In  high  schools,  where  the  ratio  had  been  1 
teacher  to  30.5  students,  the  ratio  would  now  be  1  to  31.5.  In  this  manner  the  District 
instituted  an  approximate  20  percent  cut  in  its  budget  across  all  of  the  instructional  programs 
at  all  of  its  sites,  without  eliminating  any  instructional  program.  As  a  result  of  the  added 
students  in  each  class,  the  District  would  need  fewer  teachers  in  general. 

   

  

FTE  positions  that  are  not  at  issue  in  this  matter,  such  as  in  administration  and  pupil  services 
positions. 

13.  The  decision  to  reduce  services  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication 

'  The  Superintendent’s  recommendation,  and  the  Board  resolution,  also  included  18 

of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

14.  The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  The  District  also  maintains  records  of  its  teachers’  current 
assignments  and  credentials. 

15.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  teaching  positions  being  reduced.  In  determining 
who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of 
reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent 
staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  In  analyzing  its  expected  budget  for  the  next  school  year 
and  the  effects  upon  teachers  lowest  on  the  seniority  list,  the  District  determined  that  it  would 
send  notices  to  all  certificated  probationary  staff  hired  as  of  the  first  date  of  paid  service  of 
the  current  school  year;  that  is,  September  4,  2007,  or  later.  Therefore,  the  District 
recommended,  and  the  Board  approved,  the  elimination  of  99  FTE  positions  for  the  teaching 
staff  in  general.  It  was  later  determined  that  one  teacher  who  was  sent  a  notice  had  an  earlier 
seniority  date  and  that  the  notice  had  been  sent  in  error. 

16.  Because  of  the  nature  of  the  services  being  reduced,  it  was  not  necessary  for  the 
District  to  determine  whether  it  would  skip  over  less  senior  employees  who  held  credentials 
in  another  area  and  could  displace  more  senior  employees,  or  to  apply  the  tie-breaker  criteria. 

17.  The  services  identified  in  the  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

Respondents’  Contentions 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

19.  Respondents  raised  the  following  contentions:  that  the  District  cannot  describe 

18.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

that  could  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce 
the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion.  The  decision  was  based  on  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

“classroom  teachers”  as  a  particular  kind  of  service  under  the  Code;  that  several  teachers 
should  have  seniority  dates  earlier  than  the  dates  assigned  to  them  on  the  District’s  seniority 
list;  that  the  District  did  not  comply  with  the  law  when  it  did  not  consider  the  credentials  or 
qualifications  of  the  teachers  to  whom  notices  were  sent;  that  the  District  did  not  consider 
attrition  due  to  resignations  and  retirements;  and  that  the  District  did  not  prove  that  it  sent  a 
pre-March  15  notice  to  Daniel  Kleinschrodt.  The  following  facts  were  established  with 
respect  to  respondents’  contentions. 

   

  

claims  that  the  date  should  be  September  4,  2007.  He  began  work  on  September  4,  2007, 
under  an  emergency  teaching  credential  in  a  position  as  a  long  term  substitute  teacher. 
Respondent  Miller  was  issued  an  internship  single  subject  teaching  credential  on  October  29, 
2007,  and  signed  a  contract  with  the  District  to  begin  as  a  temporary  teacher  effective 

20(a).  Dale  E.  Miller  was  assigned  a  seniority  date  of  November  13,  2007,  and 

November  13,  2007.  Respondent  Miller  did  not  work  75  percent  or  more  of  the  school  year 
in  the  substitute  position. 

20(b).  Brandie  Hayungs  was  informed  by  a  school  principal  in  late  August  2007  that 

she  would  be  hired  as  an  English  teacher.  This  was  later  than  for  most  new  employees  and 
respondent  Hayungs  was  behind  other  new  employees  in  getting  her  paperwork  and 
processing  completed  by  the  District.  Respondent  Hayungs  was  informed  by  the  school 
principal’s  secretary  that  she  should  attend  the  first  day  of  in  service  training  on  September  4, 
2007,  even  though  her  paperwork  had  not  been  fully  processed.  Respondent  Hayungs 
attended  that  day,  and  the  following  days,  writing  lesson  plans  for  the  substitute  teacher 
teaching  the  class  and  assisting  the  head  of  the  English  Department. 
completed  such  that  respondent  Hayungs’  first  date  of  paid  service  was  September  10,  2007, 
the  date  assigned  to  her  on  the  seniority  list. 

The  processing  was 

20(c).  Demmie  Apahidean  was  assigned  a  seniority  date  of  September  4,  2007.  She 

had  prior  service  to  the  District  in  long  term  substitute  positions  in  the  school  years  from 
2001/2002  through  2005/2006,  sometimes  for  just  one  semester  of  a  school  year. 
Respondent  Apahidean  did  not  work  75  percent  or  more  of  a  school  year  in  any  of  these 
substitute  positions. 

20(d).  Respondent  Craig  Tagler  was  assigned  a  seniority  date  of  September  4,  2007. 
He  was  told  by  the  head  of  the  Math  Department  to  attend  departmental  meetings,  which  he 
did  on  the  morning  of  August  30,  2007.  Also  on  August  30,  2007,  respondent  Tagler  worked 
as  a  coach  for  the  girls’  golf  team  of  the  school  to  which  he  was  assigned,  which  had  a 
tournament  that  day.  Respondent  Tagler  worked  the  rest  of  the  semester  as  a  golf  team 
coach,  for  which  he  received  a  stipend  from  the  District. 

20(e).  Respondents  Robert  Flores  and  Caylin  Ledterman  hold  credentials  and/or 
supplemental  authorizations  in  geoscience  and  the  District  employed  them  to  teach  earth 
science.  Based  upon  their  credentials,  these  respondents  are  considered  to  be  highly 
qualified  teachers  under  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  law.’  The  District  hired  these 
respondents  in  September  2007  to  teach  earth  science  and  the  District  intends  to  have  most 
high  school  freshmen  take  this  course  in  the  next  school  year.  The  District  has  sent  notices 
to  these  respondents. 

   

  

hearing  did  not  include  a  proof  of  service  or  signed  acknowledgment  of  receipt  indicating 
that  the  respondent  had  been  properly  served  with  a  notice.  The  District  subsequently 
submitted  evidence  that  such  notice  was  received  by  respondent  Kleinschrodt  before  the 
March  15  deadline.  (Exhibit  42.) 

this  law,  school  districts  receive  financial  incentives  for  offering  a  quality  education  and 
when  students  attain  certain  levels  of  proficiency. 

?  The  “No  Child  Left  Behind  Act,”  20  U.S.C.  sections  6319  and  6311(g)(2).  Under 

20(f).  With  respect  to  respondent  Daniel  Kleinschrodt,  the  District’s  evidence  at 

  

20(g).  After  the  notices  were  sent  to  respondents,  the  District  has  approved  the 
resignations  or  retirements  of  several  other  employees,  26  as  of  the  hearing.  More  are 
scheduled  for  consideration  at  subsequent  Board  meetings.  The  District  did  not  rescind  any 
notices  based  upon  these  retirements  or  resignations. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44944  and  44945  were  met.’ 

2.  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings  are 

necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Board’s  decision  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion.  The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school  year  is 
an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that 
section,  and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated 
staff,  section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate 
that  reduction.” 

3.  A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision 
(b)  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

4.  Respondents’  contention  that  no  particular  kind  of  service  has  been  properly 
identified  by  the  Board  is  rejected.  Respondents  cite  to  numerous  cases  wherein  courts  have 
approved  the  practice  of  identifying  particular  types  of  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated 
at  the  junior  and  senior  high  school  level  by  the  nature  of  the  subject  taught  (e.g.,  English, 
math,  science).  (See,  e.g.,  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn  vy.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  In  these 
instances,  specific  curricular  offerings  were  identified  as  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
identified  in  the  statute  as  providing  a  basis  for  layoffs. 

Because  elementary  school  teachers  do  not  require  the  same  types  of  teaching 
credentials  as  do  teachers  at  secondary  schools  and,  more  importantly,  because  they  usually 
teach  all  curricular  subjects  to  their  students,  case  law  developed  that  allowed  school  districts 
to  identify  classroom  teachers  as  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  satisfies  the  statutory 
requirements.  Although  the  initial  case  of  Burgess  v.  Board  of Education  (1974)  41 
Cal.App.3d  571  initially  found  that  this  was  not  permitted,  in  later  cases  the  same  court  that 
decided  Burgess,  and  others,  declined  to  follow  Burgess  and  approve  the  practice  of  using 

3  All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

the  general  description  for  elementary  school  teachers  subject  to  layoff.  (See,  e.g.,  Degener, 
supra;  Campbell,  supra.) 

Neither  the  statutory  language  nor  the  cases  approving  of  the  use  of  specific 

curricular  descriptions  requires  such  specificity.  The  cases  relating  to  elementary  school 
teacher  layoffs  make  it  clear  that  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  takes  place  in  an 
elementary  school  setting  when  increasing  the  student  teacher  ratio  results  in  the  need  for 
fewer  teachers.  As  stated  in  California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32,  quoting  from  Rutherford,  supra  at  p.178-179: 

Appellants  argue  that,  even  if  elementary  classes  are  a  particular  kind 
of  service,  reducing  the  number  of  classes  in  order  to  maintain  the  same 
level  of  service  is  not  the  “reduction”  of  services  required  by  Education 
Code  section  44955.  This  contention  has  been  rejected.  “A  board  may 
‘reduce  services’  . 
reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal 
with  pupils  involved.  [This]  determination  falls  within  the  statutory 
language.” 

.  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be 

. 

Other  cases  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  (Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  of 

Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838;  Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1996)  41  CalApp.4th  1571.)  Specific  positions  to  be  eliminated  do  not  need  to  be  identified. 
As  long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching,  the  layoff  can  proceed.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.)  The  different  systems  of  credentialing 
of  teachers  at  the  two  different  levels  do  not  justify  any  different  result.  Section  44955 
relates  to  the  conditions  that  must  be  met  by a  district  to  layoff  teachers,  and  there  is  nothing 
in  the  statute  to  suggest  that  an  increased  ratio  of  students  to  teachers  would  be  a  reduction  in 
a  particular  kind  of  service  only  at  the  elementary  school  level.  As  the  case  law  approves  of 
such  a  particular  kind  of  service  at  the  elementary  school  level,  it  is  also  permissible  at  the 
secondary  school  level. 

5.  Under  section  44845,  a  probationary  or  permanent  employee  is  deemed  to  have 

been  employed  “on  the  date  upon  which  he  first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary 
position.”  Respondent  Tagler  was  not  rendering  “paid  service  in  a  probationary  position” 
when  he  attended  departmental  meetings  or  coached  the  golf  team  before  the  District’s  first 
paid  in-service  training  day  of  September  4,  2007.  Similarly,  respondent  Hayungs  was  not 
being  paid  for  her  attendance  prior  to  her  approval  to  start  paid  service  on  September  10, 
2007.  Under  section  44918,  a  substitute  teacher  who  serves  less  than  75  percent  of  the 
school  year  is  not  entitled  to  the  same  rights  as  a  full  time  teacher  hired  as  a  probationary 
employee.  As  there  was  no  evidence  that  respondents  Miller  or  Apahidean  had  sufficient 
service  under  their  contracts  as  substitute  teachers  to  qualify  for  an  earlier  seniority  date. 
None  of  these  respondents  submitted  sufficient  evidence  to  affect  a  change  in  the  seniority 
dates  assigned  to  them  by  the  District.  See  Factual  Findings  14,  15  and  20. 

  

  

 

  

6.  Respondents  Flores  and  Ledterman  established  that,  by  virtue  of  their  credentials, 

the  District  may  be  entitled  to  additional  funding  under  the  federal  No  Child  Left  Behind 
Act.  However,  the  District  is  not  mandated  to  provide  services  at  that  level,  nor  did  these 
respondents  establish  that  their  being  laid  off  would  result  in  the  District  being  unable  to 
provide  instruction  at  any  level  mandated  by  law.  See  Factual  Finding  20. 

7.  Respondents  did  not  establish  facts  or  submit  applicable  authorities  concerning 

their  contention  that  the  District  did  not  consider  teaching  credentials  or  qualifications  of  the 
employees  who  received  notices.  The  District  determined  that,  as  one  particular  kind  of 
service  to  be  reduced,  it  would  increase  the  teacher  to  student  ratios  in  all  programs  and 
across  all  school  sites,  thereby  reducing  the  number  of  teachers  needed.  Such  a 
determination  does  not  require  a  further  examination  of  credentials  or  qualifications,  nor  is 
any  such  examination  required  by  the  applicable  statutes. 

8.  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  the  District  incorrectly  considered  attrition  in 
determining  the  number  of  employees  to  be  laid  off,  or  that  it  was  the  District’s  burden  to 
disprove  this  contention.  While  such  attrition  must  be  considered  when a  lay  off  is  caused  by 
a  reduction  in  average  daily  attendance,  this  requirement  does  not  apply  when  the  lay  off  is 
based  upon a  reduction  in  a  particular  kind  of  service. 

9.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 

the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District’s  decision  to  the  identified  services 
was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools 
and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949.  See  Factual  Findings  1  through  18. 

ORDER 

1.  The  District  may  give  notices  to  employees  occupying  98  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2000  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Such  notices  may  be  given  to  the 
following  employees  on  the  attached  list. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  Each  respondent  shall  receive 

such  a  notice. 

DATED:  April  25,  2008. 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

List  of  Respondents,  Accusations  before  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the 
Anaheim  Union  High  School  District, 
QAH  case  no.  L2008030466,  administrative  hearing  April  14,  2008. 

Aphidean,  Demmi 
Blackshear,  Sherrita  Rose 
Charboneau,  Michelle  E. 
Cruchley,  Lara  Ashley 
Flores,  Robert  M. 
Goodman,  Erica  S. 
Hayungs,  Brandie  Noel 
Hernandez,  Monique  Marie 
Karels,  Laura  M. 
Keiser,  Derek  L. 
Kleinschrodt,  Daniel  Joseph 
Kung,  Pamela  P. 
Ledterman,  Caylin  J. 
Lee,  Pei  C. 
Loeper,  Alison  Perez 
Long,  Garrett  R. 
Ly,  Tuyen  Kim 
McDaid,  Eileen  Mary 
Mendiola,  Trina 
Miceli,  Cynthia  Joan 
Miller,  Dale  Everett 
Patel,  Heenen  Pramukh 
Rice,  Ann  Meredith 
Ruvalcaba,  Maria  A. 
Shupper,  Lena  Mara 
Smith,  Stephen  G. 
Stegall-Chant,  Pamela  Ann 
Surratt,  Rodney  Raymond 
Tagler,  Craig  Alan 
Tsai,  Rosemary  Chun-Han 
Voragen,  Katalin  Zsuzsanna 

Exhibit  A  

