BEFORE  THE 
ORANGE  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations 
Against: 

ERICA  ALVAREZ,  LEWIS  LEE 
LESTER  IV,  JESSICA  LOPEZ,  WENDY 
LYNNE  PARENT,  CARRIE  SAVAGE,  and 
PEGGY  LYNNE  THOMAS, 

OAH  No.  L-2008030361 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Vincent  Nafarrete,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  on  April  28, 

2008,  at  Costa  Mesa.  Complainant  Orange  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  was 
represented  by  David  C.  Larsen,  Attorney  at  Law. 

Respondents  Lewis  Lee  Lester  IV,  Wendy  Lynne  Parent,  and  Peggy  Lynne  Thomas 
Respondents  Erica 

were  present  and  represented  by  Marianne  Reinhold,  Attorney  at  Law. 
Alvarez,  Jessica  Lopez,  and  Carrie  Savage  were  not  present  or  represented  at  the  hearing. 

Documentary  and  stipulated  evidence  having  been  received,  oral  argument  heard,  and 

the  matter  submitted  for  decision,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  finds  as  follows: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  takes  official  notice  that,  on  April  3,  2008,  the 

Accusations  were  made  and  filed  by  Nina  Boyd  in  her  official  capacity  as  Assistant 
Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  and  Support  Services  of  the  Orange  County 
Department  of  Education  and  as  a  designee  of  the  Orange  County  Superintendent  of  Schools 
(hereinafter  Department). 

2. 

Respondents,  and  each  of  them,  are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employees  of  the  Department. 

  

 

  

3. 

(A)  Through  its  Special  Schools  program,  the  Department  provides  special 

education  and  services  to  students  with  significant  or  profound  needs.  Twenty-eight  school 
districts  in  Orange  County  refer  the  students  to  the  Department  when  the  school  districts 
cannot  provide  services  to  them.  In  recent  years,  the  school  districts  have  referred  a  lesser 
number  of  students  to  the  program.  Last  school  year,  the  Department  offered  services  to 
students  in  the  Special  Schools  program  in  small  classroom  settings. 

(B)  On  or  prior  to  March  4,  2008,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Business 
Services  for  the  Department  performed  an  estimate  and  analysis  of  the  anticipated  funding 
and  budget  of  the  Department’s  Special  Schools  program  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
The  Assistant  Superintendent  has  determined  that  the  Special  Schools  program  must  reduce 
its  expenditures  by  $2.1  million.  The  need  to  reduce  the  Department’s  expenditures  arises 
not  only  from  the  declining  number  of  students  in  the  Special  Schools  program  but  also  from 
the  impending  state  budget  crisis  which  will  result  in  the  projected  loss  of  revenue  for  public 
education.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Business  Services  has  further  determined,  in 
part,  that  the  discontinuance  or  reduction  of  12.0  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  in 
classroom  teaching  programs  is  necessary  and  will  result  in  a  budget  savings  of  $900,000.  In 
addition,  the  Department  plans  to  lay-off  or  terminate  the  employment  of  classified  personnel 
who  provide  support  services  in  those  classroom  teaching  programs. 

4. 

(A)  On  March  4,  2008,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 

the  Orange  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  (Superintendent)  determined  that  the  Orange 
County  Department  of  Education  does  not  expect  to  have  the  financial  ability  or  resources 
for  the  2008-2009  fiscal  year  to  provide  all  of  the  services  that  it  is  currently  providing  and 
must  reduce  or  discontinue  programs  and  services  in  the  2008-2009  fiscal  year  to  maintain  a 
balanced  budget  and  provide  for  essential  services.  The  Superintendent  further  determined 
that  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  which  are  now  being 
rendered  by  certificated  personnel  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  such  services  for  the 
2008-2009  fiscal  year  may  result  in  the  reassignment  and  the  layoff  of  probationary  and/or 
permanent  certificated  employees. 

(B)  On  March  4,  2008,  the  Superintendent  resolved  that  particular  kinds  of 

services  must  be  discontinued  or  reduced  in  administration  by  3.0  FTE  positions  and  in 
classroom  teaching  by  13.0  FTE  positions  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  school 
year.  The  Superintendent  further  resolved  that,  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  in 
particular  kinds  of  services,  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  current  2007-2008 
school  year  probationary  and/or  permanent  certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to  the 
positions  affected  and  services  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  Superintendent  directed  the 
Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  and  Support  Services  as  his  designee  to  give 
written  notice  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  certificated  employees  prior  to  March 
15,  2008. 
The  Superintendent  also  adopted  tiebreaking  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the 
order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
Department  on  the  same  date  (Resolution,  Exh.  A). 

  

 

5. 

On  or  about  March  4,  2008,  pursuant  to  the  resolution  of  the  Superintendent 

and  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  as  designee  of  the  Superintendent  gave  written  notices  to  respondents,  and 
each  of  them,  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year.  The  written  notices  included  the  resolution 
of  the  Superintendent  to  reduce  and/or  discontinue  certain  services  or  programs  in  the 
Department  and  a  request  for  hearing.  Respondents,  and  each  of  them,  requested  a  hearing 
to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6. 

The  notice  dated  March  4,  2008,  was  sufficient  in  providing  notice  to 

respondents  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Respondents  were  not 
prejudiced  by  errors  in  the  notice,  if  any,  with  respect  to  the  description  of  their  current 
assignments  or  any  other  matters.  No  claims  were  raised  that  the  notice  was,  in  fact, 
deficient. 

7. 

On  or  about  April  3,  2008,  the  Department  served  respondents,  and  each  of 

them,  with  an  Accusation,  Statement  to  Respondent,  copies  of  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955  and  Government  Code  sections  11500,  11505,  11506,  11507.5-11507.7, 
Except  for  respondents 
11509,  and  11520,  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and  Notice  of  Hearing. 
Erica  Alvarez  and  Jessica  Lopez,  all  respondents  filed  timely  notices  of  defenses,  requesting 
a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  not  to  employ  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  All 
prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  by  the  parties. 

8. 

On  March  4,  2008,  pursuant  to  his  Resolution  and  Findings,  the 

Superintendent  resolved  and  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  services  or 
programs  offered  by  the  Department  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  in  the  following  FTE 
positions: 

Administrative 

Full-Time 

Equivalent  Positions 

Program  Administrator,  Special  Schools 
Coordinator,  Success  Project 
Coordinator,  Early  Education 

Classroom  Teaching 

SDC/Severely  Handicapped 
SDC/Emotionally  Disturbed 
SDC/Deaf  &  Hard  of  Hearing 
SDC/Oral  Deaf 
SDC/Itinerant  Deaf  Program 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

8.0 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  services  set  forth  hereinabove  constitute  a  total  of 
16.0  full-time  equivalent  positions. 

  

 

  

9. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Finding  8  above  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which 

may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
determination  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  Department  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
services  is  within  the  sound  discretion  of  the  Department  and  is  not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

10. 

(A)  With  the  adoption  of  the  resolution  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 

kinds  of  services,  the  Department  has  planned  to  reduce  special  day  classes  for  students  who 
are  severely  handicapped  (8.0  FTE)  and  emotionally  disturbed  (1.0  FTE).  In  addition,  the 
Department  plans  to  reduce  special  day  classes  in  total  communication  for  grades:6  through 
12  for  the  deaf  and  hard  of  hearing  (2.0  FTE)  and  in  oral  deaf  for  students  who  are  three 
With  these  reductions  by  12.0  FTE,  the  Department 
years  of  age  through  grade  6  (1.0  FTE). 
will  not  be  able  to  offer  services  in  small  class  settings  as  in  the  past  but  will  still  be  offering 
87  classes  for  special  education  students  for  the  next  school  year  and  will  be  able  to  meet  all 
state  mandates  to  its  students  with  the  remaining  staff. 

(B)  Further,  the  Department  has  obviated  the  need  to  reduce  or  discontinue  all 

11. 

Respondents  did  not  raise  any  issues  or  claims  that  the  seniority  list  prepared 

by  the  Department  is  erroneous  or  incorrect  with  respect  to  the  dates  of  first  paid  service, 
credentials,  or  any  other  matter. 

of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  described  in  Finding  8  above  by  taking  into  account  the 
personnel  changes  due  to  resignations,  temporary  attrition,  and/or  reassignment  of  individual 
employees  within  the  Department.  Since  adoption  of  the  Resolution,  the  Department  has 
determined  not  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  special  day  classes  for  the  itinerant  deaf  program 
by  1.0  FTE  and  found  that  the  reduction  of  administrative  services  by  3.0  FTE  would  be 
satisfied  by  staff  retirements  and  reassignments  and  not  require  the  termination  of  any 
certificated  staff. 
Nevertheless,  the  Department  has  determined  that  these  services  in 
classroom  teaching,  as  described  in  Finding  8  and  10(A),  still  must  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  to  maintain  a  balanced  budget  and  provide  essential  services.  The  issue  for 
decision  in  this  matter  is  whether  cause  exists  for  the  termination  of  respondents  and  other 
certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  classroom  teaching  services 
for  the  next  school  year. 

   

(A)  Pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  special  day  classes  for  the 
Deaf  and  Hard-of-Hearing  program  by  2.0  FTE  and  for  the  Oral  Deaf  program  by  1.0  FTE, 
the  Department  served  notices  and/or  accusations  upon  respondents  Niel  C.  Thompson  and 
Peggy  Lynne  Thomas  as  well  as  certificated  employees  Jean  Kim  and  Nancy  Wilcox  Davis. 
All  four  of  them  have  the  same  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006.  The  Department  applied 
the  tie-breaking  criteria  after  verifying  seniority  dates  and  credentials. 
the  tie-breaking  criteria,  the  Department  determined  that  the  inverse  order  of  lay-off  for  these 
four  certificated  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  date  would  be  as  follows:  Kim,  Thompson, 
respondent  Thomas,  and  Davis. 

Special  Day  Classes  for  the  Deaf 

After  application  of 

12. 

(B)  On  or  about  March  10,  2008,  the  Department  served  a  notice  upon  Niel 
Thompson, a  certificated  teacher  of  the  deaf  at  University  High  School,  that  his  services  in 
the  Deaf  and  Hard-of-Hearing  program  will  not  be  needed  for  next  school  year.  On  March 
25,  2008,  Thompson  submitted a  letter  in  which  he  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  notice.  He 
noted  that  he  was  one  of  several  certificated  teachers  in  his  unit  to  have  been  served  with  a 
notice  and  that  all  of  them  have  the  same  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006. 
In  his  letter, 
Thompson  volunteered  to  be  the  first  certificated  teacher  to  be  terminated  if  only  one  or  two 
teachers  from  the  Deaf  and  Hard-of-Hearing  program  were  to  be  terminated  from  their 
employment  with  the  Department.  Thompson  did  not  file  a  hearing  request. 

(C)  Jean  Kim  and  Nancy  Wilcox  Davis,  certificated  teachers  in  the  Deaf  and 

Hard-of-Hearing  program,  were  duly  notified  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  next  year. 
Subsequently,  Kim  admitted  to  the  Department  that  she  did  not  feel  qualified  or  capable  of 
performing  services  in  the  Oral  Deaf  program  for  young  children.  Kim  did  not  file  a  request 
for  a  hearing.  Davis  filed  a  request  for  hearing  then  withdrew  her  hearing  request. 

(D)  Respondent  Peggy  Lynne  Thomas  is a  certificated  teacher  in  the  Deaf  and 

Hard-of-Hearing  program.  Thomas  was  served  with  a  notice  and  accusation  and  filed  a 
request  and  notice  of  defense  for  a  hearing.  Based  on  Thompson’s  express  wish  to  be 
terminated  first,  at  the  hearing  on  April  28,  2008,  the  Department  dismissed  the  Accusation 
and  withdrew  the  notice  issued  to  respondent  Peggy  Lynne  Thomas. 

13. 

Based  on  Findings  1  —  11  and  12  above,  the  three  certificated  employees  Jean 

Kim,  Niel  C.  Thompson,  and  Nancy  Wilcox  Davis  may  be  terminated  pursuant  to  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  by  3.0  FTE  of  special  day  classes  for  the  Deaf  and 
Hard-of-Hearing  and  for  the  Oral  Deaf.  It  was  not  established  there  are  any  certificated 
employees  with  less  seniority  than  these  certificated  employees  who  are  being  retained  by 
the  Department  to  provide  services  they  are  credentialed  and  competent  to  render. 

Severely  Handicapped  and  Emotionally  Disturbed  Programs 

14. 

(A)  Pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  special  day  classes  for  the 
Severely  Handicapped  program  by  8.0  FTE  and  for  the  Emotionally  Disturbed  program  by 
1.0  FTE,  the  Department  served  notices  and/or  accusations  upon  respondents  Erica  Alvarez, 
Lewis  Lee  Lester  IV,  Jessica  Lopez,  Wendy  Lynne  Parent,  and  Carrie  Savage. 

(B)  The  Department  also  duly  served  notices  upon  certificated  employees  Lisa 

Annette  Ehlow,  Rana  Mohammad  Elhatem,  Sean  Patrick  MacDonald,  and  Karen  McBride 
Miller  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  next  school  year.  Ehlow,  Elhatem, 
MacDonald,  and  Miller  did  not  file  requests  for  hearing  after  being  served  with  the  lay-off 
notices.  On  April  25,  2008,  due  to  staff  reassignments,  the  Department  withdrew  the  notice 
against  Miller,  who  was  the  most  senior  of  these  four  certificated  employees. 

  

    

  

(C)  Respondents  Erica  Alvarez  and  Jessica  Lopez  both  filed  requests  for 

hearing  after  being  served  with  notices  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that 
their  services  will  not  be  needed  next  year.  Respondents  Alvarez  and  Lopez  were  then 
properly  served  with  Accusations,  Notices  of  Defense  forms,  and  Notices  of  Hearing 
pursuant  to  Government  Code  sections  11505,  subdivision  (c),  11506,  and  11509,  but  neither 
filed  a  notice  of  defense.  The  Department  may  take  action  against  respondents  Alvarez  and 
Lopez  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11520,  subdivision  (a). 

(D)  Respondent  Carrie  Savage  was  properly  served  with  the  Accusation  and 

Notice  of  Hearing  pursuant  to  Government  Code  sections  11505,  subdivision  (c),  and  11509. 
Respondent  Savage  failed  to  appear  at  the  noticed  hearing  on  April  28,  2008,  either  in  person 
or  by  representative,  and  a  default  is  hereby  entered  against  her.  The  Department  may 
proceed  against  respondent  Savage  in  her  absence  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section 
11520,  subdivision  (a). 

15. 

Respondent  Lewis  Lee  Lester  IV  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  27,  2007,  and 
holds  credentials  in  mild  and  moderate  disabilities  and  social  science.  At  the  hearing  in  this 
matter,  the  Department  determined  that  Lester  can  be  reassigned  to  another  position  based  on 
his  social  science  credential  and  withdrew  the  notice  and  dismissed  the  Accusation  against 
him.  Lester  has  also  taught  in  the  alternative  education  program. 

16. 

(A)  Respondent  Carrie  Savage  is  a  certificated  teacher  in  the  Severely 

Handicapped  program  and  instructs  students  with  moderate  and  severe  handicaps.  She  holds 
an  education  specialist  instruction  credential  and  has  a  seniority  date  with  the  Department  of 
October  5,  2005. 

(B)  Respondent  Jessica  Lopez  is  a  certificated  teacher  in  the  Severely 

Handicapped  program.  Lopez  holds  an  education  specialist  instruction  credential  and  has  a 
seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006. 

(C)  Respondent  Wendy  Lynn  Parent  is  a  certificated  teacher  in  the  Severely 
Handicapped  program  and  teaches  students  with  moderate  to  severe  disabilities.  She  holds 
an  education  specialist  instruction  credential  and  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  11,  2006. 

(D  Respondent  Erica  Alvarez  is  a  certificated  teacher  in  the  Severely 

Handicapped  program  and  instructs  students  with  moderate  and  severe  handicaps.  She  is 
employed  in  a  part-time  position  of  0.56  FTE.  Alvarez  holds  a  credential  in  education 
specialist  instruction  and  has  a  seniority  date  of  January  8,  2007. 

(E)  Certificated  employees  Lisa  Annette  Ehlow,  Rana  Mohamad  Elhatem,  and 

Sean  Patrick  MacDonald  are  teachers  in  the  Severely  Handicapped  program  and  hold 
education  specialist  instruction  credentials.  Ehlow’s  seniority  date  is  July  19,  2006. 
Elhatem’s  and  MacDonald’s  seniority  date  is  August  28,  2007. 

 

17. 

Based  on  Findings  1  —  11  and  14  —  16  above,  respondents  Alvarez,  Parent, 

Lopez,  and  Savage  as  well  as  certificated  employees  Ehlow,  Elhatem,  and  MacDonald  may 
be  terminated  pursuant  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  services  for  special  day  classes 
for  the  Severely  Handicapped  program  by  8.0  FTE  and  for  the  Emotionally  Disturbed 
program  by  1.0  FTE.  It  was  not  established  there  are  any  certificated  employees  with  less 
seniority  than  said  respondents  or  certificated  employees  who  are  being  retained  by  the 
District  to  provide  services  that  said  respondents  or  certificated  employees  are  certificated 
and  competent  to  render. 

Pursuant  to  the  foregoing  findings  of  fact,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the 

following  determination  of  issues: 

OK  OK  OK  OR  ROK 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

2. 

Jurisdiction  exists  for  the  subject  proceedings  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  based  on  Findings  1  —  11  above.  All  notices,  accusations,  and 
other  related  papers  and  reports  required  by  these  Education  Code  sections  have  been 
provided  in  timely  manner  and,  as  such,  the  parties  have  complied  with  the  statutory 
requirements. 

Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  reduce 
by  12.0  full-time  equivalent  positions  the  concomitant  number  of  certificated  employees  of 
the  Department  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  as  set 
forth  in  Findings  1-17  above. 
With  respect  to  those  respondents  whose  employment  have 
been  found  to  be  terminable  by  the  District  and  any  other  certificated  employees  who 
received  notices  but  did  not  request  a  hearing,  the  causes  set  forth  in  the  Accusations  relate 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  Department's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44949. 

    

Based  on  Findings  1  —  17,  there  is  no  certificated  probationary  or  permanent 
employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  one  of  respondents  or  the  certificated  employees  who 
is  being  retained  by  the  Department  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  to  render  services  which 
any  one  of  respondents  or  certificated  employees  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

// 
M 
H/

3. 

  

WHEREFORE,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Order: 

eR OR OR OK OK Ok 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusations  against  respondents  Erica  Alvarez,  Jessica  Lopez,  Carrie 
Savage,  and  Wendy  Lynne  Parent  are  sustained,  based  on  Conclusions  of  Law  nos.  1  —  3 
above. 
inverse  order  of  seniority  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  2008-2009 
school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 

The  Department  may  give  notice  to  these  four  respondents,  and  each  of  them,  in  the 

2. 

The  Accusations  issued  against  respondents  Peggy  Lynne  Thomas  and  Lewis 

Lee  Lester  IV  are  dismissed,  based  on  Findings  12(D)  and  15,  respectively. 

3 

The  Department  may  give  notice  to  certificated  employees  Jean  Kim,  Niel  C. 
Thompson,  Nancy  Wilcox  Davis,  Lisa  Annette  Ehlow,  Rana  Mohamad  Elhatem,  and  Sean 
Patrick  MacDonald,  all  of  whom  were  served  with  notices  that  their  services  will  not  be 
needed  next  year  but  did  not  file  requests  for  hearing,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

4. 

Before  giving  notice  to  respondents  and  the  other  certificated  employees  who 

did  not  request  a  hearing,  the  Department  shall  determine  and  take  into  account  positively 
assured  attrition  among  certificated  employees  in  deciding  how  many  and  when  certificated 
employees  should  be  terminated  before  the  ensuing  2008-2009  school  year. 

Dated: 

Vincent  Nafarrete 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

