BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MT  DIABLO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

KATHERINE  COYLE,  MARJENE  GRAZE, 
LUIS  LUCERO,  MICHAEL 
LAURICELLA,  TARA  BARTLETT, 
BROOKE  SAFRANEK,  CAROLYN 
MOORE,  and  CHRISTOPHER  TOD, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  N  2008030582 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Ruth  S.  Astle,  State  of  California,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Concord,  California,  on  April  29,  2008. 

Marleen  L.  Sacks  and  James  Scot  Yarnell,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented 

complainant. 

Ernest  H.  Tuttle  III,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 
official  capacity. 

Gary  McHenry,  Superintendent  (Superintendent),  made  the  accusation  in  his 

2. 

At  all  times  mentioned  herein,  each  respondent  has  been  employed  by  the  Mt. 

Diablo  Unified  School  District  (District)  as  a  certificated  employee. 

3. 

At  the  hearing  the  accusation  was  dismissed  as  to  all  respondents  who 

requested  a  hearing  except  those  named  in  the  caption.  All  temporary  teachers  will  be 
released,  except  as  set  forth  in  Finding  9,  below. 

4, 

On  March  14,  2008,  written  notice  was  given  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the 

District,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  of  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  that  notice  be  given  each  respondent  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be

  

  

required  for  the  next  school  year  (2008-2009).  That  letter  stated  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

5. 

Each  respondent,  in  writing,  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 

for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  next  school  year. 

6. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 

for  not  reemploying  respondents  for  the  next  school  year  because,  by  Resolution  of  the 
Governing  Board  adopted  on  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  determined  it  was 
necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  certain  particular  kinds of  services  and  that  as  a  result  of 
those  reductions  or  eliminations  it  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees of  the  District  to  the  extent  set  forth  in  the  Resolution  as  of  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year. 

The  total  number of  F.T.E.’s'  that  are  being  cut  is  98.5  F.T.E.’s  including 

elementary  teaching  positions,  middle  School  teaching  positions,  and  high  school  teaching 
positions.  After  considering  all  the  positively  assured  attrition,  the  number of  certificated 
employees  whose  services  will  need  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  was  reduced  to  eight. 

7. 

Cause  for  not  reemploying  respondents  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  Mt. 
Diablo  Unified  School  District  and  the  pupils  thereof within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955. 

8. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  certificated  employee  of  the  Mt.  Diablo  Unified 

School  District  having  less  seniority  than  respondents  will  be  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  respondents  are  certificated,  competent  and  legally  entitled  to  render. 

Marjene  Graze’s  position  is  being  reduced  by  0.6  F.T.E.’s 

9. 

All  temporary  teachers  were  give  precautionary  notices.  All  of  them  will  be 
released  except  one.  Cesley  Ford-Frost  was  misclassified  as  a  temporary  teacher.  She  is  a 
probationary  teacher  and  will  be  retained.  Her  retention  does  not  affect  any  other  teacher’s 
status  on  the  “bumping  list.” 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

By  reason  of  the  Factual  Findings  set  forth  above,  cause  exists  for  the 

Governing  Board of  the  Mt.  Diablo  Unified  School  District,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  to  give  notice  to  respondents  Graze  (0.6  F.T.E.),  Coyle,  Lucero, 
Lauricella,  Bartlett,  Safranek,  C.  Moore,  and  C.  Tod  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or 
eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

'  Full-time  equivalent 

 
6
“

 

ORDER 

Notice  shall  be  given  by  the  Governing  Board  to  respondents  Graze  (0.6  F.T.E.), 
Coyle,  Lucero,  Lauricella,  Bartlett,  Safranek,  C.  Moore,  and  C.  Tod  that  their  services  will  be 
reduced  or  eliminated,  pursuant  to  the  Legal  Conclusions  above,  by  the  District  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year. 

DATED: 

Tas  ¢  Wot 

 

RUTH  S.  ASTLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

