  

 
”
f
o

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MADERA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  for 

OAH  No.  2008030572 

A.  Layoffs  Against:  CINDY  BITTER, 
NICK  BURNS,  GARY  CAUCHI, 
MAURECIA  CLARK,  JOHN  DENNO, 
SHELDON  HORN,  KIM  JOHNSON, 
KELLY  VALMONTE,  and  GUILLERMO 
VILLAREAL; 

B.  Reduction  in  Work  Year  Against: 
CATHERINE  COLEMAN-JOHNSON, 
JULIE  FRANICH,  LUCKINDER  GILL, 
VICKI  GINELLI,  TINA  GONZALEZ, 
DONNA  HAWES,  BRENDA 
LICCIARDELLO,  DONNA  LITTLE, 
NANCY  PARKER,  CAITLIN  PENDLEY, 
JENNIFER  SHOWALTER, 
LORI  SHREVE,  and  LYDIA  TORRES; 

    

C.  Unnamed  Precautionary  Layoffs, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Madera,  California,  on  April 
22,  2008. 

Madera  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Elizabeth  Lind, 
of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo.  District  Superintendent  Larry  Risinger 
and  District  Director  of  Certificated  Human  Resources,  Jerry  Stehman,  were  also 
present. 

Ernest  Tuttle  III,  of  Tuttle  &  McCloskey,  represented  all  respondents,  except 

John  Denno,  Lydia  Torres,  and  Donna  Little.  Respondents  Cindy  Bitter,  Maurecia 

 

Clark,  and  Tina  Gonzalez  were  present.  Sue  Thornton,  President  of  the  Madera 
Unified  Teachers  Association  (MUTA)  was  also  present  on  respondents’  behalf. 

@ 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Larry  Risinger  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Madera  Unified  School 

District  (District).  Mr.  Risinger’s  actions  and  the  actions  of  the  District  Governing 
Board  (Board)  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2. 

The  District  has  a  projected  budget  deficit  of  over  eight  million  dollars 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  various  factors  including  state  budget  cuts  and 
increased  salaries.  In  anticipation  of  financial  reductions,  the  District  and  the  Board 
engaged  in  a  systematic  process  of  gathering  financial  data  and  public  input  on  how  to 
remedy  this  deficit  consistent  with  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to 

reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  of  the  District  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The 
Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  55  —  2007/08,  pursuant  to  which  the  Board  determined 
that  the  following  PKS  will  be  reduced  or  discontinued  no  later  than  the  beginning  of 
the  2008-2009  school  year: 

1  Full  Time  Equivalent  [FTE] 

Principal  (Elementary)  -- 
Vice-Principal  (Elementary)  --  2  FTE 
Physical  Education  Coordinator  (Elementary)  -- 
Physical  Education  Teacher  (Elementary)  --  4  FTE 
Music  Teacher  (Elementary)  --  2  FTE 
Nurse  --  .619  FTE  (10  x  .052  FTE  =  .52  +  .042  +  .031  +  .026  FTE  =  .619 
FTE) 

1  FTE 

e@ 

Total: 

10.619  FTE 

The  Board  adopted  tie  breaker  criteria  to  be  applied  to  any  ties  in 

seniority  between  certificated  employees.  The  Board  directed  the  District  to 
send  layoff  notices  to  employees  affected  by  its  resolution. 

4, 

The  services  set  forth  in  Board  Resolution  55-2007/2008  are 

particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  the  services  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion  and 
was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious. 

 

5. 
the  District. 

Respondents  are  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  of 

  

@ 

  

Nine  of  the  respondents  were  issued  layoff  notices  of  1  full  time  equivalent 

(FTE)  each.  Respondent  John  Denno  is  the  District’s  physical  education  (PE) 
coordinator,  an  administrative  position.  Respondents  Cindy  Bitter,  Nick  Burns, 
Maurecia  Clark,  Kim  Johnson,  Kelly  Valmonte,  and  Guillermo  Villareal  are  PE 
teachers.  Respondents  Gary  Cauchi  and  Sheldon  Horn  are  music  teachers. 

Thirteen  of  the  respondents  are  school  nurses  who  were  issued  reduction  in 

work  year  layoff  notices  from  193  days  per  year  to  183  days  per  year,  for  a  reduction 
of  .619  FTE,  or  corresponding  fraction  thereof  for  part-time  nurses.  Respondent 
nurses  are  Catherine  Coleman-Johnson,  Julie  Franich,  Luckinder  Gill,  Vicki  Ginelli, 
Tina  Gonzalez,  Donna  Hawes,  Brenda  Licciardello,  Donna  Little,  Nancy  Parker, 
Caitlin  Pendley,  Jennifer  Showalter,  Lori  Shreve,  and  Lydia  Torres. 

6. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  District  provided  each  of  the  respondents  with 
a  written  notice  of  recommendation  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  were  advised  of  the  Board’s  adoption  of 
Resolution  No.  55  —  2007/08,  reflecting  its  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  PKS  no 
later  than  the  start  of  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Each  of  the  respondents  was  further 
notified  that  the  District  had  recommended  to  the  Board  that  notice  be  given  to 
him/her,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that  his/her  services 
would  be  reduced  or  not  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  were 
advised  of  their  right  to  request  a  hearing. 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  caused  this  notice,  its 

accompanying  documents,  and  blank  Request  for  Hearing  forms  to  be  personally 
served  on  each  of  the  respondents. 

8. 

On  March  20,  2008,  Sue  Thornton,  in  her  capacity  as  president  of  the 
Madera  Teacher’s  Union  (MUTA),  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  on  behalf  of  all 
respondents  except  John  Denno  and  Lydia  Torres. 

9. 

Waiver  of Hearing  by  Respondents  John  Denno,  Lydia  Torres,  and 
Donna  Little:  Respondents  John  Denno  and  Lydia  Torres  were  personally  served 
with  this  notice  and  supporting  documents,  but  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing. 
Respondent  Donna  Little  filed  a  timely  Request  for  a  Hearing,  but  later  withdrew  her 

request. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (b),  these  three 

respondents  have  waived  their  right  to  a  hearing  in  this  matter.  The  District  may 
proceed  with  its  layoff  of  Mr.  Denno  and  with  the  reduction  of  work  year  of  Ms. 
Torres  and  Ms.  Little. 

‘On  April  7,  2008,  Ms.  Thornton,  MUTA,  advised  the  District  that  Ms.  Little  had  withdrawn  her  request  for 
hearing. 

 

10. 

On  April  2,  2008,  the  District  provided  a  “certificated  layoff  hearing 

r 

packet”  to  all  respondents  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  specific  documents  provided 
were:  a  statement  to  respondents  that  cause  exists  for  terminating  their  employment  in 
whole  or  in  part  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  with  notice  of 
right  to  request  a  hearing;  a  copy  of  the  Accusation,  Resolution  No.  55-2007-08,  the 
District’s  March  11,  2008  recommendation  to  the  Governing  Board  that  respondents 
be  given  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year; 
a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  Form;  a  Notice  of  Hearing;  and  copies  of  relevant 
Education  and  Government  Code  sections. 

The  District  thereafter  caused  these  documents  to  be  personally  served  on  the 

respondents,  who  signed  acknowledgments  of  receipt. 

11. 

On  April  7,  2008,  Ms.  Thornton  of  MUTA  filed  a  timely  Notice  of 

Defense  on  behalf  of  the  named  respondents. 

12. 

Lack  of Standing  to  Request  Hearing  by  Nine  Unnamed  Precautionary 
Respondents:  On  March  20,  2008,  and  on  April  7,  2008,  MUTA  included  the  names 
of  nine  additional  employees  on  the  Request  for  Hearing  and  Notice  of  Defense 
forms,  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  it  filed  with  the  District  on 
respondents’  behalf.  The  District  never  served  the  Accusation  for  reduction  in 
services,  or  any  documents  regarding  PKS  layoffs  on  these  nine  employees,  and  they 
were  not  named  in  the  Accusation.  Rather,  the  District  had  served  these  nine  teachers 
with  “notices  of  non-reelection  for  probationary  certificated  employees,”  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b). 

r 

Under  Education  Code  section  44929.21,  subdivision  (b),  the  non-reelection  of 

probationary  teachers  is  within  the  sole  discretion  of  a  school  district.  A  school 
district  may  choose  not  to  reelect  a  probationary  employee  “without  providing  cause 
or  other  procedural  protections  to  the  terminated  employees”  (Board  of Education  v. 
Round  Valley  Teachers  Assn.  (1996)  13  Cal.  4th  269,  281;  Bellflower  Education 
Association  v.  Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1991)  228  Cal.  App.  3d  805,  808). 
However,  if  non-reelection  is  for  economic  reasons  (such  as  a  decline  in  daily 
attendance  or  discontinuance  of  services),  the  teacher  is  entitled  to  certain  procedural 
protections  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949.  (Cousins  v.  Weaverville 
Elementary  School  Dist.  (1994)  24  Cal.  App.4th  1846,  1854;  Kavanaugh  v.  West 
Sonoma  County  Union  High  School  Dist.,  29  Cal.  4th  911,  918,  ftnt.  4.) 

In  this  case,  there  was  no  evidence  offered  to  suggest  that  the  non-reelection  of 

these  employees  was  for  economic  reasons.  On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing 
Board  adopted  a  distinct  “Resolution  Regarding  the  Non-reelection/Release  of 
Certificated  Employees,”  No.  58-2007/08,  which  ordered  the  non-reelection  of  these 
nine  probationary  employees  and  directed  the  Superintended  to  serve  written  notice 
on  them  of  their  non-reelection  pursuant  to  sections  44929.21  and  99454.  Non- 
reelection  notices  were  then  personally  served  on  these  employees  on  a  timely  basis.

  

@ 

  

It  was  undisputed  that  these  non-reelected  employees  did  not  meet  the  District’s 
instructional  needs  and  that  the  District  was  seeking  appropriate  teachers  to  fill  their 
positions.  As  a  consequence,  these  employees  would  have  been  non-reelected 
regardless  of  the  District’s  need  to  reduce  PKS,  and  they  did  not  occupy  any  of  the 
PKS  Positions  being  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  pursuant  to  Resolution  55- 
2007-08. 

Accordingly,  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of  financial  motive  as  a 

subterfuge  for  non-reelection,  the  District  was  entitled  to  issue  notices  of  non- 
reelection  to  these  probationary  employees,  and  they  lack  standing  to  request  a 
hearing  or  to  participate  in  this  matter. 

13. 

Administrative  reductions:  The  Board’s  reduction  in  PKS  of  one 

FTE  elementary  principal  position  and  two  FTE  elementary  vice-principal 
positions  did  not  impact  the  lay  offs  of  any  of  the  respondents.  Due  to 
administrative  attrition,  these  affected  individuals  did  not  receive  lay  off  notices 
because  they  were  able  to  fill  other  District  administrative  positions  and  did  not 
“bump”  into  any  positions  respondents  were  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 

14. 

Reduction  in  Work  Year  of School  Nurses:  The  District  issued 

precautionary  layoff  notices  to  its  school  nurses  advising  them  of  the  reduction 
of  their  school  year,  pursuant  to  Board  Resolution  55-2007-08,  from  193  days 
to  183  days.  This  reduction  affects  the  following  respondents:  Catherine 
Coleman-Johnson,  Julie  Franich,  Luckinder  Gill,  Vicki  Ginelli,  Tina  Gonzalez, 
Donna  Hawes,  Brenda  Licciardello,  Nancy  Parker,  Caitlin  Pendley,  Jennifer 
Showalter,  and  Lori  Shreve.  All  of  these  nurses  are  full  time  employees,  except 
Nancy  Parker,  who  works  a  50  percent  position,  and  Jennifer  Showalter,  who 
works  an  80  percent  position. 

Jurisdiction  does  not  exist  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955  to  address  the  District’s  minor  reduction  in  hours.  (Black  v.  Compton 
Unified  School  District  (1996)  46  Cal.App.  4th  493,  498-500.)  In  Black,  adult 
education  teachers  had  their  hours  reduced  by  approximately  6  to  18  percent 
due  to  a  budget  crisis.  The  court  noted  the  general  rule  that  school  districts 
have  broad  powers  to  reassign  permanent  employees  to  different  positions, 
including  positions  with  a  reduction  in  pay,  so  long  as  the  reassignment  is 
reasonable  and  is  within  the  scope  of  the  employee’s  certificate.  It  held  that  the 
Education  Code’s  economic  layoff  notice  and  hearing  procedures  did  not  apply 
to  a  minor  (i.e.,  reasonable)  reduction  in  work  hours  by  5.7  to  17.6  percent, 

?  Pursuant  to  the  Board’s  Non-Reelection  Resolution  (No.  58-2007/08),  the  probationary  employees  who 
were  not  reelected  were:  Sue  (Laurel)  Becker-See  (ELA),  Katherine  Brown  (Special  Ed),  James  Davis 
(Alternative  Ed),  Nic  Defendis  (Science),  Matthew  Heberer  (Math),  Becky  Ingels  (Special  Ed),  Lennice 
Najieb  (Math),  Kimberly  Parsneau  (ELA),  and  George  Roach  (Special  Ed). 

   

  

  

where  the  teacher  was  not  terminated,  and  remains  employed  full  time,  with  no 
loss  of  benefits. 

In  this  case,  none  of  the  respondent’s  school  nurse  positions  are  being 
eliminated;  all  the  school  nurses  will  be  reemployed  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year,  with  a  10  day  reduction.  All  full  time  nurses  will  experience  a  reduction 
calculated  to  be  .052  FTE.  The  positions  of  respondents  Ms.  Parker  and  Ms. 
Showalter  were  never  full  time;  their  reductions  are  proportional  to  their 
respective  positions  (.026  and  .042)  and  are  reasonable.  Respondents  provided 
no  evidence  and  no  argument  that  any  of  the  District’s  school  nurses  would 
suffer  a  loss  of  benefits.  The  reduction  of  10  days  over  the  school  year  brings 
the  school  nurses’  work  year  into  alignment  with  the  183  days  typically  allotted 
for  teachers.  This  reduction  still  includes  two  days  prior  to  the  commencement 
of  the  school  year  and  one  day  after  the  end  of  the  school  year  to  complete  their 
work.  Further,  as  indicated  in  Mr.  Stehman’s  testimony,  the  District  will  be 
able  to  maintain  all  mandated  nursing  services  within  these  reduced  work  year 
schedules. 

Accordingly,  the  reduction  in  work  year  of  these  respondents  is  within 

the  District’s  discretion. 

District  Subject-Specific  Seniority  Lists 

15. 

Jerry  Stehman  is  the  District’s  Director  of  Certificated  Human 
Resources.  Mr.  Stehman  and  other  staff  under  his  direction  were  responsible 
for  the  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff  required  by  the 
Board’s  Resolution.  To  implement  the  reduction  of  four  FTE  PE  teachers  and 
two  FTE  music  teachers,  the  District  relied  on  seniority  lists  that  are  specific  to 
its  PE  and  music  teachers,  rather  than  on  a  comprehensive,  District-wide 
seniority  list. 

Mr.  Stehman  testified  that  the  District  does  not  currently  have  a 

comprehensive  seniority  list  because  it  is  in  the  process  of  transitioning  to 
another  system  and  is  verifying  the  employment  data  of  all  District  employees. 
Because  the  PKS  to  be  reduced  is  narrowly  focused  on  music  and  PE,  the 
District  developed  and  maintained  separate  seniority  lists  for  these  two  areas, 
with  the  employee’s  name,  his/her  first  date  of  paid  service,  type  of  teaching 
credential  and,  for  the  PE  list  only,  the  teacher’s  status  as  permanent  or 
probationary.  Mr.  Stehman  testified  that  he  was  confident  in  the  accuracy  of 
the  initial  dates  of  paid  service  contained  on  the  PE  and  music  seniority  lists. 
Because  the  layoffs  were  implemented  with  the  least  senior  PE  and  music 
teachers,  each  of  whom  only  possessed  a  single  subject  credential,  the 
employees  affected  by  the  layoff  did  not  have  the  ability  to  bump  any  less 
senior  teachers  within  their  area  of  certification  and  competence.

  

The  District  does  not  dispute  that  having  a  comprehensive  seniority  list 

is  the  best  practice,  but  noted  the  unusual  circumstances  that  resulted  in  its 
absence  at  this  time.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  establishes  the  basic  rule 
that  “[e]xcept  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent 
employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any 
probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.”  Neither  Education  Code  section  44949  nor  44955,  however, 
requires  the  District  to  provide  a  comprehensive  seniority  list  to  employees. 
Nevertheless,  employees  to  a  layoff  action  must  have  a  reliable  source  of 
information  from  which  to  determine  their  seniority  relative  to  other  teachers, 
so  they  can  assess  whether  they  may  be  able  to  bump  employees  with  less 
seniority. 

The  PE  and  music  subject-specific  seniority  lists  were  created  by  the 
District  as  part  of  its  obligation  to  implement  the  Board’s  reduction  in  PKS 
resolution.  There  is  a  presumption  that  District  has  regularly  performed  its 
official  business.  (Evid.  Cod  664.)  In  this  case,  respondents  did  not  present  any 
evidence  that  they  requested  a  District-wide  seniority  list  in  discovery  as 
authorized  by  Education  Code  sections  44949,  subdivision  (c)(2),  and  44955. 
More  importantly,  none  of  the  respondents  presented  any  evidence  or  testimony 
that  they  were  prejudiced  by  the  lack  of  a  District-wide  seniority  list.  This 
presumption  of  regularity,  coupled  with  Mr.  Stehman’s  testimony,  establishes 
that  the  District  used  appropriate  subject-specific  seniority  lists  to  implement 
the  reduction  in  PKS  in  the  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Layoff of 2  FTE  Music  Teachers 

16. 

The  District  provided  a  seniority  list  specific  for  their  music  teachers. 
Respondent  Sheldon  Horn’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  was  January 
13,  2007.  Respondent  Gary  Cauchi’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  was 
August  10,  2007.  Mr.  Cauchi  is  the  District  music  teacher  with  the  least  seniority; 
Mr.  Horn  is  senior  only  to  Mr.  Cauchi. 

Both  Mr.  Horn  and  Mr.  Cauchi  have  a  single  subject  credential  in  music.  By 

virtue  of  their  single  subject  music  credentials,  Mr.  Horn  and  Mr.  Cauchi  are 
authorized  to  teach  instrumental  music,  music  appreciation,  music  theory,  and  vocal 
music.  (Cal.  Code  Regs.,  tit.  5,  80005,  subd.  (a)(10).)  Neither  Mr.  Cauchi  nor  Mr. 
Horn  testified.  No  evidence  was  offered  by  either  respondent  that  they  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  bump  into  any  other  position.  The  District’s  layoff  of 
these  two  music  teachers  is  upheld. 

  

 

  

Layoff of PE  Teachers  and  Application  of  Tie  Breaker  Criteria 

17. 

During  the  current  school  year,  the  District  had  34  permanent  or 

probationary  PE  teachers.  In  addition,  the  District  had  three  temporary  teachers 
who  worked  on  a  categorical  grant  program  not  required  by  state  or  federal 
statute.  Funding  for  this  program  ended;  these  employees  were  terminated  and 
are  not  respondents  to  this  matter.  (Educ.  Code  44909.)?  One  PE  teacher,  Nick 
Burns,  had  a  probationary  PE  appointment  and  a  partial  appointment  under  the 
categorical  grant.’  Mr.  Burns  is  a  respondent  to  this  matter. 

18. 

The  Resolution  called  for  the  reduction  in  PKS  of  four  FTE  PE 
teachers.  Because  the  District  anticipated  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  use  the 
Resolution’s  tie  breaker  criteria  to  determine  who  should  be  laid  off,  it  issued 
two  additional  precautionary  layoff  notices.  The  District  asks  that  two  of  these 
layoff  notices  be  rescinded,  so  that  only  four  PE  teachers  are  actually  laid  off. 

Under  the  PE  Seniority  List,  the  six  least  senior  PE  teachers  and  their 

first  dates  of  paid  service  with  the  District  are  as  follows: 

Respondent 

First  Date  of  Paid  Service 

Kelly  Valmonte 
Guillermo  Villareal 
Maurecia  Clarke 
Cindy  Bitter 
Kim  Johnson 
Nick  Burns 

August  13,  2004 
August  11,  2005 
August  11,  2005 
August  10,  2006 
August  10,  2006 
August  10,  2007 

19. 

No  evidence  was  offered  to  challenge  the  appropriateness  of  the 
District’s  layoff  notices  to  probationary  (Prob)  employees  Mr.  Burns  (Prob  0), 
Ms.  Johnson  (Prob  2),  and  Ms.  Bitter  (Prob  2).  These  layoffs  are  appropriate 
and  are  upheld. 

20. 

The  Fourth  PE  layoff:  Mr.  Stehman  testified  that  the  District 
initially  believed  there  was  a  three-way  seniority  tie  between  Ms.  Valmonte, 
Mr.  Villareal,  and  Ms.  Clarke.  However,  although  Ms.  Valmonte  had  an 
emergency  credential  when  she  began  working  for  the  District  in  2004,  the 
District  acknowledged  her  right  to  accrue  seniority  during  this  time  period  in 

3  Education  Code  44909  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that  “[sJuch  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods 
which  are  less  than  a full  school  year  and  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially 
funded  project  without  regard  to  other  requirements  of  this  code  respecting  the  termination  of  probationary 
or  permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918.”  These  individuals,  Johnny  Sharp,  Wayman  Stairs,  and 
Salvador  Lozano  were  not  served  with  the  notices/Accusation  and  are  not  respondents. 

‘Mr.  Burns’s  exact  FTE  was  not  provided. 

 

light  of  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City 
School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.  App.  4"  1260.  Consequently,  the  District 
determined  that  Ms.  Valmonte  had  more  seniority  and  applied  the  Resolution’s 
tie  breaker  criteria  only  to  Mr.  Villareal  and  Ms.  Clarke,  who  each  began  paid 
service  to  the  District  on  August  11,  2005. 

21. 

Tie  Breaker  Criteria:  The  Resolution  provides  that  its  tie  breaker 

criteria  are  listed  in  priority  order  and  that  each  criterion  shall  be  used  only  if  the 
preceding  criteria  do  not  determine  the  order  of  termination: 

a. 

b. 

c 

d. 

e. 

f. 

g 

h. 

Possession  of  a  currently  valid  and  properly  filed  regular  credential 
(clear,  professional  clear,  or  preliminary); 

The  certificated  employee  is  “Highly  Qualified”  within  the  meaning  of 
the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act; 

Possession  of  a  currently  valid  and  properly  filed  BCLAD  certificate; 

Possession  of  a  currently  valid  and  properly  filed  CLAD,  EL,  SDAIE, 
or  other  valid  certificate  authorizing  instruction  to  English  Language 
Learners; 

The  certificated  employee  whose  currently  valid  and  properly  filed 
credentials  authorize  a  broader  scope  of  service.  (This  tie-breaker  is  to 
be  repeated  as  applicable.); 

Possession  of  a  Master’s  Degree; 

The  certificated  employee  holding  the  highest  current  placement  on  the 
salary  schedule.  (This  tie-breaker  is  to  be  repeated  as  applicable.); 

If  a  tie  still  exists  after  application  of  criteria  a.  to  g.,  the  tie  shall 
be  broken  by  lot.  Numbers  shall  be  drawn  with  the  lowest 
number  drawn  winning  the  tie  and  continuing  until  all  remaining 
tied  individuals  are  ranked  in  order. 

22. 

In  applying  these  criteria,  Ms.  Clark  and  Mr.  Villareal  tied  on 

criteria  (a)  through  (f).  The  tie  was  broken  by  comparing  their  relative 
placements  on  the  District’s  salary  schedule  under  subdivision  (g).  Because 
Ms.  Clark  has  a  lower  salary  placement  on  the  District’s  salary  schedule,  the 
District  determined  that  she  should  receive  the  fourth  PE  layoff.  At  the  outset 
of  the  hearing,  the  District  requested  that  the  layoff  notices  issued  to  Mr. 
Villareal  and  Ms.  Valmonte  be  rescinded  and  that  those  of  Ms.  Clark,  Mr. 

   

Burns,  Ms.  Johnson,  and  Ms.  Bitter  be  upheld.   

  

  

23. 

|  Maurecia  Clark  testified  that  the  information  on  the  Seniority 

List  about  her  credential  and  initial  start  date  with  the  District  was  accurate.  It 
was  also  accurate  that  Ms.  Clark  is  a  permanent  employee;  this  status  was 
effective  at  the  beginning  of  the  2007-2008  school  year. 

Ms.  Clark  objected  to  the  District’s  conclusion  that  Ms.  Valmonte  had 

more  seniority  than  she  did.  Ms.  Clark  understood  that  Ms.  Valmonte  came 
into  the  District  under  an  emergency  credential.  Once  Ms.  Valmonte  obtained 
her  credential,  she  became a  first  year  probationary  employee.  Ms.  Clark 
testified  that  she  believed  Ms.  Valmonte  was  currently  a  second  year 
probationary  teacher,  and  had  not  achieved  the  permanent  status  that  Ms.  Clark 
possessed. 

24. 

Onreflection  in  light  of  this  testimony,  the  District  agreed  with 

Ms.  Clark  that  under  Education  Code  section  44955,  it  could  not  release  a 
permanent  employee  while  retaining  the  services  of  probationary  employee  to 
render  a  service  which  the  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

25. 

In  light  of  this  concession  by  the  District,  and  because  Mr. 

Villareal  is  also  a  permanent  employee,  Ms.  Valmonte  is  the  PE  teacher  who 
shall  receive  the  fourth  PE  layoff.  The  District’s  layoff  of  Ms.  Valmonte  is 
upheld. 

Ability  to  Bump  into  Alternative  Schools 

26.  |  Under  Education  Code  section  44865,  subdivision  (f),  a  teacher 

who  has a  valid  teaching  credential  “based  on  a  bachelor’s  degree,  student 
teaching,  and  special  fitness  to  perform,  shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for 
assignment  as  a  teacher  in”  a  District’s  alternative  schools,  if  the  teacher 
consents  to  the  assignment. 

>  The  precise  dates  during  which  Ms.  Valmonte  worked  on  an  emergency  credential  were  not  introduced; 
however,  this  was  during  the  2004-2005  school  year.  Mr.  Stehman  believed  Ms.  Valmonte  received  her 
credential  in  May  2006. 

°  Education  Code  section  44865  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  as  follows: 

A  valid  teaching  credential  issued  by  the  State  Board  of  Education  or  the  Commission  for 
Teacher  Preparation  and  Licensing,  based  on  a  bachelor’s  degree,  student  teaching,  and 
special  fitness  to  perform,  shall  be  deemed  qualifying  for  assignment  as  a  teacher  in  the 
following  assignments,  provided  that  the  assignment  of  a  teacher  to  a  position  for  which 
qualifications  are  prescribed  by  this  section  shall  be  made  only  with  the  consent  of  the  teacher: 

 

(i).  .  (i. 

(f)  Alternative  schools. 

  

10 

The  District  has  alternative  education  programs  that  will  operate  in  the  2008- 

2009  school  year.  Mr.  Stehman  conceded  that  it  is  possible  that  a  teacher  in  a  District 
alternative  education  program  might  have  less  seniority  than  a  laid  off  music  or  PE 
teacher.  In  exercising  its  discretion  to  assign  teachers  to  alternative  education 
programs,  however,  the  District  considers  whether  a  teacher  is  “highly  qualified” 
under  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB)  program,  20  United  States  Code  section 
6301,  et  seq.  Mr.  Stehman  testified  that  the  PE  and  music  teachers  who  were  laid  off 
only  have  single  subject  PE  and  music  credentials  and  are  not  “highly  qualified” 
teachers  under  the  NCLB.  No  evidence  to  the  contrary  was  provided  by  respondents. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44949  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  as  follows: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in 
Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be 
given  written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his 
or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no 
superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board, 
that  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the 
employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor. 

. 

(i).  -  [1 

(b) 
The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
is  cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  . 
If  an  employee  fails  to  request  a  hearing  on  or  before  the  date 
specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his  or  her 
waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.  The  notice  provided  for 
in  subdivision  (a)  shall  advise  the  employee  of  the  provisions  of 
this  subdivision. 

    

In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the 
(c) 
proceeding  shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance 
with  Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of 
Division  3  of  Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  and  the  governing 
board  shall  have  all  the  power  granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except 
that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1) 
five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any,  within 

i

  

(2)  The  discovery  authorized  by  Section  11507.6  of  the  Government 
Code  shall  be  available  only  if  request  is  made  therefor  within  15  days 
after  service  of  the  accusation,  and  the  notice  required  by  Section 
11505  of  the  Government  Code  shall  so  indicate. 

()--  (1 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  that: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her 
position  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907 
and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no 
probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position 
for  cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949, 
inclusive. 

. 

. 

.  a  particular  kind  of  service 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  . 
is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the 
following  school  year,  . 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing 
board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any 
of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees 
in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not 
more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees 
of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this 
section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with 
less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

(]---  (9 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 
the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of 
termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students 
thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination 
is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no 
later  than  five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held 
in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria 
used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of 
the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees 
in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on 
request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of 
termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any 
legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

12 

 

(c)  Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the 
15th  of  May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services 
of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in 
which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a 
permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and  a 
right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be 
deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such 
a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which 
their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior 
to  assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject 
which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does 
not  have  a  teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s 
major  area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the 
governing  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(W)..1] 

3. 

Except  as  set  forth in  Legal  Conclusions  4  and  5,  jurisdiction in  this 

matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  As  set  forth in 
Factual  Findings  1  through  8  and  10  through  11,  all  notices  and  jurisdictional 
requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied.  The  District  has  the  burden 
of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  proposed  reduction  or 
elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  served 
on  respondents  are  factually  and  legally  appropriate. 

4. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  9  and  Legal  Conclusion  1,  respondents 
John  Denno,  Lydia  Torres,  and  Donna  Little  have  waived  their  rights  to  a  hearing  in 
this  matter.  The  District  may  proceed  with  these  layoffs. 

5. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  14,  jurisdiction  does  not  exist  over 

minor  reductions  of  work  year  schedules  of  the  District’s  school  nurses.  Accordingly, 
District  has  discretion  to  proceed  with  reductions  in  work  year  schedules  of 
respondents  Catherine  Coleman-Johnson,  Julie  Franich,  Luckinder  Gill,  Vicki  Ginelli, 
Tina  Gonzalez,  Donna  Hawes,  Brenda  Licciardello,  Nancy  Parker,  Caitlin  Pendley, 
Jennifer  Showalter,  and  Lori  Shreve. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular 

kind  of  service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another 
manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571;  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Goleta  Union  School  Dist.  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.)  A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  the 

13 

  

 

  

statute  either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all 
or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services. 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167.) 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  4,  the  services  set  forth  in  Board  Resolution  55- 

2007/2008  are  particular  kinds  of  services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  As  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  2  and  3,  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44949. 

7. 

In  the  course  of  reducing,  discontinuing  or  eliminating  a  particular  kind 

of  service,  the  Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to 
respondents  to  perform  services  which  respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent 
to  render.  (Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kruse  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648.) 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  16,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  as  a 

whole,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Horn  is  being 
retained  to  perform  the  services  which  Mr.  Horn  is  competent  and  certificated  to 
render. 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  16,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  as  a 

whole,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Mr.  Cauchi  is  being 
retained  to  perform  the  services  which  Mr.  Cauchi  is  competent  and  certificated  to 
render. 

10. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  17  through  19,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions  as  a  whole,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Mr. 
Burns  is  being  retained  to  perform  the  services  which  Mr.  Burns  is  competent  and 
certificated  to  render. 

1l. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  17  through  19,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions  as  a  whole,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms. 
Johnson  is  being  retained  to  perform  the  services  which  Ms.  Johnson  is  competent 
and  certificated  to  render. 

12. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  17  through  19,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions  as  a  whole,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms. 
Bitter  is  being  retained  to  perform  the  services  which  Ms.  Bitter  is  competent  and 
certificated  to  render. 

 

  

14 

13. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  17  through  25,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions  as  a  whole,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms. 
Valmonte  is  being  retained  to  perform  the  services  which  Ms.  Valmonte  is  competent 
and  certificated  to  render. 

14. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  as  a  whole,  and  particularly  in 
Factual  Findings  3,  18,  20  through  25,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole,  the 
District  has  not  established  that  there  is  a  need  to  effectuate  the  layoffs  of  Ms.  Clark 
or  Mr.  Villareal  in  order  to  implement  the  Resolution  to  reduce  PKS.  Accordingly, 
the  Accusations  against  Ms.  Clark  and  Mr.  Villareal  will  be  dismissed  and  no  layoff 
shall  proceed  against  these  employees. 

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Sheldon  Horn  that  his  services  will  be  reduced 

by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Gary  Cauchi  that  his  services  will  be  reduced 

by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Cindy  Bitter  that  her  services  will  be  reduced 

by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

4. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Kim  Johnson  that  her  services  will  be  reduced 

by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Ken  Burns  that  his  services  will  be  reduced  by 
1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance 
of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

6. 

The  Accusations  against  Mauricia  Clark  and  Guillermo  Villareal  are 

dismissed. 

DATED:  April  30,  2008 

  

  

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

15 

f 

