  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
COVINA-VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoffs  of: 

THE  CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES 
LISTED  IN  ATTACHMENT  1, 

   
   

OAH  No.  L2008020284 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Eric  Sawyer,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  April  21  and  30,  2008,  in  Covina.  The 
record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing. 

Margaret  A.  Chidester,  Esq.,  Margaret  A.  Chidester  &  Associates,  represented  the 

Covina-Valley  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Glenn  Rothner,  Esq.,  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  represented  the  Respondents 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Parties  and  Jurisdiction 

represented  themselves  throughout  the  hearing. 

Respondents  James  Arellanes,  Jr.  and  David  Ho.! 

listed  in  Attachment  2.  On  the  second  day  of  the  hearing,  Respondent  Michael  Rogers,  who 
was  previously  represented  by  Mr.  Rothner,  decided  to  represent  himself  for  the  duration  of 
the  hearing. 

Robert  E.  Lindquist,  Staff  Attorney,  California  Teachers  Association,  represented 

Respondents  Tara  Chance,  Janay  Mc  Kinney  and  Kellie  Kurasz  were  present  and 

   
  

Ahlberg  did  not  submit  a  request  for  a  hearing,  a  notice  of  defense,  or  make  a  request  at  the 
hearing  for  leave  from  his  failure  to  do  either.  Therefore,  Mr.  Ahlberg  waived  his  right  to  a 
hearing  and  is  not  a  Respondent  in  this  matter.  (Ed.  Code,  §  44949,  subd.  (b).) 

certificated  District  employees.  The  District  currently  employs  804  certificated  employees. 

  

'  Mr.  Lindquist  stated  that  he  may  also  represent  Mark  Ahlberg.  However,  Mr. 

David  Samuelson,  the  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services, 

The  Respondents  listed  in  Attachment  1  were  at  all  times  mentioned 

made  and  filed  the  Accusations  in  his  official  capacity. 

  
  

1, 

2. 

  

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  07-08-26,  which  proposed  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  encompassing  105.6  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  by  the  close  of  the  2007- 
2008  school  year. 

4. 

By  no  later  than  March  15,  2008,  the  Board  and  246  certificated  employees  of 
the  District,  including  the  Respondents  listed  in  Attachment  1,  were  given  preliminary  notice 
that  those  certificated  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  following  school 
year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

5. 

The  District  gave  preliminary  layoff  notices  to  246  certificated  employees, 

even  though  the  Board  proposed  to  reduce  or  discontinue  105.6  FTEs,  in  order  to  maintain 
flexibility  to  enact  Resolution  No.  07-08-26  in  the  event  that  some  of  its  decisions  in 
effectuating  the  resolution  (such  as  the  application  of  seniority  dates,  tie-breaking  criteria, 
“bumping”  and  “skipping”)  are  not  sustained  in  this  matter. 

6. 

Of  the  246  certificated  employees  who  received  the  above-described 

preliminary  notices,  62  received  a  preliminary  notice  that  was  different  from  those  received 
by  the  others.  (The  62  employees  who  received  the  different  notices  are  indicated  by  “Ex” 
on  the  far  left  column  of  exhibit  3A.)  The  preliminary  notices  received  by  the  62  certificated 
employees  in  question  contained  the  additional  statement  “Because  of  your  credential, 
expertise,  and  current  assignments,  the  District  will  request  the  administrative  law  judge  to 
exempt  you  from  the  order  of  layoff.  You  are  being  sent  this  notice  as  a  precaution.”  (See 
exhibit  A,  an  exemplar  of  those  “precautionary  notices.”) 

7. 

Of  the  246  certificated  employees  who  received  the  preliminary  notices,  the 

Respondents  listed  in  Attachment  1  timely  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 
for  terminating  their  services  next  school  year.  Each  Respondent  listed  in  Attachment  1  was 
thereafter  served  with  an  Accusation.  The  Respondents  listed  in  Attachment  |  timely  filed 
Notices  of  Defense,  which  requested  the  instant  hearing,  except  for  Respondent  David  Platt.” 

8. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (e),  the  parties 

stipulated  to  continue  all  statutory  deadlines  of  Education  Code  sections  44944  and  44955  by 
seven  calendar  days  in  order  to  accommodate  a  continuance  of  the  second  hearing  day.  The 
parties  therefore  stipulated  that  if  a  second  day  of  hearing  was  necessary  (which  it  was),  the 
proposed  decision  of  the  ALJ  was  due  to  the  parties  on  or  before  May  14,  2008,  and  that  the 
Board  shall  give  final  notice  of  termination  of  services  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (c),  no  later  than  May  22,  2008. 

>  No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  Respondent  Platt  at  the  hearing,  but  the 
District  did  not  contend  that  Mr.  Platt  waived  his  right  to  a  hearing  by  failing  to  file  a  Notice 
of  Defense.  In  any  event,  during  the  hearing  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  against 
Respondent  Platt  (see  factual  finding  9). 

 

  

9. 

During  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusations  against  the 

individuals  listed  in  Attachment  3,  including  all  of  those  who  had  received  the  precautionary 
notices  described  above  in  factual  finding  number  6  except  for  Respondent  James  Arellanes, 
Jr.,  Respondent  Hilda  Galeana,  and  Mr.  Ahlberg. 

The  Decision  to  Reduce  or  Eliminate  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

10. 

Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-26  specifically  provides  for  the  reduction  or 

elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

(1.1) 
(1.2) 
(1.3) 
(1.4) 
(1.5) 
(1.6) 
(1.7) 
(1.8) 
(1.9) 
(1.10) 
(1.11) 
(1.12) 
(1.13) 
(1.14) 
(1.15) 
(1.16) 

Director  of  Curriculum  and  Instruction 
Principal,  K-5 
Dean  9-12 
Counselors  6-12 
Support  Services  Specialist,  Health  Care 
Classroom  Teacher,  K-6 
Classroom  Teacher,  Itinerant  Music  K-5 
Classroom  Teacher,  7-12  Computers 
Classroom  Teacher,  7-12  English 
Classroom  Teacher,  7-12  Photography 
Classroom  Teacher,  7-12  Physical  Education 
Classroom  Teacher,  7-12  Social  Science 
Classroom  Teacher,  7-12  Spanish 
Even  Start  Teacher 
Learning  Specialists,  Elementary  Schools 
Teacher  On  Special  Assignment  (TOSA) 

(2  F.T.E.) 
@GE.T.E.) 
(2  F.T.E.) 
(15  F.T.E.) 
(1  F.T.E.) 
(39  F.T.E.) 
(4  F.T.E.) 
(3  F.T.E.) 
(6  F.T.E.) 
(.6  F.T.E.) 
(4  F.T.E.) 
(6  F.T.E.) 
(2  F.T.E.) 
(3  F.T.E.) 
(12  F.T.E.) 
(3  F.T.E.) 

11. 

TOTAL 

105.6  FTEs 

The  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  105.6  FTEs  was  the  result  of  financial 

difficulties  being  experienced  by  the  District,  caused  by  the  current  state  budget  crisis, 
revenue  loss  and  a  continuing  decline  in  enrollment.  The  Board  has  determined  that  the 
proposed  reduction  or  elimination  of  such  services  will  allow  it  to  maintain  solvency  and 
provide  it  with  the  financial  flexibility  needed  to  meet  this  problem. 

   

>  However,  a  school  district  is  not  required  to  account  for  circumstances  that  occur 
after  March  15th  when  implementing  layoff  decisions.  (Lewin  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976) 
62  Cal.App.3d  977,  982.) 

consider  all  known  assured  attrition,  including  an  early  retirement  program  that  was  offered 
to  certificated  employees.? 

After  adoption  of  Resolution  No.  07-08-26,  the  Board  has  continued  to 

12. 

  

13. 

During  the  hearing,  the  District  announced  the  withdrawal  of  the  proposed 
reductions  of  the  3  FTEs  for  Even  Start  Teachers  (No.  1.14);  the  4  FTEs  for  the  itinerant 
music  teachers  in  grades  K-5  (No.  1.7);  the  12  FTEs  for  the  elementary  school  learning 
specialist  positions  (No.  1.15);  and  that  only  21  of  the  39  FTEs  for  the  K-6  classroom 
teachers  will  be  reduced  (No.  1.6).  Thus,  the  District  now  requests  the  reduction  or 
elimination of  68.6  total  FTEs. 

“Skipping” 

14. 

Pursuant  to  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-26  (exhibit  “A”  to  the  resolution),  the 

Board  identified  seven  different  types  of  positions  to  be  exempted  from  the  order  of 
certificated  layoff,  due  to  “special  training,  experience,  or  credentialing  that  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess,”  and  on  that  basis,  intended  to  deviate  from  the  usual  order  of 
terminating  certificated  employees  on  the  basis  of  seniority  (known  as  “skipping”).4 

15. 

Only  the  following  position  the  District  sought  to  skip  was  the  subject  of 

dispute  in  this  matter: 

“7.  Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing  service  in 

physical  education,  who  will  be  placed  in  a  high  school  head  football  coach  assignment,  and 
who,  if  serving  in  school  year  2008-09  will  be  placed  in  a  head  coach  assignment.” 

16. 

The  District  contends  the  above-described  position  should  be  skipped  because 

of  the  unique  experience  and  expertise  of  the  high  school  varsity  head  football  coach 
position.  The  District  also  contends  that  this  position  should  be  skipped  because  of  the 
tremendous  impact  varsity  football  has  on  a  high  school,  in  terms  of  morale,  school  spirit  and 
revenue.  Moreover,  the  sport  of  football  at  the  high  school  level  has  evolved  to  such  an 
extent  that  it  is  now  a  year-long  activity.  During  the  off-season,  the  players  participate  in 
weight-training  and  conditioning.  The  players  also  have  football  as  one  period  of  their 
school  curriculum.  The  players’  physical  and  academic  progress  is  monitored  by  the  coaches 
throughout  the  year.  The  head  coach  supervises  all  three  levels  of  football  played  at  the  high 
school,  coaches  over  140  athletes,  and  supervises  ten  staff  members  and  coaches.  During  the 
season,  the  head  coach  works  long  hours,  including  the  evenings  and  weekends.  The  head 
coach  is  also  responsible  for  various  fund-raising  activities,  including  interaction  with  the 
Booster  Club.  This  is  a  very  difficult  and  time-consuming  position,  which  few  are  qualified 
and  competent  to  perform. 

*  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  permits  a  school  district  to 
deviate  from  the  order  of  seniority  in  teacher  layoffs  when  “the  district  demonstrates  a 
specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study  . 
.  and  that  the 
employee  [who  is  retained]  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course 
or  course  of  study  ..  .  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  (See  also,  Poppers 
v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399.)

. 

  

17. 

For  the  above  reasons,  the  varsity  head  football  coach  at  Northview  High 

School  holds  a  position  that  is  combined  with  a  certificated  teaching  position.  According  to 
a  job  opportunity  announcement,  the  position  is  entitled  “Teacher/Head  Varsity  Football 
Coach.”  The  person  holding  this  position  is  expected  to  perform a  certificated  teaching 
position  and  be  the  varsity  head  football  coach.  The  job  opportunity  announcement  states 
that  the  successful  applicant  must  have  a  valid  credential  in  physical  education,  social 
science  (or  a  combination  thereof),  plus  demonstrated  competence  and  experience  coaching; 
“TvJarsity  head  coaching  experience  is  desirable.” 

18. 

|  Respondent  James  Arellanes,  Jr.  was  the  only  person  proven  to  be  the  subject 
of  the  above-described  position  sought  to  be  skipped.  As  noted  above,  he  was  also  given  a 
preliminary  layoff  notice,  in  case  the  skipping  decision  is  not  sustained.  He  is  the  varsity 
head  football  coach  of  Northview  High  School.  He  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in 
physical  education.  He  currently  holds  a  certificated  position  as  a  guidance  studies  teacher  at 
the  high  school.  Any  person  with  a  credential  allowing  them  to  teach  at  a  high  school  allows 
them  to  perform  the  guidance  studies  position.  Mr.  Arellanes  has  tremendous  skill  and 
experience  coaching  football.  For  example,  he  was  a  star  quarterback  in  high  school,  junior 
college  and  at  a  major  college  football  program.  In  1997  he  was  on  the  developmental  squad 
of  an  NFL  team  and  in  1998  he  was  invited  to  their  training  camp.  From  1998-2001,  Mr. 
Arellanes  played  on  professional  football  teams  in  NFL  Europe,  the  Arena  Football  League 
and  the  XFL.  Mr.  Arellanes  also  has  many  years  of  significant  experience  coaching  various 
levels  of  high  school  football.  He  has  enjoyed  success  as  the  head  coach  of  the  Northview 
High  School  varsity  football  team,  in  that  last  season  the  team  won  their  first  league  football 
championship  in  17  years,  and  made  it  to  the  C.I.F.  playoffs.  More  importantly,  only  two 
students  have  had  to  leave  the  football  program  because  of  academic  problems  while  Mr. 
Arellanes  has  been  the  varsity  head  coach. 

19. 

(A)  Nonetheless,  it  was  not  established  that  the  position  held  by  Respondent 

Arellanes,  Jr.  is  properly  subject  to  skipping.  It  is  true  that  the  position  of  teacher/head 
varsity  football  coach  requires  special  training  and  experience;  Mr.  Arellanes  certainly  has 
both.  However,  it  was  not  established  that  others  with  more  seniority  in  the  District  do  not 
possess  the  same  special  training  and  experience  to  also  perform  this  position. 

*  As  noted  above,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  requires  that  in 

order  to  skip,  it  must  be  shown  that  the  position  involves  such  special  training  and  experience 
“which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  In  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the 
Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567,  the  selective  retention 
of  bilingual  speaking  teachers  over  monolingual  teachers  was  prohibited  where  it  was  not 
shown  that  senior  employees  were  unable  to  perform  the  duties  of  those  to  be  “skipped.”  In 
a  law  review  article  cited  by  the  District  regarding  this  issue,  which  was  also  the  subject  of 
discussion  in  the  Alexander  case,  the  commentator  notes  that  “skipping  because  of  special 
skills  may  not  be  permitted,  such  as  when a skill  is  very  narrowly  defined  and  is  not  the 
actual  academic  subject  in  question.”  (See,  Ozsogomonyan,  Teacher  Layoffs  in  California, 

   

(July  1979)  30  Hastings  L.J.  1727,  1749.)   

  

   (B)  There  is  no  dispute  that  many  of  the  Respondents  with  greater  seniority 

are  credentialed  and  competent  to  teach  guidance  studies  at  the  high  school  level.  Next, 
there  was  no  evidence  presented  indicating  that  there  were  no  other  senior  certificated 
employees  within  the  District  who  do  not  have  the  requisite  training,  experience  and 
credentialing  to  be  a  varsity  head  football  coach  and  teach  guidance  studies.  To  the  contrary, 
there  was  an  abundance  of  evidence  indicating  that  there  are  such  persons.  For  example, 
there  are  two  other  high  schools  within  the  District  that  have  successful  varsity  football 
programs.  Each  of  those  teams  has  assistant  coaches.  Mr.  Arellanes  testified  that  six  of  his 
assistant  coaches  are  certificated  employees;  some  teach  physical  education,  and  two  teach 
guidance  studies.  Four  of  his  assistant  coaches  were  on  the  coaching  staff  before  Mr. 
Arellanes  took  the  position.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  job  announcement  for  Mr. 
Arellanes’  position  stated  that  only  past  coaching  experience  was  required;  head  coaching 
experience  was  “desirable.”  Finally,  some  of  the  Respondents  who  testified  in  this  matter 
also  have  high  school  football  coaching  experience. 

(C)  The  skipping  protocol  developed  by  the  Board  for  this  position  is 

narrowly  drawn.  The  District’s  evidence  supporting  this  skip  focused  exclusively  on  the 
special  experience  possessed  by  Mr.  Arellanes,  as  opposed  to  the  certificated  position 
attached  to  his  head  coaching  duties.  These  are  signs  that  the  Board  has  considered  only  the 
experience  and  expertise  of  the  person  performing  the  position  in  question,  as  opposed  to  the 
credentials  and  competence  of  others  who  may  do  so.  Finally,  it  was  not  established  that  any 
of  the  District’s  concerns  regarding  losing  Mr.  Arellanes  will  come  to  fruition,  which  is 
further  evidence  that  this  position  is  not  subject  to  skipping.  For  example,  the  District’s 
other  high  school  football  programs  are  successful,  even  though  those  coaches  do  not  have 
the  same  kind  of  football  experience  as  Mr.  Arellanes.  Even  assuming  the  Northview  High 
School  team  is  less  successful  next  season,  that  still  does  not  mean  that  school  spirit  or 
revenues  generated  by  the  football  program  will  disappear.  Even  great  coaches  have  losing 
seasons.  In  sum,  it  is  apparent  that  the  decision  to  skip  over  Mr.  Arellanes’  position  was  due 
to  the  quality  of  his  experience  and  not  because  he  is  the  only  certificated  employee  in  the 
District  who  can  perform  this  function. 

Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-26  also  established  tie-breaking  criteria  to 

determine  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on 
the  same  date  (exhibit  “B”  to  the  resolution).  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  used  in  this 
matter  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  amongst  certificated  personnel.  The  validity  or  application 
of  the  tie-breaking  process  is  not  subject  to  dispute  in  this  matter,  except  as  follows. 

   

Tie-Breaking  Criteria 

20. 

   

  

21. 

Respondent  Michael  Rogers  challenged  the  validity  of  tie-breaking  criterion 

G,  which  provided  one  point  for  assignment  as  a  BTSA  Support  Provider  within  the  last  five 
years  in  the  District.  The  basis  for  that  criterion  is  that  certificated  employees  who  help  new 
teachers  themselves  receive  extensive  training  and  gain  valuable  experience.  The  fact  that 
the  number  of  new  teachers  will  be  reduced  next  year  because  of  the  proposed  layoffs  does 
not  take  away  from  the  past  experience  and  training  already  obtained  by  those  who 
participated  in  the  BTSA  program.  Therefore,  it  was  established  that  this  tie-breaking 
criterion  is  solely  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

22. 

Respondent  Rogers  also  challenged  the  validity  of  tie-breaking  criterion  E, 

which  provided  two  points  for  each  earned  master’s  degree.  The  basis  for  this  criterion  was 
that  a  person  with  a  master’s  degree  has  additional  training  that  enriches  his/her  ability  to 
teach  students.  In  applying  this  criterion,  the  District  also  gave  2  points  to  those  with  a 
doctorate.  Mr.  Rogers’  contention  is  unpersuasive  that  those  with  a  doctorate  should  be 
given  more  credit  than  those  with  a  master’s  degree,  in  that  it  was  not  shown  that  the 
different  degrees  necessarily  result  in  a  greater  degree  of  teaching  enrichment.  For  example, 
Mr.  Rogers  has  a  Juris  Doctorate  degree.  It  is  not  apparent  from  the  evidence  that  his  J.D.  is 
more  beneficial  to  a  school  environment  than  a  person  with  a  master’s  in  an  educational 
discipline.  Therefore,  it  was  established  that  this  tie-breaking  criterion  is  solely  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

24. 

23. 

Respondent  Rogers  also  challenged  the  tie-breaking  process  because  no  credit 
was  given  to  those  with  athletic  coaching  experience.  Mr.  Rogers  points  to  the  fact  that  the 
District  “skipped”  over  the  position  held  by  the  Northview  High  School  varsity  head  football 
coach  as  demonstrating  such  an  error.  That  skipping  decision  relates  only  to  whether  a 
position  requires  special  training,  experience,  or  credentialing  that  others  with  more  seniority 
do  not  possess,  which  is  a  different  inquiry  from  how  to  rank  those  with  the  same  seniority 
date.  In  any  event,  school  districts  are  given  wide  discretion  in  determining  tie-breaking 
criteria.°  In  this  case,  the  District  reasonably  exercised  its  discretion  by  giving  credit  for  tie- 
breaking  purposes  to  those  with  additional  educational-related  experience.  It  cannot  be 
concluded  that  the  failure  to  include  athletic  coaching  experience  in  the  tie-breaking  criteria 
was  an  abuse  of  discretion  or  otherwise  rendered  the  tie-breaking  process  not  solely  related 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

   

valid,  was  fairly  applied  and  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

°  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides  only  that  such  criteria  be 

Based  on  the  above,  it  was  established  that  the  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  is 

The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  FTE  positions  in  question  will  not  reduce 

“solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof.” 

services  below  mandated  levels. 

Overall  Findings 

25. 

26.  —  The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  containing  employees’  seniority  dates, 

current  assignments  and  locations,  credentials  and  authorizations.  Mr.  Samuelson  and  other 
District  administrators  were  responsible  for  compiling  the  seniority  list.  To  assure  the 
accuracy  of  the  seniority  list,  certificated  employees  were  twice  notified  in  writing  of  the 
District’s  records  regarding  their  information,  in  order  to  allow  them  to  confirm  or  challenge 
the  accuracy  of  that  information.  The  seniority  list  was  updated  based  on  new  information 
obtained  from  certificated  employees  that  was  verified.  The  initial  seniority  list  presented  at 
the  hearing  (exhibit  3)  was  updated  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  to  account  for  the 
various  changes  caused  by  the  withdrawn  Accusations  and  the  FTE  positions  the  District 
decided  to  no  longer  reduce  or  eliminate  (exhibit  3A).  It  was  established  that  the  information 
on  the  seniority  list  is  accurate. 

27. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  implement  and  determine  the  proposed 

layoffs.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  other 
credentials  entitling  them  to  “bump”  other  employees  or  be  “skipped.”  In  determining  who 
would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  each  kind  of  particular  service  reduced,  the  District  counted 
the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on 
incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

28. 

The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described  particular 

kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its 
discretion. 

29. 

The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds 

of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  in  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

30.  |  No  permanent  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to 

render  a  service  that  the  Respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

The  Coaches 

31. 

By  virtue  of  the  District  seeking  to  skip  Mr.  Arellanes’  position  as 

teacher/varsity  head  football  coach,  a  number  of  other  certificated  employees  subject  to 
layoff  who  also  have  coaching  experience  testified  in  this  matter. 

32. 

The  Respondents  with  coaching  experience  who  testified  were  Christine 
Costello  (junior  varsity  softball),  Mae  Wong  (jumping  events  for  track  and  field),  John 
Williams  (basketball),  Ryan  Williams  (freshman,  junior  varsity  and  varsity  football; 
throwing  events  for  track  and  field),  Albert  Lorello  (softball,  volleyball,  and  soccer), 
Matthew  Froid  (middle  school  football,  track  and  field,  basketball,  soccer,  and  high  school 
basketball  and  baseball),  and  Michael  Rogers  (freshman,  junior  varsity  and  varsity  football, 
junior  varsity  baseball).  Each  has  a  distinguished  record  of  success  in  their  respective 
coaching  capacities  and  their  efforts  have  been  appreciated  by  the  District. 

  

 

  

33. 

|  These  Respondents  essentially  contend  that  if  Mr.  Arellanes’  position  is 
skipped,  so  should  their  certificated  positions  so  they  may  also  continue  their  coaching 
duties.  As  discussed  above,  Mr.  Arellanes’  position  is  not  the  proper  subject  of  skipping,  so 
he  is  subject  to  receiving a  final  layoff  notice.  Therefore,  the  contention  of  these 
Respondents  is  not  determinative  of  the  outcome  of  this  matter  as  to  them. 

William  Selak 

Michael  Rogers 

34. 

The  initial  seniority  list  (exhibit  3)  showed  that  Respondent  William  Selak, 

who  is  credentialed  to  teach  music  for  grades  nine  and  below,  bumped  Respondent  Andrew 
Henken,  who  teaches  music  at  various  elementary  schools  but  has  less  seniority.  The 
updated  seniority  list  (exhibit  3A)  indicates  that  Respondent  Selak  is  no  longer  subject  to 
layoff  due  to  the  changes  that  occurred  during  the  hearing.  Respondent  Selak  should 
therefore  not  receive a  final  layoff  notice. 

35. 

(A)  Respondent  Michael  Rogers  is  a  high  school  history  teacher.  He  contends 

the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  not  correctly  applied  to  him,  which  resulted  in  his  receiving  a 
lower  seniority  ranking,  subjecting  him  to  the  jeopardy  of  layoff. 

(B)  Respondent  Rogers’  seniority  date  is  August  26,  2005,  which  placed  him 

in  a  tie  with  several  other  certificated  employees.  After  application  of  the  tie-breaking 
criteria,  Respondent  Rogers  was  given a  seniority  number  of  661,  which  placed  him  a  few 
spots  below  Respondent  Jason  Van  Duyne  (seniority  number  654),  who  also  teaches  high 
school  history  classes.  Mr.  Van  Duyne  was  given  five  tie-breaking  points;  Mr.  Rogers  just 
four  points.  Both  were  given  two  points  for  having  a  master’s  degree  (Mr.  Rogers  was  given 
credit  for  his  J.D.)  The  difference  between  the  two  was  that  only  Mr.  Van  Duyne  was  given 
one  point  credit  for  his  experience  in  the  BTSA  program.  Mr.  Rogers  has  no  such 
experience. 

(C)  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  properly  applied  to  Respondent  Rogers.  As 

found  above,  the  credit  Mr.  Van  Duyne  received  for  his  experience  in  the  BTSA  program 
was  valid.  Respondent  Rogers  did  not  establish  that  he  was  entitled  to  additional  credits 
because  he  received  a  doctorate  degree  as  opposed  to  a  master’s  degree,  or  because  he  had 
past  athletic  coaching  experience.  There  is  no  basis  to  change  his  seniority  number. 

 

  

Yemina  Arellanes 

36. 

Respondent  Yemina  Arellanes  is  a  high  school  social  studies  teacher.  She 

contends  her  seniority  date  of  August  30,  2006  is  five  days  later  than  approximately  40 
others  who,  like  her,  began  teaching  with  the  District  at  the  start  of  the  2006-2007  school 
year.  However,  Ms.  Arellanes  agrees  that  her  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  was 
August  30,  2006.  Her  seniority  date  is  the  same  as  three  others,  indicating  that  she  is  not 
It  was  not  established  that  the 
being  singled  out  or  treated  differently  than  everybody  else. 
seniority  date  of  August  25,  2006,  assigned  to  the  40  other  employees,  is  incorrect.  Under 
these  circumstances,  there  is  no  basis  to  change  Ms.  Arellanes’  seniority  date. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  party  asserting  a  claim  or  making  charges  in  an  administrative  hearing 
generally  has  the  burden  of  proof.  (Brown  v.  City  of Los  Angeles  (2002)  102  Cal.App.4th 
155.)  For  example,  in  administrative  hearings  dealing  with  personnel  matters,  the  burden  of 
proof  is  ordinarily  on  the  agency  prosecuting  the  charges  (Parker  v.  City  of Fountain  Valley 
(1981)  127  Cal.App.3d  99,  113);  in  personnel  matters  concerning  the  dismissal  of  a  teacher 
for  cause,  the  burden  of  proof  is  similarly  on  the  discharging  school  district  (Gardner  v. 
Commission  on  Prof.  Competence  (1985)  164  Cal.App.3d  1035).  As  no  other  law  or  statute 
requires  otherwise,  the  standard  of  proof  in  this  case  requires  proof  to  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence.  (Evid.  Code,  §  115.)  In  this  case,  the  District  has  the  burden  of  establishing  by  a 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  cause  to  give a  final  layoff  notices  to  certificated  employees 
given  notice  of  this  proceeding. 

2. 

(A) 

Respondents  argue  the  District’s  layoff  decision  is  invalid  because  part 
of  the  decision-making  included  the  anticipated  reduced  revenue  from  declining  enrollment. 
Respondents’  argument  is  unconvincing.  As  stated  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  on  the 
basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  Education  Code  section  44955,  and,  “in 
fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff,  section 
44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that  reduction.” 
Such  a  decision  may  be  overruled  if  proven  to  be  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  a  motivation  to 
maintain  flexibility  in  light  of  financial  uncertainty  is  neither.  (Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  808.) 

(B)  _  Inthis  case,  the  District  met  its  burden  of  establishing  by  a 

preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  it  proposes  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  instant  layoff  decision  was  caused  by 
overall  budget  concerns  and  not  a  simple  reduction  in  average  daily  attendance  (ADA). 
Thus,  the  reason  for  the  layoff,  i.e.  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
(PKS),  was  correctly  stated  in  the  pertinent  notices.  There  is  nothing  in  Education  Code 
section  44955  prohibiting  an  expected  decline  in  student  attendance  from  being  one  factor  of 
many  in  the  overall  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Factual 
Findings  1-13.) 

  

 

  

3. 

(A) 

Respondents  contend  that  by  serving  preliminary  notices  on  246 

certificated  employees  for  only  105.6  FTEs,  the  District  essentially  deprived  all  involved 
certificated  employees  of  the  requisite  notice  that  they  would  in  all  probability  be  subject  to 
layoff,  thus  depriving  them  of  due  process.  Respondents  therefore  contend  that  all  the  layoff 
notices  should  be  rescinded. 

(B) 

There  are  no  known  cases  directly  on  point.  However,  Respondents 
cite  to  Karbach  v.  Board  of Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355.  In  Karbach,  the  court 
noted  that  because  the  March  15th  notice  date  is  intended  to  insure  that  the  affected 
employees  are  informed  of  the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability 
they  will  not  be  reemployed,  the  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  (/d.,  at  361-363.)  If  the  notice  specifies  only  one  of  the  two  statutory 
reasons  for  dismissal  (ADA  or  PKS),  the  district  may  not  later  at  the  hearing  attempt  to 
justify  dismissal  on  the  other  ground  not  stated  in  the  preliminary  layoff  notice.  (/d.) 

In  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116 

Cal.App3d  831,  841  (Santa  Clara),  the  court  found  that  the  March  15th  notice  is  “only  the 
first  step  in  the  termination  process,  and  that  the  Karbach  decision  does  not  require  that  the 
preliminary  notice  specify  the  precise  number  of  teachers  to  be  terminated  or  the  specific 
positions  to  be  eliminated;  those  details  emerge  as  the  administrative  hearing  process 
progresses.  It  is  enough  that  the  Board  specify  in  the  March  15th  notice  the  statutory 
grounds  set  forth  in  section  13447  (now  section  44955)  for  staff  reduction.”  (Jd.) 

In  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  the 

court  similarly  recognized  the  statutory  necessity  of  giving  more  notices  than  the  number  of 
teachers  who  may  actually  be  laid  off.  The  A//en  court  observed  that  the  present  statutory 
timetable  is  unrealistic,  and  that  although  a  teacher  who  is  terminated  has  preferential  rights 
to  reemployment  should  the  district  decide  fewer  reductions  are  necessary,  “this  provides 
little  solace  to  the  understandably  upset  teacher  who  is  given  a  needless  preliminary  (and 
perhaps  final)  notice  because  the  school  district  cannot  accurately  ascertain  its  financial 
circumstances  for  the  ensuring  school  year  until  the  chaptering  of  the  state  budget.”  (/d.,  at 
pp.  632-633.)  Therefore,  the  Allen  court  followed  Santa  Clara.  “The  preliminary  notice  is 
sufficient  if  it  specifies  the  statutory  grounds  set  forth  in  section  44955.”  (Id.) 

(C) 

The  above  authorities  indicate  that  for  purposes  of  notice  to  certificated 

employees  in  a  layoff  proceeding,  the  preliminary  layoff  notice  must  only  specify  which  of 
the  two  statutory  grounds  (or  both)  are  being  relied  upon.  Pursuant  to  the  Santa  Clara  and 
Allen  cases,  the  District  is  legally  permitted  to  issue  preliminary  notices  to  a  greater  number 
of  certificated  employees  than  FTEs  sought  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated,  so  long  as  the 
notices  state  the  proper  basis  for  the  proposed  layoffs.  In  this  case,  it  was  not  established  that 
the  District  deprived  Respondents  of  the  notice  required  by  the  Education  Code  by  giving 
preliminary  notices  to  246  certificated  employees  for  a  reduction  of  105.6  FTEs.  The 
preliminary  notices  Respondents  received  stated  the  basis  for  the  layoff,  i.e.  PKS.  Thus,  the 
Karbach  case  is  not  applicable.  There  was  also  no  showing  that  any  Respondent  was 
prejudiced  by  the  District  proceeding  in  this  way.  (Factual  Findings  1-9.) 

11 

 

  

4. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44944 

and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1-9.) 

5. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-26  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Services  will  not  be  reduced 
below  mandated  levels.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  those  particular 
services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning 
of  Education  Code  section  44949,  (Factual  Findings  1-36.) 

6. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 
to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Factual  Findings  1-36.) 

7. 

Considering  that  the  proposed  skip  of  the  position  held  by  Mr.  Arellanes  is  not 
sustained,  no  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  that 
a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Factual  Findings  1-36.) 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusations  against  the  Respondents  listed  in  Attachment  3  are  dismissed. 

None  of  those  Respondents  shall  be  given  notice  that  their  services  will  not  required  for  the 
next  school  year. 

2. 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  William  Selak  is  dismissed.  He  shall  not 

be  given  notice  that  his  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year. 

3. 

The  Accusations  are  sustained  as  against  the  remaining  Respondents  listed  in 
Attachment  1.  The  Board  may  give a  final  notice  of  layoff  to  those  Respondents  correlating 
to  a  maximum  of  the  68.6  FTEs  that  have  not  yet  been  withdrawn  from  reduction  and/or 
elimination.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  those  Respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and  such  notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority. 

Dated:  May  12,  2008 

ERIC  SAWYER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

12

  

