BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
TEMECULA  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008020596 

Respondents  listed  in  Appendices  A  and  B. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Temecula,  California  on  April  15  and  16,  2008. 

Margaret  A.  Chidester,  Margaret  A.  Chidester  &  Associates,  represented  the 

Temecula  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Tosdal,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  the  respondents  listed 

in  Appendix  A  to  this  Proposed  Decision. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  respondents  listed  in  Appendix  B  to 

this  Proposed  Decision. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  16,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Chris  Cordner,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources  of  the  Temecula 
Valley  Unified  School  District,  made  and  filed  the  accusations  dated  March  26,  2008  in  his 
official  capacity  as  the  designee  of  Carol  Leigthy,  Ed.D.,  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

2. 

Respondents!  are  certificated  District  employees. 

  

' 
Appendices  A  and  B.

Unless  otherwise  noted,  the  term  “respondents”  refers  collectively  to  all  176  respondents  listed  in 

  

3. 

In  early  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
the  District  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  of  its  recommendation  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  services  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

4. 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-08/24, 
determining  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the 
current  school  year.  The  Governing  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  must  be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time  equivalent 
(FTE)  positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Elementary  Principal 
Director—Categorical,  Library  &  Summer  School 
Director—Human  Resources  Development 
TOSA—Teacher  on  Special  Assignment—EL, 

Library,  Title  I,  Health 

POSA—Principal  on  Special  Assignment 
Elementary  School  Assistant  Principal 
Middle  School  Assistant  Principal 
High  School  Assistant  Principal 
Program  Specialist—Special  Education 
Adaptive  PE  Classroom  Teacher—Special  Ed. 
School  Psychologist—Special  Education 
Nurse—Special  Education 
PE  Elementary  Planning  Time  Teacher  (K-5) 
Music  Elementary  Planning  time  Teacher  (K-5) 
Special  Education  Classroom  Teacher—Deaf  and 

Hard  of  Hearing 

Elementary  Classroom  Teacher  (K-8) 
Elementary  Planning  Time  Teacher  (K-5) 

2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

4.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
7.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
3.0  FTE 
2.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
4.5  FTE 
1.5  FTE 
4.5  FTE 
5.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 
56.0  FTE 
13.6  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  total  111.1  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

5. 

The  Governing  Board  further  determined  in  Resolution  No.  2007-08/24  that  it 

would  be  necessary  to  retain  certificated  employees  who  possess  special  training  and 
competency  that  other  certificated  employees  with  more  seniority  might  not  possess,  to  wit: 

a. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  administrative  credentials  who  are 

currently  assigned  to  administrative  positions,  and  who  will  be  assigned  to  administrative 
positions  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

b. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess a  credential  authorizing  service  in 

special  education,  including  intern  specialist,  and  except  adaptive  physical  education  teacher, 
who  are  presently  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  credential,  and  who  will  be  assigned 
within  the  scope  of  that  credential  for  the  2008-09  school  year, 

2 

  

 

c. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing  service  as  a 
Program  Specialist  and  who  will  be  assigned  as  a  Program  Specialist  for  the  2008-09  school 
year. 

d. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  special  education  temporary 
credential  under  a  STSP/PIP  permit  who  are  presently  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that 
credential,  and  who  will  be  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  special  education  credential  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year. 

e. 

Certificated  personnel  in  Temecula  Valley  Charter  School  (TVCS) 
service  who  are  currently  assigned  to  TVCS,  and  who  will  be  assigned  to  TVCS  teaching 
positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

f. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing  service  in 
science,  math,  foreign  language  (Spanish  &  French)  who  are  presently  assigned  within  the 
scope  of  that  credential,  and  who  will  be  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  credential  for  the 
2008-09  school  year. 

g 

Certificated  personnel  who  have  a  Board  Authorization  per  Education 

Code  sections  44256(b),  or  44258.2,  or  44263  and  have  been  approved  and  who  are  presently 
assigned  within  the  scope  of  the  Board  Authorization  and  who  will  be  assigned  within  the 
scope  of  that  Board  Authorization  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

h. 

Certificated  personnel  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing  service  as  a 

Special  Education  program  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (TOSA)  assigned  to  Autism  or 
Behavior  Specialist  programs  who  are  presently  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  credential, 
and  who  will  be  assigned  as  a  TOSA  within  the  scope  of  that  credential  for  the  2008-09 
school  year. 

i. 

Certificated  personne!  who  possess  a  credential  authorizing  service  as 
an  EETT  program  manager  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (TOSA)  assigned  to  the  EETT 
program  who  are  presently  assigned  within  the  scope  of  that  credential,  and  who  will  be 
assigned  as  a  TOSA  within  the  scope  of  that  credential  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

6. 

The  Governing  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  determine 

which  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result 
of  the  reduction  of  the  aforementioned  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Governing  Board 
further  directed  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of 
these  particular  kinds  of  services. 

7. 

Subsequent  to  the  action  the  Governing  Board  took  on  March  10,  2008  to 

reduce  services  by  111.1  FTE  positions,  the  District  continued  to  evaluate  personnel  needs  in 
the  District.  Since  the  Governing  Board’s  action,  after  taking  into  consideration  upcoming 
positively  assured  attrition,  resignations,  and  retirements,  the  District  has  now  determined  it 

  

3

can  meet  its  fiscal  needs  by  reducing  services  by  a  total  of  95.5  FTE positions  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year.” 

8. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  on  respondents  a 

written  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended,  and  that  the  Governing  Board  had 
determined,  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The 
notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  determination.  The  notice  advised 
respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  and  those  respondents  each  had  to  deliver  a  request 
for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  of  termination  by a  specific  date, 
which  date  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served. 

The  recommendation  and  determination  that  respondents  be  terminated  from 

employment  was  not  related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

9. 

Respondents  timely  filed  written  requests  for  hearing  to  determine if there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  accusations  were  thereafter 
timely  served  on  respondents.  Respondents  timely  filed  notices  of  defense.  Certain 
individual  certificated  employees  failed  to  file  a  timely  notice  of  defense  and  the  District 
declined  to  waive  this  time  requirement  as  to  those  employees.*  All  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

10. 

The  services  the  Governing  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  2007-08/24 

were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning 
of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise 
of  discretion. 

11. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation of particular  kinds of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

12. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

Specifically,  the  District  rescinded  the  adaptive  PE  classroom  teacher-special  education  1.0  FTE  reduction, 
. 
and  amended  the  school  psychologist  FTE  reduction  from  4.5  to  |.5  positions,  and  the  administrative  position  FTE 
reduction  from  [8  to  7  positions, 

Certificated  emplo 

Daniel  Garcia,  Marvin  Morton,  and  Elizabeth  Frank  claimed  to  have  signed 

> 
requests  for  a  hearing  and  notices  of  defense  and  transmitted  these  documents  to  their  site  representatives  in  timely 
fashion,  No  documentation  was  produced  in  support of  these  claims,  and  the  District  claimed  that  its  Human. 
Resources  office  never  received  any  such  documents.  Based  on  these  considerations,  the  ALJ  ruled  at  the  outset  of 
the  hearing  that  these  three  individuals  had  waived  their  right  to  participate  as  respondents. 

   

4 

 

  

  

13. 

Initially,  about  210  certificated  employees  received  layoff  notices  in 

connection  with  the  111.1  FTE  positions  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  eliminate.  The 
District  did  not  know  in  advance  to  what  extent  the  skipping  directives  prescribed  in  the 
Resolution  would  be  challenged  and,  if  challenged,  would  be  upheld  in  this  proceeding.  The 
District  took  great  care  in  attempting  to  determine  the  likelihood  that  particular  individuals  in 
particular  assignments  would  or  might  reasonably  be  subject  to  layoff.  The District’s 
issuance  of  termination  notices  was  based  on  its  careful  and  reasonable  assessment, 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion,  and  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious. 

Alleged  Retention of Less  Tenured  Staff 

14. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 
services  which  any  respondent  with  more  seniority  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 
Further,  and  with  regard  to  certain  employees  specifically  identified  by  respondents: 

a. 

Retention  of Mike  Vaez  and  Rachel  Ross,  and  layoff of Dennis  Perez, 

Patrick  DeLa  Cruz,  Darcy  Hernandez,  Greg  Page,  Debra  Berna,  and  Amber  Lane.  The 
District  has  rescinded  the  layoff  notice  issued  to  Dennis  Perez,  who  had  the  same  seniority 
date  as,  but  more  tiebreaker  points  than,  Mike  Vaez.  Rachel  Ross  has  a  single  subject 
credential  in  English  and  teaches  middle  school  language  arts.  Patrick  DeLa  Cruz,  Darcy 
Hernandez,‘  Greg  Page,  and  Debra  Bernal  each  have  higher  seniority  than  Ms.  Ross,  and 
have  supplemental  authorizations  to  teach  English.  However,  the  District  determined  that 
none  are  NCLB  (No  Child  Left  Behind)  compliant  in  English,  and  thus  are  not  qualified  to 
“bump”  (i.e.,  displace)  Ms.  Ross.  On  the  other  hand,  Amber  Lane,  who  also  has  a 
supplemental  authorization  to  teach  English,  is  NCLB  compliant  in  that  subject.  The  District 
has,  however,  determined  that  Ms.  Lane,  who  is  presently  an  elementary  school  teacher,  is 
not  qualified  to  teach  at  the  secondary  level,  because  of  the  lack  of  any  indication  that  she 
has  ever  taught  at  that  level  in  the  past. 

b. 
Deanne  Johnson. 

Layoff of Deanne  Johnson.  The  District  did  not  issue  a  layoff  notice  to 

- 

c. 

Delayed  layoff of Audra  McGuire.  Though  the  District  did  not  issue 
layoff  notices  to  all  employees  simultaneously,  Audra  McGuire  timely  received  a  notice  of 
termination  prior  to  March  15,  2008. 

Darcy  Hernandez  is  an  elementary  school  teacher  with  a  multiple  subject  credential,  as  well  as  a 
‘ 
supplementary  authorization  in  English.  She  is  NCLB  compliant  with  regard  to  her  credential,  but  not  with  regard 
to  her  supplementary  authorization.  Ms.  Hernandez  credibly  testified  that  she  did  not  realize  she  was  not  NCLB. 
compliant  in  her  English  supplemental  authorization  until  some  point  during  these  layoff  proceedings.  She  did  not 
testify  that  the  District  erroneously  told  her  she  possessed  such  compliance,  however.  Instead,  she  made  the 
assumption  that  her  NCLB  compliance—which  in  fact  applied  only  to  her  multiple  subject  credential—applied  as 
well  to  her  supplementary  authorization.  Respondents  cited  no  authority  in  support  of  their  assertion  that  the 

District’s  actions  or  policies  violated  the  due  process  rights  of  Ms.  Hernandez.   

d. 

Layoff  of  Timothy  Woods.  The  District  properly  served  a  layoff  notice 

on  PE  teacher  Timothy  Woods.  Mr.  Woods  does  not  have  the  right  to  bump  more  junior 
certificated  employees  who  teach  middle  school  math  and  science,  since  all  District  middle 
school  math  and  science  classes  are  taught  in  a  departmentalized  setting,  and  Mr.  Woods’ 
multiple-subject  credential  does  not  authorize  him  to  teach  such  classes  in  such a  setting. 

e. 

Retention  of Rodney  Bayaca.  Rodney  Bayaca  is  a  school  counselor. 

Neither  Mr.  Bayaca  nor  any  more  senior  counselor  received a  layoff  notice. 

f. 

Layoff of Martin  Morton,  Paul  Rittenberg,  and  Stephen  Stametelatos. 

Though  these  three  employees  each  received  layoff  notices,  the  District  in  fact  seeks  to 
exempt  them  from  layoff;  they  do  not  appear  on  the  District’s  final  proposed  layoff  list. 
Respondents  have  neither  challenged  nor  presented  evidence  that  the  exemption  of  these 
three  employees  would  violate  the  Governing  Board’s  “skipping”  (i.e.,  exemption)  criteria  or 
would  otherwise  be  improper. 

g 

Retention  of Gina  Martinot  retained,  and  layoff of Dennis  Perez.  The 

layoff  notice  issued  to  Dennis  Perez  has  been  rescinded. 

Alleged  Inability  to  Demonstrate  Adequate  Grounds for  Skipping/Retention  of Less  Tenured 
Staff 

15. 

|  The  Governing  Board’s  skipping  criteria  are  supported  by  adequate  grounds 
and  reflect  a  reasonable  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  District’s  application  of  the  Board’s 
skipping  criteria  was  proper;  the  District  did  not  improperly  skip  certificated  employees. 
Further,  and  with  regard  to  certain  employees  specifically  identified  by  respondents: 

a. 

Layoff of Kelly  Manzani,  Leslie  Bouchard,  and  Stephen  Stametelatos. 

The  District  stated  at  the  hearing  that  neither  Kelly  Manzani  nor  Leslie  Bouchard  will  be  laid 
off.  As  noted  above,  the  District  is  seeking  to  exempt  Stephen  Stametelatos. 

b. 

Layoff of Krystal  Fielstra.  The  District  is  seeking  to  exempt  Krystal 
Fielstra.  Respondents  have  neither  challenged  nor  presented  evidence  that  the  skipping  of 
Ms.  Fielstra  would  violate  the  Governing  Board’s  skipping  criteria  or  would  otherwise  be 
improper. 

c. 

Layoff of Leticia  Del  Moral.  Leticia  Del  Moral,  a  certificated 

psychologist,  is  bilingual  and  has  the  skills  to  work  with  the  District’s  second-language 
students.  However,  no  evidence  was  presented  that  Ms.  Del  Moral  is  English-Learner 
certified  or,  as  claimed,  a  “bilingual  specialist.”  Further,  Ms.  Del  Moral  has  a  PPS 
(psychology  or  counseling)  credential;  she  is  not  credentialed  as  a  teacher.  Additionally,  no 
evidence  was  presented  or  specific  argument  articulated  as  to  how  Ms.  Moral’s  termination 
would  be  improper  in  connection  with  any  skipping  criteria  or  vis-a-vis  other  employees.  In 
any  event,  the  District  no  longer  intends  to  lay  off  Ms.  Del  Moral;  her  name  does  not  appear 
on  the  District’s  final  proposed  layoff  list. 

6 

 

d. 

e. 

e. 

f. 

has  rescinded  the  layoff  notice  issued  to  Dennis  Perez. 

Retention  of Mike  Vaez,  layoff of Dennis  Perez.  As  noted,  the  District 

notice  to  Deanne  Johnson. 

Layoff 

of  Deanne  Johnson.  As  noted,  the  District  did  not  issue  a  layoff 

The  Alleged  Reduction  of Particular  Kinds  of Services  Below  Legally-Mandated  Levels 

16. 

The  proposed  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services  will  not  result  in  a 
deprivation  to  District  students  of  any  services  mandated  by  state  or  federal  law.  Further, 
and  with  regard  to  certain  employees  specifically  identified  by  respondents: 

a. 

Layoff of Leticia  Del  Moral.  No  evidence  was  presented  that  Ms.  Del 

Moral  is,  as  claimed,  a  “bilingual  specialist.”  Further,  no  evidence  was  presented  that 
federal-  and  state-mandated  service  levels  will  not  be  met  as  a  result  of  the  layoff  of  Ms.  Del 
Moral.  As  noted,  the  District  no  longer  intends  to  lay  off  Leticia  Del  Moral. 

b. 

Layoff of Nicole  Lombardi-Risen.  As  noted,  the  District  has  rescinded 

its  proposed  elimination  of  the  1  FTE  adaptive  PE  classroom  position  currently  held  by 
Nicole  Lombardi-Risen.  The  District  has  indicated  that  Ms.  Lombardi-Risen  may 
nonetheless  be  bumped  by  a  more  senior  certificated  employee.  Whether  or  not  this  occurs, 
the  services  to  be  provided  to  District  students  via  the  adaptive  PE  classroom  position  will 
remain  in  effect,  and  thus  no  deprivation  of  any  mandated  services  will  occur. 

c. 
a  layoff  notice. 

Layoff of Deanne  Johnson.  As  noted,  Deanne  Johnson  did  not  receive 

d. 

Layoff  of Anthony  Maldonado.  Anthony  Maldonado  is  a  District 

psychologist.  Even  if  he  is  laid  off,  the  District  will  retain  a  sufficient  number  of 
psychologists  to  meet  any  state  or  federal  mandates. 

teacher  on  special  assignment,  all  services  mandated  under  Title  II]  will  still  be  provided. 

Layoff of Elena  Perez.  Regardless  of  the  layoff  of  Elena  Perez,  a 

Layoff of Michelle  Presley.  Michelle  Presley  is  a  teacher  on  special 

assignment.  She  is  a  “Health  Itinerant  Teacher”  for  the  District,  providing  health  education 
to  district  students  in  areas  including  safe  school,  drug,  alcohol  and  tobacco,  HIV,  and 
pregnancy  and  sexually  transmitted  disease  prevention.  The  District  receives  public  funding 
for  the  services  Ms.  Presley  provides,  and  will  continue  to  receive  such  funding  for  at  least 
one  more  year  after  (and  if)  Ms.  Presley  is  laid  off.  Though  the  evidence  suggested  that  the 
District  has  not  yet  determined  exactly  how  it  will  continue  to  meet  mandated  service  levels 
if  Ms.  Presley  is  laid  off,  it  was  established  that  other  means  do  exist  through  which  the 
District  will  provide  mandated  health-related  services.

Alleged  Incorrect  Application  of  Tiebreaker  Criteria 

17. 

Between  those  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 
same  date,  the  Governing  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  District  and  the  students.  The  specific  criteria  used  to  determine  the  order  of 
termination  were: 

a. 

1  point  if  the  certificated  employee  has  received  an  effective  rating,  or 

above,  in  each  Element  under  all  Standards  evaluated  on  the  latest  evaluation 
subsequent  to  the  2005/2006  school  year.  If  no  evaluation  has  occurred  since 
2005/2006,  then a  satisfactory  rating  will  be  presumed. 

b. 

1  point  for  holding  a  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic 

Development  (CLAD)  Certificate. 

2  points  for  holding  a  Bilingual  Cross-cultural  Language  and  Academic 

Development  (BCLAD)  Certificate  or  Bilingual  Certificate  of  Competence  (BCC). 

1  point  for  each  current,  valid  credential  held. 

e. 

1  point  for  “hard  to  hire”  credentials  held  (math,  science,  special 

education,  Spanish  &  French). 

f 

‘4  point  for  each  additional  supplemental  authorization  appearing  on 

the  face  of  the  credential  provided  that  the  subject  is  offered  in  the  District’s 
instructional  program  in  2008-2009. 

¥  point  for  each  Board  authorization  for  2007/2008. 

1  point  for  an  earned  Master’s  degree. 

1  point  for  each  year  of  step  placement  on  salary  schedule. 

1  point  for  serving  as  a  BTSA  Support  Provider  or  PAR  Consulting 

teacher  in  the  last  five  years. 

1  point  for  NCLB  HQT  status  compliance. 

1  point  for  National  Board  Certification 

m. 

1  point  for  completion  of  each  TVUSD  training  in  2007-2008  and  the 

last  two  school  years  (2006-07,  2005-06): 

e  LAP/ACE  Development  and  Pilot  (K-5) 
Essential  Elements  of  Instruction  (K-12) 
e 
Beginning  Teacher  Support  and  Assistance  (BTSA)  (K-12) 
* 

c 

d. 

g. 

h. 

i. 

je 

k. 

I. 

 

 

e 
e 

GATE  Certification  (Susan  Winebrenner)  (K-12) 
SIOP  Training  (6-12) 
PLC  Leadership  Training  (K-12) 
Assessment  for  Learning  (K-5) 

18. 

The  District  properly  applied  the  tiebreaker  criteria  and  gave  notice  to  the 

following  employees  that  their  services  would  no  longer  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school 
year:  Heidi  Acosta,  Debra  Bernal,  Kelly  Carillo,  Terilyn  Colacino,  Laura  Cooper,  Troy 
Constein,  Vicki  Crabtree,  Therese  Davis,  Emily  Foster,  Tiana  Fox,  Casey  Garrison, Sonja 
Grover,  Andrew  Hajdu,  James  Harris,  Stephanie  Hunter,  Kim  Huth,  Adrianne  Lara,  Colleen 
Lippe,  Teresa  Lyons,  Zsanna  Marble,  Audra  McGuire,  Shamonique  Moore,  Megan  Moser, 
Christine  Olin,  Frank  Parla,  Marciela  Ramirez-Guerrero,  Herschel  Ramirez,  Rodrigo 
Sanchez,  Kristy  Santoro,  Jennifer  Scharf,  Linda  Scofield,  Michelle  Stevens,  Anna  Tapley, 
Natalie  Waddell;  Robert  Weeg,  Denise  Yoak,  and  Amber  Zering.  Further,  and  with  regard  to 
certain  employees  and  tiebreaker  criteria  specifically  identified  by  respondents: 

a. 

With  regard  to  BTSA  training,  James  Harris,  a  third  grade  teacher  with 

a  multiple  subject  credential,  received  his  mandatory  BTSA  training  while  employed  with 
the  Oceanside  Unified  School  District,  prior  to  his  employment  with  the  District.  He  was  not 
offered  BTSA  training  when  he  commenced  his  employment  with  Temecula  Valley  USD. 
Nonetheless,  the  Board’s  determination  that  a  tiebreaker  point  be  awarded  for  BTSA  training 
only  when  such  training  was  secured  within  the  District,  and  the  District’s  application  of  this 
criterion  to  Mr.  Harris  so  as  to  deny  him a  tiebreaker  point  for  his  out-of-District  BTSA 
training,  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion,  and  was  neither  arbitrary  nor capricious. 

b. 

With  regard  to  employee  evaluations,  respondents  presented  no 

evidence  that  any  certificated  employees  either  were  denied  a  tiebreaker  point  by  reason  of 
erroneous  application  of  this  criterion  (i.¢.,  that  they  did  not  receive  the  point  despite  an 
effective  rating  in  each  element  evaluated),  or  received  improper  or  unfair  evaluations. 
Instead,  respondents  contended  that,  due  to  the  evaluation  procedures  prescribed  in  the 
collective  bargaining  agreement,  to  award  a  tiebreaker  point  only  in  the  case  of  across-the- 
board  effective  ratings  is  irrational  and  unfair.  However,  the  Board’s  establishment  of  this 
tiebreaking  criterion  constituted.a  proper-exercise.of  its  discretion  and.was  neither arbitrary 
nor  capricious. 

c 

With  regard  to  GATE  certification,  Anne  Tapley,  an  elementary  school 
teacher  with  a  multiple  subject  credential,  earned  her  GATE  certification  in  1998.  She  was 
not  offered  GATE  training  by  the  District,  and  accordingly  received  such  training  at  UC 
Riverside.  Nonetheless,  the  Board’s  determination  that  a  tiebreaker  point  be  awarded  as  to 
GATE  certification  only  if  secured  within  the  District,  and  the  District’s  application  of  that 
criterion  to  deny  a  tiebreaker  point  to  Ms.  Tapley,  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion 
and  was  neither  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

19. 

With  regard  to  NCLB  compliance,  Kelly  Gradstein,  a  first  grade  teacher,  was 

told  by  her  principal  that  she  would  receive  a  tiebreaker  point  for  NCLB  compliance,  but  was 

  

not  given  one,  because,  through  no  fault  of  her  own,  her  paperwork  pertaining  to  NCLB 
compliance  was  not  processed  by  the  school  in  timely  fashion,  despite  numerous  inquiries  by 
Ms.  Gradstein  as  to  the  status  of  her  NCLB  compliance,  numerous  assurances  given  to  her 
that  the  paperwork  would  be  taken  care  of  and,  more  specifically,  that  she  would  receive  a 
tiebreaker  point  for  being  NCLB  compliant,  and  Ms.  Gradstein’s  reliance  on  those 
assurances.  It  is  undisputed  that  Ms.  Gradstein  was  fully  eligible  to  become  NCLB 
compliant,  took  all  necessary  steps  to  become  NCLB  compliant,  and  would  have  received 
formal  NCLB-compliant  status  but  for  the  inadvertent  failure  of  her  school  to  process  her 
paperwork  so  that  she  could  receive  that  status  formally. 

As  concluded  in  Legal  Conclusion  2,  the  District  is  estopped  from  denying  to  Ms. 

Gradstein  a  tiebreaker  point  with  regard  to  NCLB  compliance. 

Alleged  Incorrect  Seniority  Dates 

20. 

Jacqueline  Hilton  was  employed  by  the  District  from  2002  to  2006,  on  a  half- 

time  (fifty  percent)  probationary  contract.  She  resigned  her  District  employment  in  the 
spring  of  2006.  She  was  reemployed  by  the  District  in  August  2007  on  a  day-to-day  and  then 
long-term  substitute  basis.  On  November  26,  2007,  she  was  employed  on a  full-time  basis. 
At  some  point  on  or  after  November  26,  2007,  she  was  erroneously  given  a  permanent 
contract,’  even  though,  as  a  half-time  employee  throughout  her  prior  employment  with  the 
District,  she  could  not  properly  have  attained  permanent  status.’  Later,  in  the  context  of  the 
present  layoff  proceedings,  the  District  discovered  its  error,  and  Ms.  Hilton  was  properly 
reclassified  as  a  probationary  employee. 

Since  Ms.  Hilton  resigned  from  her  probationary  employment  in  2006,  and  was 
reemployed  on  a  regular  (i.e.,  non-substitute)  basis  on  November  26,  2007,  the  latter  date  is 
her  seniority  date.” 

21.  |  Meagan  Townley,  a  fourth  grade  teacher,  began  her  employment  with  the 
District  in  October  2005,  as  a  day-to-day  substitute.  She  continued  in  that  capacity  on  a 
sporadic  basis  until  approximately  January  2007.  In  February  or  March  2007,  she  was 
assigned  to  a  long-term  substitute  position,  and  completed  the  school  year  in  that 

  

. 
Ms.  Hilton  testified  that  she  was  given  a  permanent  contract  as  early  as  2004,  i.e.,  after  two  years  as  a  half- 
time  employee.  She  testified  further  that  she  was  given  a  “temporary”  contract  in  November  2007,  and  a  permanent 
contract  in  February  2008, 

° 
Ms.  Hilton  could  not  properly  have  been  given  permanent  status  because,  as  a  half-time  teacher,  she  had 
never  worked  75  percent of school  days  in  any  year,  without  which  “credit”  for  having  completed  a  probationary 
year  could  not  be  earned, 

7 

See  Legal  Conclusion  3. 

10 

 

assignment.®  She  continued  her  employment  as  a  long-term  substitute  at  the  commencement 
of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  apparently  working  in  that  capacity  until  as  late  as 
September  19.  She  applied  for  full-time  employment,  which  she  was  granted,  effective 
September  24,  2007.  There  was,  however,  a  two-day  break  in  service  between  her  last  day  as 
a  long-term  substitute  (September  19)  and  her  first  day  of  her  regular  employment 
(September  24).  Because  of  this  two-day  break  in  service,  Ms.  Townley’s  seniority  date  is 
September  24,  2007." 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  all  respondents. 

2. 

Promissory  estoppel  applies  whenever  a  promise  induces  action  that  would 
(1)  A 

result  in  an  injustice  if  the  promise  were  not  enforced.  The  required  elements  are: 
promise  is  clear  and  unambiguous  in  its  terms;  (2)  reliance  by  the  party  to  whom  the  promise 
is  made;  (3)  the  promisee’s  reliance  must  be  both  reasonable  and  foreseeable;  and  (4)  the 
promisee  must  be  injured  by  his  or  her  reliance.  (Lange  v.  TIG  Insurance  Co.  (1998)  68 
Cal.App.4th  1179,  1185.)  The  District  is  estopped  from  denying  to  Kelly  Gradstein  a 
tiebreaker  point  for  being  NCLB  compliant.  This  does  not,  however,  affect  the  District’s 
proposed  layoff  of  Ms. Gradstein."° 

3. 

If  a  certificated  employee  resigns  and  is  thereafter  reemployed,  her  date  of 
employment  is  normally—and  with  exceptions  inapplicable  here—deemed  by  Education 
Code  section  44848  to  be  the  date  of  reemployment.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v,  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  641.)!! 

A  several-day  break  in  Ms.  Townley’s  service  in  early  May  2007  occurred,  but  is  irrelevant  to  this 
‘ 
proceeding,  especially  in  light of  the  District’s  position  that  a  long-term  substitute  position  requires  three  weeks  of 
service,  which  Ms.  Townley  unquestionably  had,  from  mid-May  2007  until  the  end of  the  school  year. 

° 

See  Legal  Conclusion  3. 

The  District  agreed  at  the  hearing  to  award  Ms.  Gradstein  the  additional  tiebreaker  point,  if  respondents 

" 
agreed,  as  they  did,  that  a  new  lottery  be  held,  since  the  granting  of a  tiebreaker  point  to  Ms.  Gradstein  would  result 
in  a  new  “tie”  between  Ms.  Gradstein  and  one  other  certificated  employee.  The  District  has  represented,  and 
respondents  do  not  contest,  that  even  if,  as  a  result  of  the  lottery,  Ms.  Gradstein  is  accorded  a  higher  seniority  date 
than  the  other  employee,  Ms.  Gradstein  would  still  be  subject  to  layoff. 
employee  may  have  significance  in  terms  of  recall  rights,  a  matter  not,  however,  at  issue  in  this  proceeding. 

Ms.  Gradstein’s  position  vis-a-vis  the  other 

" 

Section  44848  provides: 

“When  any  certificated  employee  shall  have  resigned  or  been  dismissed  for  cause  and  shall  thereafter  have 
been  reemployed  by  the  board,  his  date  of  employment  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  date  on  which  he  first 
accepted  reemployment (if  reemployed  before  July  1,  1947)  or  rendered  paid  service  (if  reemployed  after 
June  30,  1947)  after  his  reemployment.  When  an  employee's  services  are  terminated  for  lack  of  enrollment 

  

11

4, 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Temecula  Valley  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
services,  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the 
evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the  accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board 
give  respondents!”  Heidi  Acosta,  Kirstin  Apodaca,  Tiffany  Aptaker,  Shannon  Arrieta,  Jill 
Bacon,  Kandera  Barnett,  Debra  Bernal,  Annette  Bonaventura,  Jodie  Brown,  Eric 
Burlingham,  Darren  Caster,  Robert  Caster,  Noelle  Catiller,  Lecia  Cecconi-Roberts,  Troy 
Constein,  Laura  Cooper,  Jose  Cruz,  Angela  Cueva,  Patrick  DeLa  Cruz,  Kassie  Denny,  Sonia 
Dombroski,  Courtney  Evans,  James  Fenney  III,  Sheryl  Ferns,  Kim  Ferrera,  Emily  Foster, 
Tiana  Fox,  Casey  Garrison,  Kelly  Gradstein,  Janene  Greenelsh,  Sonja  Grover,  Gustavo 
Guerra,  Tanya  Hagenbuch,  Andrew  Hajdu,  James  Harris,  Bridget  Heeren,  Darcy  Hernandez, 
Jacqueline  Hilton,  Lauren  Hoxmeier,  Stephanie  Hunter,  Kim  Huth,  Tonia  Jackson,  Shelley 
Jacobson,  Carynn  Kanow,  Michael  Knight,  Ann  Kuentz,  Amber  Lane,  Adrianne  Lara, 
Colleen  Lippe,  Nicole  Lombardi-Risen,  Anthony  Maldonado,  Zsanna  Marble,  Sherry! 
Martinez,  Lisa  McCaughey,  Ashley  Meredith,  Alan  Mills,  Gail  Molstre,  Creighton  Morrison, 
Donald  Mowrer,  Stanley  Nickel,  Jennifer  Nolte,  Greg  Page,  Sang  Park,  Destiny  Patino, 
Andrea  Plummer,  Michelle  Presley,  Maricela  Ramirez-Guerrero,  Salvador  Reza,  Cynthia 
Salazar,  Robin  Schenck,  Patricia  Schockert,  Jennifer  Scholz,  Megan  Schuck,  Linda  Scofield, 
Sarah  Strandberg,  Anna  Tapley,  Wendy  Thyfault,  Meagan  Townley,  Noel  Van  Leeuwen, 
Jessica  Wells,  Craig  Winger,  Timothy  Woods,  and  Erica  Wright  notice  before  May  15,  2008. 
that  their  services  are  no  longer  required  by  the  District. 

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  respondents  Heidi  Acosta,  Kirstin  Apodaca,  Tiffany 
Aptaker,  Shannon  Arrieta,  Jill  Bacon,  Kandera  Barnett,  Debra  Bernal,  Annette  Bonaventura, 
Jodie  Brown,  Eric  Burlingham,  Darren  Caster,  Robert  Caster,  Noelle  Catiller,  Lecia  Cecconi- 
Roberts,  Troy  Constein,  Laura  Cooper,  Jose  Cruz,  Angela  Cueva,  Patrick  DeLa  Cruz,  Kassie 
Denny,  Sonia  Dombroski,  Courtney  Evans,  James  Fenney  III,  Sheryl  Ferns,  Kim  Ferrera, 
Emily  Foster,  Tiana  Fox,  Casey  Garrison,  Kelly  Gradstein,  Janene  Greenelsh,  Sonja  Grover, 
Gustavo  Guerra,  Tanya  Hagenbuch,  Andrew  Hajdu,  James  Harris,  Bridget  Heeren,  Darcy 
Hernandez,  Jacqueline  Hilton,  Lauren  Hoxmeier,  Stephanie  Hunter,  Kim  Huth,  Tonia 
Jackson,  Shelley  Jacobson,  Carynn  Kanow,  Michael  Knight,  Ann  Kuentz,  Amber  Lane, 
Adrianne  Lara,  Colleen  Lippe,  Nicole  Lombardi-Risen,  Anthony  Maldonado,  Zsanna 
Marble,  Sherry!  Martinez,  Lisa  McCaughey,  Ashley  Meredith,  Alan  Mills,  Gail  Molstre, 
Creighton  Morrison,  Donald  Mowrer,  Stanley  Nickel,  Jennifer  Nolte,  Greg  Page,  Sang  Park, 
Destiny  Patino,  Andrea  Plummer,  Michelle  Presley,  Maricela  Ramirez-Guerrero,  Salvador 

  

or  discontinuance of service  or  are  otherwise  interrupted  in  a  manner  declared  by  law  not  to  constitute  a 
break  in  service,  his  original  order  of  employment  shall  stand.” 

@ 
in  the  Order  below,  includes  a  number  of  individuals  who,  though 
timely  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice,  never  filed  a  request  for  a  hearing  and  thus  are  not  respondents. 

This  list,  and  the  corresponding  list 

12 

 

Reza,  Cynthia  Salazar,  Robin  Schenck,  Patricia  Schockert,  Jennifer  Scholz,  Megan  Schuck, 
Linda  Scofield,  Sarah  Strandberg,  Anna  Tapley,  Wendy  Thyfault,  Meagan  Townley,  Noel 
Van  Leeuwen,  Jessica  Wells,  Craig  Winger,  Timothy  Woods,  Erica  Wright  are  sustained. 
Notice  shall  be  given  to  these  respondents  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  services  as  indicated. 

patep:  SS? 

bNal. 

DONALD  P.  COLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

13 

 

Appendix  A 

Acosta,  Heidi 

Aguilar,  Sarah 

Alix,  Gregory 

Armijo,  Alison 

Armstrong,  Amy 

Arrieta,  Shannon 

Augustine,  Lori 

Bacon,  Jill 

Balland,  Michele 

Baranksi,  Michelle 

Barnett,  Kandera 

Baughman,  Brett 

Bernal,  Debra 

Berry,  James 

Bishop,  Adam 

Bonaventure,  Annette 

Bouchard,  Lesliane 

Brannon,  Tobin 

Brown,  Christina 

Brown,  Jean 

Brown,  Jodie 

Burlingham,  Eric 

 

  

29. 

Carrillo,  Kelly 

Caster,  Darren 

Cecconi-Roberts,  Lecia 

30. 

31, 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43, 

44, 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

Cisneros,  Sarah 

Colacino,  Terilyn 

Constein,  Troy 

Cooper,  Allison 

Cooper,  Laura 

Cortez,  Sharill 

Crabtree,  Vicki 

Crouch,  Carolyn 

Cruz,  Alexander 

Cruz,  Jose 

Cueva,  Angela 

Davis,  Therese 

Del  Moral,  Leticia 

DeLa  Cruz,  Patrick 

Denny,  Kassie 

Dixon,  Stacie 

Dombroski,  Sonia 

D’Souza,  Aruna 

50. 

Dunbar,  Michael 

  

Egerton,  Cambie

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

70. 

Farmer,  Kristin 

Fenny  III,  James 

Ferns,  Sheryl 

Ferrera,  Kim 

Fielstra,  Krystal 

Foster,  Emily 

Fox,  Tiana 

Gaines,  Benjamin 

Garcia,  Rachel 

Garrison,  Casey 

Greenelsh,  Janene 

Griffis,  Marissa 

Grover,  Sonja 

Guerra,  Gustavo 

Hagenbuch,  Tanya 

Hajdu,  Andrew 

Harris,  James 

Heeren,  Bridget 

Heimbach,  Leah 

62. 

Gradstein,  Kelly 

73. 

Hernandez,  Darcy 

75. 

Hilton,  Jacqueline 

76. 

Hoxmeier,  Lauren  

77. 

78. 

79. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

87. 

88. 

89. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

Hunter,  Stephanie 

Huth,  Kim 

Jackson,  Tonia 

Jordan,  Maria 

Kanow,  Carynn 

Khoyi,  Shahrzad 

Kingman,  Brian 

Knight,  Michael 

Kuentz,  Ann 

Landraint,  Sunday 

Lane,  Amber 

Lara,  Adrianne 

Lippe,  Colleen 

Manzani,  Kelly 

Marabotto,  Donna 

Marble,  Zsanna 

Marcoux,  Erika 

McCabe,  Patricia 

Lombardi-Risen,  Nicole 

Lyons,  Teresa 

93.  - 

Maldonado,  Anthony 

99. 

100. 

McCaughey,  Lisa 

  

McGuire,  Audra-Noel

101. 

Meredith,  Ashley 

102. 

Meyers,  Keith 

103. 

Mills,  Alan 

104. 

Mitchell,  Mark 

105. 

Moore,  Evan 

106. 

Morales,  Kristan 

107. 

Morel,  Christopher 

108. 

Morrison,  Creighton 

109. 

Moser,  Megan 

110. 

Mowrer,  Donald 

lll. 

Mull,  Jessica 

112. 

Myers,  Susan 

113. 

Nevens,  Patrick 

114, 

Newton,  Dana 

116. 

Nolte,  Jennifer 

118. 

Olin,  Christine 

119. 

Page,  Greg 

120. 

Paino,  Jacob 

Park,  Sang 

Parla,  Frank 

Patino,  Destiny 

Patricio,  Robyn 

Perez,  Dennis 

 

131, 

Ramirez-Guerrero,  Maricela 

126. 

Perez,  Luz  Elena 

127. 

Pinckard,  Jim 

128. 

Plummer,  Andrea 

129. 

Presley,  Michelle 

130. 

Ramirez,  Herschel 

132. 

Rasmussen,  Ashley 

133. 

Razukas,  Matthew 

134. 

Reece,  Thomas 

135. 

Reza,  Salvador 

136. 

Richard,  Holly 

137. 

Rittenberg,  Paul 

138. 

Robinson,  Robbie 

140. 

Rodriguez,  Kathryn 

141. 

Salazar,  Cynthia 

142. 

Sanchez,  Rodrigo 

143. 

Santoro,  Kristy 

144. 

Scarcella,  Anthony 

145. 

Schap,  Charles 

146. 

Scharf,  Jennifer 

147. 

Schenck,  Robin 

  

150. 

Scholz,  Jennifer 

151.   

Scofield,  Linda 

19

  

152. 

Shackelford,  Joel 

153. 

Smith,  Breck 

155. 

Sonia,  Edward 

156. 

Stamatelatos,  Stephan 

157. 

Stevens,  Michelle 

158. 

Strandberg,  Sarah 

159. 

Suggett,  Roy 

160. 

Summer,  Jennifer 

161. 

Tapley,  Anna 

162. 

Thurman,  Tara 

163. 

Thyfault,  Wendy 

164. 

Townley,  Meagan 

Trout,  Noel 

166. 

Van  Leeuwen,  Noel 

167. 

Voechting,  Beverly 

169. 

Weeg,  Robert 

170. 

Wells,  Jessica 

Wilson,  Graham 

Winger,  Craig 

Wood,  Tyler 

Wright,  Erica 

Yoak,  Denise 

 

20 

Appendix  B 

Addison,  Richard 

Allen,  Georgeanna 

Apodaca,  Kirstin 

Aptaker,  Tiffany 

Brennan,  Alicia 

Carbajal,  Edward 

Hamilton,  Kristen 

Hickey,  Robert 

Jacobson,  Shelly 

23. 

28. 

69. 

74. 

80. 

115, 

Nickel,  Stanley 

117. 

Nunez,  Amy 

139. 

Rodriguez,  Gilbert 

148. 

Schockert,  Patricia 

154. 

Smith,  Carla 

168. 

Waddell,  Natalie 

  

 

