  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
ESCONDIDO  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  for  Lay-Off 
of  Certificated  Employees  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008030380 

69  Certificated  Employees  of  the 
Escondido  Union  School  District, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Vallera  J.  Johnson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Escondido,  California  on  April  8,  2008. 

Melanie  A.  Petersen,  Esq.  and  Dean  T.  Adams,  Esq.,  Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost 

LLP,  represented  Escondido  Union  School  District. 

With  the  exception  of  Respondents  Frances  Morales  and  Robert  Riebel,  Fern  M. 
Steiner,  Esq.,  Tosdal  Smith  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  Respondents  who  filed  a  Request  for 
Hearing.' 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  Respondents  Frances  Morales  or  Robert 
: 

: 

Riebel. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  9,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Jennifer  Walters  made  and  filed  the  Accusation,  dated  March  14,  2008,  in  her 

official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent  (Superintendent)  of  the  Escondido  Union  School 

Respondents’  Exhibit  “A”  set  forth  a  list  of  the  names  of  Respondents  that  she  represented.  The  District’s 

' 
Exhibit  1-4  sets  forth  a  list  of  employees  who  received  a  layoff  notice  and  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing.  There  is  a 
discrepancy  between  the  names  on  the  two  exhibits.

  

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

District  (District)  against  the  certificated  employees  listed  in  attached  Exhibit  “A” 
(Respondents). 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

The  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Escondido  Union 

School  District  (Board)  and  Respondents  that  she  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 
Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-08-18  that  reduced  or 
eliminated  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  employees  with  the  same 
seniority  date. 

Respondents  were  served  with  the  preliminary  layoff  on  or  before  March  15,  2008. 

The  notice of termination  stated  that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be  required  for 

the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The 
recommendation  that  Respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
competency.  In  addition,  the  notice  advised  Respondents  of  the  right  to  hearing,  and  the 
request  for  hearing  must  be  delivered  to  Human  Resources  no  later  than  March  14,  2008,  not 
less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served,  and  the  failure  to 
request  a  hearing  would  constitute  waiver  of  the  right  to  hearing. 

Respondents  filed  a  timely  Request  for  Hearing. 

The  District  served  an  Accusation  for  Lay-Off  of  Certificated  Employees,  Notice  to 

Respondent  and  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  accompanied  by  relevant  sections  of  the 
Education  Code  and  Government  Code,  upon  each  Respondent  in  a  timely  manner. 

The  District  considered  any  Respondent  served  with  the  Accusation  entitled  to  a 

hearing,  regardless  of  whether  the  Respondent  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

All pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

Prior  to  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  layoff  notices  issued  to  Respondents 

Dawn  Ayles-Challman,  Carrie  Eros,  Marissa  Palmquist,  Donna  Sellier,  Audrey  Taylor, 
Talene  Dodd,  Robyn  Solomich,  Jennifer  Lucas,  Shadlee  Moyneur,  Wendy  Zeugschmidt,  Kay 
Mitchell,  Maria  Hernandez  and  Kristina  Medina. 

6. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  Number  2007-08-18  and 

took  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services 
commencing  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

  

 

Particular  Kind  of  Services 

Full-Time  Equivalent  Positions 

Counselor 
Elementary  Teacher 
(K  CSR) 
Teacher  on  Special  Assignment 
Special  Day  Class/Non  Severe 

9.0 
40.0 

28.0 
1.0 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  78.0  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

7. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  including  resignations  and 

retirements,  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to 
its  employees. 

8. 

Robert  Leon  (Leon),  Deputy  Superintendent,  Human  Resources  (Deputy 

Superintendent),  was  responsible  for  implementing  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The 
District  developed a seniority  list  that  contained  the  seniority  date,  employees  name,  current 
assignment  and  credential(s)  including  authorization(s). 

The  seniority  date  was  based  on  the  first  date  of  paid  service  rendered.”  A  teacher 

hired  as  a  probationary  employee  who  worked  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee  for  at 
Jeast  75  percent  of  the  school  days  during  the  previous  year  and  performed  the  duties 
normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school  district,  was  deemed  to  have 
served  a  complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary 
employee  for  the  following  school  year.  The  teacher  was  entitled  to  have  that  earlier  year 
counted  as  a  year  of  probationary  service.  The  prior  year  was  “tacked”  on  for  seniority 
purposes,  *  but  only  one  year  could  be  tacked  on. 

The  Deputy  Superintendent  gave  certificated  employees  an  opportunity  to  update  or 

challenge  information  on  file  with  the  District  prior  to  drafting  the  seniority  list.  He 
contacted  all  who  received  layoff  notices  by  memorandum,  dated  February  8,  2008.  Among 
other  things,  he  informed  them  of  the  definition  of  seniority  date,  provided  the  employee’s 
seniority  date  and  credential(s)  on  file  with  the  District,  and  advised  them  to  contact  Ellen 
Bose  or  him  by  February  26,  2008  regarding  inaccurate  or  incomplete  information.  The 
District  received  additional  information  from  some  noticed  employees  and  considered  the 
foregoing  when  Leon  prepared  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

9. 

The  District  hired  teachers  to  provide  services  in  categorically  funded 

programs.  The  majority  of  certificated  employees  who  provided  services  in  these  programs 
were  hired  on  temporary  contracts  and  classified  as  temporary.  These  programs  were 
ongoing  from  year  to  year.  Their  time  toward  seniority  was  counted  as  other  certificated 
employees  classified  as  temporary.  The  District  did  not  know  what  the  funding  would  be for 

“ 

Education  Code  section  44845. 

  

Education  Code  section  44918.

3 

categorically  funded  programs  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  anticipated  that  it  would  be 
reduced  but  had  no  information  that  any  program  would  be  terminated. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  District  improperly  classified  teachers  who  provided 

services  in  categorically  funded  programs  as  temporary.  Relying  on  the  holding  in 
Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield  Unified  School  District  (2006),  145 
Cal.App.4"  1260,  1281,  1285-87,  Respondents  asserted  that  these  teachers  could  only  be 
classified  as  temporary  when  the  program  expired.  According  to  the  evidence,  on  the  date  of 
the  hearing,  none  of  the  programs  were  to  be  terminated;  therefore,  the  District’s  teachers  in 
categorically  funded  programs  should  not  have  been  classified  as  temporary. 

Education  Code  section  44909  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

“Service  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service 
required  as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a 
permanent  employee  unless  (1)  such  person  has  served  pursuant  to  this  section  for  at 
least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  by  which  he 
is  employed  are  maintained  and  (2)  such  person  is  subsequently  employed  as  a 
probationary  employee  in a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications.” 

No  Respondent  was  identified  as  providing  service  in  a  categorically  funded  program. 

It  was  not  established  that  any  Respondent  met  the  requirements  of  Education  Code  section 
44909  and,  therefore,  should  have  been  classified  as  a  probationary  employee.  Insufficient 
evidence  was  offered  to  establish  it  was  improper  for  the  District  to  classify  any  Respondent 
who  served  in  a  categorically  funded  program  as  temporary  or  that  this  classification 
impacted  whether  any  Respondent  should  have  received  a  layoff  notice. 

10. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  “bumping” 

list  to  determine  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in 
another  area  that  would  entitle  to  "bump" other  junior  employees.  In  determining  who  would 
be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions 
and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  then 
checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they  could  “bump”  other 
employees. 

1]. 

The  District  may  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of 
seniority  if  the  District  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 
or  course  of  study,  and  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  the  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others 
with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.* 

‘ 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d). 

 

12. 

The  District  skipped  teachers  certified  to  provide  special  education  services 

because  the  District  and  students  need  teachers  to  have  this  certification  who  have  served  and 
will  continue  to  service  in  this  assignment.  As  required  by  the  Board  Resolution  that  reduced 
PKS,  despite  the  foregoing,  the  District  reduced  special  education  by  1.0  FTE. 

13. 

The  District  skipped  seven  teachers  who  hgld  a  Bilingual,  Crosscultural, 

Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD)  Certificate.  The  District  has  programs  that 
provide  primary  language  instruction  as  a  component  of  the  programs  al  seven  of  its  sites. 
Each  program  requires  that  the  teacher  hold  a  BCLAD  Certificate  in  order  to  provide 
instruction  in  the  program.  During  the  ensuing  school  year,  each  skipped  teacher  will  teach 
full-time  in  programs  that  require  that  the  teacher  have  a  BCLAD  Certificate. 

Some  teachers  who  hold  BCLAD  Certificates  were  skipped  not  because  they  hold 

BCLAD  Certificates  but  for  other  reasons. 

14. 

The  District  skipped  teachers  authorized  to  teach  math  or  science  because  the 
District  needs  teachers  with  the  certification  to  provide  instruction  in  the  respective  subject 
area. 

Teachers  with  Multiple  Subject  Credentials  are  authorized  to  teach  core  subjects  to 

the  students  in  the  same  grade  level.  For  example,  certificated  employees  who  hold  the 
foregoing  credential  may  teach  math  and  science  to  sixth  graders.  However,  there  are  a 
variety  of  assignments  that  require  additional  competency  in  math,  science  or  social  science, 
to  wit:  Ifa  teacher  is  required  to  teach  a  single  subject  six  periods  a  day  to  the  same  grade 
level,  if  the  subjects  being  taught  are  Algebra,  Life  Science  or  Biology,  or  if  the  assignment 
involves  a  single  subject  but  is  being  taught  to  more  than  one  grade  level. 

15. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  District  skipped  junior  teachers  who  do  not  have 

special  training  or  experience  while  more  senior  teachers  are  being  layed  off;  further  the 
District  failed  to  establish  that  all  of  these  teachers  will  be  assigned  to  classes  for  which  the 
additional  training  or  experience  is  necessary. 

Respondents  identified  the  junior  teachers  that  were  improperly  retained-as  Kathy 

Smith  (Smith),  Michael  De  Neve  (De  Neve)  and  Rochell  Bernsdorf  (Bernsdorf)  and  Robin 
Flynn  (Flynn). 

Smith  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2007.  She  is  a  probationary  one  teacher  with 
the  District.  She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential,  a  Single  Subject  Math  Credential  and  a 
Single  Subject  Social  Science  Credential.  The  District  hired  her  to  teach  math.  With  her 
math  credential,  Smith  taught  math  to  seventh  graders  in  a  departmentalized  classes  during 
the  2007  =  2008  school  year. 

De  Neve  has a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2007.  He  is  a  probationary  one  teacher 

and  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential.  He  was  hired  to  teach  math  because  De  Neve 
satisfied  the  District’s  criteria.  He  had  five  years  experience  outside  the  District  teaching 
math;  he  is  NCLB  compliant  in  the  area  of  math  and  has  completed  the  requisite  number  of 
5

  

units  to  obtain  a  math  authorization  from  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing  (CCTC).  In  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44256,  subdivision  (b), 
44258.2  and  44263,  the  Board  authorized  De  Neve  to  teach  in  a  math  assignment,  as  set  forth 
in  Board  Resolution  Number  2007-08-06,  adopted  November  1,  2007.  During  the  current 
school  year,  he  taught  math  to  sixth,  seventh  and  eighth  graders,  a  departmentalized  math 
assignment. 

’ 

Bernsdorf  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  22,  2007.  She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject 

Credential;  she  has  completed  all  requirements,  has  applied  for  and  is  waiting  for  a 
Supplemental  Authorization  in  Math  from  CCTC.  She  taught  Algebra  during  the  2007  — 
2008  school  year. 

Flynn  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  23,  2006.  She  holds  a  Multiple  Subject 
Credential;  she  has  completed  all  requirements,  has  applied  for  and  is  waiting  for  a 
Supplemental  Authorization  in  Math  from  CCTC.  During  the  2007  —  2008  school  year,  she 
taught  math  to  sixth,  seventh  and  eighth  graders. 

16. 

The  District  skipped  Alex  Quan  (Quan).  During  2007  —  2008,  he  has  been 

assigned  to  teach  Community  Day  School. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  described  the  Community  Day  School  as  a  unique 
alternative  learning  facility  for  students  who  are  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  in  a 
regular  elementary  or  middle  school  classroom.  The  students  who  attend  Community  Day 
School  have a  variety  of  different  behavioral  and/or  academic  challenges.  The  District 
needed  a  teacher  who  was  willing  to  work  in  this  challenging  environment  and  had  the 
background  to  do  so.  The  District  hired  Quan  because  he  had  his  extensive  experience  (12 
years)  working  with  and/or  teaching  students  with  similar  challenges. 

In  order  to  teach  in  the  Community  Day  School,  the  teacher  is  required  to  have  a 

Multiple  Subject  Credential.  Quan  holds  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential  and  a  CLAD 
Certificate.  His  seniority  date  is  January  8,  2007.  There  are  more  senior  teachers  employed 
by  the  District  who  hold  a  Multiple  Subject  Credential.  None  of  these  teachers  were  offered 
this  assignment.  There  is  no  evidence  in  the  record  that  any  more  senior  employee  has  the 
experience  or  desire  to  teach  in  this  position. 

17. 

The  District  has  the  discretion  to  determine  whether  teachers  are  certificated 
and  competent  to  hold  the  position  for  which  said  teachers  have  been  skipped  and  retained. 
(King  v,  Berkley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016.)  In  this  case,  the 
District  made  the  decision  to  skip  and  retain  more  junior  teachers  described  in  Findings  12, 
13,  14,  15  and  16  based  on  the  requirements  of  the  programs  or  the  subject  matter  the 
certificated  employee  has  additional  training  and  experienée  to  teach.  The  criteria  used  by 
the  District  to  make  the  determination  were  reasonable  and  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  any  Respondent  who  is  more  senior  and  received  a  layoff  notice  is 
competent  to  perform  the  services  for  which  the  more  junior  employees  are  being  retained. 

 

The  skipped  teachers  must  be  assigned  to  positions  for  which  they  were  retained. 

(Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139 
Cal.App.3d  567)  The  District  established  that  the  teachers  skipped  to  provide  special 
education  services  and  the  teachers  skipped  to  teach  in  programs  with  BCLAD  Certificates 
will  be  assigned  to  such  positions  during  the  ensuing  school  year.  Therefore  the  District 
properly  skipped  and  retained  these  teachers  was  proper. 

However,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  in  the  record  regarding  the  assignment  of 
Quan  or  some  or  all  math  teachers  for  the  2008  —  2009  school  year.  If  the  District  assigns 
Quan  to  teach  Community  Day  School  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  skip  and  his  retention 
was  appropriate.  If  the  math  teachers  are  assigned  to  teach  classes  for  which  math 
competency  is  required,  the  District  properly  skipped  and  retained  these  teachers.  If  Quan 
and/or  any  math  teacher  is  not  assigned  to  a  position  for  which  he/she  was  skipped,  retention 
was  inappropriate. 

18. 

In  Resolution  No.  2007-08-18,  the  Board  adopted  tie-breaker  criteria  to 
determine  the  order  of  termination  of  employees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  which 
provided,  in  pertinent  part: 

“The  following  rating  system  shall  be  applied  in  determining  the  order  of  termination 

of  certificated  employees: 

A.  Number  of  teaching  and/or  special  service  credentials. 

Rating  +1  per  credential 

B.  Number  of  supplementary  authorizations. 

Rating  +1  per  supplementary  authorization 

C.  Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BA/BS  level. 

Rating  +1  per  degree 

D.  Meets  Highly  Qualified  requirements  for  credential/assignment  under 
No  Child  Left  Behind. 

Rating+1]  per  credential 

TIE-BREAKING  PROCEDURE 

In  the  event  that  common  day  hires  have  equal  qualifications  based  on  application  of 

the  above  criteria,  the  District  will  then  break  ties  by  utilizing  a  lottery.” 

19. 

As  it  pertained  to  Respondents,  it  was  necessary  to  apply  the  tie-breaking 

criteria. 

Jennifer  Steres  and  Respondent  Robert  Riebel  had  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service 
with  the  District  of  August  23,  2006.  In  order  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of  these 
employees,  the  District  applied  the  point  values  appropriate  for  each  of  them.  As  these 
employees  had  the  same  point  values,  the  District  did  a  random  selection  between  the  two; 
this  resulted  in  retention  of  Jennifer  Steres  and  Respondent  Robert  Reibel  receiving  a 
preliminary  layoff  notice. 

7

  

20. 

Between  the  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 

same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
District  and  the  students.  The  Board  adopted  specific  criteria  and  provided  clear  instructions 
for  implementation  of  the  criteria.  The  tie-breaker  criteria  were  fairly  applied  to  rank 
employees  hired  on  the  same  date.  The  order  of  termination  was  based  on  program  or 
subject  matter  requirements,  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

21.  —  The  services  that  the  District  proposed  to  reduce  were  “particular  kinds  of 

services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

22. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

23. 

Except  as  provided  in  Finding  17,  no  certificated  employee  junior  to  any 

Respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  these  sections  are  satisfied. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shal] 
not  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustee)  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

. 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Escondido  Union  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The 
cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4, 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he/she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the  senior 

5. 

Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the 

junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts 

8 

  

 

lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  y.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District 
(1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

6. 

Except  as  provided  in  Findings  17,  no  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any 

Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a  service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  Dawn  Ayles-Challman,  Carrie  Erdos, 

Marisa  Palmquist,  Donna  Sellier,  Audrey  Taylor,  Talene  Dodd,  Robyn  Solomich,  Jennifer 
Lucas,  Shadlee  Moyneur,  Wendy  Zeugschmidt,  Kay  Mitchell,  Maria  Hernandez  and  Kristina 
Medina  shall  be  dismissed.  These  Respondents  shall  be  retained. 

2. 

If  Kathy  Smith,  Michael  De  Neve,  Rochell  Bernsdorf  and/or  Robin  Flynn  are 

not  assigned  to  teach  math  in  departmentalized  classes,  Escondido  Union  School  District 
shall  dismiss  the  Accusation  against  the  most  senior  teacher  who  holds  a  Multiple  Subject 
Credential,  and  the  teacher  shall  be  retained. 

3. 

If  Alex  Quan  is  not  assigned  to  teach  Community  Day  School  for  the  2008  — 

2009  school  year,  the  Accusation  against  the  most  senior  teacher  who  holds  a  Multiple 
Subject  Credential  shall  be  dismissed,  and  the  teacher  shall  be  retained. 

4. 

Except  as  provided  in  Paragraphs  1,  2  and  3  of  this  Order,  the  Accusation 

served  on  Respondents  listed  in  Exhibit  “A”  are  sustained.  Except  as  provided  in 
Paragraphs  1,  2  and  3  of  this  Order,  notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  before  May  15, 
2008  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED: 

SIGL0 

   

6g 

Pi 
4 

i 

ora 
ee  (pines 

 

VALLERA  J.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

  

EXHIBIT  A 

Lena  Morales 
Frances  Morales 
Kimberly  Morrow 
Shadlee  Moyneur 
Katherine  Nichols 
Kelly  O'Brien 
Elaine  Olson 
Nathalie  Olsson 
Kim  Ontiveros 
Brandi  Ortiz 
Marisa  Palmquist 
Julie  Park 
Erin  Peet 
Carrie  Purcell 
Francis  Quiogue 
Robert  Riebel 
Mark  Roberts 
Yadira  Rodriguez 
Charlotte  Rolls 
Maria  Santoyo 
Julie  Schafer 
Donna  Sellier 
Kelly  Solie 
Robyn  Solomich 
Nancy  Sotello 
Scott  Soucy 
Robert  Steward 
Alexis  Tate 
Michelle  Taylor 
Audrey  Taylor 
Carrie  Toorop 
Maria  Topolovac 
Monica  Trujillo 
Silvia  Valles 
Vanessa  Vittek 
Jennifer  Wade 
Jamie  Washington 
Tamara  Whitney 
Wendy  Zeugschmidt 

Rachel  Allan 
Kaitlin  Alto 
Dawn  Ayles-Challman 
Alma  Baires 
Asa  Barbani 
Joseph  Benson 
Christy  Blake 
Kim  Bloodgood 
Kyra  Bowers 
Veronica  Carrillo 
Maria  Cervantes 
Kristine  Christensen 
Daniel  Cleary 
Hisame  Dame 
Sharilyn  Daniels 
Christine  Davis 
Lindsay  Demler 
Diane  DeWindt 
Talene  Dodd 
Michael  Dwyer 
Mary  Elliott 
Carrie  Erdos 
Amy  Erickson 
Paul  Erickson 
Sarah  Escalona 
Robin  Estrada 
Molly  Francis 
Mark  Gale 
Karen  Grissom 
Veronica  Jeannette  Gonzalez- 
Cortez, 
Meredith  Hammond-Miller 
Maria  Hernandez 
Jennifer  Hill 
Karina  Johnson 
Heather  Jovin 
Tiffany  Kalick 
Chris  Kaminski 
Kim  Klockenteger 
Maren  Knauf 
Lynsey  Kogan 
Celena  Lopes 
Jennifer  Lucas 
Krystyna  Maiorano 
Sherry  McPhillips 
Kristina  Medina 
Cristina  Meglich 
Alejandra  Mendoza 
Kaystle  Miller 
Kay  Mitchell 
Jacqueline  Monroe 

   

