BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
OF  THE 
LOMA  PRIETA  JOINT  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

PADDY  O’REGAN, 

OAH  No.  2008030114 

  

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Mary-Margaret  Anderson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Los  Gatos,  California  on  April  30,  2008. 

Patricia  P.  White,  Littler  Mendelson,  represented  the  Loma  Prieta  Joint  Union 

Elementary  School  District. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Paddy  O’Regan,  who 

was  present. 

The  record  closed  on  April  30,  2008. 

SUMMARY 

The  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Loma  Prieta  Joint  Union  Elementary  School  District 

decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated 
employees  for  the  2008/2009  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not 
related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  teachers  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be 
reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using a  selection  process  involving 

review  of  credentials  and  seniority.  The  selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code 
requirements. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Henry  Castaniada  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as 

‘Superintendent of the  Loma  Prieta  Joint  Union  Elementary  School  District  (District). 

2. 

Paddy  O’Regan  (Respondent)  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District. 

 

  

  

3. 

On  March  4,  2008,'  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  (Board)  adopted 

Resolution  No.  08-XII  (Resolution),  which  sets  forth  the  Board’s  determination  that  it  will  be 
necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the 
2008/2009  school  year.  The  reasons  for  the  reductions  are  solely  budgetary.  A  total  of  4.4 
certificated  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions  were  targeted  for  reduction: 

Title 

Full  Time  Equivalent 

K-5  Classroom  Teaching 
Spanish 
Leadership  (Social  Studies) 

4.0 
2 
2 

4. 

The  Resolution  also  contained  the  Board’s  determination 

to  retain  the  following  particular  kinds  of  service: 
1.  Mathematics-Middle  School 
2.  Mild  to  Moderate  and  Moderate  to  Severe 

Special  Education  Services 

3.  Language,  Speech  and  Hearing  Special  Education  Services 
4.  Resource  Specialist  Special  Education  Services 

5. 

The  District  maintains  a list of certificated  employees  that  includes  seniority 

7. 

6. 

dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and 
authorizations.  This  document  is  referred  to  as  the  Certificated  Seniority  List.  Certain 
teachers  on  the  Seniority  List  were  not  noticed  despite  their  respective  placements  because  of 
the  Board’s  decision  to  retain  services  as  set  forth  in  Finding  4. 

By  letter  dated  March  7,  Superintendent  Castaniada,  gave  written preliminary 

Respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

terminating  her  services  for  the  2008/2009  school  year.  Accordingly,  an  Accusation  was 
filed  and  served.  Other  teachers  were  served  with  preliminary  notices,  but  did  not  request 
hearings. 

notice  to  Respondent  that,  based  upon  the  Resolution,  her  services  as  a  Middle  School 
Spanish  Teacher  will  be  reduced  from  0.6  FTE  to  0.4  FTE  for  the  2008/2009  school  year. 
The  notice  contained  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  a  copy  of  the  Resolution. 

   

At  hearing, no  jurisdictional  issues  were  raised,  save  that  Respondent  did  not 
timely  file  a  Notice  of  Defense.  The  District  waived  this  procedural  defect  and  the  Parties 
stipulated  that  all  notices  were  timely  and  properly  served. 

All  dates  are  in  2008. 

8. 

' 

9. 

The  District  considered  attrition  in  its  initial  determination  of  the  reductions 
that  were  necessary  and  some  notices  have  been  rescinded  due  to  information  subsequently 
received. 

10. 

Respondent  has  credentials  in  Spanish  and  in  Multiple  Subjects.  She  currently 

teaches  three  periods  (.06  FTE)  of  Spanish  at  the  District’s  middle  school.  The  reduction 
proposed  for  the  2008/2009  school  year  would  reduce  this  to  two  periods  (.04  FTE). 

There  is  no  0.2  FTE  position  at  the  elementary  school  that  is  held  by  a  less  senior 

teacher  that  would  be  compatible  with  Respondent’s  position  at  the  middle  school. 
Superintendent  Castaniada  credibly  testified  that  creating  such  a  position  at  the  elementary 
school  would  require  a  complete  restructuring  of  the  elementary  school  schedule.  The 
District  does  not  desire  to  do  this. 

11. 

No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  for  which  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

12. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  District  is  reducing  services  for  the 

2008/2009  school  year. 

13. 

The  evidence  established  that  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  is 

related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  District  established  jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  as  to  Respondent.  All 

notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  have  been 
provided  or  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce  the  number 

of  certificated  employees  in  4.4  FTE  positions  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

The  proposed  reductions  and/or  discontinuation  of  services  are  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44949, 
subdivision  (c)(3). 

4, 

The  District  is  not  required  to  restructure  the  elementary  school  program  so  as 
to  allow  Respondent  to  retain  0.2  FTE  by  teaching  part  time  there.  (King  v.  Berkeley  Unified 
School  Dist.  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016,  1020-1021.) 

5. 

All  contentions  made  by  Respondent  not  specifically  addressed  herein  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected.

  

     

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  Paddy  O’Regan  that  her  service  as  a  Middle  School  Spanish 
Teacher  will  be  reduced  by  0.2  FTE  for  the  2008/2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction 
or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

@ 

DATED:  _  {Aw ©,  260% 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

