  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
WHITTIER  CITY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  Against: 

RUTH  BRAVO,  PATRICIA  CARDIEL, 
RACHEL  CHAVEZ,  MARY  DISHIGRIKYAN, 
LEAH  ELMANGE,  JANEY  HAMRICK,  BRIAN 
HANSEN,  JENNIFER  HERNANDEZ,  MARIA 
HERNANDEZ,  GLORIA  JIMENEZ, 
DOMANI  KEM,  RICHARD  LARSON, 
BERNADETTE  LEEPER,  KATHRYN  MACIAS, 
ELIZABETH  MARTEL,  ARLENE  MARTINEZ, 
BUFFIE  MEYERS,  REAGAN  MIKHAIL, 
CATHERINE  MIYAGISHIMA,  JENNIFER  MUNOZ, |  OAH  No.  L2008030264 
RICARDO  OJEDA,  ROBERTA  OLBRANTZ, 
MYRA  OROZCO,  SHARON  QUIRARTE, 
ANN  RAMEH,  CRISTINA  RAMOS, 
KRISTY  ROSANDER,  MONICA  RUSSELL, 
GINGER  SPARKS,  YVONNE  SPITZER, 
ALISHA  ZEPEDA,  MERCED  RODRIGUEZ, 
JEONON  MOCILAC,  MELISSA  HOLO, 
MANUEL  CORNEJO,  VIRGINIA  FRANCO, 
NILDA  HUERTA,  and  ALEXANDRIA  ZIRSCHKY, 

Respondents.   

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  by  Robert  S.  Eisman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  May  2,  2008,  in  Whittier,  California. 

Aaron  V.  O’Donnell,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Rudd  &  Romo,  represented 

Whittier  City  School  District,  whose  representative  was  also  present. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Esq.,  Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  represented  Ruth  Bravo,  Patricia 
Cardiel,  Rachel  Chavez,  Mary  Dishigrikyan,  Leah  Elmange,  Janey  Hamrick,  Brian  Hansen, 
Jennifer  Hernandez,  Maria  Hernandez,  Gloria  Jimenez,  Domani  Kem,  Richard  Larson, 
Bernadette  Leeper,  Kathryn  Macias,  Elizabeth  Martel,  Arlene  Martinez,  Buffie  Meyers, 
Reagan  Mikhail,  Catherine  Miyagishima,  Jennifer  Munoz,  Ricardo  Ojeda,  Roberta  Olbrantz, 

 

  

Myra  Orozco,  Sharon  Quirarte,  Ann  Rameh,  Cristina  Ramos,  Kristy  Rosander,  Monica 
Russell,  Ginger  Sparks,  Yvonne  Spitzer,  Alisha  Zepeda,  Merced  Rodriguez,  Jeonon  Mocilac, 
Melissa  Holo,  Manuel  Cornejo,  Virginia  Franco,  Nilda  Huerta,  and  Alexandria  Zirschky 
(respondents).  Each  respondent  was  present,  except  for  Richard  Larson  and  Roberta 
Olbrantz. 

@ 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  May  2,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Carmella  Franco  (complainant)  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Whittier  City 

School  District  (District).  She  made,  signed,  and  filed  the  Accusation,  which  applies  to  each 
respondent,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  District’s  Superintendent. 

2. 

The  District,  which  serves  the  City  of  Whittier  community,  consists  of  10  ele- 

mentary  schools  (kindergarten  through  fifth  grade)  and  two  middle  schools  (sixth  through 
eighth  grade),  with  a  current  enrollment  of  approximately  6,700  students. 

3. 

Respondents  were  certificated  District  employees  at  all  times  relevant  in  this 

matter. 

4. 

The  District  estimates  that  the  2008-2009  school  year  will  be  impacted  by  a 
projected  $2.5  million  budget  deficit  that  will  adversely  affect  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  the  District  currently  renders  to  students.  Although  the  reductions  in  services  are  fiscally 
driven,  the  District  has  also  experienced  reducing  enrollment  in  varying  amounts  that  re- 
sulted  in  a  need  for  approximately10  less  teachers  each  school  year. 

@ 

5. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 
No.  R-17  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services,  encompassing  a 
total  of  51.5  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions,  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008- 
2009  school  year.  Due  to  the  reductions  or  discontinuances  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  a 
number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955, 
would  not  be  reemployed  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  The  reduced  or  discontinued  particu- 
lar  kinds  of  services  are  as  follows: 

11.0  FTE  Reading  Coach  Services 
3.0  FTE  Math  Coach  Services 
2.0  FTE  Elementary  Physical  Education  Teaching  Services 

21.0  FTE  Elementary  Teaching  Services 

2.0  FTE  Middle  School  Language  Arts  Teaching  Services 
2.0  FTE  Middle  School  Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
3.0  FTE  Middle  School  6th  Grade  Multiple  Subject  Classroom  Teaching  Services 
1.0  FTE  Middle  School  Physical  Education  Teaching  Service 
1.0  FTE  Special  Education  Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (TOSA) 
1.0  FTE  Severely  Handicapped  Special  Education  Teaching  Service 

  

@ 

 

  

0.5  FTE  Middle  School  Counselor 
3.0  FTE  Coordinators 
1.0  FTE  Elementary  Principal 

The  Governing  Board  further  resolved  that  the  District’s  Superintendent,  or  designee, 

be  directed  to  give  Notice  of  Recommendation  Not  to  Re-employ,  in  accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  to  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  allowed  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955,  and  be  delegated 
authority  to  take  all  actions  necessary  to  accomplish  the  purposes  of  Resolution  No.  R-17. 

6. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  also  adopted 
Resolution  No.  R-16,  which  provided,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955, 
a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  seniority  among  certificated  em- 
ployees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  i.e.,  the  date  the  employee  first  rendered  paid  service  to 
the  District  (Tie-Breaker  Resolution).  Resolution  No.  R-16  provides  for  use  of  the  tie- 
breaking  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the 
District. 

Pursuant  to  Resolution  No.  R-16,  the  following  criteria  are  listed  in  priority  order  and 

each  criterion  is  used  only  if  the  preceding  criteria  do  not  delineate  the  order  of  senior- 
ity/termination: 

a. 

As  between  certificated  employees  possessing  the  same  seniority  date  as  de- 

fined  in  Education  Code  Section  44845,  then  employees  possessing  a  clear  professional, 
standard,  or  general  teaching  credential  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  seniority  than 
those  employees  possessing  only  a  preliminary  credential,  intern  credential,  provisional  in- 
ternship  permit,  short  term  staff  permit,  emergency  permit,  or  other  provisional  credential. 

b. 

Employees  possessing  a  preliminary  credential  will  be  regarded  as  having 

greater  seniority  than  employees  possessing  only  an  intern  credential,  provisional  internship 
permit,  short-term  staff  permit,  emergency  permit,  or  other  provisional  credential. 

c. 

Employees  possessing  a  Bilingual,  Cross-cultural,  Language  and  Academic 

Development  (BCLAD)  certification  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  seniority  for  pur- 
poses  of  determining  seniority  order  than  certificated  employees  currently  possessing  Cross- 
cultural,  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD)  certification  or  SDAIE  certification 
pursuant  to  Senate  Bill  (SB)  1969  or  SB  395.  Similarly,  certificated  employees  possessing 
CLAD  certification  or  Specially  Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English  (SDAIE)  certifi- 
cation  pursuant  to  SB  1969  or  SB  395  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  seniority  for  pur- 
poses  of  determining  seniority  order  than  certificated  employees  not  having  certifica- 
tion/authorization  to  teach  English  Language  Learners. 

d. 

Employee  who  possesses  the  greater  number  of  supplemental  authorizations 

in  addition  to  the  employee's  underlying  credential  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  senior- 
ity  than  the  employee  possessing  the  lesser  number  of  such  supplemental  authorizations. 

 

  

e. 

Employees  with  the  following  subject  matter  authorizations,  in  order  of  pref- 

erence,  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  seniority 

Resource  Specialist  (RSP)  or  Special  Day  Class  (SDC) 

Speech  and  Language 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Math 

(4)  —  Sciences  (including  Health) 

f. 

Employees  with  a  Ph.D./Ed.D.  from  an  accredited  institution  of  higher  educa- 

tion  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  seniority  than  employees  possessing  a  Master's  De- 
gree  from  an  accredited  institution  of  higher  education.  Similarly,  employees  with  a  Master's 
Degree  from  an  accredited  institution  of  higher  education  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater 
seniority  than  employees  possessing  a  Bachelor's  Degree. 

g. 

Certificated  employees  will  be  ranked  by  total  semester  credits  earned  at  an 

accredited  institution  of  higher  education  after  earning  a  Bachelor's  Degree  starting  with  the 
greatest  number  of  credits  to  the  least  number  of  credits. 

h. 

The  employee  with  the  earlier  effective  date  of  issuance  of  a  clear  profes- 

sional,  standard,  or  general  credential  authorizing  a  classroom  teaching  assignment  will  be 
regarded  as  having  greater  seniority. 

i. 

The  employee  with  the  earlier  effective  date  of  issuance  of  a  preliminary  cre- 
dential  authorizing  a  classroom  teaching  assignment  will  be  regarded  as  having  greater  sen- 
iority  for  purposes  of  determining  seniority  order. 

j. 

Seniority  is  determined  by  a  random  drawing  by  lot. 

7. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  adopted  Resolution 
No.  R-18,  regarding  non-reelection  and  release  from  employment  of  40  temporary  and  sub- 
stitute  certificated  employees. 

Education  Code  Section  44954  requires  the  Governing  Board  to  notify  certain  tempo- 
rary  certificated  employees  before  the  end  of  the  school  year  of  the  District’s  decision  to  not 
reelect  the  employee  for  the  next  succeeding  year.  Education  Code  Section  44953  allows  the 
Governing  Board  to  dismiss  substitute  certificated  employees  at  any  time  at  the  pleasure  of 
the  Board. 

Resolution  No.  R-18  directed  that  prior  to  March  15,  2008,  the  Superintendent  or  her 
designee,  provide  notice  to  certain  individuals  presently  employed  as  temporary  or  long-term 
substitute  certificated  employees  within  the  District  that  the  Governing  Board  desires  to  not

  

reelect  those  employees  for  the  next  succeeding  school  year  in  any  certificated  position 
within  this  District,  that  the  Board  has  determined  to  release  and  to  not  reelect  them  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  and  that  their  employment  is  thereby  ended  upon  the  close  of  the 
2007-2008  school  year. 

8. 

The  District  identified  respondents  Maria  Hernandez,  Richard  Larson,  Roberta 
Olbrantz  and  Cristina  Ramos  as  being  “Temporary  Categorical  Employees  (Precautionary).” 

9. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  Superintendent’s  designee,  Laurie  Bruton,  Ed.D.,  As- 

sistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  sent  notices  to  certain  certificated  probationary 
and  permanent  employees,  including  respondents,  by  personal  service  and/or  first  class  mail, 
informing  them  that  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  “it  has  been  rec- 
ommended  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  school  year  (2008-2009).” 

The  notice  set  forth  the  reason  for  the  layoff  as  being  the  Governing  Board’s  decision 

to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  certificated  service  not  later  than  the  commencement  of  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  which  required  a  reduction  in  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  positions. 

The  notices  further  advised  the  employees  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  which  must  be 
requested  in  writing  and  delivered  to  Dr.  Bruton,  no  later  than  4:30  p.m.  on  Monday,  March 
24,  2008.  Individuals  who  failed  to  timely  return  the  Request  for  Hearing  form  waived  their 
right  to  a  hearing. 

10. 

Prior  to  March  12,  2008,  Dr.  Bruton  sent  notices  to  all  certificated 

“precautionary”  employees,  including  respondents,  by  personal  service,  giving  them  notice 
that  the  Governing  Board  has  taken  action  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year. 

The  notices  further  advised  the  employees  that  the  District  believes  they  are  not 

entitled  to  the  rights  of  probationary  or  permanent  certificated  employees  within  the  layoff 
process  due  to  their  temporary  employee  status  under  Education  Code  section  44929.25. 
However,  the  District  provided  them,  as  a  precaution,  the  same  type  of  notification  as  sent  to 
respondents  classified  as  probationary  and  permanent  employees. 

11. 

Each  respondent  who  is  a  probationary,  permanent,  or  precautionary  employee 

filed  timely  requests  for  hearing. 

12. 

On  April  18,  2008,  the  District  served  each  respondent,  by  registered/certified 

mail,  with  an  accusation  packet,  consisting  of  a  Notice  of  Accusation,  a  copy  of  the 
Accusation  that  was  filed  by  the  District’s  Superintendent,  relevant  sections  from  the 
Government  Code  pertaining  to  administrative  adjudication,  and  a  Notice  of  Hearing.  As 
required  by  the  Education  Code,  the  Accusation  notices  informed  respondents  that  unless  a 
written  request  for  a  hearing,  signed  by  the  certificated  employee  or  on  that  employee’s 

  

 

  

behalf,  and  received  by  the  Governing  Board  on  or  before  4:30  p.m.  on  April  28,  2008,  the 
Governing  Board  may  proceed  on  the  Accusation  without  a  hearing.  The  request  for  a 
hearing  was  to  be  made  by  delivering  or  mailing  a  Notice  of  Defense,  as  provided  in 
Government  Code  section  11506,  to  Dr.  Bruton.  The  certificated  employees  were  also 
informed  that  failure  to  request  a  hearing  by  filing  a  Notice  of  Defense  within  the  specified 
period  would  constitute  a  wavier  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

13. 

Each  respondent  who  is  a  probationary,  permanent,  or  precautionary  employee 

filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 

14. 

Prior  to  commencing  the  administrative  hearing,  the  parties  so  stipulated  and 

the  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  filed  against  respondent  Rachel  Chavez.  During  the 
hearing,  the  parties  additionally  agreed  to  the  following: 

a. 

The  provisions  in  the  employment  contracts  under  which  respondents  Maria 

Hernandez,  Richard  Larson,  Roberta  Olbrantz,  and  Cristina  Ramos  were  originally  hired 
have  not  changed. 

b. 

Although  the  parties  disagree  with  respect  to  respondent  Ann  Remah’s  senior- 
ity  date,  they  agree  that  a  change  in  her  seniority  date  would  not  affect  her  being  identified  as 
an  employee  who  should  receive  a  layoff  notice. 

c. 

15. 

16. 

The  parties  agree  that  Arlene  Martinez  and  Virginia  Franco  have  BCLAD  au- 

reduce  District  services  below  mandated  levels. 

thorizations  that  were  not  included  in  the  current  seniority  list. 

The  proposed  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  51.5  FTE  positions  will  not 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  containing  employees’  seniority  dates, 

The  seniority  list,  current  as  of  March  7,  2008,  was  used  to  identify  those  employees 

credentials  and  authorizations,  current  locations  and  assignments  and  status  (tenure, 
probationary,  or  intern).  The  information  on  the  seniority  list  is  maintained  on  a  continuous 
basis,  with  provision  for  employees  to  request  that  corrections/updates  be  made.  The 
seniority  list  is  deemed  accurate. 

and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.    

list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  to  positions  in  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  being  reduced  or  discontinued.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least 
senior  employees  held  other  credentials  entitling  them  to  "bump"  other  employees  or  be 
“skipped.”  In  determining  who  would  be  subject  to  layoff  for  each  kind  of  particular  service 
reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies, 

subject  to  receiving  layoff  notices.  The  most  recent  update  to  the  seniority  list  was  com- 
pleted  on  May  1,  2008,  and  corrections  would  continue  to  be  made,  as  necessary. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  "bumping" 

17. 

18. 

|  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  above-described 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was a  proper  exercise  of 
its  discretion. 

19, 

The  cause  for  reducing  and/or  eliminating  the  above-described  particular  kinds 

of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

20. 

Respondents  are  not  certificated  and  competent  to  render  the  service  being 

performed  by  any  employee  with  less  seniority  who  is  being  retained,  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44955.  As  specified  within  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  except  as 
otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  is  being  terminated 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  being 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

21. 

To  the  extent  seniority  ties  occurred,  seniority  ties  were  broken,  in  accordance 

with  the  tie-breaking  criteria  set  forth  in  Resolution  No.  R-16,  adopted  by  the  Governing 
Board  on  March  4,  2008.  Tie-breaking  analysis  was  completed  for  groups  of  employees  with 
the  same  seniority  dates  as  far  back  as  August  15,  2004.  Dr.  Bruton  testified  that  the  senior- 
ity  rank  ordering  that  resulted  from  applying  the  tie-breaking  criteria  did  not  result  in  a 
change  as  to  who  should  or  should  not  have  received  a  layoff  notice. 

22. 

The  causes  for  terminating  each  respondent's  employment  relate  solely  to  the 

welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

23. 

Respondents  Maria  Hernandez,  Richard  Larson,  Roberta  Olbrantz,  and  Cris- 
tina  Ramos  have  been  classified  by  the  District  as  certificated  temporary  employees  serving 
in  categorically  funded  positions.  However,  these  “precautionary”  respondents  contend  that 
since  categorical  funding  for  the  positions  they  now  hold  has  not  ended,  they  are  entitled  to 
the  same  rights  in  the  layoff  proceedings  as  probationary  employees. 

Each  of  these  respondents  is  employed  under  the  Class  Size  Reduction  program  Op- 
tion  2  at  0.5  FTE  (i.e.,  half-time  contract).  Under  option  2,  a  school  district  shall  provide  a 
reduced  class  size  for  all  pupils  in  each  classroom  for  at  least  one-half  of  the  instructional 
minutes  offered  per  day  in  each  grade  level  for  which  funding  is  claimed.  Funding  for  this 
program  is  dependent  on  the  number  of  classes  that  fit  program  ratios  of  20  students  per 
teacher. 

24. 

A  categorically  funded  program  is  one  financed  outside  a  district’s  base  reve- 

nue  limit  with  funds  designated  for  a  use  specified  by  the  particular  program.  The  Class  Size 
Reduction  program  is  a  categorically  funded  program.  (Ed.  Code,  §§  52120-52128.5.) 
Teachers  in  these  programs  are  often  treated  by  districts  as  temporary  employees,  and  under 
Education  Code  section  44909,  they  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  funding  for  the 
program  without  the  protections  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  However, 

 

  

  

  

they  may  be  terminated  in  this  fashion  only  if  the  program  has  expired.  If  the  program  does 
not  expire,  these  teachers  cannot  be  dismissed  without  the  procedural  protections  due  perma- 
nent  and  probationary  employees.  (Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield 
City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260.) 

25.  —  The  original  contracts  for  each  of  the  categorically  funded  temporary  respon- 
dents  incorporated  an  agreement  that  the  District  will  employ  each  of  them  as  “a  temporary 
certificated  employee  pursuant  to  the  Education  Code”  for  a  specific  period  (the  current 
school  year).  The  employee,  in  signing  the  contract  acknowledges  that  the  contract  is  for 
temporary  employment  for  the  length  of  service  specified  there  in  and  that  their  position  is 
“subject  to  end  pending  a  drop  of  enrollment”  (i.e.,  if  enrollment  falls  below  21  students  for 
five  consecutive  days,  the  contract  shall  be  terminated). 

Respondent  Roberta  Olbrantz’s  original  start  date  was  November  1,  2003;  Maria  Her- 
nandez  started  on  October  1,  2004;  Cristina  Ramos  started  on  August  30,  2005;  and  Richard 
Larson  started  on  October  15,  2007.  The  District  has  not  established  that  the  categorical 
funding  for  their  positions  will  end  at  the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  The  impact  of  the 
anticipated  budgetary  shortfall  on  the  District’s  categorically  funded  programs  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  is  not  known. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a),  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given 
notice  by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section 
44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given 
written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her 
designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no  superintendent 
by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has  been 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stat- 
ing  the  reasons  therefor. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  po- 

sition  for  causes  other  than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907 
and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive,  and  no  pro- 
bationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for 
cause  other  than  as  specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclu- 

Sive. 

 

(b)  Whenever  . .  .  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced 

. 

or  discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following 
school  year,  . 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board 
of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of 
these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employ- 
ees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  ser- 
vices  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certifi- 
cated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probation- 
ary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  pro- 
vided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee  may  be 
terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  proba- 
tionary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  dis- 
trict  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee 
whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing 
board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section 
44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining 
the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in 
ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on 
request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order 
of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employ- 
ees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a 
requirement.... 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassign- 
ments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  ren- 
der  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle 
them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning  or  reassigning  any 
certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not 
previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a 
teaching  credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major 
area  of  postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  gov- 
erning  board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

  

 

  

  

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  de- 

viate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  sen- 
iority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services 
authorized  by a  services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either 
pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide 
those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the 
laws. 

3. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this  pro- 

ceeding.  The  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  25.) 

4. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  are 
neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  are  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the  re- 
duction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  Dis- 
trict  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neces- 
sary  to  address  a  decrease  the  expenditures  of  the  District  resulting  from  a  projected  budget- 
ary  shortfall  affecting  the  2008-2009  school  year.  (Factual  Findings  1  through  5,  7,  18,  19, 
and  22.) 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44909  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

. 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  may  employ  persons  possessing 
an  appropriate  credential  as  certificated  employees  in  programs  and  projects  to 
perform  services  conducted  under  . 
.  categorically  funded  projects  which  are 
not  required  by  federal  or  state  statutes.  The  terms  and  conditions  under  which 
such  persons  are  employed  shall  be  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  employee  and 
the  governing  board  and  such  agreement  shall  be  reduced  to  writing.  Service 
pursuant  to  this  section  shall  not  be  included  in  computing  the  service  required 
as  a  prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent 
employee  unless  (1)  such  person  has  served  pursuant  to  this  section  for  at  least 
75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  by  which 
he  is  employed  are  maintained  and  (2)  such  person  is  subsequently  employed 
as  a  probationary  employee  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications. 
Such  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods  which  are  less  than  a  full  school 

10 

 

year  and  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially 
funded  project  without  regard  to  other  requirements  of  this  code  respecting  the 
termination  of  probationary  or  permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918. 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44918  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  Any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee,  who 
serves  during  one  school  year  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the 
regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained  in  that  school  year  and  has  per- 
formed  the  duties  normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  school 
district,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete  school  year  as  a  probation- 
ary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee  for  the  following  school 
year. 

(b)  Any  such  employee  shall  be  reemployed  for  the  following  school  year  to 
fill  any  vacant  positions  in  the  school  district  unless  the  employee  has  been  re- 
leased  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  of  Section  44954  [after  serving  during  one 
school  year  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the 
district  are  maintained,  if  the  employee  is  notified  before  the  end  of  the  school 
year  of  the  district's  decision  not  to  reelect  the  employee  for  the  next  succeed- 
ing  year]. 

7. 

Cause  exists  to  provide  respondents  Maria  Hernandez,  Richard  Larson, 

Roberta  Olbrantz,  and  Cristina  Ramos  with  the  rights  accorded  to  probationary  employees 
under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  (Factual  Findings  7  through  25.) 

8. 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due 

to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Factual  Findings  1 
through  25.) 

9. 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955 

for  terminating  the  employment  of  Ruth  Bravo,  Patricia  Cardiel,  Mary  Dishigrikyan,  Leah 
Elmange,  Janey  Hamrick,  Brian  Hansen,  Jennifer  Hernandez,  Maria  Hernandez,  Gloria 
Jimenez,  Domani  Kem,  Richard  Larson,  Bernadette  Leeper,  Kathryn  Macias,  Elizabeth  Mar- 
tel,  Arlene  Martinez,  Buffie  Meyers,  Reagan  Mikhail,  Catherine  Miyagishima,  Jennifer 
Munoz,  Ricardo  Ojeda,  Roberta  Olbrantz,  Myra  Orozco,  Sharon  Quirarte,  Ann  Rameh,  Cris- 
tina  Ramos,  Kristy  Rosander,  Monica  Russell,  Ginger  Sparks,  Yvonne  Spitzer,  Alisha 
Zepeda,  Merced  Rodriguez,  Jeonon  Mocilac,  Melissa  Holo,  Manuel  Cornejo,  Virginia 
Franco,  Nilda  Huerta,  and  Alexandria  Zirschky  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  due  to  particu- 
lar  kinds  of  services  that  are  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  as 
more  fully  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  5,  which  requires  a  corresponding  decrease  in  the 
number  of  employees  within  this  District  by  51.5  full-time  equivalent  positions.  Each  Re- 
spondent  is  one  of  those  employees  whose  employment  it  is  therefore  necessary  and  appro- 
priate  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  current  year. 

  

11 

 

  

ORDER 

1. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Ruth  Bravo,  Patricia  Cardiel,  Mary 

Dishigrikyan,  Leah  Elmange,  Janey  Hamrick,  Brian  Hansen,  Jennifer  Hernandez,  Maria 
Hernandez,  Gloria  Jimenez,  Domani  Kem,  Richard  Larson,  Bernadette  Leeper,  Kathryn 
Macias,  Elizabeth  Martel,  Arlene  Martinez,  Buffie  Meyers,  Reagan  Mikhail,  Catherine 
Miyagishima,  Jennifer  Munoz,  Ricardo  Ojeda,  Roberta  Olbrantz,  Myra  Orozco,  Sharon 
Quirarte,  Ann  Rameh,  Cristina  Ramos,  Kristy  Rosander,  Monica  Russell,  Ginger  Sparks, 
Yvonne  Spitzer,  Alisha  Zepeda,  Merced  Rodriguez,  Jeonon  Mocilac,  Melissa  Holo,  Manuel 
Cornejo,  Virginia  Franco,  Nilda  Huerta,  and  Alexandria  Zirschky,  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  as  provided  in  Governing  Board  of  Whittier  City  School  District 
Resolution  No.  R-17. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  Each  respondent  shall 

receive  such  a  notice. 

DATED:  May  7,  2008. 

ROBERT  S.  EISMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

12 

