BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
MORENO  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of 
Certain  Employees  of  the  Moreno  Valley 
Unified  School  District: 

Tina  L.  Arias,  Nicole  L.  Castro, 
Christopher  G.  Fuerte,  John  Pepe,  Shannon 
Robinson,  Kathy  Shirley,  and 
Daniel  W.  Singer, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030656 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Moreno  Valley,  California,  on  April  18,  2008. 

Melanie  A.  Peterson,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Kerrie  Taylor,  Attorney  at  Law, 

represented  the  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Tina  L.  Arias,  Nicole  L. 

Castro,  John  Pepe,  Shannon  Robinson,  Kathy  Shirley,  and  Daniel  W.  Singer. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  behalf  of  respondent  Christopher  G.  Fuerte. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  18,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in  Moreno 

Valley,  California.  The  District  is  the  third-largest  school  district  in  Riverside  County.

  

@ 

The  District  maintains  and  operates  23  elementary  schools,  six  middle  schools,  five 
comprehensive  high  schools,  and  five  alternative  schools.  The  District  provides  services  to 
approximately  37,000  students  from  kindergarten  through  12"  grades.  The  District  employs 
approximately  1,600  certificated  employees. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five  member  Board  of  Education  (the 

Board).  The  Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Rowena  T.  Lagrosa  (Superintendent 
Lagrosa),  the  Superintendent  of  Schools.  Olivia  Hershey  is  the  District’s  Assistant 
Superintendent  of  Schools  and  Human  Resources  Officer.  Robert  Kronk  is  the  District’s 
Assistant  Superintendent  of  Business  Services.  Willie  Hasson  is  the  District’s  Director  of 
Certificated  Services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition of local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  the 
passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of 
California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  necessary  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 
state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  the  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops. 

e 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under  Education 
Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  certificated  employees 
no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4, 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  budget  deficit 
and  its  fiscal  impact.  As  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  District  projected  a  budget  deficit 
of  about  $11.1  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  District  was  required  to  look  into 
ways  to  balance  its  budget. 

e@ 

Be  

2 

  

The  District’s  administrative  staff  prepared  a  recommendation  that  was  given  to  the 
Board  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  as  one  of  the 
methods  available  to  meet  the  budgetary  shortfall. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  2007-08-67  and 

Resolution  No.  2007-08-69,  based  on  its  opinion  that  it  was  necessary  for  the  District  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  resolutions  directed  the  Superintendent  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all 

employees  whose  services  would  be  terminated  by  virtue  of  the  Board’s  actions. 

More  specifically,  Resolution  2007-08-067  provided: 

RESOLUTION  NO.  2007-08-67  -  INTENTION  TO  DISMISS 
CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  -  PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board of  the  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  has 

determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  of 
the  District  as  itemized  in  Exhibit  “A”  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  shall  be  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end of  the  2007-2008  school  year, 
the  employment  of  certain  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as  a  result  of  this  reduction  or 
discontinuance  in  particular  kinds  of  services; 

THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  the  Superintendent  is  directed  to  send 
appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  services  shall  be  terminated  by  virtue  of  this  action. 
Nothing  herein  shall  be  deemed  to  confer  any  status  or  rights  upon  temporary  or  categorically 
funded  project  certificated  employees  in  addition  to  those  specifically  granted  to  them  by  statue. 

Adopted  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  on  the 

* 

11th  day  of  March,  2008. 

AYES: 

NOES: 

ABSENT: 

MORENO  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT  GOVERNING  BOARD 

/s/ 

Jesus  M.  Holguin,  President 
Board  of  Education 

Exhibit  A  provided: 

EXHIBIT  A 

Recommended  Reduction  in  2008-2009  Programs/Services  for  the  Moreno  Valley 

Unified  School  District. 

The  Superintendent  recommends  that  the  Governing  Board  adopt  a  resolution  to  reduce 

the  programs  and  services  for  2008-2009  as  follows:   

  

GENERAL  FUND 
(Reduction  in  Force) 

  

  

Services 

FTE 

  

  

9-12: 
e 

2. 

Counselors: 

e 

K-5 

TOTAL 

lL 

  

  

Work  Experience 

2.0  FTE 

  

  

  

  

  

  

7.0  FTE 

9.0  FTE 

  

  

Resolution  2007-08-069  provided: 

RESOLUTION  NO.  2007-08-69  -  INTENTION  TO  DISMISS 
CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  -  PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  has 

determined  that  it  shall  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of  services  of 
the  District  as  itemized  in  Exhibit  “C”  (as  amended)  at  the  close of the  current  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  it  shall  be  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year, 
the  employment  of  certain  certificated  employees of the  District  as  a  result  of  this  reduction  or 
discontinuance  in  particular  kinds of  services; 

THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  the  Superintendent  is  directed  to  send 
appropriate  notices  to  all  employees  whose  services  shail  be  terminated  by  virtue of this  action. 
Nothing  herein  shall  be  deemed  to  confer  any  status  or  rights  upon  temporary  or  categorically 
funded  project  certificated  employees  in  addition  to  those  specifically  granted  to  them  by  statue. 

Adopted  by  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Moreno  Valley  Unified  School  District  on  the 

11th  day  of  March,  2008. 

AYES: 

NOES: 

ABSENT: 

/s/ 
Jesus  M.  Holguin,  President 
Board  of  Education 

Exhibit  C  provided: 

EXHIBIT  C 

Recommended  Reduction  in  2008-2009  Programs/services  for  the  Moreno  Valley 

Unified  School  District. 

 

  

The  Superintendent  recommends  that  the  Governing  Board  adopt a  resolution  to  reduce 

the  programs  and  services  for  2008-2009  as  follows: 

  

CATEGORICAL 
(Possible  Reduction  Funding  —  Addresses  Compliance  Issues) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

Services 

1. 

Counselors: 

© 

Categorical 

2. 

_P.E.  (K-6) 

  

  

FTE 

3.0  5-0  FTE 

4.0  FTE 

  

4. 

  

  

  

  

Categorical  Teachers 

12.1  294  FTE   
  
    

Title  ]  Teacher  (1.1  FTE) 
English  (2.0  FTE) 
Math  (2.0  FTE) 

TOTAL 

5.1  FTE 

  

  

  

  

e 
© 

6. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year  and  would  not  be 
needed  for  the  upcoming  2008-2009  school  year.  Each  employee  was  notified  of  their  right 
to  a  hearing. 

7. 

Seven  employees  timely  requested  an  administrative  hearing:  Respondents 

Tina  L.  Arias,  Nicole  L.  Castro,  Christopher  G.  Fuerte,  John  Pepe,  Shannon  Robinson,  Kathy 
Shirley,  and  Daniel  W.  Singer. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

8. 

On  April  14,  2008,  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearing  received  notice  from 
Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  that  he  represented  respondents  Tina  Arias,  Nicole  Castro, 
John  Pepe,  Shannon  Robinson,  Kathy  Shirley,  and  Dan  Singer. 

On  April  18,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  a  stipulation  of jurisdictional  facts  was  filed,  sworn 
testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record 
was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services/Decline  in  Attendance  Issues 

9. 

The  services  identified  in  Exhibit  A  were  services  that  could  properly  be 

reduced  or  discontinued.  The  reduction  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious, 
and  it  constituted  a  matter  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  Before  issuing 
preliminary  layoff  notices,  the  administrative  staff  considered  all  known  positive  attrition 
including  resignations,  retirements  and  probationary  non-reelects  to  determine  the  number  of 
layoff  notices  that  needed  to  be  served.  The  administrative  staff  met  with  teachers,  board 
members,  and  others  in  the  educational  community  before  making  specific  recommendations 
regarding  a  reduction  in  force. 

No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated 

by  state  or  federal  law. 

The  Seniority  List 

10. 

The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list,  a  living  document  that  is  updated  as  new 
employees  are  hired  and  as  other  employees  retire  or  resign.  The  seniority  list  contains  each 
employee’s  name,  his  or  her  seniority  date  (based  on  the  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the 
District),  the  employee’s  hire  date,  the  teacher’s  assignment,  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
teacher’s  credentials,  the  name  of  the  school  site  where  the  employee  provides  services,  the 
employee’s  status  (intern,  probationary,  tenured),  and  what  percentage  of  full-time  equivalent 
(FTE)  service  the  employee  provides. 

12. 

11. 

The  District’s  Layoff Notices 

Under  the  Board’s  reduction  in  force  resolutions,  the  District  was  required  to 
provide  notice  to  the  two most  junior  physical  education  teachers  and  the  seven  most  junior 
counselors. 

As  soon  as  the  District  determined  that  the  budget  crisis  might  require  a  reduction 
in  force,  the  certificated  seniority  list  was  sent  to  all  school  sites  and  was  made  available  for  all 
employees  for  review.  Employees  were  given  a  reasonable  period  of  time  in  which  they  could 
request  corrections  or  changes  to  the  seniority  list.  When  employee  comments  were  returned, 
the  District  investigated  the  requests  and  made  changes  to  the  seniority  list  when  appropriate. 

   

In  reviewing  the  seniority  list,  staff  concluded  that  Tina  Arias  (hired  2/27/07,  a 
probationary  |  elementary  school  counselor  at  Sierra  Elementary  School),  Daniel  W.  Singer 
(hired  3/5/07,  a  probationary  1  continuation  school  counselor  at  March  Mountain 
Continuation  School),  John  Pepe  (hired  4/9/07,  a  probationary  1  middle  school  counselor  at 
Sunnymead  Middle  School),  Nicole  Castro  (hired  4/10/07,  a  probationary  |  middle  school 

a  probationary  1  elementary  school  PE  teacher  at  Hidden  Springs  Elementary  School)  and 
Kathy  Shirley  (hired  1/14/08,  a  probationary  1  middle  school  PE  teacher  at  Sunnymead 
Middle  School)  were  the  most  junior  physical  education  teachers  and  should  be  given  notice. 

In  reviewing  the  seniority  list,  staff  concluded  that  Christopher  Fuerte  (hired  1/14/08, 

6 

  

counselor  at  Badger  Springs  Middle  School),  and  Shannon  Robinson  (hired  8/17/07,  a 
probationary  |  high  school  counselor  at  Valley  View  High  School)  were  the  most  junior 
counselors  and  should  be  given  notice. 

13. 

Each  certificated  employee  identified  in  Factual  Finding  12  was  given  notice 

as  required  by  law  and  timely  filed  a  request  for  a  hearing.  Thereafter,  the  District  timely 
served  an  Accusation  and  other  required  jurisdictional  documents  on  each  certificated 
employee  identified  in  Factual  Finding  12,  along  with  a  Notice  of  Hearing. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services  to  reduce.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion  to 
determine  the  extent  to  which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  determining  a certain  type  of  services  or  by 

reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  A  school board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper 
because  the  school  board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board 
of Trustees of  Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute. 

: 

- 

4. 

For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b)  provides: 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.” 

5. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  who  render  services  which  the 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  A  district  may  move  a  junior 

7 

 

employee  upward  from  the  bottom  of  a  seniority  list,  “skipping”  over  more  senior 
employees,  so  long  as  the  junior  employee  being  retained  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render  services  which  more  senior  employees  are  not.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

6. 

As  a  result  of  the  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  service,  cause  exists 

under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  respondents  Tina  L. 
Arias,  Nicole  L.  Castro,  Christopher  G.  Fuerte,  John  Pepe,  Shannon  Robinson,  Kathy 
Shirley,  and  Daniel  W.  Singer  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  respondents  Tina  L.  Arias,  Nicole  L. 
Castro,  Christopher  G,  Fuerte,  John  Pepe,  Shannon  Robinson,  Kathy  Shirley,  and  Daniel  W. 
Singer  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and 
that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

     

(oes  ane  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

