BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
LAKE  ELSINORE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Respondents  Listed  on  Exhibit  “A” 

OAH  No.  2008020569 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Vallera  J.  Johnson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Lake  Elsinore,  California  on  April  18,  2008. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Anderson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  Dr. 

1. 

listed  in  Exhibit  “A.” 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Frank  W.  Passarella,  Superintendent,  Lake  Elsinore  Unified  School  District. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  18,  2008. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Esq.,  Tosdal  Smith  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  Respondents 

Kip  Meyer-made  and  filed  Accusation,  dated  March  14,  2008,  against 

    

  

Respondents  listed  on  Exhibit  “A”  in  his  official  capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent 
(Assistant  Superintendent),  Personnel  Services,  and  designee  of  Dr.  Frank  W.  Passarella, 
Superintendent  (Superintendent),  Lake  Elsinore  Unified  School  District  (District). 

  

School  District  (Board)  and  Respondents  that  he  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to 
Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.

The  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  Lake  Elsinore  Unified 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

e@ 

On  March  11  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-08-071  that  reduced  or 
eliminated  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  established  skipping 
and  tie-breaker  criteria. 

Respondents  were  served  on  March  14,  2008. 

The  written  notice  of  termination  stated  that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be 

required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
The  recommendation  that  Respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
competency.  The  notice  advised  Respondents  of  the  right  to  hearing,  that  the  request  for 
hearing  must  be  delivered  to  the  Superintendent’s  office  no  later  than  March  31,  2008,  not 
less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  and  that  the  failure  to 
request  a  hearing  would  constitute  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

The  District  served  an  Accusation  on  Respondents  in  a  timely  manner. 

Respondents  filed  a  timely  Request  for  Hearing  and/or  Notice  of  Defense. 

All pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

4. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007-08-071  and  took 

e@ 

action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services 
commencing  in  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

1802  Counselors 
Elementary  Band  Teacher 
Elementary  Physical  Education  Teacher 
Freshman  Foundation  Teacher 
Health  Teacher 
Secondary  Social  Science  Teacher 
Secondary  Physical  Education  Teacher 
Middle  School  Core  Teacher 

7.0 
1.0 
1.0 
2.2 
5.4 
2.0 
4.6 
7.0 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  30.2  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

6. 

Respondents  objected  to  terminating  teachers  who  provide  instruction  in  the 

District’s  health  program.  The  Board  requires  its  student  to  complete  certain  courses  taught 
by  health  teachers,  and  there  are  students  who  have  not  satisfied  this  requirement;  in 
addition,  the  District  is  required  to  provide  instruction  regarding  certain  subjects,  such  as 
AIDS. 

e@ 

Instruction  in  the  health  program  will  continue  during  the  2008  —  2009  school  year. 

The  manner  or  method  by  which  these  services  will  be  provided  will  change.  It  will  be 
accomplished  by  fewer  teachers  to  a  similar  number  of  students. 

2 

  

 

According  to  the  evidence,  the  Board  intends  to  provide  mandatory  services;  the 
District  has  considered  several  options  but  has  not  made a  final  decision  about  how  these 
services  will  be  provided  and  is  not  required  to  do  so  prior  to  the  issuance  of  final  layoff 
notices. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  District  abused  its  discretion  or  that  the  decision  to 

reduce  the  health  program  by  5.4  FTE  positions  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

Given  the  foregoing,  insufficient  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  reduction  of 

the  health  program  was  improper. 

The  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  including  resignations  and 

retirements,  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  final  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its 
certificated  employees. 

The  District  rescinded  layoff  notices  issued  to  Respondents  Blanca  Dixon, 

Phillip  Johnson,  and  Marni  Thuyns. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the 

technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  developed a  seniority  list  that  contained,  among 
other  matters,  each  employee’s  name,  seniority  date,  status,  current  assignment, credential(s) 
and  whether  the  teacher  was  No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB)  compliant. 

e 

The  seniority  date  was  based  on  the  first  date  of  paid  service  rendered.’  A  teacher 

hired  as  a  probationary  employee  who  worked  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee  for  at 
least  75  percent  of  the  school  days  during  the  previous  year  and  had  performed  the  duties 
normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  was  deemed  to  have  served  a 
complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee 
for  the  following  school  year.  The  teacher  was  entitled  to  have  that  earlier  year  counted  as  a 
year  of  probationary  service.  The  prior  year  was  “tacked”  on  for  seniority  purposes,  *  but 
— 
only  one  year  could  be  tacked. 

- 

: 

  

10. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  and  “bumping” 

list  to  determine  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being 
reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in 
another  area  that  would  entitle  him  or  her  to  “bump”  other  junior  employees.  In  determining 
who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of 
reductions  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The 
affected individuals and whether  they  could “bump 

—___District-then-checked_the.credentials_of 

Education  Code  section  44918,   

Education  Code  section  44845. 

other  employees. 

' 

11. 

In  compliance  with  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  by 
adoption  of  Resolution  No.  2007-08-071,  dated  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  skipped  and 
retained  all  certificated  employees  who  held  EL  authorization.  Any  and  all  teachers  qualified 
to  provide  services  to  EL  students  were  properly  skipped  and  should  not  have  received  a 
layoff  notice. 

12. 

The  Board  adopted  tie-breaker  criteria  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of 

employees  with  the  same  seniority  date,  which  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“WHEREAS,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subsection  (b),  related  to 

certificated  layoffs,  provides  in  relevant  part,  ‘[a]s  between  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall 
determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  need  of  the  district  and  the 
students  thereof; 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  that  based  upon  the  needs  of  the 
District  and  the  students  thereof,  in  the  event of  a 
certificated  layoff  the  following 
criteria  shall  be  applied  in  order  based  on  the  information  on  file  as  of  March  11, 
2008,  one  step  at  a  time  until  the  tie  is  broken,  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  between 
certificated  employees: 

1.  Highly  Qualified  status  pursuant  to  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  in  the 

area  of  assignment. 

2.  Authorization  to  teach  English  Language  Learners  (CLAD,  BCLAD, 

3. 

 
A
D
I
S

SB395,  SDAIE,  etc.) 
Credential  status  in  area  of  assignment  in  order  of  priority:  a)  clear;  b) 
preliminary;  c)  intern;  d)  provisional/other. 
Number  of  additional  credentials  or  supplemental  authorizations. 
Number  of  years  credentialed  teaching  experience  outside  the  District 
Possession  of  a  Masters  Degree  —  earliest  date  prevails. 
Total  post-secondary  credits. 
Ifa  tie  still  exists  after  applying  steps  one  through  seven  (1  —  7)  above, 
seniority  shall  be  determined  based  upon  a  comparison of the  most  recent 
employee  evaluations  or  classroom  observations  if  there  is  no  employee 
evaluation  on  file.” 

13. 

Respondents  Danny  Hernandez  (Respondent  Hernandez)  and  Caren  Simpson 

(Respondent  Simpson)  each  received  a  layoff  notice  while  other  more  junior  employees  were 
skipped  and  retained  because  the  more  junior  employees  were  authorized  to  provide 
instruction  to  EL  students,  and  Respondents  Hernandez  and  Simpson  are  not. 

For  many  years,  the  District  has  encouraged  its  certificated  employees  to  obtain 

authorization  to  teach  EL  students.  Following  an  audit  of  the  District’s  categorical  funding 
programs  in  2007,  the  District  was  cited  (found  in  violation)  because  teachers  without  EL. 
authorization  provided  instruction  to  EL  students.  As  part  of  the  layoff  process,  the  District 

4 

 

  

required  that  certificated  employees  provide  evidence  of  EL  authorization  no  later  than 
March  11,  2008. 

Over  the  years,  by  letter  or  email,  the  District  has  consistently  communicated  with 

Respondent  Hernandez  regarding  the  issue.  By  letter,  dated  September  28,  2001,  the  District 
notified  Respondent  Hernandez  about  the  requirement  and  the  consequence  thereof. 
Respondent  Hernandez  completed  the  course  requirements  on  January  31,  2008.  However, 
he  provided  the  necessary  information  to  the  District  in  an  untimely  manner,  on  March  17. 
Respondent  Hernandez  testified  about  a  number  of  reasons  that  one  would  consider 
reasonable  but  for  the  consistent  efforts  made  by  the  District  over  the  past  six  years. 

Respondent  Simpson  has  not  obtained  an  EL  authorization.  She  testified  that  she 

learned  about  the  requirement  a  year  ago  and  that  she  is  scheduled  to  take  the  required 
courses  in  August  2008. 

Given  the  foregoing,  the  District  properly  issued  preliminary  layoff  notices  to 

Respondents  Hernandez  and  Simpson. 

14. 

Between  the  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 

same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
District  and  the  students.  The  Board  adopted  specific  criteria  and  provided  clear  instructions 
for  implementation  of  the  criteria.  The  order  of  termination  was  based  on  the  needs  of  the 
District  and  its  students.  The  tie-breaker  criteria  were  fairly  applied  to  rank  those  employees 
hired  on  the  same  date. 

15. 

The  services  that  the  District  proposes  to  reduce  were  “particular  kinds  of 

services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

16. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  to  the 
welfare  of the District  and  its-pupils:The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

17. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

 

  LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

ee 

  

1, 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  these  sections  are  satisfied. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall 

5 

not  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  of the  Goleta  Union 
School  Dist.  (1981)  132  Cal.App.3d  32,  36;  citing  Rutherford  v.  Board of Trustees  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Lake 
Elsinore  Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The 
cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to 
the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he/she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.  3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the  senior 

5. 

Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the 

junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts 
lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Board  of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District 
(1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

6. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to 

render  a  service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

   

  

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  against  Respondents  Blanca  Dixon,  Phillip  Johnson  and  Marni 
Thuyns  is  dismissed.  Respondents  Blanca  Dixon,  Phillip  Johnson  and  Marni  Thuyns  shall  be 
retained. 

2. 

Except  as  provided  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Order,  the  Accusations  served  on 

Respondents  listed  in  attached  Exhibit  “B”  are  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to 
Respondents  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED:  We 

L008 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

   

  

EXHIBIT  A 

. 

. 

Archer,  Jamie 

Dixon,  Blanca 

Dillon,  Marie 

Duhamel,  Stephanie 

Gilliland,  Mindie 

Henderson,  Brian 

Hernandez,  Amy 

Hernandez,  Danny 

9. 

Jones,  Christopher 

10.  Parks,  Kathleen  (0.6  FTE) 

11.  Penwarden,  Andrew 

12.  Romero,  Christopher  (0.6  FTE) 

13.  Simpson,  Caren 

14.  Thuyns,  Marni 

  

   

  

EXHIBIT  B 

Archer,  Jamie 

Dillon,  Marie 

Henderson,  Brian 

Hernandez,  Amy 

Hernandez,  Danny 

Jones,  Christopher 

Parks,  Kathleen  (0.6  FTE) 

Penwarden,  Andrew 

Romero,  Christopher  (0.6  FTE) 

10. 

Simpson,  Caren 

. 

   

