  

e 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
DELHI  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction 
In  Force)  against: 

OAH  No.  2008030628 

SALLY  PAYNE-OTT, 

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Karl  S.  Engeman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  15,  2008,  in  Delhi,  California. 

@ 

Elizabeth  P.  Lind,  Esq.,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  represented  the 

Delhi  Unified  School  District. 

Joan  Marie  Maredyth,  Esq.,  Maredyth  and  Fischer,  LLP,  represented  Sally  Payne-Ott. 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Bill  Baltazar  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Delhi  Unified  School  District 

(District).  His  actions  and  the  actions  of  the  District  Governing  Board  were  taken  in  their 
official  capacities. 

2. 

Respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District.  On  or  before  March  15, 

2008,  the  District  served  on  respondent  a  written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that 
notice  be  given  to  respondent  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  her 
services  would  be  reduced  or  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The 
written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  District 
Governing  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  15  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions  including  elimination  of  1.0  FTE  Director  of  Health  Services. 

e 

  

 

  

Respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  her  for  the  ensuing  school  year.' 

3. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  an  Accusation  against  respondent.  The 

Accusation  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  was 
timely  served  on  respondent.  Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  at  a  regular  meeting,  the  District  Governing 

Board  was  given  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  employees 
holding  15.0  FTE  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be  reduced  or  not 
required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

5. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  District  Governing  Board  determined  that  it  was 

necessary  to  decrease  programs  and  services  and  thus  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  teaching 
services  affecting  employment  of  15  FTE  positions.  The  District  Governing  Board  adopted 
Resolution  No.  03-11-2008-E  providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination of the  following 
particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS): 

1  FTE 

|  FTE 

1  FTE 

Middle  School  Site  Principal  -- 
Director  of  ELD  -- 
Coordinator  of  Pupil  Services  -- 
Counselor  -- 
1  FTE 
K-8  Elementary  Classroom  Teachers  --  3  FTE 
ELD/Spanish  Classroom  Teacher  -- 
Special  Education  Classroom  Teacher  —  1  FTE 
High  School  Alternative  Education  Teacher  -- 
Part  Time  Support  Teachers  -- 
Math  Coach  -- 
Intervention  Teacher  -- 
Librarian  -- 
|  FTE 
Director  of  Health  Services  -- 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

|  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

|  FTE  (.5  FTE  +  .5  FTE) 

Total:  15  FTE  © 

6. 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  these  particular 

kinds  of  services  was  made in  order  to  address  a  substantial  estimated  budget  shortfall in  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

7. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’ 

seniority  dates  (first  date  of  paid  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or  temporary,  and 
credentials  and  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are  obtained  from 
the  District’s  records  and  employees  are  given  the  opportunity  to  correct  errors  in  the 
seniority  list. 

  

'  None  of  the  other  affected  certificated  employees  requested  a  hearing.

8. 

The  Superintendent  and  other  District  employees  were  responsible  for 

implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to 
develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various 
services  being  reduced.  The  District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees 
held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees. 

9. 

Sally  Payne-Ott  has  a  seniority  date  of  September  27,  1997.  She  holds  a 

Professional  Clear  School  Nurse  Services  Credential.  Ms.  Payne-Ott’s  position  is  Director  of 
Health  Services.  Ms.  Payne-Ott  is  the  District’s  only  nurse.  She  is  a  qualified  public  health 
nurse,  a  registered  nurse,  and  a  certified  audiometrist  (allowing  her  to  conduct  hearing 
examinations).  Ms.  Payne-Ott  was  initially  hired  to  work  163  days  during  the  school  year. 
Since  then,  her  contract  has  been  changed  to  provide  200  days,  including  approximately  two 
weeks  before  and  after  school  is  in  session,  and  her  work  day  is  eight  hours. 

10. 

Ms.  Payne-Ott’s  duties  are  described  in  her  duty  statement  as  providing 

“direction,  implementation,  supervision,  and  evaluation  of  all  aspects  of  the  District’s  health 
services  program  for  the  benefit  of  both  students  and  staff.”  More  specifically,  she 
coordinates  all  mandated  school  health  screenings  including  vision,  hearing,  and  scoliosis. 
She  prepares  mandated  reports  including  those  relating  to  immunizations.  She  supervises  the 
District’s  health  clerks.  She  confers  on  Individual  Educational  Plans  for  special  education 
students  with  health  issues  and  attends  between  20  and  40  IEP  team  meetings  each  school 
year.  She  crafts  and  helps  implement  Individual  Health  Plans  for  non-special  education 
students  with  health  needs.  She  works  with  diabetic,  Spina  Bifida,  and  seizure  disorder 
students,  including  the  supervision  of  their  medication  regimens.  She  teaches  first  aid  and 
CPR  courses. 

11. 

The  District  understands  that  it  must  continue  to  provide  legally  mandated 

health  services,  including  hearing,  vision  and  scoliosis  screening.”  The  District  has  not  yet 
determined  the  manner  in  which  such  services  will  be  provided  but  is  focusing  on  two 
options.  The  first  option  involves  contracting  with  a  county  office  of  education  to  provide 
nursing  services.  The  District  has  had  discussions  with  the  Merced  County  Office  of 
Education  which  can  provide  nursing  services  at  a  projected  cost  approximately  $30,000  less 
than  the  salary  and  benefits  Ms.  Payne-Ott  receives.  The  other  option  is  to  change  the  title  of 
Director  of  Health  Services  to  School  Nurse,  and  reduce  the  annual  contract  to  approximately 
181,  6  hour,  days  to  roughly  correspond  to  the  time  that  students  are  actually  in  school. 
There  would  be  a  corresponding  decrease  in  the  position  salary,  although  the  exact  amount 
has  not  been  determined.  The  District  projects  that  this  option  would  save  it  approximately 
$27,000. 

12. 

No  junior  certificated  employees  are  being  retained  in  positions  for  which  Ms 
Payne-Ott  is  certificated  and  competent.  If  the  District  does  elect  to  change  the  position  title 
and  hours  rather  than  contract  with  a  county  office  of  education  for  nursing  services,  the 
District  acknowledges  Ms.  Payne-Ott  would  be  entitled  to  the  School  Nurse  position  by 

?  The  District  currently  contracts  out  most  of  its  hearing  screening  services  to  a  county  office  of  education. 

  

 

  

virtue  of  her  credential,  qualifications  and  seniority.  Ms  Payne-Ott  asserts  that  the 
elimination  of  the  Director  of  Health  Services  is  not  a  proper  PKS  reduction  or  elimination 
under  applicable  provisions  of  law.  She  also  asserts,  at  least  by  implication,  that  the  District 
cannot  fulfill  its  legal  mandate  relating  to  health  services  if  the  Director  of  Nursing  position 
is  eliminated.  These  assertions  are  rejected  for  reasons  outlined  in  the  Legal  Conclusions 
below. 

e@ 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
44944  and  44945  were  met.  The  notice  sent  to  respondent  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the 
reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  was  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  her  due  process.  (San 
Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

3. 

2. 

e 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

The  services  identified  in  the  Board  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services 
that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was 
a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

   

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  whenever  a  particular  kind 
of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  ...or  whenever  the 
amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum, 
and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it 
shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions 
to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district, 
the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

1-4 

@ 

4. 

a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the 
district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services 
of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a 
service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 
14 

5. 

District  will  be  required  to  have  a  plan  in  place  for  the  provision  of  nursing 

services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  but  it  does  not  have  to  have a  finalized  plan  in  place 
at  the  time  that  it  opts  to  reduce  or  eliminate  nursing  services  and  give  notice  to  affected 
certificated  employees.  It  must  be  presumed,  absent  evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  the 
District  will  comply  with  its  legally  mandated  obligations  (Ev.  Code  §664,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.  App.689,  696.)  The  District  has  discretion  to  determine 
how  and  in  what  manner  mandated  services  are  to  be  provided.  (Campbell  Elementary 
Teachers  Assn  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.  App.3d  796,  811;  Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996) 
41  Cal.  App.  4"  1571,  1582-1590.)  Changing  the  way  in  which  a  service  is  to  be  performed 
constitutes  a  reduction  in  a  particular  kind  of  service,  as  does  having  fewer  employees 
available  to  perform  the  service.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.  App.3d 
167,  179;  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn..  v.  Abbott,  supra,  76  Cal.App.  3d  at  p.  811.) 

6. 

Turning  to  Ms.  Payne-Ott’s  contentions,  the  District  has  not  yet  determined 

the  precise  manner  in  which  it  will  provide  the  legally  mandated  health  services  next  school 
year,  but  it  is  not  required  to  do  so  at  this  point  and  it  must  be  presumed  that  District  will 
meet  its  mandate.  The  elimination  of  the  Director  of  Health  Services  position  is  a  legitimate 
PKS  reduction  or  elimination.  If  the  District  does  contract  with  a  county  office  of  education, 
that  will  be  a  change  in  the  manner  in  which  such  services  are  provided  which,  as  noted 
above,  is  a  permissible  PKS  change.  If  the  District  changes  the  days  and  hours  of  the 
position  but  retains  Ms.  Payne-Ott  to  perform  nursing  duties,  that  change  amounts  to  a 
reduction  in  nursing  services,  also  a  permissible  PKS  change. 

     

DATED:  April  28,  2008      

  

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Sally  Payne- -Ott  that  her  services 5 will  be  reduced  by  1.0  FTE 

Office  of  AdministrattveHearings 

AN 
Judge) 

ORDER 

