BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CAPISTRANO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

OAH  No.  L2008020611 

In  the  Matter  of: 

AMY  ABBOTT,  et  al., 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Daniel  Juarez,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

heard  this  matter  on  April  17  and  18,  2008,  in  San  Juan  Capistrano,  California. 

David  C.  Larsen,  Attorney  at  Law,  Rutan  &  Tucker,  represented  the  Capistrano 

Unified  School  District  (CUSD). 

Marianne  Reinhold,  Attorney  at  Law,  Reich,  Adell,  Crost  &  Cvitan,  represented  all 

Respondents,  except  those  represented  by  John  F.  Kohn,  noted  directly  below,  and  those 
representing  themselves,  identified  further  below. 

listed  in  Appendix  I  and  Exhibit  1.  (See  fn.  2.) 

John  F.  Kohn,  Staff  Attorney,  California  Teachers  Association,  represented  13 

The  following  Respondents  represented  themselves  but  were  not  present  at  the 

All  Respondents  originally  served  with  the  Accusation  at  issue  in  this  proceeding  are 

hearing  on  either  day:  Nicky  Avarinejad,  Nicole  Brubaker,  Carol  Brillon,  and  Gregory 
Gibson. 

Respondents  (hereinafter  sometimes  referred  to  as  “the  13  Respondents”):  Joice  Alapag, 
Kari  Ambrose,  Terri  Arndt,  Jenni  Balck,  Amy  Devore,  Brenda  Gansel,  Christa  Jones,  Andrea 
Julson,  Tami  Mays,  Darla  O’Leary,  Christa  Strick,  Stephanie  Veravanich,  and  Stacy  Biggs. 

   

each  party  to  submit  a  written  closing  brief.  Counsel  for  the  parties  submitted  closing  briefs 
timely.  The  brief  for  CUSD  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  21,  the  brief  on  behalf 
of  those  respondents  represented  by  Ms.  Reinhold  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit 
E,  and  the  brief  on  behalf  of  the  13  Respondents  represented  by  Mr.  Kohn  was  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  F;  thereafter,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  closed  the  record.  The 
parties  submitted  the  matter  for  decision  on  April  23,  2008. 

The  Administrative  Law  Judge  held  the  record  open  until  April  23,  2008  to  allow 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Suzette  D.  Lovely,  CUSD  Deputy  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services,  filed 

the  Accusations  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  designee  of  A.  Woodrow  Carter,  CUSD 
Superintendent.  CUSD  served  the  Accusations  on  all  Respondents  timely. 

2(a). 

The  parties  stipulated  to  the  jurisdictional  pleadings  in  the  Accusations  served 

on  all  Respondents.  The  stipulation  included  the  following  facts: 

2(b). 
employees  of  CUSD. 

Respondents  are  employed  as  probationary  or  permanent  certificated 

2(c). 

On  March  10,  2008,  by  resolution,  the  CUSD  Governing  Board  (the 

Governing  Board)  determined  to  reduce  and/or  discontinue  certain  services  within  the  school 
district,  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  give  notice  to  those  employees  who  might  be 
affected  by  that  determination. 

2(d). 

Pursuant  to  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution,  and  by  March  15,  2008,  the 

Superintendent’s  designee  notified  the  Governing  Board  and  Respondents,  in  writing,  that  it 
was  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  Respondents  be  notified  Respondents’ 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  written  notice  stated  the 
reasons  for  the  lay-off  and  informed  each  Respondent  of  his  or  her  right  to  request  an 
administrative  hearing. 

2(e). 

Respondents  requested  administrative  hearings  to  determine  if  there  was  cause 

for  not  reemploying  Respondents  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.! 

3. 

The  recommendation  that  Respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was 

not  related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

4. 

CUSD  dismissed  the  Accusation  as  to  the  following  Respondents:  Alana 

Brewer,  Erin  Bro,  Gregory  Gibson,  Dana  Judd,  Christina  Lee,  Julie  Matters,  Victor  Mosconi, 
Catherine  Prescott,  Lynn  Sanchez,  Michael  Schooler,  Roni  Schwartz,  Roxanne  Smathers, 
Michael  Young,  and  Stuart  Young. 

5. 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  number  0708-40  proposed a  layoff  of  306.8 

full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions.  Specifically,  the  Governing  Board  proposed  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  or  programs,  set  forth  in 
Table  A: 

'  Not  all  Respondents  filed  Notices  of  Defense,  however,  CUSD  proceeded  as  if  all 

Respondents  had  filed  timely  Notices  of  Defense,  including  the  four  Respondents  who 
represented  themselves  (Avarinejad,  Brubaker,  Brillon,  and  Gibson). 

  

 

  

Table  A 

  

Particular  Kind  of  Service  or  Program 
Certificated  Non-Management  Positions 

Number  of  Full  Time 
Equivalents 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Elementary  Instructional  Services (Self  Contained  Classrooms) 
Primary  Grade  Classrooms 
Kindergarten  CSR_  (10  FTE) 
(72  FTE) 
1"  Grade  CSR 
(75  FTE) 
2™  Grade  CSR___ 
_(74  FTE) 
3"  Grade  CSR 
Upper  Grade  Classrooms 
Grades  4-6 
Secondary  Instructional  Services  (Single  Subject  Course 
Offerings) 
Grades  7-12 

  

  

231  FTE 

16  FTE 

23.9  FTE 

  

© 
e 
e 
e 
e 
e 
© 
° 

Art 
English 
Social  Science 
Math 
Science 
Foreign  Language 
Music 
PE 

(4  FTE) 
(4.5  FTE) 
(4.5  FTE) 
(4.4  FTE) 
(4.0  FTE) 
(3  FTE) 
(.6  FTE) 
(2.5  FTE) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
    
  

Instructional  Support  Services 
Resource  Teachers  on  Special  Assignment 
Literacy  Specialist 
Special  Education  (TLC;  Secondary  Classroom  Restructuring) 
Psychologists 
Certificated  Management  Services 
Director  I,  Music 
Director  IV,  Intervention  &  Special  Education  Support 
Director  VI,  English  Language  Development 
Executive  Director  I,  Elementary  Special  Education 
Executive  Director  I,  Facilities  Planning 
Executive  Director  I,  State  &  Federal  Programs 
Principal  on  Special  Assignment 
Program  Specialist 
Resolution  Specialist 
TOTAL  FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENTS 

1  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
.8  FTE 
5  FTE 
2  FTE 
1  FTE 
306.8  FTE 

10.6  FTE 
3  FTE 
10  FTE 
3  FTE 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

 

  

6. 

The  services  at  issue  were  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  could  be  reduced 

or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary 
or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

7. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  CUSD  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  CUSD,  as 
determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

8. 

The  Governing  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements, 

and  requests  for  transfer,  at  the  time,  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff 
notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees. 

9. 

CUSD  maintains a  seniority  list  that  contains  employees’  seniority  dates  (first 
date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  locations,  advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and 
authorizations. 

10. 

To  assure  the  accuracy  of  the  seniority  list,  CUSD  notified  all  Respondents  of 

the  District’s  records  regarding  each  Respondent’s  first  date  of  paid  service  and  his  or  her 
credentials.  CUSD  asked  each  Respondent  to  verify  and  confirm,  or  seek  corrections  to,  that 
information  maintained  by  CUSD. 

11. 

|  Thereafter,  CUSD  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  flowcharts  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  it  seeks  to  reduce.  CUSD  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of 
service  reduced,  CUSD  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  known  vacancies, 
and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  CUSD  then 
checked  Respondents’  credentials  to  determine  whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees. 

12. 

In  various  cases,  several  Respondents  shared a  first  date  of  paid  service  and 

CUSD  was  required  to  apply  the  tie-breaker  criteria  approved  by  the  Governing  Board,  as  set 
forth  in  Factual  Finding  13. 

13. 

The  Governing  Board’s  resolution  number  0708-40  established  tie-breaker 

criteria  as  between  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  service  in  a  probationary 
position  to  the  District  on  the  same  date.  In  developing  and  approving  the  tie-breaker 
criteria,  the  Governing  Board  determined  that  these  criteria  best  served  the  needs  of  CUSD 
and  its  students,  and  would  be  applied,  effective  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  tie-breaker 
criteria  set  forth  a  point  and  lottery  system  as  follows: 

One  (1)  point  if  the  certificated  employee  holds  an  English  Language 
a. 
(EL)  or  equivalent  certificate.  (i.e.  AB  2913,  SB  395,  1969,  LDS,  BCLAD, 
BCC,  ete.)

  

  

b. 

One  (1)  point  for  service  as  a  certificated  employee  at  a  Title  I  and/or 

Program  Improvement  school  within  the  last  two  years. 

One  (1)  point  if  the  certificated  employee  is  compliant  with  the 

c. 
requirements  of  NCLB  Highly  Qualified  Teacher. 

One  (1)  point  for  expertise  or  specialty  emphasis  in  a  particular  area  of 

d. 
need  (i.e.  Advanced  Placement  courses,  IB,  CAHSEE,  TLC,  etc.). 

One  (1)  point  for  an  additional  credential  authorizing  service  in  a 

e. 
subject  currently  not  being  rendered. 

f. 

One  (1)  point  for  each  advanced  degree  (Masters,  Doctorate) 

One  (1)  point  for  service  as  a  Support  Provider  in  the  BTSA/Induction 

g. 
Program  within  the  last  five  years. 

h. 

One  (1)  point  for  service  in  a  co-curricular  assignment  in  the  2007-08 

school  year. 

Certificated  employees  who  receive  a  Preliminary  Notice  of  Layoff  and  who 
share  the  same  date  of  first  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position  shall  be 
ranked  by  total  points. 

If  the  criteria  listed  above  do  not  break a  tie,  the  District  shall  hold  a  lottery  at 
least  five  working  days  prior  to  the  layoff  hearing.  Each  group  of  tied 
employees  shall  have  the  right  to  attend  the  lottery  and  pick  a  lottery  number. 
In  the  absence  of  the  employee,  the  Deputy  Superintendent,  Personnel 
Services,  will  select  a  lottery  number  on  behalf  of  the  employee. 

14(a).  At  hearing,  several  Respondents  argued  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  unfair. 

Respondents  argued  that,  pursuant  to  criteria  (b)  and  (h),  CUSD  allotted  points  for  the 
particular  qualification  stated,  but  only  if  that  qualification  was  within  the  last  two  years,  for 
criterion  (b),  and  in  the  current  school  year,  for  criterion  (h).  Respondents  argued  that,  to  be 
fair,  CUSD  should  have  considered a  teacher’s  qualifications  during  the  whole  of  his  or  her 
teaching  career.  Those  Respondents,  who  testified  on  this  issue,  provided  testimonial 
evidence  of  their  qualifications  and  experience  that  went  beyond  the  time  frame  allowed  by 
the  tie-breaking  criteria. 

14(b),  Other  Respondents  argued  that  CUSD  should  consider  qualifications  and 

experience,  in  addition  to  the  experience  set  forth  in  the  tie-breaker  criteria,  as  developed  by 
the  Governing  Board.  Still  other  Respondents  argued  that  some  criteria  only  related  to 
experience  available  to  elementary  school  teachers,  leaving  high  school  teachers,  for 
example,  at  a  disadvantage  in  obtaining  points. 

 

14(c).  Lastly,  several  other  Respondents  argued  that  criterion  (d)  was  unfairly  vague 

as  to  what  was  meant  by  “expertise  or  specialty  emphasis  in  a  particular  area  of  need.” 
Respondents  pointed  to  the  open-ended  nature  of  the  parenthetical  description  within  the 
criterion. 

14(d).  CUSD  explained  that  it  chose  to  consider  more  recent  teacher  experience 

because  such  experience  provided  its  students  with  more  readily  available  teaching  skills. 
CUSD  also  argued  that  it  considered  as  broad  a  spectrum  of  experience  and  qualifications  as 
would  reasonably  meet  the  District’s  needs.  Respondents’  arguments  were  insufficient  to 
conclude  that  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  unfair  or  inappropriately  developed  by  the 
Governing  Board,  or  inappropriately  applied  by  CUSD.  The  points  allotted  by  CUSD  to 
Respondents  were  appropriate  and  fair. 

15. 

Three  other  Respondents  made  specific  challenges  to  different  aspects  of  the 
lay-off  process.  Respondent  Karen  Loukides  argued  that  her  seniority  date,  currently  set  as 
September  5,  2000,  should  be  August  30,  2000.  That  change  would  not  dismiss  the 
Accusation  against  her,  but  it  would  place  her  higher  on  the  seniority  list  for  potential  recall. 
Loukides  pointed  to  a  2003  administrative  decision  (OAH  case  no.  2003020034),  wherein, 
Loukides,  a  respondent  facing  lay-off  in  that  2003  proceeding,  had  the  Accusation  in  that 
matter  dismissed  against  her.  Loukides  argued  that  CUSD  dismissed  the  2003  Accusation 
against  her  due  to  CUSD’s  recognition  that  her  seniority  date  should  have  been  set  as  August 
30,  2000,  the  date,  Loukides  asserted,  when  she  began  an  orientation  session  at  CUSD. 
Loukides  did  not  present  sufficient  evidence  to  support  her  argument,  and  the  2003 
administrative  decision,  on  which  she  relied,  failed  to  corroborate  her  assertion,  as  it  failed  to 
explain  the  reasons  why  the  Accusation  in  that  matter  was  dismissed  against  her. 
Consequently,  Respondent  Loukides’  seniority  date  remains  September  5,  2000. 

16. 

Respondent  Kyle  Russo  argued  that  he  was  entitled  to  a  greater  number  of  tie- 

breaking  points  than  CUSD  allotted  him.  According  to  Russo  (who  obtained  four  points), 
CUSD  should  have  allotted  him  five  points.  Russo  argued  that  he  was  entitled  to  the  extra 
point,  pursuant  to  criterion  (e),  for  having  an  administrative  services  credential.  However, 
Russo  does  not  hold  the  administrative  services  credential.  Russo  himself  presented 
evidence  from  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  that  showed  Russo  is  eligible  to  be 
issued  the  preliminary  credential  when  he  completes  all  of  the  requirements,  including, 
“verification  of  employment  in  an  administrative  position.”  Russo  has  not  completed  that 
requirement,  and  has  not  requested  that  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  issue  him 
the  credential.  As  Respondent  Russo  does  not  hold  an  administrative  services  credential,  he 
is  not  entitled  to  the  additional  tie-breaking  point. 

17. 

Respondent  Josephine  Logie,  a  teacher  at  Ladera  Ranch  Middle  School,  with  a 

seniority  date  of  December  8,  2003,  argued  that  she  should  “bump”  another  teacher,  with  a 
seniority  date  of  February  26,  2007,  who  teaches  the  Culinary  Arts  Academy  at  Aliso  Niguel 
High  School.  Logie  argued  that  with  a  single  subject  home  arts  (home  economics) 
credential,  she  could  teach  the  culinary  arts  classes.  However,  the  Culinary  Academy  classes 
involve  the  teaching  of  food  industry  subject  matter,  emphasizing  the  business  aspects  of  the

  

  

food  industry,  including  the  restaurant  and  hotel  businesses.  As  a  vocational  education 
program,  the  Culinary  Academy  prepares  students  to  move  from  school  into  the  work  arena. 
In  support  of  her  position,  Logie  asserted  that  she  has  taught  home  economics,  food  and 
nutrition,  and  hospitality  services  when  engaged  with  the  Los  Angeles  Unified  School 
District  at  an  earlier  time.  Respondent  Logie  failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  that  her 
experience  and  credential  qualify  her  to  teach  the  Culinary  Arts  Academy  at  Aliso  Niguel 
High  School.  (See  Legal  Conclusion  8.) 

18. 

The  parties  stipulated  that  the  seniority  date  of  Respondent  Patricia  Hine  is 

August  20,  2004,  and  not  August  22,  2005. 

19(a).  CUSD  argued  the  13  Respondents  (those  represented  by  Mr.  Kohn)  should  be 
“skipped,”  though  they  may  be  junior  to  other  Respondents  that  CUSD  seeks  to  lay-off.  The 
13  Respondents  teach  (or  will  teach  in  the  ensuing  school  year)  at  Kinoshita  Elementary 
School  (Kinoshita),  a  school  within  CUSD.  Due  to  its  low  student  test  scores,  Kinoshita  is 
identified  as  a  program  improvement  school.  As  a  program  improvement  school,  Kinoshita 
must  make  efforts  to  raise  its  student  test  scores  or  be  penalized.  Kinoshita  is  in  its  third  year 
as  a  program  improvement  school.  Kinoshita  is  also  known  as  a  “Title  I”  school  because  it 
has  a  high  percentage  of  low-income  students  (a  90  percent  poverty  rate)  and  the  highest 
percentage  of  English  language  learners,  meaning  children  whose  native  language  is  not 
English  (80.5  percent).  Kinoshita  holds  the  highest  percentages  of  low-income  and  non- 
English-speaking  students  in  CUSD. 

19(b).  Kinoshita’s  efforts  to  end  its  program  improvement  status  are  predicated  on 
the  use  of  an  outside  training  program  (known  by  the  acronym,  ALS).  The  ALS  program 
imparts  specific  teaching  and  learning  methods  in  language  arts.  The  training  program 
teaches  the  teachers,  including  the  13  Respondents,  by  providing  them  intensive  instruction, 
coaching,  and  observing  the  teachers  in  the  classroom  setting,  among  other  things,  over  a 
three-year  period.  CUSD  believes  that  this  method  of  training  and  teaching  will  eventually 
lead  Kinoshita  out  of  program  improvement  status.  All  teachers  at  Kinoshita  are  required  to 
be  trained  by  ALS  and  implement  the  ALS  teaching  methodology  when  teaching  students; 
they  have  completed  two  of  the  three-year  training  years.  Kinoshita  will  continue  to  use  the 
ALS  program  through  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  ALS  program  constitutes  a  specific 
course  of  study  that  the  teachers  at  Kinoshita,  including  the  13  Respondents,  implement  in 
teaching  their  students;  it  is  specific  to  Kinoshita’s  particular  needs  as  a  Title  I  and  program 
improvement  school. 

   

received  by  the  Kinoshita  teachers,  but  none  of  that  training  was  conducted  by  the  ALS 
entity.  Only  one  teacher  had  some  ALS  training,  but  not  in  a  quantity  similar  to  that  of  the 
13  Respondents. 

Some  Respondents  argued  that  they  had  similar  training  to  the  ALS  training 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform 

any  services  that  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

20. 

21. 

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The  parties  met  all  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in 

Education  Code  sections  44944  and  44945. 

2. 

Cause  exists  to  sustain  CUSD’s  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  306.8  full-time 

equivalent  positions,  as  set  forth  in  CUSD’s  resolution  number  0708-40  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  as  set  forth  in  Factual 
Findings  1-21,  and  Legal  Conclusions  3-11. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

(W---  (9 

(b) 

whenever  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  or... 
when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become 
necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of 
permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing  board  may  terminate  the 
services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section 
while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

(].--  {i 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on 

the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination 
solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the 
request  of  any  employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination 
and  the  application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the 
other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board 
provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for  determining  the  order  of 
termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right 
or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

(c) 

Notice  of  such  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  before  the 
15th  of  May  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Section  44949,  and  services  of  such 
employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were 

 

  

employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
Sections  44844  and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary 
employee  is  not  given  the  notices  and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in 
Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed  reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such 

a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to  assigning 
or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach  a  subject  which  he  or  she  has 
not  previously  taught,  and  for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching 
credential  or  which  is  not  within  the  employee's  major  area  of  postsecondary 
study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing  board  shall  require  the  employee 
to  pass  a  subject  matter  competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  —  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate 
from  terminating a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 

(1) 

The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach 
.  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has 

a  specific  course  or  course  of  study  . 
. 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of 
study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess. 

(a) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44949  states,  in  pertinent  part: 

No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice 

by  the  governing  board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board 
and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the 
district  or  his  or  her  designee,  or  in  the  case  of  a  district  which  has  no 
superintendent  by  the  clerk  or  secretary  of  the  governing  board,  that  it  has 
been  recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the 
reasons  therefor. 

   

In  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  the  employee,  the 
proceeding  shall  be  conducted  and  a  decision  made  in  accordance  with 
Chapter  5  (commencing  with  Section  11500)  of  Part  1  of  Division  3  of  Title  2 

|  The  employee  may  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  him  or  her  for  the  ensuing  year. 

(+  {9 

(b) 

(c) 

  

of  the  Government  Code  and  the  governing  board  shall  have  all  the  power 
granted  to  an  agency  therein,  except  that  all  of  the  following  shall  apply: 

(1) 

The  respondent  shall  file  his  or  her  notice  of  defense,  if  any, 

within  five  days  after  service  upon  him  or  her  of  the  accusation  and  he  or  she 
shall  be  notified  of  this  five-day  period  for  filing  in  the  accusation. 

(]--- {9 

(3) 

The  hearing  shall  be  conducted  by  an  administrative  law  judge 

who  shall  prepare  a  proposed  decision,  containing  findings  of  fact  and  a 
determination  as  to  whether  the  charges  sustained  by  the  evidence  are  related 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof.  The  proposed  decision 
shall  be  prepared  for  the  governing  board  and  shall  contain  a  determination  as 
to  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  a  recommendation  as  to  disposition. 
However,  the  governing  board  shall  make  the  final  determination  as  to  the 
sufficiency  of  the  cause  and  disposition.  None  of  the  findings, 
recommendations,  or  determinations  contained  in  the  proposed  decision 
prepared  by  the  administrative  law  judge  shall  be  binding  on  the  governing 
board.  Nonsubstantive  procedural  errors  committed  by  the  school  district  or 
governing  board  of  the  school  district  shall  not  constitute  cause  for  dismissing 
the  charges  unless  the  errors  are  prejudicial  errors.  Copies  of  the  proposed 
decision  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governing  board  and  to  the  employee  on  or 
before  May  7  of  the  year  in  which  the  proceeding  is  commenced. 

5. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board’s  resolution  number  0708-40 

are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Governing  Board  can  reduce  or  discontinue  under 
Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the 
identified  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 
Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  CUSD’s 
schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949.  CUSD  identified 
the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Governing 
Board  directed  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued. 

6. 

A  school  district  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 

section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to 
students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by 
determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are 
made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

7. 

The  evidence  did  not  support  Respondents’  arguments  alleging  the  tie- 

breaking  criteria  were  unfair  or  inappropriately  applied  by  CUSD  (Factual  Finding  14).  The 
criteria  were  reasonable  and  fair. 
decided  to  look  at  more  recent  teacher  experience  because  it  concluded  that  the  more  recent  a 

In  assessing  tie-breaking  criteria  (b)  and  (h),  CUSD 

  

10 

  

 

teacher’s  experience,  the  more  readily  that  experience  is  put  to  effective  use  with  students. 
That  decision  was  reasonable.  The  broad  wording  of  criterion  (d)’s  teacher  expertise  was 
also  reasonable.  The  broad  description  allowed  CUSD  to  consider  all  teacher  expertise. 
CUSD  could  then  further  assess  each  teacher’s  expertise  in  juxtaposition  with  the  school 
district’s  particular  needs.  The  evidence  supported  a  conclusion  that  all  Respondents 
proffered  all  of  their  claimed  expertise,  even  though  CUSD  then  considered  some  experience 
as  meeting  a  school  need  while  other  experience  did  not.  Those  discretionary  decisions  must 
be  left  to  the  special  competence  of  CUSD.  (Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District 
(1987)  196  Cal.App.3d  555,  565  [citing  Martin  v.  Kentfield  School  District  (1983)  35  Cal.3d 
294,  299].)  CUSD  applied  the  tie-breaking  criteria  appropriately  and  fairly,  and  the  criteria 
themselves  were  fair  and  reasonable. 

‘ 

8. 

Respondents  Loukides  and  Russo  failed  to  present  sufficient  evidence  to 

support  their  arguments,  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  15  and  16,  Similarly,  Respondent 
Logie  did  not  establish,  through  adequate  evidence,  that  her  single  subject  home  arts 
credential  would  qualify  her  to  teach  the  more  expansive,  business/vocational  orientation  of 
the  high  school  Culinary  Arts  Academy.  (Factual  Finding  17.) 

9. 

“The  general  rule  is  that  any  reduction  in  staff  is  to  be  made  according  to 

seniority.  However,  the  exception  to  that  rule  permits  retention  of  an  employee  holding  a 
special  credential  or  needed  skill,  even  though  that  retention  results  in  termination  of  the 
senior  employee.”  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara 
Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  843  [italics  added].) 

10.  |  CUSD  and  the  13  Respondents  established  the  13  Respondents  should  be 

“skipped”  due  to  their  specialized  training  to  teach,  using  the  ALS  methodology,  a 
specialized  course  of  study,  at  Kinoshita.  CUSD  demonstrated  a  specific  need  for  these  13 
teachers  to  teach,  as  they  have  learned  (and  will  continue  to  learn)  through  the  ALS  training 
program  over  the  last  two  years.  Through  that  on-going  training,  the  13  Respondents 
established  that  they  have  the  specialized  experience  necessary  to  teach  the  students  at 
Kinoshita  that  other  Respondents  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  While  other 
Respondents  may  have  excellent  training  that  may  even  have  some  similarity  to  the  ALS 
program,  the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the  non-ALS  training  was  sufficiently  similar  to 
make  more  senior  Respondents  competent  to  teach  at  Kinoshita  as  the  13  Respondents  are. 
Respondents  argued  that  many  of  them  teach  at  other  Title  I  schools  and,  thus,  have  the 
requisite  credentials  to  teach  at  Kinoshita.  However,  credentials  alone  are  not  enough  in  this 
circumstance.  Here,  the  intensive  and  particular  instruction  provided  by  the  contracted  entity 
(ALS),  developed  specific  skills  and  experience  in  the  13  Respondents  that  no  other 
Respondent  showed  they  had.  Kinoshita  is  unique  in  that  it  is  a  Title  I  school,  on 
performance  improvement  status,  and  it  has  the  most  low-income  and  non-English-speaking 
students  of  any  other  school  in  CUSD.  Through  ALS  training  over  the  past  two  years,  the  13 
Respondents  now  possess  unique  and  specialized  skills  with  which  to  teach  the  students  at 
Kinoshita.  It  is  therefore  appropriate  for  CUSD  to  “skip”  the  13  Respondents. 

   

11 

  

11. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

that  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

l(a). 

The  Accusation  served  on  Respondents  (those  Respondents  identified  in 

Appendix  A  and  Exhibit  1),  is  sustained,  with  the  exceptions,  as  discussed  above,  of 
Respondents  Alana  Brewer,  Erin  Bro,  Gregory  Gibson,  Dana  Judd,  Christina  Lee,  Julie 
Matters,  Victor  Mosconi,  Catherine  Prescott,  Lynn  Sanchez,  Michael  Schooler,  Roni 
Schwartz,  Roxanne  Smathers,  Michael  Young,  and  Stuart  Young;  and  with  the  exceptions,  as 
discussed  above  of  Respondents  Joice  Alapag,  Kari  Ambrose,  Terri  Arndt,  Jenni  Balck,  Amy 
Devore,  Brenda  Gansel,  Christa  Jones,  Andrea  Julson,  Tami  Mays,  Darla  O’Leary,  Christa 
Strick,  Stephanie  Veravanich,  and  Stacy  Biggs. 

l(b). 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents,  other  than  those  excepted  above,  as 

required  by  law,  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  2007-2008  academic 
year.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

Dated:  April  29,  2008 

DANIEL  JUAREZ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

12 

  

  

APPENDIX  I 
RESPONDENTS  IN  OAH  CASE  NO.  L2008020611,  BY  ALPHABETICAL  ORDER? 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

FIRST  NAME 
LAST  NAME 
Amy 
Abbott 
Joice 
Alapag 
Kari 
Ambrose 
Nicky 
Anvarinejad 
  
Delores 
Argast 
Stephanie 
Avera 
  
Balck 
Jennifer 
  
Balogh 
Michelle 
  
Banuelos 
Christyann 
  
Baptiste 
Natalie 
  
Barnes 
Brian 
  
Beaty 
Ingrid 
  
Becerra 
Jesus 
Bentley 
Janet 
Beyer 
Quinn 
Biggs 
Stacy 
Billman 
Wendy 
Bismack 
Brooke 
Bowen 
Andrika 
Boylan 
Sandra 
Brennan 
Brewer 
Brillon 
Brooks 
Brooks 
Brubaker 
Bushkin 
Calkins 
Cantacessi 
Carlini-Castiglia 

      
    

Kelly 
Alana 
Carol 
  
Teresa 
Tracey 
Nicole 
  
Annette 
  
Joan 
  
Angela 
Marcella 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

?  CUSD  submitted  the  respondent  list  set  forth  in  Appendix  I  to  the  Administrative 
Law  Judge.  However,  Appendix  I  appears  to  be  incomplete.  In  accordance  with  CUSD’s 
undisputed  representation  at  hearing,  Respondents,  as  listed  in  Exhibit  1,  comprise  a 
complete  listing  of  Respondents  in  this  matter.  Therefore,  both  Appendix  I,  as  attached  here 
to  the  Proposed  Decision,  and  Exhibit  1,  as  admitted  into  the  record  at  hearing,  together, 
comprise  a  complete  list  of  Respondents  in  this  matter  (though  the  combined  lists  duplicate 
various  Respondents). 

13 

 

  

FIRST  NAME 
Brian 
Carolyn 
Kristen 
Bernadette 
Nick 
WTS 
Jenika 
Jason 
Liza 
Leigh 
Amy 
Kendra 
Lindy 
Kimberly 
Mariann 
Mary 
Judy 
Kristen 
Ellen 
Kayla 
Jane 
Teresa 
Anne  Marie 
Brenda 
Michelle 
Maggie 
Sarah 
Brooke 
Debra 
Eric 
Christopher 
Gregory 
Sarah 
Elizabeth 
Tiffany 
Kimberly 
Midori 
Jocelyn 
Carrie-Anne 
Vernon 
Krista 
Michael 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

    
 
    

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

LAST  NAME 
Carmer 
Carrie 
Chapman 
Clark 
Corbin 
Cox 
Cracchiolo 
Cropley 
Dembiec 
Devlin 
Devore 
Dixon 
Donsker 
Downing 
Duff, 
Dunnicliffe 
Eckrote 
Edson 
Eltiste 
Evans 
Evert 
Fantasia 
Faris 
Fatehi 
Fialho 
Fisher 
Flanagan 
Foster 
Franzi 
Frommholz 
Gallagher 
Gibson 
Gibson 
Gibson 
Gilstrap 
Goode 
Gordon 
Graham 
Gray 
Gries 
Guthrie 
Hale 

  

14 

FIRST  NAME 
James 
Juliean 
Lacey 
Johanna 
Patricia 
Gail 
Todd 
Heather 
Kirsten 
Sheri 
Nicole 
Michael 
Maria 
Shaina 
Tricia 
Dana 
Andrea 
Elisa 
Christina 
Jamie 
Troy 
Nicole 
Justine 
Cynthia 
Erin 
Cynthia 
Christina 
Josephine 
Deborah 
Karen 
Jennifer 
MaryAnn 
Heidi 
Andrew 

LAST  NAME 
Hammons 
Hansen 
Hansen 
Heavlin-Martinez 
Hine 
Hodel 
Hoffman 
Hollis 
Hollis 
Jahn 
Jarrell 
Jensen 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Judd 
Julson 
Koenig 
Kolley 
Koskie 
Kubly 
LaMarre 
Lang 
Laroche 
Last 
Lawbaugh 
Lee 
Logie 
Lombrano 
Loukides 
Love 
Mackey 
Marshall 
Mashburn 
Matters 
Mayemura 
Mayer 
Mays 
Mc  Kinstry 
Mc  Lellan 
McDaniel-Siplivy 
McGinley 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
    
  
   

Julie 
Deanne 
Mariah 
Tami 
Shannon 
Hayley 
Heather 
Cynthia 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

15 

  

  

FIRST  NAME 
Randall 
Sarah 
Bonny 
Nicole 
Carrie 
Michelle 
Diana 
Victor 
Orla 
Shari 
Darla 
Katherine 
Susan 
Eric 
Ryan 
Christin 
David 
Lari 
Angela 
Gina 
Catherine 
Karen 
Susan 
Mark 
Catherine 
Stacy 
Kyle 
Timothy 
Lynn 
Reannah 
Michael 
Elisa 
Roni 
Andrea 
Celina 
Tara 
Kylie 
Kelly 
Amanda 
Nayla 
Carly 
Cynthia 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

    
 
      

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

16 

LAST  NAME 
McGraw 
McKeon 
Meyers 
Misiraca 
Montez 
Montgomery 
Morgan 
Mosconi 
Murphy 
Newman 
O’Leary 
Olsen 
Paradise 
Paulsen 
Persinger 
Peterson 
Ponce 
Portas 
Portnoff 
Poteet 
Prescott 
Primack 
Puccinelli 
Quest 
Ramirez 
Rumpf 
Russo 
Sampson 
Sanchez 
Sartoris 
Schooler 
Schoonover 
Schwartz 
Semas 
Shwam 
Sieling 
Siglock 
Skon 
Soboleski 
Southworth 
Squires 
Stark 

  

  

  

  

FIRST  NAME 
Barbara 
Jennifer 
Christa 
Shari 
Celeste 
Steven 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
    
    

  

  

  

  

  

LAST  NAME 
Starr 
Stevens 
Strick 
Suda 
Swanson 
Tobenkin 
Todd 
Trudeau 
Tumminia 
Valenti 
Veravanich 
Wade 
Walker 
Wegner 
Weidetz 
Welch 
West 
Willey 
Williams 
Wilson 
Wiseman 
Young 
Young 
Zimmer 

Mary 
Laura 
Jill 
Kristen 
Stephanie 
Natalie 
Kristen 
Kathleen 
Rhonda 
Karen 
Lelia 
Elizabeth 
Kimberly 
Christine 
Holly 
Michael 
Marissa 
Maureen 

   

17 

  

