  

BEFORE 
THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF 
VALLEJO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

      In  the  Matter of  the  Accusation  Against: 
    

CERTAIN  NAMED  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES  OF  THE  VALLEJO  CITY  UNIFIED 
SCHOOL  DISTRICT  REPRESENTING  77.30 
FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS 

OAH  No.  2008030353 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  28,  2008,  within  the  Board  Room of  the  Administrative  Offices  of the 

Vallejo  City  Unified  School  District  at  665  Walnut  Avenue,  Vallejo,  California, 
Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 
of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Lawrence  M.  Schoenke,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Miller  Brown  and  Dannis, 
71  Stevenson  Street,  Nineteenth  Floor,  San  Francisco,  California  94105,  represented 
Superintendent  Mary  M.  Bull,  Ph.D.,  (the  Superintendent),  for  the  Vallejo  City  Unified 
School  District  (the  District). 

David  Weintraub,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Beeson,  Tayer  and  Bodine,  1404  Franklin 

Street,  Suite  500,  Oakland,  California  94612,  represented  Respondents  Angela  Bandy 
(also  known  as  A.  Nicole  Bandy),  Stacy  Bates,  Retina  Bowen,  Jennifer  Castro, 
Donna  Chin,  Kristina  Crowley,  Veera  De  La  Mater,  Rosalinda  De  Paz,  Byron  Durkee, 
Taira  Elrod,  Frances  Grasso,  Shanon  Hawkesworth,  Timothy  Hite,  Tovah  Keleshian, 
Kristina  Kittel,  Karen  Mallaya,  Brooke  Peterson,  Kristin  Rogerson,  Katy  J.  Thomas, 
Maria  Christina  Thomas,  Danielle  Tinsley,  Christy  Whitmire,  and  Jennifer  Zeeb. 

Respondents  Miranda  Crane,  Christine  Dalisay,  Miriam  Dizon, 

Cathleen  Gilmore,  Gina  Glass,  Katrina  Hammer,  Michelle  Hawthorne,  Tiffany  Jackson, 
Michael  Mercado,  Richard  Responte,  Gina  Rolling,  Karen  Soltesz,  and  Diana  Williams 
were  not  represented  by  legal  counsel  at  the  hearing,  but  each  of  those  individual 
respondents  had  requested  a  hearing  in  this  matter.  The  District Superintendent’s 
personnel  served  each  of  those  respondents  with  notice  of  the  hearing  but  they  failed  to 
appear  for  the  hearing  of  this  matter.  The  absent  respondents,  who  were  not  represented 
by  legal  counsel,  were  in  default  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11520,  and  the 
hearing  proceeded  in  their  absence. 

 

  

  

On  April  28,  2008,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record  closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  or  before  March  5,  2008,  the  District’s  Superintendent,  or  her 

designee,  presented  the  District’s  Governing  Board  with  a  recommendation  that  the 
District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds of  services,  then  offered  through  the  District,  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  ensuing  school  year  (2008-2009). 

The  respondents  to  the  proceeding  are  identified  by  name  on  the  list 

attached  hereto  as  Attachments  “A.” 

Ms.  Nona  Cohen-Bowman,  in  her  capacity  as  the  District’s  Director  for 

Human  Resources,  appeared  at  the  hearing.  She  provided  competent,  credible  and 
persuasive  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

The  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009 

school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in  money  for  the  District’s 
budget.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a  reasonable  budget  for  the 
ensuing  school  year,  the  Superintendent,  or  her  designee,  recommended  to  the 
Governing  Board  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated  due  to  lack  of  money  to 
fund  operations,  programs  and  functions  of  the  District. 

With  the  aid  of  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Director  Cohen-Bowman, 

the  Superintendent  recommended  on  or  before  March  5,  2008,  that  the  District 
eliminated  77.30  full  time  equivalent  positions  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

District  Resolution  number  2401. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

The  resolution  recites  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  it  has 
become  necessary  for  the  District  to  reduce  and/or  to  discontinue,  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form  of 
F.T.E.  (full  time  equivalent)  certificated  positions  as  follows: 

Particular  Kinds  of Services 

Full  Time  Equivalent  Positions 

BTSA  Support  Provider 
PDC  Teacher 
Teacher  on  Special  Assignment 

Library  Media  (JBHS) 
Categorical  Funded  EL  Teacher  Leader 

(Special  Projects) 

Categorical  Funded  ELA  Teacher  Leader 
(Reading  First  Program) 

2.0 
2.9 

1.0 

1.0 

3.6 

 

Categorical  Funded  District  ELA  Teacher  Leader 

(Special  Projects) 

Categorical  Funded  Teacher 

On  Special  Assignment 
(Math  &  Technology) 

Categorical  Funded  Secondary  ELA  Teacher 

On  Special  Assignment 

Categorical  Funded  Staff  Development  Teacher 

Categorical  Funded  Teacher  Leader 
Alternative  Education  Teacher, 
Community  Day  School 
Opportunity  Teacher  (Middle  School) 
Elementary  Support  Teacher 
Secondary  Support  Teacher  (Middle  School) 
Senior  High  School  Counselors 
Class  Size  Reduction  (CSRI)  High  School 

English 

Secondary  Academic  Coach  (Middle  School) 
World  Languages,  Filipino 

0.8 

2.0 

1.0 

1.0 
31.5 

1.0 
4.0 
1.7 
2.6 
12.0 

78 
1.0 
0.4 

Total  FTE  Eliminated  or  Reduced 

77.30 

6. 

‘The  District’s  Human  Resources  Director,  Ms.  Cohen-Bowman,  further 

established  that  upon  learning  that  the  District  was  required  to  initiate  lay-off 
proceedings  regarding  positions  held  by  certificated  employees  of  the  District,  the 
director,  with  her  staff,  took  reasonable  and  lawful  steps  to  develop  the  District’s 
seniority  list  for  the  District’s  teachers. 
She  studied  records  of  certificated  employees 
and  set  forth  on  the  District’s  2007-2008  seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates 
or  first  date  of  paid  service  for  all  teachers  employed  by  the  District. 

7. 

Ms.  Cohen-Bowman,  and  District  staff  in  the  Human  Resources 

Director’s  office,  identified  82  individuals,  who  held  positions  as  interns,  probationary 
employees,  as  well  as  permanent  teachers,  who  occupied  positions  that  were  subject  to 
elimination  or  reduction  under  the  Board’s  resolution. 

8. 

By  individual  letters,  dated  March  14,  2008,  Ms.  Nona  Cohen-Bowman, 

dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number  of  FTE  position  holders,  including  each 
respondent,  that  the  District’s  Governing  Board  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to 
discontinue  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice. 
Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind of service 
now  rendered  to  the  District,  each  of  the  respondents  learned  the  District  would  not 
reemploy  the  named  individuals  in  the  certificated  positions  each  had  worked.  (The 
letters,  which  served  as  the  preliminary  notice  to  respondents,  reflected  a  date  of  “March 
14,  2008;”  but,  Ms.  Cohen-Bowman  explained  that  the  form  letters  were  prepared  sooner 

  

-3-

  

than  expected  and  hence  were  taken  to  a  post  office  on  Thursday,  March  13,  2008,  and 
mailed  on  that  earlier  date.) 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  14,  2008,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  District’s 

resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  each  respondent  a right  to  file  a 
request  for  hearing  “to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  employing  [the  named 
respondent]  for  the  ensuing  school  year.” 

9. 

On  Thursday,  March  13,  2008,  the  District’s  Director  of  Human 

Resources  caused  to  be  mailed  to  the  address  of  record  for  Respondent  Tovah  Keleshian 
the  letter  that  set  out  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  actions  of  District  certificated 
employees.  Because  the  address  of  record  for  Respondent  Keleshian  did  not  include  an 
apartment  number,  the  letter,  which  had  been  dispatched  by  certified  mail,  was marked 
by  the  United  States  Postal  Service  on  Saturday,  March  15,  2008,  as  “Return  to  sender. 
Insufficient  address.  Unable  to  forward.” 

On  Monday,  March  17,  2008,  personnel  in  the  office of  the  District’s  Director  of 
Human  Resources  conversed  with  Respondent  Keleshian  about  the  return  to  the  office  of 
the  District's  Human  Resource  of  the  envelope  that  bore  the  preliminary  notice  of  her 
On  that  date,  Respondent  Keleshian  conveyed  to  the  personnel  in  the  office  of 
layoff. 
the  Districts  Director  of  Human  Resources  that  her  address  included  an  apartment 
number.  Also  on  March  17,  2008,  an  envelope,  which  contained  the  preliminary  notice, 
was  mailed  to  Respondent  Keleshian’s  address  that  included  her  apartment  number. 

Respondents  did  not  show  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter  that  Respondent  Keleshian 

was  prejudiced  by  any  form  of  deprivation  of  due  process  rights  because  of  the 
The 
misaddressed  envelope  that  contained  the  preliminary  notice  of  her  layoff. 
misaddressed  envelope  may  be  attributed  to  neglect  by  Respondent  Keleshian  in  failing 
to  assure  that  the  address  of  record  on  file  with  the  District  included  an  apartment 
number  at  the  mailing  address  that  represented  the  site  of  her  residence. 

10. 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  respondents  from  the  District’s 

Superintendent  and  the  District’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons  of  the 
District’s  Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services. 

11. 

Respondents  each  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  each  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school 
year. 

12. 

13. 

Each  respondent  filed  timely  notices  of  defense. 

All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

 

Respondents’  Contentions 

14, 

Respondents  contend  that  Respondent  Rosalinda  De  Paz,  who  has  a 

multiple  subject  credential  and  has  a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  later  in  time 
than  teachers  who are junior  to  her  for  whom  the  District  proposes  to  retain  for  the  next 
school,  should  have  dismissed  the  accusation  as  filed  against  her.  Such  dismissal  is 
sought  even  though  Respondent  De  Paz  is  currently  providing  services  to  District 
students  at  the  high  school  level  under  a  contract  whereby  she  holds  a  0.4  FTE  position 
to  teach  under  the  District’s  World  Language  program  in  the  area  of  the  Filipino 
language.  Respondents  aver  that  Respondent  De  Paz  is  entitled  to  bump a junior  teacher 
who  holds  a  1.0  FTE  position  at  the  elementary  school  level  because  she  holds  a 
multiple  subject  credential. 

Also,  respondents  aver  the  District’s  seniority  list  is  substantively  defective  and 
improper  insofar  as  two  certificated  employees,  namely  Respondent  Timothy  Hite  and 
Respondent  Shanon  Hawkesworth,  who  dispute  the  accuracy  of  the  seniority  list 
regarding  their  respective  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District.  Each  of  those  two 
respondents  avers  that  due  to  his  or  her  respective  reporting  to  an  “in  service”  training 
day  on  a  date  before  other  teachers  began  the  school  year  that  the  District  should  grant 
each  respondent  an  such  earlier  date  as  his  or  her  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a 
probationary  employee  of  the  District. 

Further,  respondents  contend  that  the  District  failed  to  timely  make  service  upon 

Respondent  Tovah  Keleshian  of  the  District’s  preliminary  notice  of  the  lay  off  action. 
Respondents  assert  that  because  proper  service  of  the  preliminary  notice  is  a 
jurisdictional  requirement  and  because  Respondent  Keleshian  did  not  receive  a 
preliminary  notice  by  certified  mail  by  the  statutory  deadline  of  March  15,  2008,  that  the 
accusation  must  be  dismissed  as  against  her. 

And  respondents  aver  that  even  though  Respondent  Donna  Chin  resigned  her 

tenured,  permanent  position  the  District  in  June  2006  that  the  District  should  gave 
granted  her  a  seniority  date  to  the  beginning  of  her  initial  period  of  employment  with  the 
District  that  is  August  1978.  Because  she  returned  to  the  District  within  39  months  of 
having  resigned  her  tenured  position  in  June  2006,  respondents  argue  that  the  District 
must  grant  Respondent  Chin  her  original  seniority  date. 

Respondents’  contentions  are  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

Individual  Respondents 

a. 

Ms.  Rosalinda  De  Paz 

15. 

Respondent  Rosalinda  De  Paz  did  not  attend  the  proceeding  in  this  matter 

to  offer  evidence  in  support  of  the  contention  made  by  her  attorney  on  her  behalf.

  

  

16. 

The  District’s  Human  Resources  Director  offered  persuasive  evidence 

regarding  the  District  records  that  reflect  information  that  pertains  to  Respondent 
De  Paz. 

@ 

Respondent  De  Paz  has a first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  29, 
She  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential,  a  CLAD  certification  and  a  supplemental 

2004. 
authorization  to  teach  “Intro:  Filipino,”  which  is  a  world  languages  course. 

Under  her  contract  with  the  District,  Respondent  De  Paz  occupies  a  0.4  FTE 

position  to  teach  a  course  titled  “World  Language:  Filipino,”  which  is  a  service  that  is 
identified  in  Broad  Resolution  2401  for  elimination  in  the  ensuing  school  year. 

17. 

Respondent  De  Paz  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  De  Paz  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  De  Paz  establish  that  the 
Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  in  the  initiation  of  the  lay- 
off  action  that  adversely  affects  her  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

5. 

Ms.  Shanon  Hawkesworth 

18. 

Respondent  Shanon  Hawkesworth  (Respondent  Hawkesworth)  offered 

evidence  at  the  hearing  of  this  matter. 

Respondent  Shanon  Hawkesworth  (Respondent  Hawkesworth)  holds  a  multiple 
subject  credential  and  an  ELD/ SDAIE.'  Respondent  Hawkesworth  has a  first  date  of 
paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  20,  2007.  Currently  Respondent  Hawkesworth 
works  as  a  first  year  probationary  elementary  school  teacher  at  Elsa  Widenmann 
Elementary  School 

19. 

Respondent  Hawkesworth  erroneously  believes  that  her  first  day  of  paid 
service  to  the  District  was  August  16,  2007.  On  that  date  she  enjoyed  a  “buy-back”  day 
for  which  she  was  paid a stipend  for  attending  in-service  training.  And  on  August  17, 
2007,  she  had  another  “buy-back”  day  for  “social  studies.”  The  District  paid 
Respondent  Hawkesworth  a  stipend  for  the  “buy-back  day,”  in  the  amount  of  $225  per 
day. 

On  August  16  and  August  17,  2007,  Respondent  Hawkesworth  received 
in-service  training  at  the  direction  of  the  principal  of  the  school  at  which  Respondent 
Hawkesworth  eventually  provided  services  as  a  teacher.  But  the  District  reasonably 
considers  those  dates  (August  16  and  August  17)  as  being  in-service  training  days, 
which  do  not  mark  Respondent  Hawkesworth’s  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a 
probationary  teacher  to  the  District. 

  

“ELD”  is  the  acronym  for  “English  Language  Development”  while  “SDAIE”  connotes  “Specially 

' 

@ 

  

Designed  Academic  Instruction  in  English.” 

 

  

20. 

The  District's  Human  Resources  Director  offered  persuasive  evidence  that 
the  District’s  personnel  records  that  pertained  to  Respondent  Hawkesworth  do  not  show 
that  she  had a first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  a  probationary  employee  other 
than  the  date  of  August  20,  2007. 

The  District’s  records  do  not  support  Respondent  Hawkesworth’s  contention  that 

she  began  work  for  the  District  on  August  17,  2007.  Contrary  to  the  position  of 
Respondent  Hawkesworth,  the  District’;  Human  Resources  Director  compellingly 
represented  that  any  “in  service”  day  for  which  a  teacher  was  paid  before  the  beginning 
of  the  school  year,  or  before  the  date  specified  in  the  subject  teacher’s  contract  as  the 
beginning  of  the  term  of  the  agreement,  was  treated  as  a  voluntary  day  for  work.  Such 
voluntary  day  was  viewed  by  the  District’s  Human  Resources  office  as  being  outside  the 
certified  employee’s  contract;  and  as  such,  the  certificated  employee’s  in-service  day 
was  not  treated  as  a  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 

21. 

The  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources,  Reynaldo 

Santa  Cruz,  offered  evidence  at  the  hearing of this  matter. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Santa  Cruz  persuasively  presented  an  overview  of  the 
meaning  of  the  District’s  “buy-back  days”  program.  Those  days  are  designated  as  staff 
development  days  that  were  initiated  at  school  sites  and  were  planned  by  school  site 
administrators.  The  days  are  considered  voluntary  days  and  are  viewed  by  the  District  as 
being  outside  regular  work  year  that  consists  183  days.  Buy-back  days,  as  staff 
development  days,  are  not  included  as  part  of  the  three  days  set  aside  for  mandatory 
preparation  by  certificated  employees.  The  District  does  not  require  a  teacher  to  attend  a 
“buy-back”  days  training  program,  although  a  teacher  is  paid  a  stipend  of  $225  per  day. 

22. 

Respondent  Hawkesworth  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the 

District  has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Hawkesworth  possesses  a 
credential  and  is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Hawkesworth 
establish  that  the  Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  in  the 
initiation  of  the  lay-off  action  that  adversely  affects  her  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

c. 

Mr.  Timothy  Hite 

23. 

Respondent  Timothy  Hite  (Respondent  Hite)  did  not  attend  the  proceeding 

in  this  matter  to  offer  evidence  in  support of  the  contention  made  by  his  attorney  on  his 
behalf. 

24,  —  The  District’s  Human  Resources  Director  offered  persuasive  evidence 

regarding  the  District  records  that  reflect  information  regarding  Respondent  Hite. 

Respondent  Hite  has a  first  date of paid  service  as  a  first  year  probationary 
teacher  of  August  20,  2007.  He  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  he  occupies  a  1.0 

-7-

  

  

FTE  position.  Respondent  Hite  works  as  an  elementary  school  teacher  at  a  District 
school  site. 

25. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Santa  Cruz  established  that  Respondent  Hite 

attended  training  over  three  days  beginning  on  August  13,  2007,  whereby  he  was  paid  at 
the  “sub  rate”  of  $125  per  day.  Also,  Respondent  Hite  was  paid  a  stipend  of  $225  per 
day  for  two  days of  “in  service”  training  on  August  16  and  August  17,  2007.  However, 
none  of  those  days  was  part  of  the  contract  year  for  certificated  employees.  By  engaging 
in  the  voluntary  training  on  those  days,  the  District  did  not  view  Respondent  Hite  as 
acquiring  a  first  day of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  teacher  for  any  of  that  time. 

26. 

Respondent  Hite  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  him  for  which  Mr.  Hite  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Hite  establish  that  the  Superintendent 
committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  of  the  lay-off  action  that  adversely  affects 
his  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

d. 

Ms.  Tovah  Keleshian 

27. 

Respondent  Tovah  Keleshian  (Respondent  Keleshian)  did  not  attend  the 

proceeding  in  this  matter  to  offer  evidence  in  support  of  the  contention  made  by  her 
attorney  on  her  behalf. 

28. 

The  District’s  Human  Resources  Director  offered  persuasive  evidence 

regarding  the  District’s  records  that  reflect  information  that  pertains  to Respondent 
Keleshian.  And  the  District’s  seniority  list  presents  further  evidence  regarding 
Respondent  Keleshian. 

Respondent  Keleshian  has a first  date  of  paid  service  as a first  year  probationary 
teacher  as  of  November  16,  2007.  She  now  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential  and  she 
occupies  a  1.0  FTE  position.  Respondent  Keleshian  works  as  an  elementary  school 
teacher  at  a  District  school  site. 

29. 

On  Thursday,  March  13,  2008,  the  District’s  Human  Resources  office 

used  the  address  of  record,  as  placed  on  file  by  Respondent  Keleshian,  to  send  the 
subject  District  certificated  employee,  by  certified  mail,  the  District’s  preliminary notice 
that  she  was  subject  to  a  lay  off  proceeding  and  that  she  had  a right  to  participate  as  a 
respondent  in  a  formal  administrative  adjudication  proceeding. 

On  Monday,  March  17,  2008,  the  United  States  Postal  Service  returned  to  the 
District’s  Human  Resources  office  the  envelope  that  contained  the  preliminary  notice 
that  had  been  intended  for  delivery  at  Respondent  Keleshian’s  address  of  record.  During 
the  course  of  that  same  day,  a  District  employee  within  the  Human  Resources  office 
conversed  with  Respondent  Keleshian  about  the  returned  envelope.  Respondent 
Keleshian  informed  the  District  employee  that  the  street  address  on  the  envelope  was 

-8- 

 

  

correct,  but  the  envelope  did  not  reflect  the  number  for  her  apartment  unit.  And,  on  that 
same  date  personnel  in  the  Human  Resources  office  sent  the  preliminary  notice  to 
Respondent’s  Keleshian’s  address  that  included  an  apartment  number. 

Respondent  Keleshian  offered  no  evidence  that  she  suffered  any  prejudice  or  dep- 

rivation  of  her  due  process  rights  by  reason  of  the  misaddressed  envelope  reaching  her 
correct  address  after  March  15,  2008. 

30. 

Respondent  Keleshian  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District 

has  retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Mr.  Keleshian  possesses  a  credential  and 
is  currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Keleshian  establish  that  the 
Superintendent  committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  in  the  initiation  of  the  lay- 
off  action  that  adversely  affects  her  teacher  position  with  the  District. 

e. 

Ms.  Donna  Chin 

hearing  of  this  matter. 

31. 

Respondent  Donna  Chin  (Respondent  Chin)  offered  evidence  at  the 

Respondent  Chin  is  a  permanent  and  tenured  certificate  employee  of  the  District. 

She  has a  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  of  August  20,  2007.  She  holds  a 
multiple  subject  credential  and  an  ELD/SDAIE  authorization.  Respondent  Chin  works 
as  a  first  grade  teacher  at  Highland  Elementary  School. 

Respondent  Chin  worked  in  the  past  for  the  District  from  August  1978  until  June 

29,  2006,  when  she  resigned  her  tenured,  permanent  certificated  employee  position  in 
order  to  accept  a  position  as  a  literacy  teacher  in  another  school  district. 

32. 

The  District’s  Human  Resources  Director  offered  credible  evidence  that 
when  Respondent  Chin  resigned  from  the  District  she  lost  her  previous  seniority  date, 
but  she  did  not  lose  her  tenured  status  as  a  permanent  employee  with  the  District. 

33. 

Respondent  Chin  was  not  persuasive  that  the  District  should  have  granted 
her  a  seniority  date  that  reflects  the  date  in  1978  when  she  began  her  initial  employment 
relationship  with  the  District  before  she  resigned  her  position  in  June  2006. 

34. 

Respondent  Chin  provided  no  competent  evidence  that  the  District  has 

retained  any  teacher  junior  to  her  for  which  Ms.  Chin  possesses  a  credential  and  is 
currently  competent  to  teach.  Nor  did  Respondent  Chin  establish  that  the  Superintendent 
committed  a  procedural  error  in  the  initiation  in  the  initiation  of  the  lay-off  action  that 
adversely  affects  her  teacher  position  with  the  District.

  

  

District’s  Reasonable  Basis  to  Proceed 

35.  |  Human  Resources  Director  Ms.  Cohen-Bowman  was  credible  and 
compelling  in  refuting  the  contention  of  Respondent  Hite  and  Respondent  Hawkesworth 
that  the  District  erred  in  crafting  the  seniority  list  as  to  their  respective  first  date  of  paid 
service  in  a  probationary  position  with  the  District.  The  District’s  Human  Resources 
Director  persuasively  noted  that  the  District’s  seniority  list  was  correct  as  to  those 
respondents.  Respondent  Hite  and  Respondent  Hawkesworth  each  hold a  first  date  of 
paid  service  to  the  District  of  August  20,  2007.  Those  respondents’  claim  that  they  were 
entitled  each  to  have a  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  reflected  as  the  date  on 
which  they  reported  for  “in  service”  training  was  not  correct. 

An  in-service  training  date  by  respondents  is  voluntary  in  nature,  although 
employees  are  paid  a  stipend  for  participation.  Furthermore,  such  training  is  an  exercise 
that  springs  from  the  discretion  of  a  supervisor  or  principal  in  the  process  of  orientation 
or  staff  development.  And,  such  in  service  training  is  not  a  component  of  the  contract 
between  the  District  and  the  new  certificated  employee. 

36. 

As  to  Respondent  Keleshian’s  motion  to  dismiss  the  accusation  as  filed 
against  her,  Ms.  Cohen-Bowman  offered  compelling  evidence  to  support  the  District’s 
position  that  it  met  the  jurisdictional  requirements  of  the  statute  to  timely  serve  the 
preliminary  notice  of  layoff  upon  Respondent  Keleshian. 

The  notice  sent  from  the  District’s  Human  Resources  office  to  Respondent 
Keleshian  reflected  the  address  of  record  as  provided  by  the  affected  certificated  teacher. 
When  she  was  first  employed  by  the  District  in  about  November  2007,  Respondent 
Keleshian  had  provided  the  District  with  a  street  address  that  did  not  reflect  an  apartment 
number.  The  argument  that  Respondent  Keleshian  had  received  other  mail  from  the 
District  that  was  timely  delivered  is  of  little  consequence  in  showing  failure  of  the 
District  to  timely  mail,  by  way  of  certified  mail,  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  by 
March  15,  2008.  First,  as  Complainant  persuasively  propounded a  rational  inference  that 
regular  mail  was  more  likely  delivered  to  the  subject  respondent’s  home  by a  postal 
employee  who  was  familiar  with  Respondent  Keleshian’s  apartment  number  and  made 
delivery  of  the  mail  with  ordinary  postage;  but,  certified  mail,  more  likely  than  not,  was 
made  by  a  postal  worker  who  was  not  familiar  with  Respondent  Keleshian’s  apartment 
number  and  returned  the  certified  mail  as  being  “undeliverable.”  Second,  the  failure  in 
the  delivery  of  the  letter,  via  certified  mail,  to  Respondent  Keleshian  was  attributable  to 
her  failure  in  providing  the  District  with  an  accurate  address  for  her  residence.  Third,  on 
Monday,  March  17,  2008--the  date  which  marked  the  statutory  deadline  because  March 
15  fell  on  a  Saturday--Respondent  Keleshian  personally  received  verbal  notice  from  the 
Human  Resources  office  of  the  return  to  that  office  of  the  envelope  that  bore  the 
preliminary  notice  of  the  pending layoff  action. 

-10- 

 

  

Ultimate  Factual  Findings 

37. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the 

District  faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State 
of  California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  provide  the  same  number  of 
services  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must  prospectively  reduce  or 
eliminate  a  number of FTE  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the  positions  held  by 
many  of  the  affected  respondents. 

38. 

No  competent  and  credible  evidence  establishes  that  as  a  result  of 
the  proposed  elimination  of  the  full  time  equivalent  positions  respectively  held  by 
respondents,  the  District  will  retain  any  teacher  who is  junior  to  respondents  to perform 
services  for  which  respondents  have  been  certificated  or  found  to  be  competent  to  teach 
in  such  FTE  positions  for  the  next  school  year. 

39. 

The  recommendation  of  the  District’s  Superintendent  and  the  Board’s 

decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  most  of a  total  of  77.30  FTE  positions  were  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious.  Rather,  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s 
decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion. 

40. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of  a  number  of  FTE 

positions  for  the  ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare of the  District  and its 
overall  student  population. 

41. 

The  Board  determined  that  it  will  be  necessary,  due  to  the  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  services,  to  decrease  the  number  of  teachers  before  the  beginning  of 
the  next  academic  year.  The  Board  lawfully  directed  the  notification  to  respondents  of 
the  elimination  of  the  certificated  positions  held  by  each  respondent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  13,  inclusive. 

3. 

Evidence  Code  section  664  establishes  a  presumption  that  the  action  or 
official  duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  its  governing  board,  have  been 
regularly  performed.  Respondents  offer  no  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the 
District  has  properly  performed  actions  related  to  the  procedures  that  seek  the  non 
reemployment  of  respondents. 

  

 

  

Board  Resolution  2401,  as  adopted  on  March  5,  2008,  stated  that  it  was  the 

Board’s  determination  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (a),  requires  that  no  later  than  March 
15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for 
the  ensuing  year,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  will  be  given  notice  by  the 
superintendent  that  it  has  been  recommended  that  preliminary  notices  be  given  to 
employees  and  the  reason  for  that  recommendation. 

The  preliminary  notice  is  intended  to  insure  that  affected  employees  are  informed 

of  the  facts  upon  which  they  can  reasonably  assess  the  probability  that  they  will  not  be 
reemployed.  The  preliminary  notice  must  state  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
(Karbach  v.  Board  of  Education  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355.) 

A  governing  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds of  services 
need  not  be  tied  to  ‘any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  projected  decline  in  the  number 
of  students  in  the  affected  district.  The  number of terminations  by  a  PKS  reduction  of 
certificated  employees  depends  entirely  on  the  district’s  governing  board’s  decision 
regarding  how  many,  or  which,  services  to  reduce  or  to  eliminate.  It  is  wholly  within  the 
Board’s  discretion  to  determine  the  numbers  by  which  the  District  will  reduce  a 
particular  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  ,  (1983),  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

The  Vallejo  City  School  District  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  seventy 

seven  and  three-tens  (77.3)  F.T.E.  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  was  a 
discretionary  decision  that  constituted  a  valid  basis  for  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of 
service  under  the  Education  Code. 

Motion  for  Dismissal  by  Respondent  Keleshian 

4. 

Respondent  Keleshian  made  a  motion  for  dismissal  of  the  accusation  as 
against  her  because  of  the  supposed  failure  by  the  District  to  make  timely  service  of  the 
preliminary  notice  upon  her  by  March  15,  2008.  The  motion  is  resolved  by  way  of  the 
v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627. 
authority  expressed  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn. 

The  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  decision  stated,  among  other  things,  that 

notice  to  employees  under  section  44949,  subdivision  (g),  is  “deemed  sufficient  when it 
.  deposited  in  the  United  States  registered  mail,  postage  pre-paid  and  addressed  to 
is  .. 
the  last  known  address of  the  employee.”  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra.  144 
(Emphasis  added.)  In  this  matter,  on  Monday,  March  17  (the  date 
Cal.App.3d  at  634.) 
required  for  delivery  of  preliminary  notices  of  layoff  because  March  15  fell  on  Saturday), 
Respondent  Keleshian  learned  that  the  misaddressed  envelope  with  the  preliminary 
notice  had  been  returned  to  the  District’s  offices,  that  she  was  a  recipient of a  layoff 
notice  and  that  the  District  was  placing  into  the  mail  an  envelope  with  her  full,  accurate 

-12. 

   

  

@ 

address.  There  was  no  substantive  error  on  the  part  of  the  Superintendent  or  her 
designee  in  making  delivery  upon  Respondent  Keleshian  of  the  preliminary  notice  of  her 
layoff  by  the  statutory  deadline  of  March  15,  2008. 

Respondent  Chin 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44848  sets  out: 

@ 

Education  Code  section  44931  prescribes: 

When  any  certificated  employee  shall  have  resigned 
or  been  dismissed  for  cause  and  shall  thereafter 
have  been  reemployed  by  the  board,  his  date  of 
employment  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  date  on 
which  he  first  accepted  reemployment  (if  reem- 
ployed  before  July  1,  1947)  or  rendered  paid  ser- 
vice  (if  reemployed  after  June  30,  1947)  after  his 
reemployment.  When  an  employee's  services  are 
terminated  for  lack  of  enrollment  or  discontinuance 
of  service  or  are  otherwise  interrupted  in  a  manner 
declared  by  law  not  to  constitute  a  break  in  service, 
his  original  order  of  employment  shall  stand. 

Whenever  any  certificated  employee  of  any  school  dis- 
trict  who,  at  the  time of his  or  her  resignation,  was 
classified  as  permanent,  is  reemployed  within  39 
months  after  his  or  her  last  day of  paid  service,  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  shall,  disregarding  the 
break  in  service,  classify  him  or  her  as,  and  restore  to 
him  or  her  all  of  the  rights,  benefits  and  burdens  of,  a 
permanent  employee,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in 
this  code.  However,  time  spent  in  active  military  ser- 
vice,  as  defined  in  Section  44800,  subsequent  to  the 
last  day  of  paid  service  shall  not  count  as  part  of  the 
aforesaid  39-month  period. 

The  decision  in  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d 

627  is  instructive: 

Appellants  also  contend  that  the  district  misclassified 
two  other  groups  of  individual  employees  for  purposes  of 
seniority;  however,  these  contentions  lack  merit.  The 

-13- 

   

  

first  group  consists of  five  individual  appellants  who 
attained  permanent  status,  resigned,  and  then  were 
rehired  within  39  months  and  were  not  given  credit  for 
purposes  of  seniority  for  their  preretirement  employment. 
Ifa  certificated  employee  resigns  and  is  thereafter 
reemployed,  his  date  of employment  is  normally  deemed 
by  section  44848  to  be  the  date  of reemployment; 
however,  the  original  date  is  effective  if  the  employee's 
services  were  ‘terminated  for  lack  of  enrollment  or 
discontinuance  of  service  or  are  otherwise  interrupted  in 
a  manner  declared  by  law  not  to  constitute  a  break  in 
service...’  Appellants  rely  on  a  combined  reading  of  the 
latter  part  of  section  44848  and  the  provisions  of  section 
44931  which  state  when  a  permanent  employee  resigns 
and  is  reemployed  within  39  months,  the  district  ‘shall, 
disregarding  the  break  in  service,  classify  him  as,  and 
restore  to  him  all  the  rights,  benefits  and  burdens  of,  a 
permanent  employee,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in 
this  code...  .’  We  hold  that  section  44931  provides  that 
the  break  in  service  shall  be  ‘disregarded’  as  to 
individual  rights,  burdens  and  benefits,  but  not  as  to 
seniority  rights  which  affect  other  employees.  The 
‘except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  code’  provision  in 
section  44931  must  be  read  as  deferring  to  section 
44848. 

(San  Jose  Teachers  Assn  vy.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  at  641.) 

The  District  is  correct  that  Respondent  Kim,  as  a  certificated  teacher  who 
resigned  and  later  was  rehired,  assumes  the  date  of  her  reemployment  in  August  2007  as 
her  current  seniority  date.  Respondent  Kim  does  not  reacquire  as  a  seniority  date  the 
August  1978  date  when  she  was  first  hired  by  the  District. 

Ultimate  Determinations 

6. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  cause  exists  for  the 

District  to  eliminate  or  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  ensuing  year  where 
such  services  are  now  offered  in  District  schools.  And  cause  exists  to  give  certain 
respondents  notice  that  for  the  ensuing  school  year  they  will  not  be  reemployed  to 
provide  services  now  rendered  by  such  respondents.  These  determinations  are  made  by 
reason of  the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  16,  17,  20  through  22  inclusive,  24 
through  26  inclusive,  29,  30,  35  through  37  inclusive,  and  41. 

7. 

The  discontinuation of  the  subject  particular  kinds  of  service  provided  by 

each  respondent  relates  solely  to  the  welfare of  the  District  and  its  students  within  the 

  

-14. 

 

meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  by  reason  of  the  matters  in 
Factual  Finding  40. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  served  on  each  respondent  is  sustained. 

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  respondents,  named  in  Attachment  A  hereto, 
that  their  respective  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because 
of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

DATED:  May  6,  2008 

PERRY  O.  JOHNSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

    

  

