BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS 
OF  THE 
MEMORIAL  ACADEMY  OF  LEARNING  AND  TECHNOLOGY 
COUNTY  OF  SAN  DIEGO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
the  38  Certificated  Employees  Receiving 
Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services 
Would  Not  Be  Required  for  the  2008-2009 
School  Year, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008040003 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Diego,  California,  on  April  30,  2008. 

Jerry  W.  Simmons,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning 

and  Technology. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Jose  Arellano,  Cherilyn 

Avedian,  Chantille  Bortscheller,  William  Brooks,  Brian  Diamond,  Dina  Galvan,  Tracey 
Makings,  Susan  Nguyen,  Isabel  Nunez,  Karissa  Ortega,  Nani  Lisa  A.  Schott,  Charlette 
Snider,  Amy  Stough,  Danny  Timothy,  Marilen  Tran,  and  Claudia  E.  Valencia. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  remaining  respondent  certificated 

employees  who  received  notice  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  30,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Charter  Schools 

1. 

Charter  schools  are  authorized  to  provide  instruction  from  kindergarten 

through  grade  12.  A  charter  school  is  usually  organized  and  created  by  a  group  of  parents, 

  

1
  

educators,  and  community  leaders  or  community-based  organizations.  An  existing  local 
public  school  district  usually  sponsors  a  charter  school.  A  charter  school’s  specific  goals  are 
usually  detailed  in  an  agreement  (or  “charter”)  between  the  local  school  district  and  the 
charter  school’s  organizers.  A  charter  school  provides  choices  for  parents  and  students 
within  the  public  school  system  for  innovative,  high-quality  learning  opportunities  and 
stimulates  competition  in  the  educational  market.  To  meet  these  objectives,  charter  schools 
are  given  increased  autonomy  in  exchange  for  increased  accountability  for  results. 

A  charter  is  typically  granted  for  five  years.  During  the  term  of  a  charter,  a  charter 
school  must  meet  the  student  performance  and  operational  goals  listed  in  its  charter,  or  the 
charter  may  be  revoked  immediately  or  not  renewed  at  the  conclusion  of  the  charter  term. 

The  Memorial  Academy  of Learning  and  Technology 

2. 

Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and  Technology  (MALT)  opened  on 

September  18,  1922,  and  was  one  of  the first  junior  high  schools  in  the  San  Diego  Unified 
School  District.  It  was  originally  named  Cleveland  Junior  High  School,  but  its  name  was 
changed  to  Memorial  Junior  High  to  honor  those  who  gave  their  lives  in  the  First  World 
War.  The  name  was  thereafter  changed  to  Memorial  Academy. 

MALT  converted  from  a  traditionally-operated  school  to  an  “arm  of  the  district” 

chartered  school  in  2000.  From  2000  to  the  end  of  the  2005  school  year,  MALT’s  payroll 
was  handled  by  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  and  its  operation  was  conducted  by  an 
internal  management  team  made  of  students,  parents  and  school  employees. 

MALT  failed  to  meet  benchmarks  established  by  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  at  the 

conclusion  of  the  2004-2005  school  year  and  was  forced  to  restructure.  The  charter  school 
changed  its  name  from  Memorial  Academy  to  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and 
Technology  at  the  beginning  of  the  2005-2006  school  year. 

An  |  1-member  governing  board  was  originally  established  through  “serial 

procedure,”  a  recognized  method  that  elects  trustees  one  at  a  time,  allowing  each  new 
member  to  immediately  vote  on  the  next  member.  The  by-laws  were  later  amended  to 
authorize  a  seven-member  governing  board  (the  Board).  Following  the  resignation  of  two 
board  members  in  2008,  the  school  has  been  operated  by  a  five-member  board. 

MALT  receives  funding  directly  from  the  State  of  California  based  on  the  number  of 

students  attending  the  school.  When  MALT  was  an  “arm  of  the  district”  charter  school, 
MALT  enjoyed  the  status  of  being  a  resident  school  for  the  area.  However,  due  to  problems 
MALT  had  meeting  accountability  standards,  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District 
withdrew  MALT’s  resident  school  status  and  assigned  students  living  in  the  area  to 
Roosevelt  Junior  High  School  as  the  resident  school. 

The  San  Diego  Unified  School  District’s  withdrawal  of  MALT’s  resident  school 

status  had  a  huge  impact  on  the  number  of  students  attending  MALT  which,  in  turn,  had  an 
impact  on  MALT’s  staffing  and  budget.  Since  it  was  restructured  in  2005,  MALT  has  faced 

2 

 

  

many  additional  challenges  including  widespread  changes  in  the  Board’s  composition, 
administrative  changes,  and  problems  meeting  mandated  accountability  standards. 

In  2005,  MALT’s  Academic  Performance  Index  (API)!  declined  and  the  school  failed 

to  meet  the  improvement  goal  established  by  the  state.  The  following  school  year,  the  API 
declined  even  further,  and  MALT  again  failed  to  meet  state  improvement  standards. 

In  November  2007,  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  sent  MALT’s  Board  a 
letter  warning  that  MALT  was  at  risk  of  losing  its  charter  at  the  next  renewal.  The  letter 
mentioned  the  school’s  poor  API  rankings,  as  well  as  its  failure  to  show  progress  necessary 
to  meet  Adequate  Yearly  Progress  targets  set  under  federal  law.  The  letter  stated: 

“It  is  the  district’s  belief  that  the  academic  performance  issues  described  above 
demonstrate  a  failure  to  comply  with  the  Charter,  a  failure  to  meet  pupil  outcomes 
identified  in  the  Charter,  failure  to  meet  state  and  federal  academic  achievement 
requirements,  and  therefore  amounts  to  a  violation  of  the  charter  and  the  charter  law.” 

3. 

In  addition  to  losing  its  resident  school  status,  the  San  Diego  Unified  School 

District  authorized  the  opening  of  a  new  charter  school  —  the  King/Chavez  Academy  of 
Excellence  Charter  School  (King/Chavez)  —  to  conduct  its  operation  on  the  campus  MALT 
occupies.  King/Chavez,  which  is  in  its  first  year  of  existence,  provides  services  to  students 
from  kindergarten  through  grade  eight.  Next  year,  Memorial  Preparatory  will  open,  and  it 
It,  too,  will  conduct 
will  be  designated  as  the  District’s  resident  middle  school  for  the  area. 
its  operation  on  the  campus  MALT  occupies.  The  opening  of  these  competitor  schools  will 
not  assist  MALT  in  growing  its  student  population. 

4. 

MALT  is  a  year-round  junior  high  school  providing  educational  services  and 
supports  to  students  in  grades  six  through  eight.  MALT  is  located  at  2850  Logan  Avenue, 
San  Diego,  CA  92113.  MALT  had a total  enrollment  of  approximately  1,350  students  a 
couple  of  years  ago,  but  the  student  body  has  dwindled  to  850  students  for  this  school  year. 
MALT’s  projected  student  body  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  is  about  400  students. 

MALT  presently  employs-about  45-certificated-employees,  a  few-of whom  are 
directly  employed  by  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  and  38  of  whom  MALT 
employs  directly.  MALT’s  present  student  teacher  ratio  is  20:1,  an  extremely  low  ratio 
which is  the  result  of  overstaffing  brought  about  by  the  loss  of  its  resident  schoo]  status. 
MALT’s  student  teacher  ratio  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  has  been Projected  to  be  28:1, 
which  exceeds  the  ratio  set  forth in  the  charter. 

The  State of California  assigns  a  single  API  ranking  to  schools  on  a  scale  from  200  to  1,000,  based  on 

} 
students’  performance  on  statewide  tests.  The  state  has  a  goal of  800  for  all  schools,  and  it  calls  for  progress  toward 
that  target  on  an  annual  basis.  MALT  was  consistently  below  800. 

 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —  Economic  Layoffs 

5. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  the 
passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of 
California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  funding.  Charter  schools,  like  public  school 
districts,  look  to  the  State  of  California  and  other  governmental  entities  for  their  funding. 

School  districts  and  charter  schools  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  that 
will  be  received  until  the  state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June. 
Before  then,  governing  boards  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst- 
case  financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  the 
budgeting  problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  certificated 
employees  no  later  than  March  15.  Many  charter  schools  operate  under  the  same  basic 
framework  as  school  districts  with  regard  to  reductions  in  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the 
need  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees.  In  this  matter,  it  was  stipulated 
that  MALT  generally  followed  the  standards  set  forth  in  the  Education  Code. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority. 

MALT’s  Response  to  the  Budget  Crisis 

6. 

In  early  2008,  MALT’s  Board  became  aware  of  the  many  financial  challenges 

facing  the  school  including  a  decrease  in  the  state  funding  to  be  provided  for  each  student 
and  the  declining  enrollment  figures.  As  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Governor’s 
proposed  budget,  and  the  decline  in  enrollment,  MALT’s  business  manager  projected  a  $5.5 
million  dollar  shortfall  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  unless  the  budget  was  reduced. 

Under  the  direction  of  Principal  Sheila  Solorzano-Y barra  (Principal  Solorzano- 
Ybarra),  who  in  early  March  2008  replaced  MALT’s  administrator/superintendent  who  had 
just  resigned,  and  Ashenefi  Hailu  (Hailu),  MALT’s  Business  Manager,  budgetary  cuts  were 
considered  including  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  being 
provided  by  certificated  employees. 

On  March  13,  2008,  Principal  Solorzano-Y barra  recommended  to  the  Board  a 

reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  totaling  38  full  time  equivalent 
(FTE)  positions.  Hailu  was  also  present  at  the  Board  meeting  to  discuss  MALT’s  financial 
situation. 

 

  

7. 

On  March  13,  2008,  following  Principal  Solorzano-Y barra’s  recommendation, 

MALT’s  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  2008-01,  which  directed  that  certain  certificated 
employee  services  would  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and 
directed  the  Interim  Principal  to  provide  notice  to  affected  certificated  employees.  The 
resolution  provided: 

Resolution  2008-01 
Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and  Technology  Charter  School 

RESOLUTION 

REDUCTION  OR  ELIMINATION  OF  CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  SERVICES 
(Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955) 

WHEREAS,  Sections  44949  and  44955 of  the  Education  Code  require  action  by  the 

Charter  Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  eliminate  services  and  permit  the  layoff  of 
certificated  employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Interim  Principal  of  the  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and 
Technology  Charter  School  has  recommended  to  the  Memorial  Governing  Board  that  particular 
kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008/2009  school 
year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Charter  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or  elimination 
of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008/2009  school  year; 
and 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Charter  Governing  Board  of  the 

Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and  Technology  Charter  School: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

That  all  of  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being  insufficient  to 
maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs  and  necessary  program  changes  resulting 
therefrom,  the  Charter  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to  reduce  or  eliminate  those 
positions  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A,  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference  herein, 
“listed 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning of  the  2008/2009  school  year. 

by field  or  classification  and  full-time  equivalent,  those  positions  which  shall-be~—— 

That  because of  the  elimination  and  reduction of particular  kinds of services  listed  in 
Exhibit  A  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the  2007/2008  school  year  certificated 
employees  equal  in  number  to  the  positions  affected  in  the  reduction  or  elimination of the 
above-described  service. 

That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some  of  the  employees  in  the  services  being 
reduced  or  eliminated  are  such  that  they  have  displacement  rights  by  virtue  of  seniority, 
and  that  no  employee'will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who  shall 
receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code  section  44955 
requires  the  Charter  Governing  Board  to  state  specific  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining 
the  order  of  termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
Charter  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and 
Technology  Charter  School  in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  dates  are  listed  and 
described  in  Exhibit  B,  which  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference  herein. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and 
Technology  Charter  School  in  a  probationary  position  on  the  same  date,  listed  and 
described  in  Exhibit  B,  are  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning 
and  Technology  Charter  School  and  the  students  thereof. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who  shall 
receive  notice of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code  §  44955  allows 
the  Charter  Governing  Board  to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order 
of  seniority  by  virtue  of  their  competence,  credential(s),  assignment,  and  the  specific 
needs  of  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and  Technology  Charter  School  and  its 
students. 

That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees 
who  may  otherwise  be  terminated  by  order  of  seniority  will  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the 
students  of  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and  Technology  Charter  School,  and  will 
ensure  that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is  retained  to 
render  service  which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

That  the  Interim  Principal  or  his  designated  representative  is  authorized  and  directed  to 
determine  which  employees’  services  may  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year  as 
a  result of  this  reduction  in  services,  and  the  Interim  Principal  shall  send  appropriate 
notices  to  all  employees  possibly  affected  by  virtue of the  reduction  and  elimination  of 
particular  kinds  of  service  prior  to  March  15,  2008  by  certified  mail,  return  receipt 
requested. 

That  the  action of  this  Charter  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be  considered  to 
prejudice  the  rights  of  certificated  employees  to  whom  notice  will  be  given  as  to  the 
Charter  Governing  Board’s  consideration of  any  proposed  decision  by  an  administrative 
law  judge 

in  the  event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  any  employee. 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  by  the  Charter  Governing  Board  of  Memorial  Academy  of 

Learning  and  Technology  Charter  School  this  13"  day  of  March  2008, 

 

8. 

Exhibit  A  to  the  resolution  described  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  were 

being  eliminated  or  reduced.  It  provided: 

Particular  Kin 

  d  of  Service  or  Program 

  

Exhibit  A 

Number  of  Full  Time  Equivalent  Positions 
Including  Prep  and  Travel  Periods  Where 
Applicable 

  

  

  

  

 
    
    

Middle  School  Teaching  (6-8) 
Counselor 

35 
3 

9. 

Exhibit B 

to  the  resolution  contained  the  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  for 

employees  having  the  same  seniority  date. 

It  provided: 

Exhibit  B 

Criteria  to  be  Applied  to  Determine  Order  of  Layoff  for  those  Certificated  Employees  with  the 
Same  Date  of  First  Paid  Probationary  Service 

The  following  criteria  will  be  applied  in  the  priority  order  indicated  to  determine  which 
certificated  employees  meet  the  particular  needs  of  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning  and 
Technology  Charter  School  in  the  event  that  all  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  hire 
are  not  terminated.  These  criteria  meet  the  particular  needs  of  Memorial  Academy  of  Learning 
and  Technology  Charter  School  at  the  present  time: 

1, 

Persons  with  advanced  degrees  in  the  following  order: 
a. 
b. 
c. 

Doctoral  Degree 
Masters  Degree  in  Core  Subject  Area 
Master  Degree 

Persons  with  majors  in  an  academic  teaching  subject  possessing  two  teaching  credentials. 

A  lottery  among  individuals  who  remain  tied  with  the  San  Diego  Teachers  Association 
(SDEA)  President  or  his  designee  invited  to  attend  with  the  first  name  drawn  being  most 
“senior  down  to  the  last  name  drawn  being  least  senior. 

10. 

In  preparation  for  the  recommended  layoffs,  MALT’s  administrative  staff 

reviewed  MALT’s  credentialed  employee  seniority  list.  That  list  contained  the  names  of  all 
persons  directly  employed  by  MALT  in a  position  requiring  a  credential,  but  not  the  names 
of  persons  employed  by  the  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  who  were  providing 
credentialed  services  at  MALT. 

The  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  employees  taught  at  the  MALT  site  before  it 
became  a  chartered  school.  When  MALT  became a  chartered  school,  they  were  given  the 
option  of  remaining  employed  at  MALT  but  maintaining  employment  with  the  San  Diego 
Unified  School  District. 

  

  

For  certificated  employees  hired  directly  by  the  chartered  school  after  it  commenced 

operation,  these  persons  received  compensation  and  benefits  at  the  same  level  and  in  the 
same  manner  as  did  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  employees  (including  cost  of  living 
increases,  retirement,  etc.),  but  they  were  not  employed  by  the  District.  For  reasons  far  too 
technical  to  require  explanation  here,  one  MALT  certificated  employee  —  Hugo  Roji  —  had  a 
seniority  date  (i.e.,  first  date  of  paid  probationary  service)  greater  than  several  of  the  most 
junior  San  Diego  Unified  School  District  Employees  providing  services  at  MALT.  However, 
the  remainder  of  the  MALT  employees  had  seniority  dates  that  made them  junior 
Diego  Unified  School  District  employees  providing  contracted  services  at  MALT. 

to  all  San 

11. 

MALT’s  seniority  list  included  the  employee’s  last  name,  the  employee’s  start 

date  (i.e.,  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  the  employee’s  assignment, 
the  credential(s)  the  employee  held,  whether  the  employee  held  BCLAD  or  CLAD 
certification,  whether  the  employee  was  NCLB  compliant,  and  the  employee’s  tenured  status 
(i.¢.,  permanent,  probationary  I,  probationary  II). 

12, 

On  March  14,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this  proceeding 

was  given  notice  that  Principal  Solorzano-Ybarra  had  recommended  that  his  or  her  services 
with  MALT  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  his  or 
her  services  would  not  be  needed  by  MALT  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Each  employee 
was  notified  of  the  right  to  a  hearing.  The  preliminary  layoff  notices  were  duly  served  on  all 
the  certificated  employees  whom  MALT  employed  directly,  including  Hugo  Roji.  Many  of 
those  served  with  the  layoff  notice  and  Board  resolution  requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation 
and  other  required  jurisdictional  documents  were  served  on  those  respondents.  All 
jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

13. 

On  April  30,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  The 

District  gave  an  opening  statement.  An  opening  statement  was  given  on  behalf  of  the 
represented  respondents.  Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  a  written  stipulation  to 
jurisdictional  facts  was  received,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was  received, 
closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

14.  _  The  particular  services  identified  by  Memorial’s  Board  for  reduction  or 
elimination  in  Exhibit  A  (Factual  Finding  7)  included  “Middle  School  Teaching”  and 
“Counselor,”  each  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  the  Board  could  properly  reduce  and 
discontinue.  The  reduction  and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within 
the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  school 
and  the  students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by  federal  and  state  laws. 

15. 

There  was  a  claim  that  Physical  Education  teachers  required  a  special 

credential  and  could  not  be  included  in  the  broad  classification  of  “Middle  School  Teaching.” 

8 

 

The  fact  that  MALT  is  a  charter  school  was  relevant  to  that  issue  because  Education  Code 
section  47605,  subdivision  (1)  provides: 

“Teachers  in  charter  schools  shall  hold  a  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing 
certificate,  permit,  or  other  document  equivalent  to  that  which  a  teacher  in  other 
public  schools  would  be  required  to  hold.  These  documents  shall  be  maintained  on 
file  at  the  charter  school  and  are  subject  to  periodic  inspection  by  the  chartering 
authority.  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Legislature  that  charter  schools  be  given  flexibility 
with  regard  to  noncore,  noncollege  preparatory  courses.” 

Physical  Education  is  a  noncore,  noncollege  preparatory  course,  and  thus  did  not  was 

properly  included  within  the  broad  classification  of  “Middle  School  Teaching.” 

16. 

There  was  a  claim  that  the  notice  was  not  sufficiently  specific  because  it 

identified  “Middle  School  Teaching”  and  did  not  specify  what  courses  were  being  taught  by 
these  teachers.  In  fact,  at  MALT  a  team-teaching  approach  is  used  outside  of  Music,  Art, 
and  Physical  Education,  with  one  member  of  the  team  teaching  Language  Arts  and  Social 
Studies  and  the  other  member  teaching  Math  and  Science.  Since  this  charter  school  teachers 
were  credentialed  to  teach  multiple  subjects,  the  notice  was  sufficiently  broad. 

17. 

The  fact  that  the  Board  planned  to  retain  the  services  of  the  San  Diego  Unified 

School  District  certificated  employees  did  not  render  the  notice  legally  insufficient.  All 
mandated  services  will  be  met.  All  MALT  employees,  other  than  Hugo  Roji,  were  junior  to 
the  District  employees  who  provide  services  at  MALT.  Had  the  Board’s  notice  and 
resolution  included  the  names  of  these  District  employees,  the  outcome  would  have  been  the 
same  except  for  Hugo  Roji. 

. 

18. 

No  employee  suffered  any  prejudice  by  reason  of  the  wording  of  the  notice 
and  resolution.  Each  certificated  employee  to  this  action  was  on  constructive  notice,  if  not 
on  actual  notice,  that  his  or  her  employment  was  at  risk  and  that  he  or  she  should  commence 
looking  for  other  employment  elsewhere. 

The  District's Layoff Procedure 

- 

- 

anne 

19. 

According  to  Principal  Solorzano-Ybarra  and  Hailu,  the  enrollment  at  MALT 
is  in  precipitous  decline.  The  Board  determined  that  the  student  teacher  ratio  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  should  be  28:1.  Using  a  projected  student  population  of  400  (which  may 
be  too  high),  MALT  had  a  need  to  retain  the  services  of  14  teachers.  Thus,  the  reduction  of 
38  FTEs  was  reasonable.  It  turned  out  that  MALT  employed  38  certificated  employees,  35 
teachers  and  three  counselors,  in  addition  to  the  teachers  employed  through  the  San  Diego 
Unified  School  District.  By  the  time  of  the  hearing,  eight  teachers  employed  by  the  San 
Diego  Unified  School  District  had  announced  their  intention  to  remain  at  MALT  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  which  means  that  the  six  most  senior  MALT  teachers  (one  of  whom 
is  Hugo  Roji)  will  be  retained.  No  junior  employee  has  been  retained  to  provide  services  a 
more  senior  employee  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render.

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

The  purpose  of  the  initial  termination  notice  provision  is  to  notify  an  employee 

of  the  probability  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  so  that  he 
or  she  may  consider  looking  elsewhere  for  employment.  Nothing  in  the  statute  relating  to  the 
termination  of  teachers  due  to  a  reduction  in  daily  average  attendance  or,  in  the  alternative,  a 
reduction  of  services  (Ed.  Code,  §  44955)  prohibits  the  statement  of  more  than  one  ground  in 
putting  employees  on  notice  that their  jobs  are  in  jeopardy.  (Moreland  Teachers  Association 
v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  653.)  However,  where  just  one  statutory  ground  is 
raised,  a  school  district  cannot  introduce  evidence  at  a  hearing  to  support  termination  on 
another  statutory  ground  that  was  not  originally  raised.  (Karbach  v.  Board  of Education 
(1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355,  363.) 

3. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion  to  determine 
the  extent  to  which  it  will  reduce a  particular  service.  At  the  elementary  school  level, 
reduction  of  classroom  teaching  can  be  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service,  A  school 
district  may  consider  its  financial  circumstances  in  deciding  whether  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
a  particular  kind  of  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  y.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  services  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  the  board 
made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of Trustees  of Bellflower 
Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute.  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b)  provides: 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.” 

5. 

As  a  result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their  employment  will  be 

10 

 

terminated  at  the  close of the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  Hugo  Roji. 

The  Accusation  against  Hugo  Roji  shall  be  dismissed. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously  served 

with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
except  for  Hugo  Roji. 

These  employees  include  Gina  M.  Alves,  Jose  Arellano,  Cherilyn  Avedian,  Chantille 

Bortscheller,  William  Brooks,  Laurie  Cartlidge,  Lauren  Castillo,  Gloria  de  Hoyos,  Brian 
Diamond,  Donald  Trey  Dugan,  Julie  Espinosa,  Dina  Galvan,  Joselyn  Gunderson,  Cristal 
Herrera,  Joy  Josker,  Aremi  Lopez,  Tracey  Makings,  Chantille  McDonald,  Katherine 
Mickelson,  Susan  Nguyen,  Isabel  Nunez,  Karissa  Ortega,  Marian  Ramirez,  Roman  Robio, 
Nani  Lisa  A.  Schott,  Elizabeth  Smith  Calvin,  Charlette  Snider,  Amy  Stough,  Danny 
Timothy,  Marilen  Tran,  Claudia  Valencia,  and  Miroslava  Zavala. 

DATED: 

__S 

Os 

oe 

Parcs 

   

JAMES  AHLER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

  

