  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
LA  GRANGE  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STANISLAUS  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Layoffs)  of: 

CATHY  BULJAN,  LINDA  GNIPP, 
KIMBERLY  MARTIN,  SARAH  POWERS, 
JOHN  REESMAN,  and  MISTY 
WESTCOTT, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030449 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  La  Grange,  California,  on 
April  15,  2008. 

Attorney  Janice  J.  Hein  represented  La  Grange  Elementary  School  District 

(District).  District  Superintendent  Joseph  Magnu  was  also  present. 

Attorney  Ernest  Tuttle  IV  represented  respondents  Cathy  Buljan,  Linda  Gnipp, 

Kimberly  Martin,  Sarah  Powers,  and  John  Reesman,  who  were  present. 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondent  Misty  Westcott. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Joseph  Magnu  is  the  Superintendent-Principal  of  the  La  Grange 

Elementary  School  District  (District).  Mr.  Magnu’s  actions  and  the  actions  of  the 
District  Governing  Board  (Board)  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2. 

The  District  serves  students  from  kindergarten  through  eighth  grades  at 
its  La  Grange  Elementary  School  (La  Grange  Elementary)  and  the  La  Grange  Charter 
Academy  (Charter  Academy).  Until  recently,  the  District  was  a  one-room  rural 
school,  with  Mr.  Magnu  as  its  sole  teacher  and  principal. 

  

 

  

In  approximately  2004,  the  District  began  to  experience  increasing  enrollment 
by  students  who  lived  closer  to  La  Grange  Elementary  than  to  the  elementary  schools 
in  their  own  districts  of  residence.  These  non-District  students  were  granted  inter- 
district  transfers  to  attend  La  Grange  Elementary.  Beginning  in  September  2006,  the 
District  established  the  Charter  Academy  as  a  “school  of  choice”  within  La  Grange 
Elementary  to  accommodate  these  non-District  students.  During  the  2007-2008 
school  year,  the  District’s  “school  within  a  school”  model  which  resulted  from  the 
creation  of  the  Charter  Academy  served  15  District  students  and  51  non-District 
students. 

3. 

Respondents  are  permanent  and  probationary  certificated  employees  of 

the  District.  Three  of  the  five  respondents  were  hired  following  the  creation  of  the 
Charter  Academy.  Respondents’  first  dates  of  paid  service  with  the  District  occurred 
at  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  years:  2004-2005  (Cathy  Buljan),  2005-2006 
(Linda  Gnipp),  2006-2007  (Sarah  Powers  and  John  Reesman);  and  2007-2008  (Misty 
Westcott).  Since  their  hire,  respondents  have  taught  both  District  students  and  non- 
District  students  at  the  combined  La  Grange  Elementary-Charter  Academy. 

4. 

On  March  4,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2008-01, 

regarding  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  service  (PKS).  The 
Board  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  PKS  not 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year:  6.0  FTE  Elementary  Teachers. 

» 

5. 

In  its  Resolution,  the  Board  adopted  tie  breaking  criteria  to  be  used  to 
determine  relative  seniority  between  employees  who  had  the  same  initial  date  of  paid 
service  with  the  District,  and  to  determine  the  order  of  reemployment.  The  Board 
defined  “competent”  and/or  “competency,”  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section 
44955(b),  as  “possessing  the  appropriate  and  necessary  credential  for  a  class  and 
having  taught  the  class  in  question  at  least  one  (1)  semester  in  the  past  ten  (10)  years. 
Finally,  the  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate 
notices  to  all  affected  certificated  employees. 

    

On  March  12,  2008,  the  District  notified  each  of  the  respondents  that  it 
had  recommended  to  the  Board  that  they  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  be 
discontinued  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents  were  advised  of  their  right 
to  request  a  hearing.  Each  respondent  was  provided  this  letter,  with  a  copy  of 
Resolution  2008-01,  a  blank  Request  for  Hearing  form,  and  copies  of  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955.  The  notice  and  accompanying  documents  were  personally 
served  on  each  respondent  by  the  superintendent. 

Accusation  and  a  Statement  to  Respondents  (Statement)  for  layoff  pursuant  to 
Resolution  2008-01  and  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Respondents

On  March  21,  2008,  Superintendent  Magnu  prepared  and  signed  an 

Each  of  the  respondents  timely  requested  a  hearing. 

6. 

7. 

were  advised  of  their  right  to  request  a  hearing.  The  Accusation,  Statement,  blank 
Notice  of  Defense  form,  and  pertinent  statutes  were  personally  served  on  each 
respondent  by  Superintendent  Magnu. 

8. 

With  the  exception  of  respondent  Misty  Westcott,  all  respondents 

timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  contesting  the  Accusation  and  requesting  a  hearing. 
No  response  was  received  from  Ms.  Westcott. 

9. 

Waiver  of Right  to  Hearing  by  Respondent  Westcott:  Education  Code 
section  44949,  subdivision  (b),  provides  that  where  an  employee  fails  “to  request  a 
hearing  on  or  before  the  date  specified,  his  or  her  failure  to  do  so  shall  constitute  his 
or  her  waiver  of  his  or  her  right  to  a  hearing.” 

11. 

10. 

Reduction  of PKS 

The  Board’s  determination  to  reduce  the  PKS  of  six  elementary 

The  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  these  PKS  was  made 

The  evidence  establishes  that  the  District  properly  served  Ms.  Westcott  with 
the  Accusation  and  accompanying  documents,  including  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense 
Form  which  explained  her  right  to  request  a  hearing.  By  failing  to  file  a  Notice  of 
Defense,  Misty  Westcott  has  waived  her  right  to  a  hearing  in  this  matter,  and  the 
District  may  proceed  with  her  layoff. 

teachers  was  within  its  discretion.  A  particular  kind  of  service  includes a  service  or 
curricular  offering  which  cannot  be  eliminated,  but  can  be  reduced  to  the  minimum 
level  required  by  law.  Elementary  teaching  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  may  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  under  Education  Code  section  44949  and  44955.  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Goleta  Union  School  District  (1982)132  Cal.  App.  3d  32,  36. 

 
    

external  business  services  for  Stanislaus  County  Office  of  Education  (COE),  in  the 
preparation  of  its  Fiscal  Year  2007-2008  Second  Interim  Report  with  general  fund 
financial  projections  for  the  next  two  fiscal  years,  2008-2009  and  2009-2010.  The 
Board  considered  the  declining  state  and  federal  revenues,  and  its  expenses,  including 
those  associated  with  operating  the  Charter  Academy.  As  explained  by  Mr.  Magnu, 
the  financial  data  revealed  that  most  of  the  District’s  deficit  spending  was  in  relation 
to  the  Charter  Academy,  which  was  thus  negatively  affecting  the  District’s  students. 
Specifically,  each  year,  the  Charter  Academy  had  to  borrow  significant  funds  from  La 
Grange  Elementary’s  reserve  account.  The  reduction  in  PKS  was  necessary  to  reduce 
costs  and  to  address  a  loss  of  revenue  that  placed  the  District  in  the  “qualified” 
category  for  fiscal  oversight  and  intervention  by  the  COE  if  the  layoffs  do  not  occur. 
Ms.  Putnam  agreed  that  the  District  would  still  have  an  appropriate  general  fund 

after  considering  financial  reports  and  information  regarding  the  District’s  current  and 
projected  income  and  expenses. 

The  District  worked  in  close  conjunction  with  Sandra  Putnam,  director  of 

  

reserve  at  the  end  of  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Ms.  Putnam  also  testified  that  the 
COE  cannot  wait  until  a  District  goes  into  bankruptcy  before  it  intervenes  and  that 
such  a  result  is  probable  if  the  District  continued  its  current  staffing. 

e 

12. 

Respondents  challenged  the  necessity  of  PKS  reduction  this  year  and 
questioned  whether  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  all  six  FTE,  when  the  second  interim 
financial  projections  do  not  indicate  a  significant  deficit  until  fiscal  year  2009-2010. 
There  is  no  merit  to  this  challenge.  The  Board  has  an  obligation  to  protect  the  fiscal 
integrity  of  the  District;  this  includes  taking  proactive  steps  to  avoid  fiscal  peril.  The 
Board  did  not  act  arbitrarily  or  capriciously  by  resolving  to  sharply  reduce  PKS  at  this 
time.  There  as  no  evidence  that  this  reduction  in  PKS  resulted  in  the  reduction  of 
services  below  the  minimum  level  required  by  law.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce 
PKS  at  this  time  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  students  by 
maintaining  it  financial  viability. 

13. 

Status  of Superintendent-Principal-Teacher  Mr.  Magnu:  The  effect  of 

the  Resolution  is  to  eliminate  the  Charter  Academy  and  to  concentrate  District 
resources  solely  on  La  Grange  Elementary  for  the  benefit  of  the  students  who  reside 
in  the  District.  During  the  2008-2009  school  year,  La  Grange  Elementary  will  return 
to  its  prior  model  where  Mr.  Magnu  is  the  sole  teacher  for  the  District’s  students.  Mr. 
Magnu  was  not  given a  layoff  notice  by  the  District. 

Mr.  Magnu  has  worked  for  the  District  for  eight  years,  during  which  he  has 
performed  a  combination  of  teaching  and  administrative  (principal/superintendent) 
duties.  Since  the  increase  in  the  District’s  certificated  staff,  Mr.  Magnu’s  teaching 
time  has  decreased;  however,  he  continues  to  teach  special  education,  and  he  monitors 
the  special  education  caseload.  As  indicated  in  the  Charter  Academy  document,  Mr. 
Magnu  is  a  master’s  level  special  education  specialist  with  16  years  of  classroom 
experience  and  seven  years  of  administrative  experience.  Mr.  Magnu  meets  the 
Resolution’s  definition  of  “competence.”  Respondents  did  not  argue  that  Mr.  Magnu 
had  less  seniority  or  that  any  of  the  respondents  should  have  been  retained  to  provide 
services  that  he  was  not  certificated  and  competent  to  perform. 

14. 

Pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  layoffs  must  take  place  in 

the  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  must  prove,  by  a  preponderance  of  the 
evidence,  that  its  decision  to  layoff  or  reduce  the  services  of  a  more  senior  teacher, 
while  retaining  the  services  of  a  less  senior  teacher,  is  appropriate.  In  pertinent  part, 
the  statute  provides  that: 

(b) 
...  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services 
of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions 
of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or  any  other 
employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which 
said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

  

e 

e  

The  record  as  a  whole  establishes  that  no  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being 

retained  to  render  a  service  for  which  any  of  the  other  respondents  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  perform.  While  there  is  a  variation  in  hiring  dates  among  the  six 
employees,  the  reduction  in  PKS  eliminates  all  six  positions.  As  a  consequence,  it 
was  unnecessary  to  apply  the  tie  breaker  criteria  to  determine  which  of  the 
respondents  would  receive  a  layoff  notice.  ' 

15. 

Best  Interests:  Respondents  questioned  whether  it  was  in  the  best 

interests  of  the  District’s  students  to  return  to  a  one  room  school  where  kindergarten 
and  first  grade  students  would  be  in  the  same  class,  and  taught  by  the  same  teacher,  as 
an  eighth  grade  student.  Respondents  also  believed  that  the  Charter  Academy  helped 
to  foster  a  better  sense  of  community  within  the  District.  Respondents  demonstrated 
an  altruistic  concern  for  the  welfare  of  their  students. 

Nevertheless,  the  District’s  decision  to  eliminate  the  Charter  Academy  and  to 
lay  off  six  FTE  teachers  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  District  established 
that  its  actions  were  motivated  by  a  legitimate  concern  for  the  welfare  of  its  students; 
the  layoffs  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  school  and  its  students. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  8,  all  notice  and 

jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections  44944  and  44945 
were  met.  The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the 
reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due 
process.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The 
description  of  services  to  be  reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices, 
adequately  describe  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838.  See,  also,  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

2. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular 

kind  of  service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another 
manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571;  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of  Goleta  Union  School  Dist.  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.)  A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  the 
statute  either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all 
or  by  reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services. 

'  The  Resolution  provided  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44846,  for  persons  who  have  a 
statutory  reemployment  preference,  the  order  of  rehire  as  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid 
service  on  the  same  date  shall  be  determined  according  to  the  same  tie  breaker  criteria.  Several 
respondents  testified  that  they  worked  several  in-service  days  in  August  of  the  year  they  were  hired  and  that 
the  District’s  Certificated  Seniority  List  incorrectly  provided  their  initial  date  of  service  as  September. 

  

 

  

(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole, 

and  particularly  in  Factual  Findings  4,  10,  and  11,  the  services  identified  in 
Resolution  No.  No.  2008-01  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  under  section  44955,  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue 
these  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  was  a  proper  exercise  of 
its  discretion,  and  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

4. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole, 

and  particularly  in  Factual  Findings  13  and  14,  the  District  has  established  that  no 
employee  junior  to  respondents  are  being  retained  to  perform  the  services  which 
respondents  are  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

RECOMMENDATION 

1. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Cathy  Bujlan  that  her  services  will  be  reduced 

by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Linda  Gnipp  that  her  services  will  be  reduced 

by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

3. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Kimberly  Martin  that  her  services  will  be 

reduced  by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

4, 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Sarah  Powers  that  her  services  will  be  reduced 
by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  John  Reesman  that  his  services  will  be  reduced 
by  1.00  FTE  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  May  2,  2008 

Adrfinistrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

