BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  LANCASTER  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  Case  No.:  2008030388 

   

CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  OF  THE 
LANCASTER  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 
identified  in  Exhibit  A,  hereto,  incorporated 
by  reference, 

   
      

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  hearing  in  the  above-captioned  matter  was  held  on  April  16  and  17,  2008,  at 
Lancaster,  California.  Joseph  D.  Montoya,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings  (OAH),  presided.  Complainant  was  represented  by  Fagen, 
Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  by  Howard  Friedman  and  Maggy  Athanasious.  Respondents  were 
represented  by  Trygstad,  Schwab  &  Trygstad,  by  Richard  J.  Schwab. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Judge  hereby  makes  his  factual  findings,  legal  conclusions,  and  orders,  as  follow. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  25,  2008.  The  Administrative  Law 

1.  Complainant  Jim  Schettig  filed  the  accusations’  in  this  proceeding  in  his  official 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  received  at  the  hearing,  and  some  argument  was 
received,  but  the  record  was  held  open  for  closing  briefs.  Complainant’s  Closing  Brief  was 
received  on  time  and  is  identified  for  the  record  as  Exhibit  13.  Respondent’s  Closing 
Brief  '  was  also  received  in  a  timely  manner,  and  is  identified  as  Exhibit  GG. 

capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  of  the  Lancaster  School  District 
(District). 

     

Procedure  Act,  Government  Code  sections  11500  and  11503.  As  noted  by  Complainant’s 
counsel  and  by  the  ALJ  during  the  hearing,  it  should  be  made  clear  that  the  Respondents  are 
not  “accused”  in  the  every-day  sense  of  that  word;  they  have  done  nothing  wrong,  and  all 
demonstrated  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  that  they  are  dedicated  professionals.  Instead, 
it  might  be  said  they  are  accused  of  not  having  enough  seniority  to  retain  their  positions  with 
the  District  in  the  face  of  a  resolution  to  reduce  positions. 

>  The  term  “accusation”  refers  to  a  type  of  pleading  utilized  under  the  Administrative 

Respondents’  brief  was  in  letter  format  without a title,  but  titled  here  for 

convenience. 

    

2.  The  persons  listed  on  Exhibit  “A”  hereto  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District, 

and  are  the  Respondents  in  this  case.  On  the  day  of  the  hearing,  Respondents  Jose  Esparza, 
Margaret  Seal,  Lori  Christensen,  Kira  Brown,  and  Kiley  Barton-Kissem  were  dismissed,  as 
the  District  determined  that  it  would  not  need  to  lay  them  off.’  Prior  to  the  hearing, 
Respondent  Nancy  Saroyan  informed  the  District  that  she  would  not  be  renewing  her 
contract,  and  that  she  was  withdrawing  her  notice  of  defense. 

3. 

(A)  On  March  4,  2008,  Howard  E.  Sundberg,  Ph.D.,  Superintendent  of  the 

District,  gave  his  recommendation  to  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  that  there  be  a 
reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  services,  and  that  notice  be  given  to  various  certificated 
personnel  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  (2007- 
2008). 

(B)  On  March  4,  2008,  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  passed  resolution 

number  2007-08:34,  “Intention  to  Dismiss  Certificated  Employees”  (Reduction  Resolution). 
The  purpose  of  the  Reduction  Resolution  was  to  reduce  and  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
certificated  services  no  later  than  the  close  of  the  2007-2008  school  year,  in  light  of 
budgetary  projections  and  other  factors. 

(C)  The  Board  determined  in  its  Reduction  Resolution  that  it  would  have  to 

reduce  elementary  school  teachers,  class  size  reduction,  grades  kindergarten  and  third,  by  58 
Full  Time  Equivalents,  or  “FTE.”  It  also  determined  to  reduce  12  FTE  of  math  and  literacy 
coaches. 

4, 

(A)  A)  In  its  Reduction  Resolution  the  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  of 
the  District,  or  a  designee  of  the  Superintendent,  to  give  notice  of  termination  to  certificated 
employees  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,‘  informing  them 
that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  following  school  year  (2007-2008). 

(B)  Further,  when  the  Board  adopted  the  Reduction  Resolution,  it  also 

identified  tie-breaking  criteria  to  be  used  when  employees  shared  the  same  first  date  of  paid 
service.  That  criteria  was  set  forth  on  Exhibit  B  to  the  Reduction  Resolution. 

5.  The  services  which  the  District  seeks  to  discontinue  or  reduce  are  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955. 

6.  The  decision  by  the  Board  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  but  rather  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion  given  uncertainty 
regarding  the  state  budget  and  the  District’s  financial  resources,  and  other  factors  considered 

3  Two  other  teachers  not  listed  among  those  on  Exhibit  A  hereto  who  had  filed  a 

notice  of  defense  were  also  “dismissed”,  Jason  Godde  and  Kelsy  Lee. 

*  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  noted. 

  

 

  

by  the  Board.  The  record  establishes  that  District  management  attempted  to  consider  a  wide 
array  of  information  regarding  the  District’s  needs,  including  the  need  to  remain  solvent,  in 
determining  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services. 

7.  The  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  services  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

8.  Prior  to  March  15,  2008,  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the 

District  were  given  a  preliminary  written  notice,  to  the  effect  that  that  pursuant  to  sections 
44949  and  44955,  their  services  would  be  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school 
year. 

9.  The  Respondents  requested  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Those  requests  for  hearing  were  timely 
filed,  or  the  Board  waived  objection  to  any  late  filing. 

10.  Thereafter,  on  or  about  between  March  27  and  April  4,  2008,  an  Accusation  was 
served  upon  those  persons  who  requested  a  hearing.  That  Accusation  was  accompanied  by  a 
notice  which  stated  that  failure  to  deliver  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the  Board  within  five  days 
of  service  of  the  Accusation  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing,  and  that  the 
Board  might  then  proceed  against  the  Respondents  without  a  hearing.  The  Respondents 
herein  requested  a  hearing. 

11. 

12. 

In  the  course  of  the  reduction  in  force  process,  the  District  created  a  seniority  list. 

(A)  The  District  determined  that  certain  junior  teachers  possessed  superior 

That  seniority  list  took  into  account  a  number  of  factors,  including  first  date  of  paid  service 
and  various  tie-breaking  criteria  that  were  developed  by  the  District  and  adopted  by  it. 

skills,  training,  or  capabilities  which  more  senior  teachers  did  not  possess,  which  would 
allow  the  more  junior  teachers  to  be  exempted  from  lay  off  or  “skipped.”  Such  teachers  were 
needed  by  the  District  to  teach  particular  courses  or  to  provide  particular  services,  and  could 
do  so  in  light  of  their  credentials  and  qualifications.  No  lay  off  notices  were  sent  to  those 
teachers. 

   

(B)  A  number  of  the  junior  teachers  who  were  retained  were  teaching  classes 
on  the  basis  of  “district  authorizations”  obtained  pursuant  to  section  44256,  or  on  what  was 
referred  to  as  “district  waivers.”  Among  those  teachers  were  Briggs,  Kennedy,  Otto,  and 
Sink. 

district  authorization  or  waiver,  but  none  of  the  Respondents  held  such  an  authorization  as  of 
March  15,  2008. 

(C)  Numerous  Respondents  had  the  education  sufficient  to  be  granted  a 

  

(D)  During  the  hearing,  no  Respondents  were  able  to  show  that  they  could 

bump  or  skip  another  teacher. 

13.  The  District  also  considered  attrition  by  retirement,  resignation,  and  re- 

assignment  in  making  its  decision  to  lay  off  certificated  personnel. 

14. 

(A)  During  the  course  of  the  hearing  it  was  established  that  the  seniority  date 

of  some  Respondents  had  been  miscalculated,  as  follows: 

(B)  It  was  established  that  the  seniority  of  Respondent  Margree  Oggs  had 

been  miscalculated  by  the  District,  and  that  her  seniority  date  should  have  been  August  15, 
2006.  The  Accusation  against  her  was  therefore  dismissed  during  the  hearing,  and  she  shall 
be  retained. 

(C)  It  was  established  that  the  seniority  date  of  Respondent  Elizabeth  Murphy 

was  miscalculated,  and  that  her  proper  seniority  date  is  October  30,  2006. 

(D)  It  was  established  that  the  seniority  date  of  Respondent  Amy  Roth  was 

miscalculated  by  one  week,  and  that  her  proper  seniority  date  is  January  24,  2007. 

15.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  by  the  District  to 

render  a  service  for  which  a  Respondent  was  certificated  and  qualified  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  Jurisdiction  was  established  to  proceed  in  this  matter,  pursuant  to  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  based  on  Factual  Findings  |  through  10. 

2. 

(A) A  District  may  reduce  a  particular  kind  of  service  (PKS)  within  the 

meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of 
service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce 
services’  by  determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer 
employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of 
Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.)  The  Court  of  Appeal  has  made  clear  that  a 
PKS  reduction  does  not  have  to  lead  to  less  classrooms  or  classes;  laying  off  some  teachers 
amounts  to  a  proper  reduction.  (Zalec  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist. 
(2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  853-854.  See  also  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144 
Cal.App.3d  627,  631,  637  [Reduction  of  classroom  teaching  can  be  a  reduction  of  a  PKS;  as 
long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method of teaching  or  in  a  particular  kind  of  service  in 
teaching  a  particular  subject  any  amount  in  excess  of  the  statutory  minimum  may  be 
reduced];  California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  132  Cal.App.3d  32.) 

(B)  The  services  to  be  discontinued  by  the  District  in  this  case  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or

  

discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949.  (See  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  808.)  This  Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  3  through  7  and  the 
foregoing  authorities. 

3. 

(A)  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to 

a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  to  fill.  In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee 
may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond 
Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  At  the  same  time,  junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers—may  “skip”  that  senior  employee—if  the  junior 
teacher  possesses  superior  skills  or  capabilities  not  possessed  by  their  more  senior 
colleagues.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399; 
Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Santa  Clara  Unified 
School Dist.  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

(B)  The  District  properly  skipped  a  number  of  employees  based  on  their 
qualifications.  No  Respondent  established  the  right  to  displace  a  senior  employee.  This 
Conclusion  is  based  on  Factual  Findings  12  and  15,  the  foregoing  authority,  and  the 
discussion  in  Legal  Conclusion  4,  below. 

(C)  No  Respondent  established  at  the  hearing  that  they  had  the  right  to  bump 

a  junior  employee,  based  on  Factual  Finding  12(D). 

4. 

(A)  The  junior  teachers  who  hold  “district  authorizations”  may  be  retained 

over  more  senior  teachers  who  don’t  hold  those  authorizations. 

(B)  The  District  skipped  several  teachers  holding  multiple  subject  credentials, 

but  with  relatively  low  seniority  dates.  They  were  skipped  because  they  hold  a  “district 
authorization”  to  teach  certain  single  subjects,  such  as  math  and  science,  and  the  District 
needed  teachers  to  instruct  in  those  areas. 
were  issued  pursuant  to  section  44256. 

(See  Factual  Finding  12(B).)  The  authorizations 

(C)  Section  44256  provides  two  pertinent  “authorization[s]  for  teaching 

credentials.”  Section  44256,  subdivision  (a)  provides  that  where  a  person  holding  a  single 
subject  credential  has  completed  20  semester  hours  of  coursework,  or  10  semester  hours  of 
upper  division  or  graduate  coursework  at  an  accredited  institution  in  a  subject  other  than  the 
one  they  are  accredited  to  teach,  then  that  credential  holder  is  “eligible  to  have  this  subject 
appear  on  the  credential  as  an  authorization  to  teach  this  [other]  subject.” 

(D)  Subdivision  (b)  of  section  44256  also  speaks  to  the  issue  of  adding 
authorization  to  a  multiple  subject  credential.  It  provides  that  a  person  holding  such  a 
credential  who  has  20  semester  hours  or  10  upper  division  or  graduate  hours  in  a  subject 

commonly  taught  in  grades  9  and  below  “shall  be  eligible  to  have  that  subject  appear  on  the    

  

credential  as  an  authorization  to  teach  the  subject  in  departmentalized  classes  in  grades  9  and 
below.”  The  statute  then  goes  on  to  provide  that  “the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  by 
resolution  may  authorize  the  holder  of  a  multiple  subject  teaching  credential  or  standard 
elementary  credential  to  teach  any  subject  in  departmentalized  classes  to  a  given  class  or 
group  of  students  below  grade  9,  provided  that  the  teacher  has  completed  at  least  12  semester 
units  or  six  upper  division  or  graduate  units,  of  coursework  ...  .”  The  authorization  must  be 
with  the  teacher’s  consent. 

(E)  Testimony  established  that  the  retained  junior  teachers  had  obtained  the 
authorizations  because  they  were  willing  to  teach  single  subject  classes,  and  that  they  could 
obtain  the  authorization  because  they  had  the  requisite  college  credits  in  the  subject  area, 
math.  They  had  obtained  the  authorizations  in  2007.  During  the  course  of  the  hearing  many 
of  the  Respondents  established  that  they  had  sufficient  course  work  to  qualify  them  for  such 
authorizations;  indeed,  a  substantial  number  of  teachers  had  sufficient  college  credits  to 
qualify  for  more  than  one  authorization  and  up  to  four,  but  these  Respondents  did  not  have 
such  an  authorization. 

(E)  Respondents  assert  that  the  district  authorizations  are  not  credentials,  and 

that  therefore  the  senior  teachers  can  not  be  displaced  by  the  junior  staff  holding  such 
credentials.  (Respondent’s  Closing  Brief,  Ex.  GG,  p.  3.)  That  is,  Respondents  assert  they 
are  qualified  to  teach  the  courses.  That  contention,  at  the  heart  of  the  main  claim  that  junior 
teachers  are  being  improperly  retained,  can  not  be  sustained. 

(F)  Section  44203  provides  a  number  of  general  definitions  relevant  to 

(G)  From  these  basic  definitions  and  a  review  of  the  statutes  and  regulations 

credentials.  Subdivision  (d)  of  that  statute  states  that  “‘authorization’  means  the  designation 
that  appears  on  a  credential,  certificate,  or  permit  that  identifies  the  subjects  and 
circumstances  in  which  the  holder  of  the  credential,  certificate,  or  permit  may  teach,  or  the 
services  which  the  holder  may  render  in  the  public  schools  of  this  state.”  It  should  also  be 
noted  that  the  Education  Code  defines  “credential”  and  “certificate.”  Specifically,  “a 
‘credential’  includes  a  credential,  certificate,  life  document,  life  diploma,  permit,  certificate 
of  clearance,  or  waiver  issued  by  the  commission.”  (§  44002.)  “Certificate,”  when  used  as  a 
noun,  refers  to  the  document  issued  by  a  county  board  of  education  to  license  the  holder  to 
perform  the  service  specified  in  the  certificate.  (§  44004.) 

   

pertaining  to  credentials  comes  the  conclusion  that  an  authorization  is  inextricably 
intertwined  with  a  credential  or  certificate.  By  definition,  any  credential  authorizes  the 
holder  to  do  teach  certain  subjects  or  provide  certain  services;  each  type  of  credential  comes 
with  its  own  authorizations.  (See  §  44250.)  Thus,  for  example,  section  44203,  subdivision 
(e),  defines  basic  teacher  credentials  as  two  types,  each  “authorizing”  the  holder  to  teach 
subjects  named  on  the  credential  or  to  provide  services. 

(H)  Similarly,  the  holder  of  a  single  subject  credential  may  be  authorized  to 
teach  one  of  the  13  subjects  for  which  a  single  subject  credential  may  issue.  (See  §  44257, 
subd.  (a).) 

If  one  of  those  13  subjects  is  a  foreign  language,  at  the  time  the  credential  is 

  

issued  the  Commission  “shall  issue”  the  single  subject  foreign  language  credential  “with  an 
authorization  to  teach  Chinese,  French,  German,  Russian,  Spanish,  or  any  other  language  that 
the  commission  determines  is  appropriate.”  (§  44257,  subd.  (b).)  An  authorization,  then, 
defines  the  scope  of  the  credential  and  might  broaden  it;  the  holder  of  a  single  subject  foreign 
language  credential  might  obtain  it  with  authorizations  to  teach  several  languages,  i.e., 
French,  Spanish,  and  Latin,  but  in  that  case  he  or  she  would  not  be  authorized— 
credentialed—to  teach  German. 

(1)  The  concept  that  an  authorization  defines  the  scope  of  a  credential,  and 

may  expand  that  license,  is  found  in  section  80499  of  title  5  the  California  Code  of 
Regulations  (CCR),  cited  by  Respondents.  The  regulation  speaks  to  “adding  an  authorization 
to  a  credential.”  Likewise,  CCR  section  80089  refers  to  adding  authorizations  to  the 
credentials  listed  section  44256,  subdivision  (a),  and  goes  on  to  state  that  the  “supplementary 
authorizations”  authorize  the  holder  to  teach  the  additional  subjects.  (CCR  §  80089,  subd. 
(b).)  CCR  sections  80057.5,  80089.3,  and  80089.4,  also  pertain  to  adding  authorizations  to 
credentials  pursuant  to  section  44256,  and  all  of  those  regulations  make  clear  that  the  scope 
of  the  underlying  credential  is  being  expanded. 

(J) 

It  is  plain  that  the  authorizations  in  issue  do  not  exist  in  a  vacuum;  whether 

actually  issued  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  or  by  Board  resolution,  the 
authorizations  effectively  credential  a  teacher  to  teach  the  newly-authorized  subject.  One 
can  not  obtain  the  authorization  without  a  credential,>  conversely,  a  teacher  without  such  an 
authorization  may  not  teach  that  subject  if  it  is  not  within  the  authorizations  set  out  in  the 
teacher’s  credential. 

(K)  The  Respondents  did  not  hold  the  additional  authorizations  as  of  March 
15,  2008.  That  they  could  obtain  them  is  not  relevant;  an  employee  may  not  bump  or  skip 
another  employee  with  a  credential  obtained  after  March  15.  (Vassello  v.  Lowrey  (1986) 
178  Cal.  App.3d  1210  1217;  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  Abbott 
(1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  815.) 

5. 

(A)  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform 
services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  based  on 
Legal  Conclusions  3  and  4,  and  Factual  Findings  12  and  15. 

6. 

(A)  The  probationary  teachers  must  be  laid  off  before  permanent  teachers  may 

be  laid  off. 

°  The  ALJ,  whose  college  major  was  in  history,  has  more  than  20  semester  hours  of 
history  courses,  but  can  not  obtain  the  authorization  because  he  has  no  teaching  credential. 

 

  

(B)  Respondent’s  contend  that  a  permanent  employee  who  has  less  seniority  than  a 
probationary  employee  can  be  terminated  before  that  probationary  employee.  They  argue 
that  “if  the  cases  of  Bakersfield,  Vallejo  and  Golden  Valley,  supra,°  represent  a  new 
interpretation  that  status  cannot  be  exalted  over  seniority,  then  those  Respondents  must  be 
retained  by  the  Lancaster  School  District.”  (Respondent’s  Closing  Brief,  Ex.  GG,  p.  5; 
emphasis  in  original.) 

(C)  The  analysis  is  misplaced,  mixing  apples  and  oranges.  The  cases  cited  by 

Respondents  stand  for  the  proposition  (among  others)  that  one’s  job  classification  is  not  a 
function  of  one’s  credential  type,  and  credential  type  does  not  trump  seniority  within  the  two 
job  classes  that  are  protected  by  the  procedures  set  out  in  section  44955,  absent  skipping. 
Those  cases  also  provide  that  entry  into  the  probationary  class  is  not  necessarily  a  function  of 
the  type  of  credential  held  by  a  teacher,  even  if  exit  from  the  probationary  classification 
upward  into  the  rank  of  permanent  employees  is  a  function  of  the  type  of  credential  held  by 
the  teacher. 

(D)  As  a  matter  of  law,  permanent  status  is  “exalted”  over  probationary  status. 

The  statutory  scheme  has  not  been  changed  by  recent  cases,  and  the  governing  statute  still 
states  that  “no  permanent  employee  may  be  laid  off  if  a  probationary  employee,  or  any  other 
employee  of  less  seniority”  occupies  a  position  that  the  permanent  employee  can  take.  (§ 
49555,  subd.  (c).)  Thus,  for  all  practical  purposes  all  of  the  probationary  class  of  a  school’s 
certificated  employees  must  be  eliminated  before  any  permanent  employee  is  terminated;  if  a 
probationary  teacher  could  be  properly  skipped,  then  they  might  survive  where  other 
permanent  teachers  without  the  particular  qualifications  would  be  laid  off.  Within  each 
class,  seniority  remains  the  key  issue  in  determining  who  in  each  class  will  be  laid  off.  An 
important  impact  of  the  cases  cited  by  Respondents  is  that  persons  in  the  probationary  class 
who  are  not  earning  credit  toward  permanent  status  may  still  earn  seniority,  leading  to  their 
retention  over  those  with  less  seniority,  even  if  the  latter  are  closer  to  permanent  status.  But, 
no  matter  how  much  seniority  one  has  within  the  probationary  group,  that  seniority  does  not 
trump  the  most  junior  permanent  teacher’s  seniority.  Hence,  none  of  the  permanent  teachers 
of  the  District  may  be  laid  off  until  all  of  the  probationary  teachers  are  laid  off. 

7. 

(A)  The  District  has  not  failed  to  comply  with  Constitutional  equal 

protection  requirements. 

(B)  Respondents  rightly  point  out  that  under  section  44955,subdivision  (d)(2), 

a  school  district  may  deviate  from  seniority  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  or  achieving 
compliance  with  Constitutional  requirements  relating  to  the  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

°  The  cases  referenced  are  Kavanaugh  v.  West  Sonoma  County  Union  High  School 

Dist.  (2003)  29  Cal.4th  911;  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bakersfield  City 
School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4th  1260;  California  Teachers  Assn.  (CTA)  v.  Vallejo  City 
Unified  School  District  (2007)  149  Cal.App.4th  135,  and  CTA  v.  Governing  Board  of Golden 
Valley  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369. 

 

They  then  argue  that  at  least  one  school  will  be  bereft  of  any  African-American  teachers  if 
Respondent  Melanie  Culver  is  laid  off.  And,  there  was  testimony  that  the  racial  or  ethnic 
balance  of  other  site  staffs  would  be  diminished  by  the  lay  offs. 

(c)  This  challenge  must  be  denied.  First  of  all,  the  power  to  depart  from 

. 

.  in  order 
.  [purpose  of  compliance  with  equal  protection  laws].”  (Emphasis  added.) 

seniority  in  such  instances  is  permissive,  not  mandatory,  as  the  statute  reads, 
“notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  . 
of  seniority  for  . 
Second,  the  Respondents  did  not  establish  that  such  a  departure  is  in  fact  necessary  to 
comply  with  Constitutional  requirements  pertaining  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.  The 
authority  cited,  Coalition for  Economic  Equity  v.  Wilson  (9th  Cir.  1997)  122  F.3d  692,  is  not 
apposite. 

. 

8.  The  seniority  list  must  be  modified,  based  on  Factual  Finding  14.  Therefore,  it 

must  be  ordered  that  Respondent  Elizabeth  Murphy  shall  have  a  seniority  date  of  October  30, 
2006,  making  her  junior  to  Respondent  Ilene  Colton,  and  senior  to  Respondent  Debra  Wahe. 
Respondent  Amy  Roth  shall  have  a  seniority  date  of  January  24,  2007,  which  will  be  the 
same  date  as  Respondent  Amy  Horn.  The  District  shall  apply  tie-breaking  criteria,  which 
may  include  a lottery,  to  determine  which  is  senior.’ 

ORDER 

dismissed. 

1,  The  Accusations  are  sustained,  except  as  to  Respondent  Margree  Oggs,  who  is 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  the  following  Respondents  listed  on  Exhibit  A  hereto  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  and 
discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

3.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  Respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority,  based  on  the 
seniority  list,  exhibit  1  in  the  proceeding,  with  Laura  Carreon  being  the  most  senior  of  the 
Respondents,  and  Tammy  Riddle  being  the  most  junior  of  the  Respondents.  Provided, 
further,  however,  that  the  seniority  list  shall  be  modified  so  that  Respondent  Elizabeth 
Murphy  shall  have  a  seniority  date  of  October  30,  2006,  making  her  junior  to  Respondent 

   

  

breaking  criteria.  Ms.  Horn  and  Ms.  Roth  both  hold,  according  to  the  seniority  list, 
preliminary  multiple  subject  credentials,  both  are  shown  as  NCLB  compliant,  “multiple 
subject,”  both  are  shown  as  EL/SDAIE.  Hence,  the  last  tie-break  criteria,  lottery,  may  be  in 
order  if  other  information  in  the  District  records  do  not  resolve  the  matter. 

It  can  not  be  determined  from  the  available  record  who  would  prevail  on  the  tie 

T 

  

Ilene  Colton,  and  senior  to  Respondent  Debra  Wahe,  and  provided  that  Respondent  Amy 
Roth  shall  have  a  seniority  date  of  January  24,  2007,  which  will  be  the  same  date  as 
Respondent  Amy  Horn.  The  District  shall  apply  tie-breaking  criteria,  which  may  include  a 
lottery,  to  determine  which  of  the  latter  two  respondents  is  senior. 

May  ___,  2008 

Joseph  D.  Montoya 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

