  

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES  OF  THE 
PARLIER  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

ALMA  CARLIN  and 
ADA  ANGELICA  DIAZ 

OAH  No.  2008031029 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Fresno,  California,  on  April  15,  2008. 

Robert  Piacente,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Parlier  Unified  School  District. 

Ernest  H.  Tuttle  II,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Alma  Carlin. 

Respondent,  Ada  Angelica  Diaz,  did  not  appear. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Rick  Rodriquez,  Superintendent  of  the  Parlier  Unified  School  District 

(District),  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

Alma  Carlin  and  Ada  Angelica  Diaz  are  certificated  District  employees. 

3. 

On  two  occasions  prior  to  March  12,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  Trustees  of  the  District  (the 
Board)  in  writing,  that  he  was  recommending  that  at  the  close  of  the  2007-2008  school  year, 
particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS)  be  discontinued.  On  March  12,  2008,  the  Superintendent 
notified  Ms.  Diaz  and  Ms.  Carlin,  in  writing,  of  his  recommendation  that  they  be  notified  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated

  

the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  recommendations  that  Ms.  Carlin  and  Ms.  Diaz  be 
terminated  from  employment  were  not  related  to  their  performance  as  teachers. 

4, 

On  March  12,  2008,  notices  of  termination  were  delivered  by  first-class  mail 
to  Ms.  Carlin  and  Ms.  Diaz.  The  written  notices  of  termination  specifically  stated  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  notices  set  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  included  a  copy  of  the  Board  Resolutions  authorizing 
the  reduction  in  services.  The  notices  advised  Ms.  Carlin  and  Ms.  Diaz  of  their  right  to  a 
hearing,  that  they  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  Superintendent  by 
March  24,  2008,  which  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served, 
and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Ms.  Carlin  and  Ms.  Diaz  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to 

determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  re-employing  them  for  the  ensuing  year.  An  Accusation 
was  timely  served  on  them.  Ms.  Carlin  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense.  All  jurisdictional 
requirements  were  met  in  respect  to  Ms.  Carlin.  Ms.  Diaz  did  not  file  a  Notice  of  Defense, 
nor  did  she  appear  at  the  hearing.  Accordingly,  this  matter  proceeded  as  a  default  against 
Ms.  Diaz,  pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11520. 

6. 

On  February  25,  2008  and  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  took  action,  through 
Resolution  Nos.  24/2007-08  and  26/2007-08  respectively,  to  discontinue  or  reduce  certain 
PKS  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year.  The  Board  resolved  to  eliminate: 

12  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  multiple  subject  teaching  positions  in  grade  1  and  2 

1) 
2)  One  FTE  multiple  subject  teaching  position  (reading  teacher-  HPSG) 
3)  One  FTE  multiple  subject  teaching  position  (reading  teacher  -IASA  Title  I/ 

Economic  Impact  Aid-LEP). 

7. 

The  designated  services  are  PKS  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within 

the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or 
discontinue  these  PKS  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of 
discretion. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  PKS  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District 

and  its  pupils.  The  Board  was  faced  with  significant  budget  cuts  in  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  The  Board  determined  that  budget  cuts  necessitated  that  services  be  reduced.  Prior  to 
determining  that  it  was  necessary  to  eliminate  13  FTE  positions,  the  Board  took  into  account 
the  number  of  temporary  teachers  employed  and  determined  to  non-reelect  those  teachers 
and  eliminate  the  positions  they  held. 

9. 

Ms.  Diaz  has a  seniority  date  of  August  11,  2004.  She  was  noticed  for  layoff 
because  she  occupies  one  of  the  12  FTE  multiple-subject  teaching  positions  in  grade  1  and  2. 
Ms.  Diaz  did  not  appear  at  hearing  and  did  not  otherwise  present  any  challenge  to  the 
reduction  in  force  or  evidence  that  persons  with  less  seniority  than  she  are  being  retained  to 
provide  certificated  services  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

  

 

Bumping 

10. 

Ms.  Carlin  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  11,  2004.  She  teaches  in  an 

elementary  school  bilingual  program.  She  holds  a  multiple-subject  teaching  credential  with 
an  English  Learners  authorization.  She  maintains  that  certificated  employees  with  less 
seniority  than  she  are  being  retained  to  provide  services  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Ms.  Carlin  argues  she  should  be  able  to  “bump”  into  the  position  held  by  the 
following  teachers. 

Connie  Prieto  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  14,  2006.  She  has  a  multiple-subject 

credential  with  a  BCLAD.  She  is  being  retained  to  teach  in  the  junior  high  school,  in  a  single 
subject,  math.  She  has  the  math  credits  necessary  for  this  appointment.  Ms.  Carlin  may  not 
bump  into  this  position  because  she  does  not  have  authorization  to  teach  single  subject,  math. 

¢ Esther  Gonzalez  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007.  She  holds  a  multiple- 
subject  credential  with  a  CLAD  certification.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  English 
language  learner  students.  She  is  currently  assigned,  per  a  board  resolution,  to  teach  a  single 
subject,  science,  because  she  has  the  science  credits  to  teach  this  class.  Ms.  Carlin  does  not 
have  the  certification  and  competence  to  teach  single  subject  science. 

¢ Rayazharida  Defendis  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007.  She  holds  a 
multiple-subject  credential  with  a  CLAD  certification.  She  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  a 
single  subject,  math,  in  the  high  school,  because  she  is  taking  classes  necessary  for  obtaining 
authorization  for  math.  Ms.  Carlin  does  not  have  the  certification  and  competence  to  teach 
single  subject  math. 

@ Richard  Florez  has  a  seniority  date  of  October  11,  2007.  He  holds  a  multiple- 

subject  credential  with  a  CLAD  certification  and  an  authorization  in  social  sciences.  He  is 
currently  assigned  to  teach  a  single  subject,  social  science,  in  the  high  school.  Ms.  Carlin 
does  not  have  the  certification  and  competence  to  teach  single  subject  social  science  in  the 
high  school. 

Sam  Clegg  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007.  He  holds  a  multiple-subject 

credential  with  an  EL  authorization.  Ms.  Carlin  maintains  that  Mr.  Clegg  was  not  noticed  for 
layoff.  However,  the  seniority  chart  entered  in  evidence  indicates  that  Mr.  Clegg  resigned 
his  position.  Thus,  Ms.  Carlin  may  not  “bump”  Mr.  Clegg  out  of  a  position. 

Sara  Gonzales  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  15,  2007.  She  holds  a  multiple-subject 

credential  with  a  Health  Education  authorization  and  is  teaching  health  education  and 
physical  education  in  the  high  school  pursuant  to  a  Board  resolution.  Ms.  Carlin  does  not 
have  the  certification  and  competence  to  teach  single  subject  health  and  physical  education  in 
the  high  school. 

 

Application  of  Tie-Breaking  Criteria 

11. 

The  District  had  eight  teachers  with  multiple  subject  credentials,  who  had  a 

common  seniority  date  of  August  11,  2004.  The  District  considered  attrition  and  layoffs  of 
junior  teachers  and  determined  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  lay  off  three  teachers  with  the 
seniority  date  of  August  11,  2004.  The  Board  had  previously  adopted  criteria  to  determine 
the  order  of  termination  among  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  paid  service 
(tie-breaking  criteria).  The  Board  adopted  the  following  tie-breaking  criteria: 

A. 

B. 

Cc. 

Dz. 

E. 
F, 
G. 
H. 

Credentials  and  experience  to  teach  or  serve  in  a  particular  program  or  provide 
a  particular  service  of  need  by  the  District,  e.g.,  special  education,  music,  etc. 
(+1  per  credential,  +1  per  year  of  experience) 
Credentials  and  experience  to  teach  in  special  categorical  programs,  e.g., 
bilingual.  (+1  per  credential,  +1  per  year  of  experience) 
Years  of  experience  previous  to  PUSD  employment  as  a  full  time,  credentialed 
teacher  in  a  probationary/permanent  K-  12  teaching  situation  in  a  public 
school.  (+1  per  year  of  experience) 
Credentials  that  permit  supplementary  authorizations.  (+1  per  supplementary 
authorization) 
Number  of  teaching  and/or  specialist  service  credentials.  (+1  per  credential) 
Earned  degrees  beyond  the  B.A.  or  B.S.  level.  (+1  per  degree) 
Multiple  language  skills  relevant  to  District  need.  (+1  for  Spanish) 
Emergency  permits  (PIPs/STIPs)  vs.  Internship  vs.  Preliminary  vs.  Clear/Life 
Credentials.  (+1  per  emergency,  +2  per  internship,  +3  per  preliminary,  +  4 
clear/life  credential). 

12. 

After  application  of  the  tie-breaking  criteria  to  the  eight  teachers,  Ms.  Carlin 
and  Ms.  Diaz  were  tied  in  the  last  position.  Ms.  Diaz  prevailed  in  a  lottery  to  break  the  tie. 
Nevertheless,  as  Ms.  Diaz  and  Ms.  Carlin  achieved  a  ranking  of  seven  and  eight  respectively, 
both  received  layoff  notices. 

    

Ms.  Carlin  takes  issue  with  the  number  of  points  she  was  assigned.  She  maintains 
that  she  received  no  points  for  criteria  G  (multiple  language  skills...),  even  though  she  is 
fluent  in  Spanish  and  teaches  in  a  bilingual  program.  District  personnel  explained  that  Ms. 
Carlin  was  not  given  a  point  for  Spanish  language  skills  because  she  did  not  hold  a  BCLAD. 
The  District  is  in  error.  The  criterion  clearly  relates  to  possession  of  a  language  skill,  not  a 
BCLAD,  and  Ms.  Carlin  should  have  been  assigned  an  additional  point.  Nevertheless,  this 
additional  point  would  have  brought  her  to  5  points,  and  she  would  be  tied  with  Mary 
Roberts-Gomez.  Ms.  Roberts—Gomez  was  also  laid  off.  The  five  teachers  with  scores  above 
5  were  retained:  Israel  Almendarez,  8  points;  Christina  Solis,  10  points;  Ivan  Garibay,  10 
points;  Yolanda  Torrez,  11  points;  and  Julissa  Montalvo,  11  points. 

criteria  B,  because  she  holds  a  BCLAD  and  would  have  received  five  additional  points, 
therefore  bringing  her  to  10  points.  Israel  Almandarez  was  in  the  fifth  position,  with  8 

Ms.  Carlin  maintains  that  she  should  have  received  additional  points  in  tie-breaking 

 

points,  and  he  was  retained.  Had  Ms.  Carlin  been  assigned  1  point  for  Spanish  proficiency 
and  5  points  for  BCLAD  authorization,  she  would  be  in  the  fifth  position  and  therefore  not 
subject  to  layoff. 

Ms.  Carlin’s  math  is  correct.  If  she  had  been  assigned  an  additional  5  points  for 
holding  a  BCLAD  under  criteria  B,  she  would  have  been  retained,  and  Mr.  Almanderez 
would  have  received  a  layoff  notice.  However,  at  the  time  the  seniority  list  was  created  and 
at  the  time  the  tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied,  Ms.  Carlin  did  not  have  verification  of  a 
BCLAD  authorization  on  file  at  the  District.  While  the  seniority  list  was  being  constructed, 
on  the  17"  or  18"  of  March,  District  personnel  notified  Ms.  Carlin  that  they  had  checked  the 
Web  site  of  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  and  she  did  not  have  a  BCLAD  on 
file.  Ms.  Carlin  contacted  her  instructional  institution,  Fresno  Pacific  University,  and  was 
advised  that  the  paperwork  had  been  misplaced.  Ms.  Carlin  produced a letter  to  the  District 
from  Fresno  Pacific  University  that  stated  that  she  was  eligible  for  the  BCLAD,  but  that  she 
had  not  filled  out  the  necessary  paperwork.  As  of  the  date  of  this  hearing,  Ms.  Carlin’s 
BCLAD  authorization  was  not  on  file  at  the  district  office. 

It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  credential  holder  to  ensure  that  her  credentials  are 
registered  with  the  District  or  with  the  County  Office  of  Education.  Ms.  Carlin  worked  for 
the  District  for  four  years  following  her  schooling  and  apparently  never  checked  her 
credentials  with  the  District  or  with  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 
The  District  is  not  responsible  for  knowing  about  credentials  that  have  been  obtained  but 
were  not  filed  with  the  District  or  with  the  County  Office  of  Education.  (Campbell 
Elementary  Teacher’s  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.  App.  3d  796,  814-815.) 

“In  making  reductions  in  its  certificated  staff,  a  District  need  not  take  into  account  a 

credential  that  has  been  applied  for  but  not  received...  At  the  time  a  district  must  prepare  its 
lay-off  notices  it  must  analyze  carefully  the  number  of  people  to  be  laid-off,  the  seniority 
listing  of  employees,  and  the  credentials  and  qualifications  of  the  individuals.  Ifa  district 
decides  it  must  lay-off  a  certain  number  of  employees,  it  must  give  those  employees  proper 
notice.  Once  March  15  passes  by a  district  may  not  notify  additional  employees  that  they 
may  be  terminated.  ..  .  A  district  does  not  have  the  right  to  add  to  the  lay-off  list... 
Respondent  [Board]  cannot  be  held  accountable  for  the  fact  that  Appellant  ....  received  his 
credential  after  all  notices  were  sent,  a  hearing  held,  and  final  Board  adoption  of  the 
decision."  (Degener  v  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.  App.  3d  689,  698.) 

   

The  rationale  for  these  decisions  is  apparent.  The  District  must  operate  under  strict 
statutory  timeframes  in  order  to  effect  a  legal  reduction  in  force.  The  District  cannot  delay 
taking  action  in  order  to  accommodate  employees  whose  credentials  are  not  on  file.  And,  in 
the  interest  of  fairness  to  all  employees,  when  a  District  applies  tie-breaking  criteria  to 
determine  seniority,  it  can  only  act  on  the  verifiable  information  it  has  available  at  the  time. 
The  District  may  not  disadvantage  one  employee  on  the  uncertain  basis  that  another 

employee’s  credentials  will  be  forthcoming, 
Ms.  Carlin  did  not  hold  a  BCLAD  authorization.  When  she  testified  in  this  proceeding  on 
April  15,  2008,  she  acknowledged  that  she  was  currently  “applying”  for  a  BCLAD. 

At  the  time  tie-  breaking  criteria  were  applied, 

13. 

Finally,  Ms.  Carlin  maintains  that  she  should  be  assigned  additional  points 

under  criteria  B  because  she  has  taught  in  bilingual  programs.  She  has  taught  for  four  years 
in a  grade  4  dual  immersion  program  where  she  teaches  50  percent  in  Spanish  and  50  percent 
in  English.  The  District  maintains  that  criteria  B  provides  points  only  if  the  employee  meets 
both  requirements  of  the  criteria:  experience  in  teaching  a  special  categorical  program  (here 
bilingual)  and  holds  the  necessary  credential  (here  a  BCLAD).  This  is  a  reasonable 
interpretation  of  criteria  B,  and  this  is  how  the  criteria  were  applied  to  each  of  the  eight 
teachers  with  Ms.  Carlin’s  seniority  date. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Ms.  Carlin  and  Ms,  Diaz  have  rendered  valuable  services  to  the  District. 

3. 

2. 

See,  also,  Degener  v. 

The  service  identified  in  Board  Resolution  Nos.  24/2007-08  and  26/2007-08 

All  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955  were  met.  The  notices  sent  to  respondent  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the 
reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  was  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  service  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notice,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

are  particular  kinds  of  service  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  discontinue  the  identified  service  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s 
schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

   

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

‘Had  the  District  credited  Ms.  Carlin  with  5  points  for  teaching  4  years  with  a  BCLAD,  Mr.  Almanderez  would 
have  received a lay  off  notice  rather  than  Ms.  Carlin.  He  would  have  ample  ground  to  challenge  his  lay  off,  in  that 
Ms.  Carlin  was  improperly  given  5  tie  breaking  points  when  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  held  a  BCLAD. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

4. 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year...  whenever  a  particular  kind  of 
service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  ...or  whenever  the 
amendment  of  state  law  requires  the  modification  of  curriculum, 
and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the  governing  board  of  the  district  it 
shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions 
to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district, 
the  governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than 
a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated  employees  of  the 
district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services 
of  no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a 
service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

4-4 

4-4 

6. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated  employees  face 

Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the  inverse  of 
the  order  in  which  they  were  employed...  The  governing  board 
shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that 
employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their 
seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render... 

layoffs  due  to  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to 
reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers, 
if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The 
intent  of  the  Legislation  is  clearly  to  prevent  Districts  from  laying  off  senior  teachers  while 
retaining  junior  teachers.  Section  44955,  subdivision  (c)  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

   

District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Diaz  is  being  retained  to  perform 
services  which  she  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

Conclusions,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Carlin  is  being 
retained  to  perform  services  which  she  is  competent  and  certificated  to  render. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  8,  and  10  through  13,  and  the  Legal 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  and  the  Legal  Conclusions,  the 

8. 

7. 

  

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Ada  Angelica  Diaz  that  her  services  will  be  eliminated 

in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Alma  Carlin  that  her  services  will  be  eliminated  in  the  2008- 

2009  school  year,  because  of  the  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  April  29,  2008 

   
ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

