BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GOLD  OAK  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

OAH  No.  N2008030564 

CHRISTIE  CLARY,  SUSAN  LANDON, 
JEANA  NEU,  TERREY  ROBINSON,  and 
MELODY  ROOT 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Trevor  Skarda,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  23,  2008,  in  Placerville,  California. 

Allen  R.  Vinson,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Trujillo  &  Vinson  LLP,  represented  the  Gold 

Oak  Union  School  District. 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Huguenin  Law  Office,  represented  all 

of  the  respondents  to  the  extent  that  their  interests  did  not  conflict.  All  respondents 
represented  themselves  to  the  extent  that  their  interests  conflicted. 

The  matter  proceeded  in  respect  to  the  Lay  Off  Notices  issued  to  Christie  Clary, 
Susan  Landon,  Jeana  Neu,  Terrey  Robinson,  and  Melody  Root,  as  these  employees  had  filed 
Requests  For  Hearing,  been  issued  Accusations,  and  had  filed  Notices  of  Defense  to  the 
Accusation. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  23,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Gold  Oak  Union  School  District  (District)  operates  one  elementary 

school  (Gold  Oak  Elementary),  one  middle  school  (Pleasant  Valley  Middle  School)  and  one 
charter  school,  Gold  Oak  Arts  Charter  School,  which  serves  children  in  grades  4  through  8.

  

  

  

2. 

Richard  L.  Williams  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  His  actions,  and 

the  actions  of  the  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and 
noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  4.5  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

4. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

5. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  served  on  those  employees  in  a  timely 

manner. 

6. 

7. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

8. 

On  March  11,  2008,  at  a  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

(Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  4.5  FTE 
positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

9. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  08-03-02,  providing 

for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  to  decrease 
a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District,  as  follows: 

A.  Reduce  2.5  FTE  Self  Contained  Classroom  Teachers  at  Gold  Oak 

B.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  7th  and  8th  Grade  Language  Arts  at  Pleasant  Valley 

C.  Reduce  1.0  FTE  Classroom  Teacher  at  Gold  Oak  Arts  Charter  School, 

School,  Grades  K-5 

Middle  School 

Grades  4-8 

10. 

On  March  9,  2004,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  04-03-02,  in  which  the 

Governing  Board  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of 
certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The  criteria 
include  whether  individuals  have  (1)  certificates  allowing  them  to  teach  English  language 
learners,  and,  if  certificates  are  the  same,  then  (2)  credentials  allowing  them  to  teach  “the 

“a 

 

   greatest  number  of  different  K-8  teaching  positions.”  If  individuals  with  the  same  seniority 

date  are  still  tied  after  application  of  the  above  criteria,  then  the  District  will  use  a  lottery  to 
determine  seniority.  The  District  used  the  2004  tie-breaker  criteria  in  the  instant  layoff.  It 
did  not  adopt  a  new  resolution  for  the  current  layoff. 

11. 

The  District  is  in  a  state  of  financial  crisis  caused  by  the  State  budget  and 
declining  enrollment.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  teaching  services, 
affecting  employment  of  4.5  FTE  teaching  positions.  The  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate 
and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  in  order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of 
students. 

12. 

Superintendent  Williams  and  other  District  employees,  in  particular,  Dawn 
Eddleman  who  is  the  Executive  Secretary  and  Personnel  Administrator,  were  responsible 
for  implementation  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

13. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Seniority  List  which  contains 

employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or 
temporary,  and  credentials  and  authorization.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data  are 
obtained  from  the  District’s  records.  The  District  circulated  a  seniority  list  in  anticipation  of 
issuing  layoff  notices. 

14. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The 
District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area 
and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for 
each  kind  of  affected  service,  the  District  determined  the  impact  on  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority.  The  District  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  to  determine  whether 
they  could  “bump”  other  employees  who  were  junior  to  them.  The  District  then  looked  at 
employee  competence  for  certain  positions  as  opposed  to  other  positions. 

15. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees.  Attrition  occurred  after  the  layoff  notices  had  be  delivered. 

16. 

Because  of  attrition,  the  Board  dismissed  the  Accusations  at  the  hearing 

against  Christie  Clary,  representing  1.0  FTE  Classroom  Teacher  at  Gold  Oak  Arts  Charter 
School,  Grades  4-8,  and  against  Susan  Landon,  representing  1.0  FTE  Self  Contained 
Classroom  Teachers  at  Gold  Oak  School,  Grades  K-5. 

   

17. 

Three  of  the  teachers  who  received  layoff  notices,  Christie  Clary,  Susan 

    

Landon  and  Terrey  Robinson,  have  the  same  seniority  date.  The  District  applied  the  tie- 
breaker  criteria  as  to  these  three  individuals  and  determined  that  Christie  Clary  was  the  most 
senior  and  Terrey  Robinson  was  the  least  senior.  It  was  not  disputed  by  respondents  that  the 
District  properly  applied  the  tie-breaker  criteria  or  that  the  determination  of  seniority  was 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

  

  

18. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  9  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

19. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  9  will  cause  it  to  reduce  its  offerings  in 
code  mandated  courses  below  the  level  required  by  law. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  were  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  08-03-02  are  particular  kinds 
of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision 
to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was 
a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838;  see,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

 

    

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

   

6. 

   

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

8. 

Services  reduced  below  the  level  mandated  by  law  are  not  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  under  Education  Code  section  44955.-  So  long  as  a  school  district  does  not  reduce 
its  offerings  in  a  code  mandated  course  below  the  level  required  by  law,  that  reduction 
should  be  considered  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

9. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  will  reduce  its  course  offerings  below 

mandated  levels  by  reducing  1.5  FTE  Self  Contained  Classroom  Teachers  at  Gold  Oak 
School,  Grades  K-5  or  1.0  FTE  7th  and  8th  Grade  Language  Arts  at  Pleasant  Valley  Middle 
School. 

10. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b)  states,  in  relevant  part,  as 

follows: 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any 
employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance 
with  Section  44949,  a  statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in 
determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the  application  of  the 
criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other 
employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing 
board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of  reasons  for 
determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to 
give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would 
not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

   

11. 

The  District’s  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  as  to  all  affected 

respondents  was  appropriate. 

    

   

   

   

   

   

   
     

   

   
    

   

    

                  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

ORDER 

lL. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  2.5  full-time  equivalent 

certificated  positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the 
following  respondents:  Jeana  Neu,  Terrey  Robinson  and  Melody  Root. 

2. 

The  Accusations  against  Christie  Clary  and  Susan  Landon  are  dismissed. 

DATED:  April  29,  2008 

TREVOR  SKARDA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

