BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CALAVERAS  COUNTY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
CALAVERAS  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Layoff) 
Against: 

OAH  No.  2008040367 

CHRISTOPHER  SMITH, 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Marilyn  A.  Woollard,  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings  (OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  San  Andreas,  California,  on 
April  28,  2008. 

Calaveras  Unified  School  District  (District)  was  represented  by  Bryan  G. 

Martin,  of  DeGoede,  Dunne  and  Martin.  Elizabeth  Valdez,  District  Personnel 
Coordinator,  was  also  present  on  the  District’s  behalf. 

Thomas  J.  Driscoll,  of  Driscoll  and  Associates,  represented  respondent 

Christopher  Smith  who  was  present. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

James  Frost  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  Calaveras  County  Unified 

School  District  (District).  Mr.  Frost’s  actions  and  the  actions  of  the  District  Board  of 
Trustees/Governing  Board  (Board)  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

2. 

The  District  serves  approximately  3600  students  from  kindergarten  (K) 

through  twelfth  grades  at  its  six  elementary  schools,  Toyon  Middle  School  (Toyon), 
and  Calaveras  High  School  (CHS).  CHS  encompasses  several  alternative  schools, 
including  West  Point  Alternative  (WPA). 

3. 

Respondent  Christopher  Smith  is  a  permanent  certificated  employee  of 
the  District  who  has  a  single  subject  clear  credential  in  business.  He  teaches  at  CHS. 
Respondent  is  a  “highly  qualified”  business  teacher  under  No  Child  Left  Behind.  By 
virtue  of  his  business  credential,  respondent  is  authorized  to  teach  grades  K  through

  

  

  

twelve,  preschool,  and  classes  organized  primarily  for  adults.  The  single  subject 
business  credential  confers  authorization  to  teach  accounting,  business 
communications,  business  English,  business  mathematics,  business  management, 
business  marketing,  computer  concepts  and  applications,  consumer  education,  data 
processing,  economics,  general  office  occupations,  keyboarding,  marketing, 
shorthand,  typewriting,  and  word  processing.  (Cal.  Code  Regs.,  tit.  5,  §  80005,  subd. 
(aJG).) 

4. 

On  March  11,  2008,  in  Resolution  2007/08-16,  the  Board  found  it  to  be 

in  the  best  interest  of  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular 
kinds of services  (PKS),  as  of  the  end  of the  2007-2008  school  year:  One  (1.00)  Full- 
Time  Equivalent  (F.T.E.)  high  school  certificated  business  department  position. 

The  Board  authorized  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  “to  initiate  and 
pursue  procedures  necessary  to  not  reemploy  the  equivalent  of  One  (1.00)  Full-Time 
Equivalent  certificated  business  employee  of  this  District  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955  because  of  said  reduction  and  discontinuance  of  services.” 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  2007/08-17,  which 

provided  the  “tie-breaking”  criteria  for  resolving  seniority  ties  between  certificated 
employees  with  common  dates  of  hire,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955. 

Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44949. 

5. 

On  March  13,  2008,  Superintendent  Frost  notified  respondent  in 

writing  that  he  had  recommended  to  the  Board  that  respondent’s  services  be 
discontinued  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondent  was  advised 
of  his  right  to  request  a  hearing.  With  this  notice,  respondent  was  provided  a  copy  of 
Resolutions  2007/08-16  and  2007/08-17,  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955, 
and  a  blank  request  for  hearing  form. 

6. 

On  March  20,  2008,  respondent  requested  a  hearing  to  determine 

whether  there  was  cause  for  not  being  reemployed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

7. 

On  April  1,  2008,  Superintendent  Frost  made  and  signed  an  Accusation 

for  layoff  against  respondent  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  based  upon  Education 
Code  section  44949  and  44955  and  Resolution  2007/08-16  for  the  reduction  of  1  FTE 
certificated  employee.’  This  Accusation  was  served  on  respondent  with  required 
accompanying  documents,  including  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form. 

‘Superintendent  Frost  clarified  that  the  reference  in  the  Accusation,  at  paragraph  VI,  to  “employees”  to  be 
decreased  was  an  error  and  that  the  Resolution  only  authorized  the  reduction of  a  single  employee. 

 

8. 

On  April  7,  2008,  respondent’s  attorney  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  on 

his  behalf. 

Order  of Economic  Layoffs 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c), 
economic  layoffs  are  generally  to  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  seniority,  with  layoffs 
required  to  proceed  in  the  inverse  order  of  seniority.  A  teacher  with  more  seniority 
typically  has  greater  rights  to  retain  employment  than  a  junior  teacher.  The  District 
has  an  affirmative  obligation  to  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions 
into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and 
competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Assn.  v. 
Abbott,  76  Cal.  App.  3d  796,  813;  Wellbaum  v.  Oakdale  Joint  Union  High  School 
District  (1977)  70  Cal.  App.  3d  93,  97-98.)  The  displacement  of  a  junior  teacher  by  a 
senior  teacher  is  known  as  “bumping.”  The  seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and  a  junior 
teacher  with  a  needed  credential  or  skills  may  be  retained  even  if  a  more  senior 
teacher  is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by  statute  (Ed.  Code  §  44955, 
subd.  (d)(1))  and  appellate  law.  (Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v. 
Governing  Board  of the  Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d 
831.) 

In  order  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic  layoff,  Education  Code 

section  44955,  subdivision  (d)  (1),  places  the  burden  on  the  District  to  “demonstrate[] 
a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study...  and  that 
the  certificated  employee  (to  be  skipped)  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...which  others  with  more  seniority 
do  not  possess.” 

10. 

Respondent’s  Contentions:  Respondent  contends  that  the  District 

cannot,  as  a  matter  of  law,  proceed  with  its  layoff  against  him  because  the  Board  did 
not  pass  a  separate  resolution  authorizing  it  to  “skip”  less  senior  employees. 
Respondent,  whose  first  date  of  service  with  the  District  was  on  July  21,  2000,  asserts 
that  the  District  had  an  affirmative  duty  to  assign  and  reassign  employees  to  retain 
him,  and  that  it  did  not  meet  its  burden  of  proof  to  skip  the  following  less  senior 
employees:  Cynthia  Larson  (July  27,  2001),  Jason  Remmers  (November  26,  2001), 
and/or  Eileen  Thorpe  (February  1,  2003).  Respondent  also  asserts  that  he  is 
competent  to  fill  the  position  of  a  retiring  senior  employee. 

11. 

Skipping  Resolution:  Respondent  cites  no  authority  for  the  asserted 

requirement  that  the  Board  must  pass  a  resolution  expressly  authorizing  the 
“skipping”  of junior  certificated  employees.  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b),  requires  the  Board  to  adopt  seniority  tie  breaking  criteria.  The  Board 
complied  with  this  mandate  by  adopting  Resolution  2007/08-17.  Education  Code 
section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  which  addresses  the  circumstances  under  which 

 

  

skipping  can  occur,  does  not  contain  a  similar  mandate.  While  it  is  the  better  practice 
to  pass  a  skipping  resolution  (either  separately  or  as  part  of  the  resolution  for  PKS 
reduction  or  elimination),  this  action  is  not  required  by  either  Education  Code 
sections  44949  or  44955. 

In  this  case,  the  Board’s  Resolution  2007/08-16  references  and  authorizes  the 
Superintendent  or  his  designees  to  act  on  its  behalf  to  implement  the  layoff  pursuant 
to  this  statutory  authority.  The  language  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (d),  which 
authorizes  skipping  in  limited  circumstances,  is  therefore  incorporated  into  the 
Board’s  Resolution  and  the  authorization  it  provided  to  the  District. 

Did  the  District  Appropriately  Skip  Less  Senior  Employees? 

12. 

The  District  had  three  certificated  teachers  in  the  business  department 

at  CHS:  Kaaren  Egge,  whose  seniority  date  is  July  27,  1998,  Richard  Behler,  and 
respondent.  Mr.  Behler  and  respondent  share  the  seniority  date  of  July  21,  2000.  The 
District  applied  Resolution  2007/08-17’s  tie  breaking  criteria  to  them.  Mr.  Behler 
was  retained  due  to  his  additional  CLAD  credential  [Criteria  No.  2].  Respondent 
stipulated  that  Mr.  Behler  was  appropriately  placed  senior  to  him  based  upon  the 
application  of  Resolution  2007/08-17. 

13. 

Cynthia  Larson  has a  single  subject  credential  in  business  and  teaches 

business  at  the  District’s  Toyon  Middle  School.  Ms.  Larson’s  first  date  of  paid 
probationary  service  to  the  District  was  July  27,  2001.  As a  result,  Ms.  Larson  has 
one  year  less  seniority  than  the  respondent.  She  was  not  issued  a  layoff  notice. 

14. 

During  the  2007-2008  school  year,  Ms.  Larson  taught  six  or  seven 

classes  of  keyboarding  at  Toyon.  Keyboarding  is  within  the  subjects  respondent  is 
authorized  to  teach  with  his  business  credential. 

15. 

In  addition  to  her  business  credential,  Ms.  Larson  holds  a  vocational 

education  credential  in  “basic  office  practice  in  secretarial  skills.”  Elizabeth  Valdez 
is  the  District’s  Coordinator  of  Personnel.  She  was  responsible  for  determining  who 
would  be  issued  the  layoff  notification  authorized  by  Resolution  2007/08-16.  Ms. 
Valdez  testified  that  Ms.  Larson’s  vocational  education  secretarial  skills  credential 
did  not  authorize  her  to  do  anything  that  respondent  cannot  do  with  his  business 
credential.  Pursuant  to  the  “Administrator’s  Assignment  Manual”  of  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing,  vocational  education  classes  may  be  taught  by 
teachers  holding  business  credentials. 

16. 

Ms.  Larson  also  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  home  economics. 

Due  to  the  retirement  of  Toyon’s  full  time  home  economics  teacher,  the  District  wants 
the  flexibility  to  offer  some  (.5  FTE)  home  economics  classes  in  the  coming  academic 
year.  Board  Resolution  2007/08-16  did  not  include  home  economics  as  a  PKS  to  be 
reduced  from  1  FTE  to  .5  FTE  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

 

  

17. 

Ms.  Larson  holds  an  “EL”  certificate  that  authorizes  her  to  provide 
instruction  to  limited-English  proficient  pupils  in  the  areas  of  business  and  home 
economics. 

Superintendent  Frost  testified  that  having  an  EL  certificate  was  “part  of  having 

a  fully  credentialed  teacher.”  He  acknowledged  that  less  than  three  percent  of  the 
District’s  students  were  English  language  learners.  During  the  2007-2008  school 
year,  only  43  of  the  District’s  students  were  limited  English  proficient;  one  of  these 
students  was  enrolled  in  Ms.  Larson’s  keyboarding  class. 

Superintendent  Frost  was  aware  that  respondent  had  completed  his  coursework 

for  his  EL  certificate  and  had  only  to  submit  a  portfolio.  It  was  undisputed  that 
respondent  did  not  have  his  EL  certificate  as  of  March  15,  2008. 

18. 

Superintendent  Frost  testified  that  Ms.  Larson  was  retained  over 

respondent  because  she  had  an  EL  certificate  and  a  certificate  in  home  economics.  As 
aresult,  Ms.  Larson  could  “meet  the  needs  of  our  students”  because  she  could  have  a 
split  assignment  in  keyboarding  and  home  economics. 

19. 

In  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High 

School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.  App.  3d  567,  the  school  district  adopted  a  PKS 
resolution  by  which  it  determined  to  retain  less  senior  employees  who  had  Spanish 
speaking  skills  over  senior  teachers  whose  employment  had  not  previously  required 
bilingual  ability.  The  appellate  court  reversed  a  decision  that  allowed  the  district  to 
skip  junior  teachers  who  possessed  Spanish  language  skills  but  who  were  not 
employed  to  teach  classes  in  a  formal  bilingual  program. 

In  doing  so,  the  court  analyzed  the  relationship  between  two  key  portions  of 

Education  Code  section  44955:  (1)  the  provision  requiring  retention  of  senior 
employees,  over  employees  with  less  seniority,  to  provide  any  services  that  they  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render;  and  (2)  the  provision  regarding  establishing 
competency  (i.e.,  tie  breaking)  criteria  to  rank  employees  with  the  same  seniority 
date.  The  court  determined  that  the  statutory  phrase  “solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of 
the  district  and  the  students  thereof”  only  applied  to  tie  breaking  criteria  between 
employees  with  the  same  seniority  dates.  Consequently,  “for  teachers  having 
different  employment  dates,  ‘the  needs  of  the  district  and  students’  [are]  not  a  proper 
measure  of  priority.”  Jd.  at  574.  The  court  explained  that: 

A  contrary  construction  would  place  all  teachers  in  a  single 
group  measured  by  the  sometimes  vague  needs  of  the  district 
and  pupils,  as  determined  by  the  school  board.  To  maintain 
the  separate  treatment  of  teachers  with  different  seniority  dates, 
we  perceive  the  problem  to  be  one  of  identifying  “competency” 
in  a  traditional  manner,  which  is  concerned  with  courses  and 

  

 

  

programs  generally  listed  in  job  descriptions  or  course  outlines. . 
With  respect  to  teachers  having  different  seniority  dates,  “needs” 
are  considered  only  in  relation  to  the  program  requirements.  Jd. 

. 

20. 

As  the  more  senior  business  teacher,  respondent  is  fully  credentialed 

and  competent  to  teach  the  keyboarding  businesses  classes  taught  by  Ms.  Larson 
during  the  2007-2008  school  year.  The  keyboarding  classes  are  not  a  “specific  course 
of  study”  designed  to  teach  limited  English-proficient  students  English  language  skills 
or  language  development,  and  such  an  ability  is  not  a  requirement  for  teaching 
keyboarding  classes.  The  EL  certificate  provides  a  method  for  the  teacher  to  teach 
keyboarding,  which  is  a  specific  course  of  study  respondent  is  competent  to  teach. 
While  an  EL  ability  may  be  preferred,  it  is  not  necessary  to  a  finding  of  “competence” 
to  teach  keyboarding  or  other  business  classes.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Resolution 
2007/08-16  did  not  include  a  definition  of  “competent”  or  “competency,”  as  is 
typically  included  where  the  board’s  resolution  includes  express  “skipping” 
authorization. 

The  weight  of  the  evidence  establishes  that  the  District  was,  in  effect,  applying 

its  tie  breaking  criteria  to  determine  which  teacher  best  met  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students.”  Because  respondent  is  senior  to  Ms.  Larson,  however,  this  result 
cannot  prevail.  The  District  did  not  meet  its  burden  of  proof  to  “skip”  Ms.  Larson  and 
respondent’s  layoff  cannot  be  upheld.  Respondent  is  entitled  to  “bump”  Ms.  Larson. 

21. 

Because  respondent  is  entitled  to  “bump”  Ms.  Larson,  it  is  unnecessary 

to  address  his  remaining  contentions. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

In  implementing  a  layoff  under  Education  Code  sections  44949 

and  44955,  the  paramount  rule  is  that  employees  shall  be  laid  off  in  the  inverse  order 
of  seniority.  Where  an  economic  layoff  is  required  due  to  a  reduction  in  PKS,  Section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  in  pertinent  part,  provides  as  follows: 

Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of 
no  permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee, 
or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to 
render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render. 

?  Tie  breaking  criteria  in  Resolution  2007/08-17  includes:  highly  qualified  status  for  NCLB  (No.  1); 
possession  of a BCLAD,  CLAD  or  other  certification  to  authorize  the  teaching  of  English  Language 
Learners  (No.2);  and  possession  of  multiple  credentials  (No.5). 

 

@ 

“Seniority”  is  determined  by  the  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  as  a 

probationary  certificated  employee.  As  between  certificated  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  “the  governing  board  shall 
determine  the  order of termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the 
students  thereof.”  (Educ.  Code  §  44955,  subd.  (b).)  The  Board  authorizes  “tie- 
breaking”  criteria  to  determine  the  relative  seniority  of  these  employees. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

@ 

The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 

(c) 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be 
retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.  However,  prior  to 
assigning  or  reassigning  any  certificated  employee  to  teach 
a  subject  which  he  or  she  has  not  previously  taught,  and 
for  which  he  or  she  does  not  have  a  teaching  credential 
or  which  is  not  within  the  employee’s  major  area  of 
postsecondary  study  or  the  equivalent  thereof,  the  governing 
board  shall  require  the  employee  to  pass  a  subject  matter 
competency  test  in  the  appropriate  subject. 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may 
deviate  from  terminating a  certificated  employee  in  order 
of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

(1) 

The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for 
personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or 
to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with 
a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health 
for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course 
or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others 
with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2) 
For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance 
with  constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection 
of  the  laws. 

3. 

Jurisdiction in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955.  As  set  forth in  Factual  Findings  1  through  8,  all  notices  and  jurisdictional 
requirements  contained in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

4. 

@ 

The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving,  by  a  preponderance  of  the 

evidence,  the  factual  and  legal  appropriateness  of  the  proposed  reduction  or

  

  

elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  of  the  preliminary  notices  of  layoff  served 
on  respondent,  and  of  the  selection  of  the  respondent  for  the  layoff. 

5. 

The  Governing  Board  may  reduce,  discontinue  or  eliminate  a  particular 

kind  of  service  and  then  provide  the  needed  services  to  the  students  in  another 
manner.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571;  California 
Teachers  Association  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of Goleta  Union  School  Dist.  (1982)  132 
Cal.App.3d  32.)  A  school  board  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  statute 
either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  shall  not  be  performed  at  all  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  (Rutherford  v. 
Board  of  Trustees  of Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  4  and  the  Legal  Conclusions  as  a 

whole,  the  services  set  forth  in  Board  Resolution  2007/08-16  are  particular  kinds  of 
services  which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  section  44955.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates 
solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of 
Education  Code  section  44949. 

7. 

In  the  course  of  reducing,  discontinuing  or  eliminating  a  particular  kind 

of  service,  the  Governing  Board  may  retain  certificated  employees  junior  to 
respondent  to  perform  services  which  respondent  is  not  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  (Moreland  Teachers  Association  v.  Kruse  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648.) 

8. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer 
to  a  continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing 
so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that 
position.  (Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior 
teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers 
possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack. 
(Poppers  v.  Tilapias  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa 
Clara  Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393,  v.  Governing  Board  of Santa  Clara 
Unified  School  District,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Legal  Conclusions  as  a  whole, 

and  particularly  in  Factual  Findings  13  through  21,  the  District  did  not  meet  its 
burden  of  establishing  that  a  less  senior  employee  should  be  “skipped”  while  laying 
off  the  respondent,  and  it  has  not  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  respondent  is 
being  retained  to  perform  the  services  which  respondent  is  competent  and  certificated 
to  render. 

Accordingly,  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  bump  Ms.  Larson 

and  his  services  cannot  be  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

 

@ 

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  respondent  Christopher  Smith  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  6,  2008 

ANY 

   

MARILYN  A.  WOOLLA’ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Heagings 

  

 

