@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
SWEETWATER  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Layoff  of 
CERTIFICATED  EMPLOYEES  OF  THE 
SWEETWATER  UNION  HIGH 
SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030390 

@ 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Vallera  J.  Johnson,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Chula  Vista,  California  on  April  18,  2008. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Nitasha  K.  Sawhney,  Esq.,  and  James  Meeker,  Esg.,  Garcia  Calderon  and  Ruiz, 
represented  Rita  S.  Beyers,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  Sweetwater  Union 
High  School  District. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Esq.,  Tosdal  Smith  Steiner  &  Wax,  represented  Respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  18,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Rita  Sierra  Beyers  made  and  filed  the  Accusation,  dated  March  27,  2008, 

against  the  certificated  employees  of  the  Sweetwater  Union  High  School  District  (District) 
listed  in  attached  Exhibit  “A”  (Respondents). 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

2. 

3. 

Jesus  M.  Gandara  ,  the  District’s  Superintendent,  notified  the  Governing 

® 

Board  of  Sweetwater  Union  High  School  District  (Board)  and  Respondents  that  he 
recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year.

  

  

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  Number  3809  that  reduced  or 
eliminated  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  criteria 
for  skipping  certain  employees  and  the  tie-breaker  criteria  to  be  used  for  employees  with  the 
same  seniority  date. 

Respondents  were  served  with  a  written  notice  of  termination  on  March  11,  2008. 

The  written  notice  of  termination  stated  that  Respondents’  services  would  not  be 

required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
The  recommendation  that  Respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
competency.  The  notice  advised  Respondents  of  the  right  to  hearing,  that  the  request  for 
hearing  must  be  delivered  to  the  Superintendent’s  Office  no  later  than  March  26,  2008,  not 
less  than  seven  days  after  the  date  the  notice  of  termination  was  served  and  that  the  failure  to 
request  a  hearing  would  constitute  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

Some  but  not  all  Respondents  filed  a  timely  Request  for  Hearing  and/or  Notice  of 

Defense. 

4. 

5. 

An  Accusation  was  served  on  Respondents  in  a  timely  manner. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  satisfied. 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  number  3809  and  took 

action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services 
commencing  in  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Counselors  —  Secondary 

17.0 

The  proposed  reductions  total  17.0  full  time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

6. 

Respondents  argued  that  the  decision  to  reduce  counseling  services  was 

arbitrary  and  capricious. 

The  District  receives  funding  for  its  budget  from  the  State  of  California.  Due  to  the 

State  of  California’s  financial  crisis,  the  District  anticipates  that  its  budget  will  be  reduced  by 
ten  percent  (10%)  or  $12  million.  In  order  to  provide  for  the  shortfall,  the  Superintendent 
considered  various  options,  including  layoff  of  classified  and  certificated  employees.  With 
the  exception  of  counselors,  the  District  anticipated  that  the  reductions  will  occur  by  means 
of  attrition. 

At  the  Board  meeting,  scheduled  April  21,  2008,  the  Superintendent  intended  to 

recommend  that  the  Board  reduce  counselor  services  to  3.2  FTE,  from  17.0  FTE.

  

e 

Pursuant  to  Assembly  Bill  1802  (Supplemental  Counseling  Program),  the  District 

received  $2.7  million  each  year  for  the  past  two  years  and  was  required  to  provide  counselor 
services  for  its  students  with  these  funds.  The  Memoranda of  Understanding  between  the 
District  and  the  Sweetwater  Counseling  and  Guidance  Association/CTA/NEA,  dated 
December  1,  2006,  and  June  20,  2007,  described  the  agreement  of  the  parties  regarding  how 
the  funds  would  be  spent. 

The  District’s  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  was  not  aware  of  how 

much  funding  the  District  received  from  the  Supplemental  Counseling  Program.  Lian 
Shoemake,  Executive  Director,  South  County  Teachers  United,  California  Teachers 
Association,  represents,  among  other  organizations,  the  Counseling  and  Guidance 
Association.  He  participated  in  the  negotiation  of  the  Memoranda.  Based  on  the  agreement 
of  the  parties,  he  testified  that  the  District  has  or  should  have  $1.5  million  dollars  remaining 
from  the  funding  that  is  required  to  be  spent  on  counseling  services. 

Given  the  facts  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs  of  Finding  6,  Respondent  asserted  that  the 

reduction  of  counseling  services  was  unnecessary. 

e@ 

In  determining  whether  the  decision  of  a  school  board  is  reasonable  rather  than 

arbitrary  or  capricious,  its  action  is  measured  by  the  standard  set  of  reason  and  reasonable 
people,  bearing  in  mind  that  such  a  standard  may  permit  a  difference  of  opinion  on  the  same 
subject.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association,  Inc.  v.  West  Valley  Federation  of 
Teachers,  Local  1953,  AFT,  AFL-CIO  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796.) 

The  Board  has  the  discretion  to  make  decisions  about  operation  of  the  District, 
including  which  programs  should  be  funded,  reduced  and/or  terminated.  According  to  the 
evidence  in  this  record,  the  District  carefully  considered  its  options,  including  reduction  of 
counselor  services.  If  the  counselor  services  are  reduced  as  proposed,  the  District  intends  to 
provide  all  mandatory  counselor  services  albeit  in  a  different  manner. 

    

responsible  for  implementing  the  technical  aspects  of  the  layoff.  The  District  developed  a 
seniority  list  that  contained,  among  other  matters,  each  employee’s  name,  position, 
assignment,  seniority  date,  status  and  date  his/her  credential  was  issued. 

hired-as-a  probationary  employee who  worked  as  a  substitute-ortemporary-emptoyee  forat— 

Considering  the  facts  in  this  Finding  6,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  District’s  action  to 

The  seniority  date  was  based  on  the  first  date  of  paid  service  rendered.’  A  teacher 

reduce  counselor  services  was  an  abuse  of  its  discretion,  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

Sandra  Huezo,  the  District’s  Director  of  Certificated  Personnel,  was 

7. 

  

  Jeast  75  percent  of  the  schoo!  days  during  the  previous  year  and  had  performed  the  duties 
normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the  District,  was  deemed  to  have  served  a 
complete  school  year  as  a  probationary  employee  if  employed  as  a  probationary  employee 

@ 

' 

Education  Code  section  44845.

for  the  following  school  year.  The  teacher  was  entitled  to  have  that  earlier  year  counted  as  a 
year  of  probationary  service.  The  prior  year  was  “tacked”  on  for  seniority  purposes,  *  but 
only  one  year  could  be  tacked. 

e 

8. 

The  District  may  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of 
seniority  if  the  District  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course 
or  course  of  study,  and  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  the  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others 
with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.° 

9. 

Subsequent  to  adoption  of  Board  Resolution  number  3809,  the  District 
received  notice  of  retirement  of  a  counselor  and  rescinded  the  layoff  notice  issued  to 
Respondent  Lauren  Didio  (Respondent  Didio). 

Respondent  Didio’s  seniority  date  is  July  25,  2007.  The  District  skipped  her  because 
she  holds  additional  credentials,  to  wit:  Special  Education  (Mild/Moderate)  Credential  and  a 
Multiple  Subject  Credential.  On  the  day  of  the  hearing,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  did  not 
know  what  Respondent  Dido’s  assignment  would  be  during  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Respondent  Marivel  Arroyo  (Respondent  Arroyo)  is  a  counselor  and  has  seniority 
date  of  July  12,  2007.  She  is  the  most  senior  counselor  who  received  a  layoff  notice  and 
more  senior  to  Respondent  Dido. 

 ) 

No  evidence  was  offered  to  establish  that  Respondent  Didio  holds  special  training 

and/or  experience  to  carry  out  duties  as  a  counselor  that  Respondent  Arroyo  does  not. 

If  Respondent  Didio  is  assigned  as  a  counselor  during  the  2007  —  2008  school  year, 

her  retention  would  be  improper,  and  Respondent  Arroyo  should  be  retained  as  well. 

10. 

Between  the  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the 

same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
District  and  its  students. 

11. 

The  services  that  the  District  proposes  to  reduce  were  “particular  kinds  of 

services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

12. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

Education  Code  section  44918. 

2 

3 

e@ 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d). 

 

services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

13. 

Except  as  provided  in  Finding  9,  no  certificated  employee  junior  to  any 

Respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any  services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  these  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall 
not  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (California  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  of the  Goleta  Union 
School  Dist.  (1981)  132  Cal.App.3d  32,  36;  citing  Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64 
Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

3. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the 

Sweetwater  Union  High  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services. 
The  cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof. 

4. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he/she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position.  (Lacy  v. 
Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the  senior 

5. 

Junior  teachers  may  be  given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the 

junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or  capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts 
lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High  School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa 
Clara  Federation of  Teachers,  Local  2393  y.  Board of Santa  Clara  Unified  School  District 
(1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

6. 

No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.

  

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  against  Respondent  Lauren  Dido  is  dismissed.  She  shall  be 

retained  for  the  2007  —  2008  school  year. 

2. 

If  Respondent  Lauren  Didio  is  assigned  to  provide  services  as  a  counselor  with 

the  Sweetwater  Union  High  School  District,  the  Accusation  against  Respondent  Marivel 
Arroyo  shall  be  dismissed;  Respondent  Marivel  Arroyo  shall  be  retained  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

3. 

Except  as  provided  in  Paragraphs  |  and  2  of  this  Order,  the  Accusation  served 
on  Respondents  is  sustained.  Notice  shal]  be  given  to  Respondents  set  forth  in  Exhibit  “A” 
before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

4. 

Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

DATED:  UP  &  LUE 

illua-F-Ffro — 

VALLERA  J.  JOANSON 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

EXHIBIT  A 

Acosta,  Jesus 

Alvarez,  Karla 

Arroyo,  Marivel 

Didio,  Lauren 

Felix,  Oscar 

Garcia,  Elizabeth 

. 

. 

. 

. 

Harken-Howarth,  Kate 

Hernandez,  Verenice 

9. 

Huerta,  Gisela 

10. 

Huerta,  Sara 

ll. 

Rico,  Vanessa 

12. 

Sevilla,  Ricardo 

13. 

Silva,  Liliana 

15. 

Tran,  Tich 

16. 

Tulao,  Ronniel 

14. 

Stephens-Ramsey,  Stephanie 

  

  

 

