BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  DRY  CREEK  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  (Reduction  of 
Particular  Kinds  of  Services)  Against: 

OAH  No.  2008020324 

Robyn  Annicchero,  Judith  Blasquez, 
Katherine  Camilleri,  James  Condon, 
Amy  Davis,  Melissa  Durrans,  Scott 
Olin,  Savir  Ravis,  Barbara  Scott  and 
James  Vordestrasse, 

  

Respondents 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Gary  A.  Geren,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

(OAH),  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2008,  in  Roseville,  California. 

the  Dry  Creek  Elementary  School  District  (District). 

Michael  N.  McCallum,  Attorney  at  Law,  appeared  on  behalf  of  respondents. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  was  closed  on  April  28,  2008,  subject  to  the 

Jacqueline  S.  McHaney,  of  Thurbon  and  McHaney,  represented  the  Superintendent  of 

parties  filing  and  serving  closing  briefs.  The  briefs  were  timely  received  by  OAH  on  April 
30,  2008. 

    

The  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  it  reduce  or 
eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services.  On  February  28,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
District  issued  Resolution  No.  2008-6  reducing  the  number  of  certificated  employees  because 
of  the  reduction  and/or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Governing  Board 
issued  the  resolution  because  of  financial  constraints  imposed  upon  the  District.  The 

he  caused  to  have  filed  and  served  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955. 

Mark  Geyer,  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acted  in  his  official  capacity  when 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

2. 

1. 

1

  

Governing  Board  resolved  to  reduce  the  following  positions  and  Full-Time  Equivalents 
(FTE),  for  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

Assistant  Principal-Middle  School 
Assistant  Principal-Elementary  School 
Teacher-Elementary 
Teacher-Middle  School 
Teacher-4/5  Science 
Teacher  on  Assignment-Special  Education  . 
Instructional  Technology  Resource  Teacher 

Total 

1.0  FTE 
1.5  FTE 
21.0  FTE 
4.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 

30.5  FTE 

3. 

The  Governing  Board  further  resolved  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 

employees  by  a  corresponding  number  of  FTEs,  and  it  directed  the  Superintendent  to  proceed 
to  notify  employees  affected  thereby.  On  March  5  and  6,  2008,  respondents  were  served 
with  written  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
In  turn,  respondents  filed  Requests  for  Hearing,  the  District  filed  an  Accusation,  and 
respondents  filed  Notices  of  Defense.  The  parties  met  all  prehearing  jurisdictional 
requirements,  and  this  matter  was  properly  set  for  hearing. 

4. 

Between  the  passing  of  the  resolution  and  the  date  of  hearing,  the  FTEs  to  be 

reduced  were  changed  from  30.5  to  10. 

5. 

On  April  12,  2008,  respondent  Savir  Rivas  withdrew  her  request  for  a  hearing. 

HAS  THE  DISTRICT  DEMONSTRATED  A  SPECIFIC  NEED  TO  RETAIN  TEACHERS 
JUNIOR  IN  SENIORITY  OVER  RESPONDENTS  BLASQUEZ,  CONDIN,  OLIN,  SCOTT 
AND  VORDERTASSE? 

6. 

Districts  are  required  to  lay-off  teachers  in  the  inverse  order  of  their  seniority. 

An  exception  exists  when a  district  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study...and  that  the  [retained]  certificated  employee  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”! 

7. 

The  District  maintains  it  may  lay-off  the  senior  teachers  here  because  it  has  a 
specific  need  to  retain  teachers  junior  to  them,  a  process  known  as  “skipping.”  The  District 
contends  “skipping”  is  appropriate  because  the  less  senior  teachers  (except  for  a  teacher 
holding  a  Special  Education  Credential)  hold  Cross-cultural  Language  and  Academic 
Development  (CLAD)  certificates  that  the  senior  teachers  do  not.”  The  California 

'  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1). 
?  For  the  purposes  of  this  Decision,  references  to  “CLAD”  certification  shall  include  functionally  equivalent 
certifications  that  permit  teachers  to  teach  students  known  as  “English  Language  Learners.”  English  Language 

2 

 

  

Department  of  Education  (CDE)  requires  a  CLAD  for  teachers  to  instruct  to  teach  English 
Language  Learners  (ELL). 

8. 

The  District  entered  into  a  “Plan  of  Correction”  with  CDE,  following  the 

findings  of  a  Coordinated  Compliance  Review  (CCR)  completed  by  CDE  in  2001.  CDE 
found  the  District  had  too  few  CLAD  certified  teachers.  In  response  to  the  CCR,  the  District 
instituted  a  policy  of  hiring  new  teachers  only  if  they  held  their  CLAD  certification.  The 
District  also  encouraged  existing  teachers  to  obtain  CLAD  certification.  It  was  the  District’s 
goal  to  have  all  teachers  CLAD  certified  by  the  end  of  2003.  Numerous  memoranda  and  e- 
mails  advised  existing  teachers  that  the  District  “required”  all  teachers  to  obtain  CLAD 
certification.  The  District  admonished  teachers  lacking  CLAD  certification  that  they  may  be 
“reassigned,”  if  they  did  not  comply. 

9. 

The  District  serves  nine  sites.  Thirteen  percent  of  its  students  are  considered 

ELL.  Approximately  95  percent  of  the  classroom  teachers  in  the  District  hold  CLAD 
certificates. 

10. 

The  District  is  concerned  that  if  CDE  conducted  another  audit  it  would  find 

them  to  be  out  of  compliance,  despite  having  95  percent  of  the  teachers  CLAD  certified.  The 
potential  consequences  of  such  an  occurrence  were  not  explained.  By  “skipping”  junior 
teachers  and  laying  off  the  five  senior  ones,  the  District  would  have  100  percent  of  its 
classroom  teachers  CLAD  certified,  thus  alleviating  the  District’s  compliance  concern. 

11. 

The  District  did  not  establish  a  specific  need  for  junior  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course.  While  the  Districts  concerns  regarding  its  ELL  students  were  laudable,  it 
did  not  establish  the  need  to  retain  junior  employees  over  senior  ones. 

At  the  District’s  middle  school  sites,  students  are  assigned  to  four  or  five  different 
“teams.”  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Personnel,  Brad  Tooker,  testified  that  it  is  possible  to 
assign  ELL  students  to  a  “team”  taught  only  by  CLAD  certified  teachers. 

At  the  elementary  schools,  Mr.  Tooker  explained  that  it  would  be  possible  to  assign 

ELL  students  to a  class  staffed  by  CLAD  certified  teachers;  however,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
assure  that  ELL  students  transferring  into  the  District  during  mid-school  year  would  be 
assigned  CLAD  certified  teachers.  With  95  percent  of  its  teachers  CLAD  certified,  it  does 
not  follow  that  it  would  unduly  burdensome  for  the  District  to  assign  new  ELL  students  to 
teachers  holding  CLAD  certification. 

12. 

Each  of  the  five  senior  teachers  has  significant  seniority,  for  example,  Ms. 
Scott  is  the  District’s  most  senior  teacher.  Each  was  hired  before  CLAD  certification  was 
required.  CLAD  certification  requires  completing  a  65  hour  course  and  passing  an 
examination.  Presently  the  cost  of  the  course  is  approximately  $1,200.  The  amount  that  the 

  

Learners  are  students  who  reside  in  homes  where  the  primary  language  spoken  is  other  than  English  and  testing 
shows  the  student’s  English  language  abilities  require  teachers  with  special  training  to  properly  teach  them. 

3 

   

  

District  pays  towards  that  cost  was  not  established  by  the  record.  Since  receiving  their  layoff 
notices,  four  teachers  have  enrolled  in,  and  one  is  “scheduled”  to  enroll  ina  CLAD 
certification  course.  Their  enrollment  in  the  course  would  allow  them  to  teach  ELL  students 
under  a  provisional  authorization.  If  the  teachers  are  granted  a  provisional  CLAD  credential, 
the  District  will  also  achieve  100%  compliance. 

@ 

13. 

In  anticipation  of  the  layoffs,  the  District  began  reviewing  its  Certified 

Seniority  List  and  discussing  laying  off  those  teachers  not  holding  CLAD  certifications. 
These  discussions  took  place  no  later  than  mid-February  2008. 

14, 

On  February  21,  2008,  Colleen  Slattery,  District  Director  of  Personnel 

Services,  distributed  e-mails  to  teachers  who  lacked  CLAD  credentials,  informing  them  of 
various  programs  in  which  they  could  enroll  to  obtain  certification.  Conspicuously  absent 
from  these  e-mails  is  any  advisement  that  that  the  District  was  considering  laying-off 
teachers  who  did  not  enroll.  Instead,  the  first  notification  the  teachers  received  that  their  lack 
of  a  CLAD  certification  would  result  in  their  being  laid  off,  was  when  they  received  their 
lay-off  notices. 

15. 

Had  the  District  informed  the  teachers  about  its  plan  to  “skip,”  the  teachers 

could  have  enrolled  in  a  CLAD  instruction  course  (as  they  have  since  receiving  their  lay-off 
notices)  and  requested  that  provisional  authorizations  be  issued.  As  set  forth  below,  other 
districts  provided  such  notice  to  teachers. 

16. 

The  District’s  contention  that  it  had  no  obligation  to  advise  teachers  of  its 

intention  to  skip,  as  a  general  proposition,  may  be  true.  However,  the  District,  having 
previously  represented  to  the  teachers  that  the  absence  of  a  CLAD  certification  might  result 
in  nothing  more  than  their  “reassignment,”  was  obligated  to  notify  teachers  of  a  change  in 
this  policy  in  order  to  avoid  lulling  senior  teachers  into  a  false  sense  of  security  before  laying 
them  off. 

17. 

The  e-mails  from  the  Director  of  Personnel  Services  could  be  fairly 

characterized  as  expressing  a  status  quo  in  the  District’s  CLAD  policy,  at  a  time  when 
teacher  lay-offs  were  on  the  horizon.  The  District  offered  no  explanation,  other  than  they 
were  “not  obligated  to,”  for  failing  to  advise  the  teachers  of  the  new,  and  more  severe, 
consequences  of  their  failure  to  hold  a  CLAD  certificate. 

  

*  The  District  cited  prior  OAH  decisions  in  support  of  their  “skipping”  policy.  Primarily,  the  District  relied  on 
Alioto  v  Sonoma  County  Superintendent  of Schools,  OAH  2005030692.  In  Alioto,  prior  to  the  teachers  receiving 
lay-off  notices,  they  received  a  letter  that  stating,  “...participating  in  training  and  earning  a certificate  would  help 
protect  existing  teachers  from  the  possibility  of  reassignment  or  exposure  to  layoff  for  not  having  the  required 
certification.”  Another  subsequent  letter  stated  that  in  the  event  of  a  layoff,  teachers  with  less  seniority  who  had 
CLAD  certification  would  be  skipped  while  teachers  with  more  seniority  who  did  not  have  CLAD  certification 
would  be  laid  off.  Clearly,  Sonoma  County  was  not  attempting  to  use  the  layoff  process  to  catch  non-compliant 
teachers  off-guard.  The  same  cannot  clearly  be  said  here.  Accordingly,  the  reasoning  in  Alioto  is  unpersuasive. 

  

e 

4

18. 

The  explanations  offered  by  the  teachers  as  to  why  they  failed  to  obtain  their 
CLAD  certification  were  less  than  compelling.  The  District’s  point  that  the  teachers  should 
have  obtained  their  certification  is  correct.  However,  the  lay-off  process  is  an  inappropriate 
mechanism  to  determine  the  appropriate  consequences  of  the  teachers’  recalcitrance.* 

OTHER  MATTERS 

19. 

With  respect  to  the  remaining  respondents,  there  is  no  dispute  that  the 

proposed  layoff  list  prepared  by  the  District  accurately  identified  them  as  the  most  junior 
teachers,  after  the  District  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements,  deaths 
and  requests  for  transfers.  The  reduction  in  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  affected 
those  respondents  was  necessary  and  appropriate  in  light  of  the  District’s  bona  fide  financial 
concerns. 

20. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  the  particular 

kinds  of  services  described  in  Factual  Finding  2  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

21. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  particular  kinds 

of  services  described  in  Factual  Finding  2  will  cause  it  to  reduce  its  offerings  in  Code 
mandated  courses  below  the  level  required  by  law. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education  code  section  44955  generally  provides  that  layoffs  must  be  done  on 

the  basis  of  seniority. 

2. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  permits  a  district  to  depart 

from a  seniority-based  layoff  only  when  it,  “demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study...and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.” 

3. 

The  District’s  attempt  to  lay-off  teachers  not  holding  a  CLAD  certificate  is  not 

a  valid  exercise  under  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1). 

4. 

In  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1982)  139  Cal.App.  567,  the  district 

implemented  a  similar  “skipping”  formula  where  junior  teachers  with  an  ability  to 
communicate  in  Spanish,  Tagalog,  or  Phillipino,  were  retained  over  senior  teachers  who 
lacked  such  skills. 

   

‘A  similar  situation  was  presented  to  the  ALJ  in  the  matter  of  Rialto  Unified  School  District,  OAH  L2007030796. 
The  decision  in  this  matter  is  consistent  with  the  reasoning  in  Rialto. 

    

5 

  

The  Alexander  court  acknowledged  the  validity  of  districts’  consideration  of  the 
multi-language  skills  of  its  teachers  when  developing a  tie  breaking  criteria  for  teachers 
sharing  the  same  hiring  date.  However,  at  pages  573-574,  the  court  specifically  noted  that  in 
determining  the  order  of  layoffs  for  teachers  having  different  hiring  dates,  the  “needs  of  the 
district  and  its  students  is  not  a  proper  measure  of  priority.”  In  so  stating,  the  Alexander 
court  affirmed  that  districts  must  follow  the  general  rule  of  seniority-based  lay-offs  in 
instances  other  than  where  teachers  share  the  same  hiring  date.  Specifically,  the  court  stated: 

@ 

Employment  of  new  teachers  with  bilingual  ability  and  gradual  prospective 
amendment  of job  descriptions  to  include  language  skills,  may  be  a  proper 
means  of  creating  district-wide  bilingualism.  However,  presently  employed 
teachers  hired  as  monolingual,  who  are  otherwise  competent  may  not  be 
discharged  under  these  conditions  merely  because  more  junior  employees  have 
achieved  passing  grades  from  a  committee  of  bilingual  teachers. 

The  reasoning  of  the  Alexander  applies:  Retaining  junior  employees  here  because 

they  obtained  their  CLAD  certification  is  no  more  appropriate  than  was  retaining  junior 
employees  in  Alexander  who  “achieved  passing  grades  from  a  committee  of  bilingual 
teachers.”  Both  efforts  are  aimed  at  providing  ELL  students  with  greater  access  to  their 
curricula,  but  such  efforts  do  not  allow  districts  the  authority  to  “trump”  the  long-standing 
principle  of  seniority  based  layoffs  established  in  Education  Code  section  44955. 

In  addition  to  Alexander,  OAH  has  addressed  the  appropriateness  of  districts’ 
“skipping”  based  on  the  concerns  of  ELL  students.  The  conclusions  reached  by  the 
Administrative  Law  Judges  have  differed,  as  have  the  facts  of  each  matter.  In  reviewing  the 
OAH  decisions  cited  by  the  parties,  Judge  Engeman’s  decision  in  Travis  Unified  School 
District,  OAH  2003020278,  contains  the  only  statutory  analysis  of  section  44955, 
subdivision  (d)(1),  and  accordingly,  provides  guidance. 

e 

In  the  Travis  matter,  Judge  Engeman  determined  that  the  District  failed  to  identify  a 

“specific  course  or  course  of  study”  when  it  laid-off  teachers  who  did  not  possess  the 
equivalent  of  a  CLAD  certification.  As  in  Travis,  the  District  failed  to  identify  a  “specific 
course  or  course  of  study”  that  senior  teachers  were  not  certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 
In  both  instances,  the  districts,  in  effect,  designated  their  entire  curriculum  as  “a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study.” 

The  District’s  “skipping”  in  an  attempt  to  place  a  CLAD  certified  teacher  in  every 

classroom,  stands  inapposite  to  the  language  of  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  that 
requires  Districts  identify  specific  courses  and  to  show  why  specific  junior  personnel  are 
competent  to  teach  them,  to  the  exclusion  of  senior  teachers.  The  District’s  “skipping” 
formula  all  but  concludes  that  a  senior  teacher  lacks  certification  and  is  incompetent  merely 
because  they  lack  CLAD  certification.  The  District  failed  to  provide  authority  that  would 
support  such  a  conclusion.  Both  Alexander  and  Travis  support  the  opposite. 

  

 

5. 

Furthermore,  Education  Code  section  51015  defines  a  “course”  as  an  “area  or 
field  of  organized  knowledge,  usually  provided  on  a  semester,  year  or  prescribed  length-of- 
time  basis”  and  Education  Code  section  51014  states  that  a  “course  of  study”  means  “the 
planned  content  of  a  series  of  classes,  courses,  subjects,  studies  or  related  activities.” 

6. 

These  statutes  make  clear  that  classes  being  taught  by  teachers  holding  CLAD 

certificates  do  not  become,  ipso facto,  a  “specific  course  or  course  of  study.”  Put  another 
way,  there  is  no  “specific  course  or  specific  course  of  study”  known  as  “CLAD.” 

7. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  states  a  district  “shall  make 
assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render 
any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render.”  As  set  forth  in 
Factual  Finding  11,  the  District  is  capable  of  making  “assignments  and  reassignments”  that 
would  not  require  the  five  senior  teachers  to  be  laid-off.  Easing  the  District’s  burden  to 
assimilate  new  ELL  students  transferring  into  the  District  during  mid-year  does  not  provide  a 
basis  for  laying-off  senior  teachers. 

8. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  2  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law. 
(Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.178-179). 

9. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  identified  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction 
of  their  services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  with  due  process. 
(San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d.  627). 

10. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  to  reduce 
the  District’s  certificated  staff  by  10  FTE.  However,  the  District  improperly  determined  the 
order  of  seniority  of  teachers  to  be  laid  off  because  it  did  not  establish  that  CLAD 
certification  is  a  separate  course  of  study  or  that  it  could  not  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  to  retain  senior  employees.  Additionally,  the  District 
attempted  to  use  the  lay-off  process  to  effectively  terminate  teachers  who  failed  to  meet  its 
requirement  to  become  CLAD  certified,  a  practice  that  if  allowed  would  undermine  the 
principle  of  seniority  based  lay-offs. 

11. 

Accordingly,  the  District  must  retain  respondents  Blasquez,  Condin,  Olin, 

Scott  and  Vorderttasse. 

12. 

Services  reduced  below  the  level  mandated  by  law  are  not  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  So  long  as  a  school  district  does  not  reduce 
its  offerings  in  a  code  mandated  course  below  the  level  required  by  law,  that  reduction 
should  be  considered  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689.)  The  District  may  proceed  to  lay  off  the  remaining 
respondents  because  it  is  appropriately  reducing  the  level  of  services  mandated  by  law.

  

  

  

RECOMMENDATION 

As  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  respondents 

Robyn  Annicchero,  Cynthia  Autrey,  Katherine  Camilleri,  Amy  Davis  and  Melissa  Durrans, 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  District  may  not 
lay-off  respondents  Judith  Blasquez,  James  Condon,  Scott  Olin,  Barbara  Scott  and  James 
Vordestrasse. 

DATED:  May  2,  2008 

G 
A.  GEREN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   

