BEFORE  THE 
OFFICE  OF  THE  SANTA  CLARA  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
COUNTY  OF  SANTA  CLARA 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

NOLY  BALBASTRO,  ANGELA  DAVIS, 
GRACE  PANOSO,  YVONNE  STEVENS 
and  STEPHANIE  SY, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008030669 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2008,  in  San  Jose,  California. 

Adam  J.  Fiss,  Esq.,  of  Littler  Mendelson,  represented  the  Santa  Clara  County 

Superintendent  of  Schools. 

Christopher  Schumb,  Esq.,  represented  respondents  Noly  Balbastro,  Angela  Davis, 

Grace  Panoso,  Yvonne  Stevens  and  Stephanie  Sy,  all  of  whom  were  present. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  28,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Laura  Kidwiler  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as  the 

Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  at  the  Santa  Clara  County  Office  of 
Education. 

2. 

Respondents  Noly  Balbastro,  Angela  Davis,  Grace  Panoso,  Yvonne  Stevens 

and  Stephanie  Sy  are  certificated  employees  of  the  County  Office. 

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  Interim  Santa  Clara  County  Superintendent  of  Schools 
Joe  Fimiani  adopted  a  resolution  reducing  or  discontinuing  particular  kinds  of  services  no 
later  than  June  30,  2008,  and  directing  the  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  to 
send  appropriate  notices  to  effectuate  the  certificated  staff  reductions.

  

  

  

4. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  Assistant  Superintendent  Kidwiler  gave  written 

notice  to  respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  that  they  will  not  be  reemployed  for 
the  2008-09  school  year. 

5. 

Each  respondent  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  terminating  his  or  her  services.  An  accusation  was  served  on  respondents,  each  of 
whom  filed  a  timely  notice  of  defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been 
met. 

6. 

The  County  Superintendent  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following 

particular  kinds of services  no  later  than  June  30,  2008: 

Position 
Teacher,  Alternative  Schools 
Teacher,  Early  Childhood, 
Special  Education 

Department 

Alternative  Schools 
Special  Education 

Special  Education 
Teacher,  Severe  Disabilities 
Teacher,  Deaf/Hard  of  Hearing 
Special  Education 
Teacher,  Emotionally  Disturbed  —  Special  Education 
Special  Education 
Principal,  Special  Education 
Special  Education 
School  Nurse 
Special  Education 
Teacher,  Orthopedic  Impairments 
Special  Education 

Audiologist 

FTE! 
4.0 
9.0 

17.0 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.6 
2.0 
0.5 
40.1 

Total 

7. 

Even  with  the  reductions  in  services  next  year,  the  County  Office  of  Education 

will  be  able  to  provide  all  legally  mandated  services  at  required  levels.  There  will  be 
adequate  staff  to  meet  established  program  standards  for  class  size. 

8. 

With  respect  to  each  respondent,  no  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  is 

being  retained  to  perform  services  that  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9. 

Thanh  Nguyen  is  a  tenured  teacher  with  more  seniority  than  any  respondent, 

and  she  is  teaching  under  an  Early  Childhood  Special  Education  Waiver  that  expires  August 
15,  2008.  The  services  Nguyen  performs  are  services  that  respondents  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render.  Respondents  assert  that  in  the  absence  of  evidence  that  Nguyen  will  be 
properly  credentialed  next  year,  her  position  should  be  considered  an  opening  that  could  be 
filled  by  one  of  them,  thus  necessitating  one  fewer  layoff.  Respondents’  assertion  is  without 
merit.  Whether  Nguyen  will  be  credentialed  next  year  to  continue  in  her  current  assignment 
is  a  matter  of  speculation.  In  determining  how  many  employees  must  be  laid  off  to 
effectuate  the  service  cuts,  the  County  Superintendent  is  not  required  to  take  into  account 
attrition  that  is  not  positively  assured,  and  the  potential  opening  in  Nguyen’s  position  falls 
into  this  category. 

'  Full-time  equivalent  positions. 

-2- 

 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been 
provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  pursuant  to  section  Education  Code  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their 
services  will  be  terminated  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44949, 

ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Noly  Balbastro,  Angela  Davis,  Grace  Panoso, 

Yvonne  Stevens  and  Stephanie  Sy  that  their  services  will  be  terminated  for  the  2008-09 
school  year,  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED:  a gorel  29,  2005 

NANCY  ILC 
RASMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

3- 

 

