  

e@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
MAXWELL  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

OAH  No.  N2008030629 

LISA  BECKER,  SUZANNE  BOGGS, 
ELENA  GOMES,  ERIC  LEAL,  SARAH 
RICHTER  and  VICTORIA  WILSON, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Trevor  Skarda,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  22,  2008,  in  Maxwell,  California. 

@ 

Diana  D.  Halpenny,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Kronick  Moskovitz  Tiedemann  &  Girard, 

represented  the  Maxwell  Unified  School  District. 

A  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Huguenin  Law  Office,  represented  all  of 

the  respondents  to  the  extent  that  their  interests  did  not  conflict. 

The  matter  proceeded  in  respect  to  the  Lay  Off  Notices  issued  to  Lisa  Becker, 
Suzanne  Boggs,  Elena  Gomes,  Eric  Leal,  Sarah  Richter  and  Victoria  Wilson,  as  these 
employees  had  filed  Requests  For  Hearing,  been  issued  Accusations,  and  had  filed  through 
their  attorney  Notices  of  Defense  to  the  Accusation. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  22,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  Maxwell  Unified  School  District  (District)  operates  three  schools, 

Maxwell  Elementary  School,  Maxwell  High  School  and  Enid  Prine  Continuation  School. 
Maxwell  High  School  is  a  “necessary  small  high  school”  with  enrollment  of just  over  100 
students. 

: 

   

  

  

2. 

Ron  Turner  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District.  He  has  held  that  position  for 
almost  eight  years.  Mr.  Turner  is  also  the  principal  of  the  High  School.  His  actions,  and  the 
actions  of  the  Board,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

3. 

Before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  properly  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  pursuant  to 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
next  school  year.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and 
noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  Resolutions  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  5.43  full-time 
equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

4. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

5. 

The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 

employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  Accusations  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense  were  served  on  those  employees. 

Respondents  timely  filed  Notices  of  Defense. 

6. 

7. 

employees  of  the  District. 

Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  permanent  or  probationary  certificated 

8. 

On  March  6,  2008,  at  a  meeting  of  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees 

9. 

.  Reduce  2.0  FTE  K-5  Classrooms 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-005,  providing 

for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services,  and  to  decrease 
a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District,  as  follows: 

(Governing  Board),  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  was  given  notice  of  the 
Superintendent’s  recommendations  that  certificated  employees  holding  5.43  FTE  positions 
be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating 
the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

Mr.  Leal  was  initially  identified  as  a  “temporary”  employee.    

Reduce  .17  FTE  Math  (1  Class),  Grades  6-8. 
Reduce  .34  FTE  Language  (2  Classes),  Grades  6-8. 
.  Reduce  .51  FTE  Literature  (3  Classes),  Grades  6-8. 
.  Eliminate  .17  FTE  Band  (1  Class),  Grades  6-8. 

Eliminate  .33  FTE  Music,  Grades  K-5 
Reduce  .17  FTE  Science  (1  class),  Grades  6-8 

Eliminate  1.0  FTE  English  Language  Development  Class,  Grades  K-8. 

It  was  stipulated  that  Eric  Leal  is  a  probationary  employee  with  an  initial  hire  date  of  August  21,  1998. 

.  Reduce  .34  .0  FTE  History  (2  Classes)  Grades  6-8. 

 
>
D
w
A
a
o
m
m
O
o
r
r

' 

J. 

Reduce  .40  FTE  Counseling  Services,  Grades  9-12. 

10. 

On  March  6,  2007,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-007,  in 
which  the  Governing  Board  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 
seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  The 
criteria  include  credentialing,  experience  (including  experience  in  other  districts  or  previous 
experience  with  Maxwell  before  the  current  date  of  hire),  education,  and  performance. 

11. 

On  March  6,  2007,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-006,  in 

which  the  Governing  Board  established  competency  criteria  for  determining  whether 
certificated  employees  could  displace  more  junior  employees.  The  competency  criteria 
require  that,  in  order  to  displace  a  more  junior  employee,  a  certificated  employee  must  have 
either  previous  experience  teaching  the  same  subject  area  at  the  same  grade  level,  or 
academic  training  in  the  subject  area. 

12. 

The  District  is  experiencing  financial  difficulties  caused  by  a  settlement  with 
the  teachers  union,  declining  enrollment  and  the  likelihood  of  reduced  State  funding  in  the 
upcoming  year.  Regarding  enrollment,  the  District  anticipates  that  multiple  students  who 
currently  attend  schools  in  the  District  on  inter-district  transfers  will  likely  return  to  their 
districts-of-residence  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Thus,  the  Governing  Board  resolved 
to  reduce  teaching  services  and  counseling  services,  affecting  employment  of  5.43  FTE 
teaching  positions  and  a total  of  seven  employees.”  The  Board’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and 
reduce  teaching  services  was  made  in  order  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

13. 

Superintendent  Turner  and  other  District  employees,  in  particular  Fiscal 

Personnel  Officer  Danielle  Wilson,  were  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical 
aspects  of  the  layoff. 

14. 

The  District  maintains  a  Certificated  Employee  Hire  List  which  contains 

employees’  seniority  dates  (first  date  of  service),  status  as  tenured,  probationary  or 
temporary,  credentials  and  other  authorizations.  Status,  credential  and  authorization  data 
are  obtained  from  the  District’s  records.  The  District  circulated  a  seniority  list  in 
anticipation  of  issuing  layoff  notices.  The  District  amended  the  credential  and  authorization 
information  on  the  seniority  list  based  on  input  received  from  the  teachers  after  the  list  had 
been  circulated. 

15. 

The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the 

least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The 
District  then  determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area 
and  were  entitled  to  “bump”  other  employees  and  developed  a  “bumping  chart.”  In 
determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  affected  service,  the  District  determined 
the  impact  on  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  The  District  checked  the  credentials  of 

?  One  teacher  who  received  a  layoff  notice,  Leanna  Glander,  did  not  request  a  hearing.  Because  she  did 

not  request  a  hearing,  the  District  is  entitled  to  reduce  Ms.  Glander’s  counseling  services  .40  FTE. 

  

 

  

affected  individuals  to  determine  whether  they  could  “bump”  other  employees  who  were 
junior  to  them. 

16. 

The  District  then  looked  at  employee  “competence”  for  certain  positions  as 

opposed  to  other  positions.  Specifically,  the  District  looked  at  proposed  class  schedules  for 
the  upcoming  year  at  District  schools  and  determined  if  the  affected  employees  were 
competent  to  teach  any  subject  currently  taught  by  a  more  junior  employee.  Because 
Maxwell  High  School  is  a  “necessary  small  school,”  the  District  is  permitted  by  law  to 
allow  any  teacher,  as  long  as  he  or  she  holds  a  credential,  consents  and  meets  the  District’s 
competency  criteria,  to  teach  any  subject  matter  at  the  High  School.  Since  all  of  the 
teachers  affected  by  the  layoff  have  teaching  credentials,  the  District  considered  whether 
any  of  them  were  “competent”  to  teach  any  class  at  the  High  School. 

MAY  THE  DISTRICT LAY  OFF  SENIOR  TEACHER  SUZANNE  BOGGS,  WHILE 
RETAINING  LESS  SENIOR  TEACHERS  WHO  TEACH  MATH  AT MAXWELL  HIGH 
SCHOOL? 

17. 

Katie  Mathis  and  Chongruk  Lewis  are  probationary  teachers  currently 

assigned  to  teach  math  at  Maxwell  High  School.  The  District  did  not  serve  either  Ms. 
Mathis  or  Mr.  Lewis  with  a  layoff  notices.  Ms.  Mathis  holds  a  preliminary  single  subject 
credential  in  math  and  Mr.  Lewis  holds  a  professional  clear  single  subject  credential  in 
math. 

18. 

19. 

|  Respondents  argued  that  the  District  should  have  utilized  one  of  two 

It  was  not  established  that  Mr.  Lay  consented  to  teaching  Math  at  Maxwell 

alternative  “bumping”  chains  whereby  either  Lewis  or  Mathis  would  have  received  layoff- 
notices  and,  ultimately,  Boggs  would  have  been  retained.  Under  either  alternative 
“bumping”  chain,  a  fourth  teacher  named  Eric  Lay,  who  has  the  same  hire  date  as  Ms. 
Boggs,  would  need  to:  (1)  consent  to  teaching  math  at  Maxwell  High  School,  and  (2)  meet 
the  competency  criteria  adopted  by  the  Governing  Board. 

High  School.  The  only  evidence  presented  relating  to  Mr.  Lay’s  consent  was  inadmissible 
hearsay  testimony  from  the  District’s  superintendent,  and  that  evidence  was  far  less  than 
unequivocal.  Superintendent  Turner  testified  that  last  summer  he  approached  Mr.  Lay,  and 
that  Mr.  Lay  was  not  interested  in  teaching  Math  at  the  high  school.  This  spring,  in  a  brief 
conversation,  Mr.  Lay  relayed  to  Mr.  Turner  that  he  would  teach  Math  at  the  high  school, 
essentially,  only  if  he  had  to. 

   

It  was  also  not  established  that  Mr.  Lay  is  competent  to  teach  math  at  the 
High  School.  As  discussed  above,  the  District’s  competency  criteria  require  Mr.  Lay  to 
have  a  credential  or  experience  teaching  the  subject  of  Math  at  the  High  School  level.  There 
was  no  evidence  that  Mr.  Lay  has  a  credential  in  the  area  of  math.  He  has  applied  for  one, 
but  his  application  is  pending.  Mr.  Lay  has  never  taught  math  at  the  High  School  level. 

20. 

21.  —  The  District  need  not  use  either  alternative  “bumping”  chain  proposed  by  the 

respondents.  The  District  may  retain  Mathis  and  Lewis,  the  current  High  School  Math 
teachers,  and  layoff  Boggs. 

MAY  THE  DISTRICT  ELMINATE  THE  PULL-OUT  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE  LEARNER 
(ELL)  CLASS? 

22. 

Eric  Leal  teaches  a  pull-out  model  ELL  class.  He  has  a  professional  clear 
single-subject  credential  in  Spanish,  a  Bilingual,  Crosscultural,  Language  and  Academic 
(BCLAD)  certificate,  a  multi-subject  credential,  and  a  clear  reading  certificate.  In  addition 
to  his  pull-out  ELL  class,  Mr.  Leal  has  other  duties,  including,  in  relevant  part,  consultation 
with  classroom  teachers  and  administration  of  tests  of  English  fluency  to  ELL  students. 

23. 

The  District  seeks  to  eliminate  Mr.  Leal’s  class.  Superintendent  Turner 

testified  that  the  District  will  switch  to  a  different  model  to  teach  ELL  students  next  year 
and  as  a  result,  a  pull-out  model,  whereby  ELL  students  are  brought  to  Mr.  Leal’s  class,  will 
not  be  necessary.  The  District  will  rely  on  teachers  with  Crosscultural,  Language  and 
Academic  (CLAD)  certificates  to  provide  some  of  the  services  previously  provided  by  Mr. 
Leal  in  their  classrooms.  Additionally,  the  District  will  likely  utilize  the  services  of  the 
Spanish  teacher  at  the  High  School,  who  also  has  a  BCLAD,  to  absorb  some  of  Mr.  Leal’s 
duties,  including  administering  tests  and  consultation  services.  According  to  Mr.  Turner, 
the  District  will  provide  the  same  level  of  services  to  its  ELL  students  next  year,  but  in  a 
different  manner.  The  District  is  not  eliminating  ELL  services,  which  the  District  conceded 
are  mandated  services. 

24.  —  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  pull-out  ELL  class  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

25. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the 

particular  kinds  of  services  of  pull-out  ELL  class  will  cause  it  to  reduce  its  offerings  in  code 
mandated  courses  below  the  level  required  by  law. 

OTHER  MATTERS 

26. 

Respondents’  attorney  argued  that  the  proposed  reduction  of  particular  kinds 

of  services,  including  2.0  FTE  of  Grades  K-5  classrooms  and  1.5  FTE  of  Grades  6-8 
classrooms  (excluding  the  .17  FTE  of  Band  for  Grades  6-8),  may  cause  the  District  to 
exceed  the  number  of  students  allowable  by  law  in  each  classroom.  Respondents’ 
contention  not  supported  by  any  admissible  evidence. 

27. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Governing  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  listed  in  Factual  Finding  9  was  arbitrary  or  capricious  or  that  its 
decision  will  cause  it  to  reduce  course  offerings  in  code  mandated  courses  below  the  level 
required  by  law. 

  

 

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955  were  met. 

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  District  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings 
are  necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Governing  Board’s  decisions  were  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  Resolution  No.  07-08-005  are  particular  kinds  of 

services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees 
of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause 
for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s 
schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notices  sent  to  respondents  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 

services  and,  therefore,  were  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  them  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Board  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds 
of  services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838;  see,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

6. 

No  junior  certificated  employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services 

which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 

 

given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

8. 

Services  reduced  below  the  level  mandated  by  law  are  not  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  So  long  as  a  school  district  does  not  reduce 
its  offerings  in  a  code  mandated  course  below  the  level  required  by  law,  that  reduction 
should  be  considered  a  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service.  (Degener  v.  Governing 
Board,  supra,  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

9. 

Education  Code  section  305  states  that  all  children  in  California  public  schools 
shall  be  taught  English  by  being  taught  in  English,  and  that  children  who  are  English  learners 
shall  be  educated  “through  sheltered  English  immersion  during  a  temporary  transition  period 
not  normally  intended  to  exceed  one  year.”  Schools  are  permitted,  but  not  required,  to 
segregate  ELL  children  from  mainstream-English  classrooms.  In  short,  nothing  in  Education 
Code  section  305  requires  schools  to  utilize  a  pull-out  model  for  educating  ELL  children. 

10. 

It  was  not  established  that  the  District  will  reduce  its  course  offerings  below 
mandated  levels  by  reducing  1.0  FTE  English  Language  Development  Class,  Grades  K-8. 

ORDER 

DATED:  April  29,  2008 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  employees  occupying  5.43  full-time  equivalent  certificated 

positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  including  the  following 
respondents:  Lisa  Becker,  Suzanne  Boggs,  Elena  Gomes,  Eric  Leal,  Sarah  Richter,  and 
Victoria  Wilson. 

    

Anwun  SL  ude 
TREVOR  SKARDA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

