e 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GATEWAY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
SHASTA  COUNTY,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

DANEECE  BYRUM  and 
DAVID  MELCHER, 

OAH  No.  2008030976 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Karen  J.  Brandt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  on  May  9,  2008,  in  Redding,  California. 

Joseph  C.  Kinkade,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Gateway  Unified  School  District 

(District). 

Respondent  Daneece  Byrum  was  present  and  was  represented  by  Michael  N. 

McCallum,  Attorney  at  Law. 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondent  David  Melcher. 

Evidence  was  received  on  May  9,  2008.  The  record  was  left  open  until  May  22, 
2008,  for  counsel  to  file  closing  briefs.  On  May  22,  2008,  Mr.  Kinkade  filed  a  closing  brief 
on  behalf  of  the  District,  which  was  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  14.  On  May  22, 
2008,  Mr.  McCallum  filed  a  closing  brief  on  behalf  of  Ms.  Byrum,  which  was  marked  for 
identification  as  Exhibit  I.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  for  decision 
on  May  22,  2008.  Pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11524  and  Education  Code  section 
44949,  subdivision  (e),  the  time  within  which  the  proposed  decision  shall  be  submitted  under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  subdivision  (c),  was  continued  to  and  including  June  5,  2008, 
and  the  time  within  which  notice  of  termination  of  services  shall  be  given  under  Education 
Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (c),  was  continued  to  and  including  June  12,  2008. 

 

ou, 

"rer 

@ 

In 

10. 

their  Study. 

tests  for  District  employees." 

testing;  (2)  Specialized Physical  Health  Care  Procedures  (SPHC’s)  for  students with 
diabetes,  epi-pens,  and  G-tubes;  (3)  Individual  Health  Services  and  Section  504  plans; (4) 
medication  administration, (5)  mandated  reports,  including kindergarten  immunization 
reports,  program  and  compliance  supervision,  oral  health  assessments  for  kindergartners,  an 
hearing  reports  to  the  state;  (6)  health  and  development reports,  including  initial, triennial, 
and  preschool reports,  TEP/SST! attendance, and  GREAT’  and  NPS?  work;  and  (7)  TB  skin 
According  to  the  Study,  when  all  these  services  are  added,  they 
total  237.3  nurse  days  a  year.  One certificated  school  nurse  works  about  190  days  a  year. 
Given  the  difference  between  these  two  numbers,  Ms.  Byrum  and  Ms.  Mancuso  believe  that 
one  certificated  school  nurse  would  not  be  able  to  provide  all  the  nursing  services  listed  in 
The District  disputed  the  amount  of  nursing  time  set  forth  in  the  Study. 
particular,  Mr.  Strohmayer  disputed  that  certificated  nurses  spent  182  hours  a  year  On  insulin 
administration,  since  there  is  only  one  student  in  the  District  who currently  requires  insulin 
He  also questioned whether  certificated  nurses  spend  33  hours  a 
year  on  Section  504  plans,  or  280  hours  a  year  attending  TEP  and  SST  meetings. 
to  Jody  Thulin,  the  Assistant Superintendent  in  charge  of  special  education,  the  Jaw  requires 
that  a  nurse  must  attend  an  IEP  meeting  only  when  nursing  services  are  4  required  part  of  the 
TEP.  Historically, services  provided  bya  certificated  nurse  have  been  included  as 
mandatory  requirement  in  the  JEP’s  of  only  about  four  students. 
Ms.  Byrum  and  Ms. Mancuso  testified  that,  while  there  was  only  one  student with 
diabetes  who  needs  insulin  administered  by  @  nurse,  there  are  six  or  seven  other  diabetic 
students  who  require  nursing  assistance.  They  also  testified  that  they  attend  TEP  and  SST 
meetings  whenevet  their  attendance  is  requested  and  fill  out  forms  as  required  for  these 
There  was  not  enough  evidence presented  at  hearing  to  determine  whether  the 
Study  accurately  reflects  the  amount  of  time certificated  school  nurses  spend  in providing the 
The  District  also  argued  that  the  Education  Code  does  not  mandate  that  all  the 
health  care services  which  the District’s  school  nurses  are currently  providing  must  be 
provided  bya certificated  school  nurse. 

The  District’s  argument  was persuasive. 

administered  by  @  nurse. 

listed  services. 

According 

meetings. 

ii. 

a 

  

Lapp”  stands  for individualized  education  program.  «gg7”  stands  for  student  study  team. 
2«GREAT”  stands  for  the  Gateway Redding Enterprise Achieving  Together. 
comprised  of  three  school  districts.  Through  GREAT,  the  District  has provided  the  nursing  services  of  Ms. 
Mancuso  to  the  Redding  Unified  School  District  one  day  a  week  for  special  education  students  with  nursing needs. 
4  Ms.  Byrum  and  Ms.  Mancuso  also  provide  nursing  services  to approximately  20  students  who  have  medically 
  «yps”  stands  for  non-public  school. 
complex  conditions,  and  to  students  who  attend  after  school  programs.

a  special  education  consortium 

js 

It 

3

School  districts  “shall  give  diligent  care  to  the  health  and  physical  development  of 

pupils,  and  may  employ  properly  certified  persons  for  the  work.”  (Ed.  Code,  §  49400.  Italics 
added.)  School  districts  must  also  “maintain  fundamental  school  health  services  at  a  level 
that  is  adequate  to  accomplish  all  the  following:  [{]  (1)  Preserve  pupils’  ability  to  learn.  [{] 
(2)  Fulfill  existing  state  requirements  and  policies  regarding  pupils’  health.  [{]  (3)  Contain 
health  care  costs  through  preventive  programs  and  education.” 

The  Education  Code  requires  school  districts  to  conduct  sight  and  hearing  screening 

(Ed.  Code,  §  49452),  and  scoliosis  screening  (Ed.  Code,  §  49452.5).  The  Education  Code 
also  contains  provisions  governing  the  administration  of  medication  and  epinephrine  to 
students  (Ed.  Code,  49423),  and  the  delivery  of  specialized  physical  health  care  services, 
including  catheterization,  gastric  tube  feeding,  suctioning,  and  other  services  that  require 
medically  related  training  (Ed.  Code,  §  49423.5.)  These  statutory  provisions  do  not, 
however,  require  that  certificated  school  nurses  must  provide  the  described  health  care 
services.  (Gallup  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1996)  41  Cal.App.4th  1571.)  In  addition,  the  law 
does  not  mandate  that  a  certificated  school  nurse  must  attend  all  IEP  and  SST  meetings,  or 
that  a  certificated  schoo]  nurse  must  be  involved  in  the  development  of  Section  504  plans  for 
students  with  disabilities.  Thus,  while  the  District  must  provide  all  the  health  care  services 
mandated  in  the  Education  Code,  it  is  not  required  to  utilize  certificated  school  nurses  to 
provide  many  of  the  services  listed  in  the  Study  prepared  by  Ms.  Byrum  and  Ms.  Mancuso. 

12. 

It  was  apparent  that  both  Ms.  Mancuso  and  Ms.  Byrum  are  very  dedicated 

13. 

In  sum,  the  math  and  nursing  services  identified  in  the  Layoff  Resolution  are 

school  nurses  who  provide  valuable  health  care  services  to  the  District.  The  law,  however, 
grants  the  District  the  discretion  to  determine  how  and  in  what  manner  mandated  health  care 
services  will  be  provided  to  students.  (Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott 
(1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  769.)  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the  District  would  not  be 
able  to  provide  all  legally  mandated  health  care  services  to  students  if  it  reduces  its 
certificated  school  nursing  staff  by  one  Full  Time  Equivalent  position. 

particular  kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code 
section  44955,  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  services  was  not 
arbitrary  or  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  Board’s  decision  was 
based  solely  on  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  properly  identified  the 
certificated  employees  providing  these  particular  kinds  of  services.  No  junior  certificated 
employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  that  respondents  are  certificated  and 
competent  to  render. 

   

and  44955.  All  notice  and  jurisdictional  prerequisites  required  by  those  sections  were 
satisfied. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

2. 

The  math  and  nursing  services  the  District  seeks  to  eliminate  in  this  matter,  as 

set  forth  in  the  Layoff  Resolution,  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that  may  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  Pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955,  legal  cause  exists  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular 
kinds  of  services.  The  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services 
relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

3. 

No  certificated  employee  with  less  seniority  than  either  respondent  is  being 

retained  to  render  a  service  that  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Legal 
cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to  give  respondents  final 
notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  2008-2009  school  year. 

RECOMMENDATION 

lL. 

The  Gateway  Unified  School  District’s  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  the 
particular  kinds  of  math  and  nursing  services  identified  in  the  Layoff  Resolution  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  is  AFFIRMED. 

2. 

The  Accusation  against  respondents  is  SUSTAINED.  The  Gateway  Unified 
School  District  may  give  final  notices  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

DATED:  May  27,  2008 

Administrative\Law  Judge 
Office  of  Adminjstrative  Hearings 

  

  

 

