BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
EL  RANCHO  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2008040027 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

Teachers  of  the  El  Rancho  Unified  School 
District, 

    

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ralph  B.  Dash,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  April  30,  2008,  at  Pico  Rivera,  California. 

Edward  J.  Kunkel,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  El  Rancho  Unified  School  District 

(District). 

The  District  served  a  Notice  of  Layoff  on  each  of  the  teachers  and  administrators 
(certificated  employees)  listed  on  Exhibit  A  attached  hereto;  said  list  is  comprised  of  all 
certificated  employees  who  requested  a  hearing.  The  names  of  the  certificated  employees 
listed  on  Exhibit  A,  marked  with  an  asterisk,  were  present  at  the  hearing. 

Lawrence  R.  Rosenzweig  and  Brent  I.  Rosenzweig,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  all 

certificated  employees  listed  on  Exhibit  A  except  for  Joanne  Brenner,  Norma  Gisela 
Castanon,  Mark  Merjil,  and  Elias  Vargas.  None  of  these  certificated  employees  appeared  at 
the  hearing,  although  due  notice  thereof  was  given  to  each  of  them  as  provided  by  law. 

During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  the  parties  stipulated  to  the  withdrawal  of  the 

Accusation  against  Adrian  Ayala,  Cynthia  Alvarez,  Ruth  Baskett,  Larry  Dean  Cochran, 
Norma  Gisela  Castanon,  John  Guzman,  Andrea  Larios,  Mark  Matthews,  Ricardo  Perez- 
Selsky,  Linda  Ramirez  and  Edna  Tristan.  The  parties  further  stipulated  that,  based  on  the 
testimony  of  Gabriel  Gonzalez,  which  counsel  for  the  District  confirmed  with  his  client  as 
being  correct,  Mr.  Gonzalez’  position  on  the  seniority  list  should  have  been  higher,  giving 
him  “bumping  rights,”  and  he  will  not  be  laid  off. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  the  matter  submitted,  the 

Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Finding  of  Facts. 

1. 

Katherine  Enloe,  Ed.  D.,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  the  District,  acting  in  her 
official  capacity,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served  upon 

 

  

Respondents  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The 
parties,  by  and  through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met.  Accordingly,  no  Findings  regarding  the  timeliness  of  any 
notices  or  requests  for  hearing  are  made. 

2.  On  March  13,  2008,  the  District's  Governing  Board  (Board)  adopted  an  Amended 
Resolution,  superceding  a  Resolution  adopted  February  28,  2008,  to  reduce  and  discontinue 
the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  (FTE  refers 
to  “full  time  equivalent”  positions):! 

  

  

1. 

2. 

ES 

4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 

15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

Teaching  Services(Inelusion Specialist, Special  Educati 

R 

oF 

Sp 

haa 

jal  t  Sp 

Our  e-F  we 

Servic  sf P3 

Resource 

Reduce  Kindergarten  through  Grade  6  Classroom 
Teaching  Services~  60  FTE 
R  a 
+4FE 
Reduce 
+47 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/Independent  Studies  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/Technology  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/Bilingual  —  2  FTE 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/Program  Improvement  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/Math  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/  Middle  School  —  2  FTE 

jal  Edu  ati 

|  Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/  BTSA/PAR  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Resource  Teaching  Services/Adult  School  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Middle/  Elementary  Math  Coaching  Services  —  3  FTE 
Reduce  Elementary  Reading  Coaching  Services  —  5  FTE 
Reduce  Grade  7  through  Grade  12  Physical  Education  Teaching  Services  —  1 
FTE 
Reduce  District-Wide  Nursing  Services  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Grade  6  through  Grade  12  District  Counseling  Services  —  8  FTE 
Reduce  District-Wide  Psychologist  Services  —  2  FTE 
Reduce  District  Supervisory  Services  for  Child  Care  Program  —  2  FTE 
Reduce  District  Parent  Education  Advisory  Services  for  Child  Care  Program  — 
1  FTE 
Reduce  District  Administrative  Services  /Coordinator,  Student  Intervention  & 
Support  — 
Reduce  District  Administrative  Services  /Coordinator,  Special 
Education/Medi-Cal  Funding  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  District  Administrative  Services  /Coordinator,  Reading  First  —  1  FTE 

1  FTE 

1.  A  number  of  FTE  positions  listed  in  Finding  2  are  “categorically  funded”  by  grants 

from  either  state  or  federal  sources,  grants  which  expire  at  the  end  of  the  school  year.  As  of 
the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  District  had  not  received  official  confirmation  that  any  of  those 
grants  would  be  made  available  for  the  next  school  year. 

    

  

  

23. 

Reduce  District  Administrative  Services  /Coordinator,  Categorical  Programs  — 
1  FTE 
Reduce  High  School  Administrative  Services/  9""  Grade  Dean  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  High  School  Administrative  Services/  10"  Grade  Dean  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  High  School  Administrative  Services/  11"  Grade  Dean  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  Middle  School  Administrative  Services/  Assistant  Principals  —  2  FTE 
Reduce  Elementary  School  Administrative  Services/  Principals  —  4  FTE 
Reduce  Middle  School  Administrative  Services/  Principal  —  1  FTE 

24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30.  |  Reduce  Child  Development/State  Preschool  Program/  Director —  1  FTE 
31.  |  Reduce  High  School  Math  Teaching  Services  —  1  FTE 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 

Reduce  High  School  English  Teaching  Services  —  1  FTE 
|  Reduce  Middle  School  English  Teaching  Services  —  2  FTE 
|  Reduce  High  School  Physical  Education  Teaching  Services  —  2  FTE 

Reduce  High  School  Science  Teaching  Services  —  4  FTE 
Reduce  High  School  Health  Teaching  Services  —  1  FTE 
Reduce  High  School  Computers  Teaching  Services  —  1  FTE 

3.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  or 

discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but 
constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

4.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

5.  The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and  requests 

for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its 
employees. 

6.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

7.  Between  those  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the 
same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of 
the  district  and  the  students.  The  specific  criteria  used  to  determine  the  order  of  termination 
were  fairly  applied  to  rank  those  employees  hired  on  the  same  date. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955.     

  

2.  Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding  2  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  which  may 

be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law. 

3. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither  arbitrary 

nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

4.  Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  to  reduce  the 
District's  certificated  employee  positions  by  120  Full  Time  Equivalents  and  to  give  notice  to 
the  affected  certificated  employees  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955. 

5.  Based  on  the  above  Findings,  including  the  preamble  to  this  Proposed  Decision, 

except  for  Adrian  Ayala,  Cynthia  Alvarez,  Ruth  Baskett,  Larry  Dean  Cochran,  Norma 
Gisela  Castanon,  Gabriel  Gonzalez  ,  John  Guzman,  Andrea  Larios,  Mark  Matthews,  Ricardo 
Perez-Selsky,  Linda  Ramirez  and  Edna  Tristan,  the  names  of  the  affected  certificated 
employees,  those  as  to  whom  final  notices  of  layoff  may  be  given,  are  set  forth  on  Exhibit  A 
attached  hereto. 

ORDER 

As  a  result  of  the  reductions  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  the 
certificated  employees  identified  on  Exhibit  A,  except  Ricardo  Perez-Selsky  and  Gabriel 
Gonzalez,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

Dated:  May  1,  2008 

RALPH  B.  DASH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

