  

BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE  BASSETT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  NO.  L2008020595 

Respondents  Named  in  the  Attached 
Accusation  Mailing  List 

  

Respondents. 

) 

) 
) 

} 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Humberto  Flores,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  1,  2008,  at  the  Board  Room  of  the  Bassett 
Unified  School  District,  La  Puente,  California. 

Margaret  A.  Chidester,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Bassett  Unified  School  District. 

Emma  Lehene,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  respondents  Amy  Arreola,  Jessica 
Barajas,  Dora  Carrillo,  Jesus  Fuentes,  and  Isabel  Reyes.  All  other  respondents  appeared  in 
Propria  Persona. 

SUMMARY 

Evidence  was  received  and  the  record  was  left  open  to  allow  the  District  to  submit  a 
revised  list  of  reductions.  The  revised  list  of  reductions  was  received  on  May  2,  2008,  and 
marked  and  admitted  as  exhibit  10.  The  matter  was  deemed  submitted  on  May  2,  2008. 

The  Board  of  Education  of  the  Bassett  Unified  School  District  (District)  decided  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  personnel  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was  not  related  to  the 
competency  and  dedication  of  the  teachers  whose  services  were  proposed  to  be  reduced  or 
eliminated. 

   

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 
review  of  credentials  and-seniority,  “bumping,”  and  breaking  ties  between  employees  with 
the  same  first  dates  of  paid  service.  The  selection  process  complied  with  Education  Code 
requirements. 

official  capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  Bassett  Unified  School 
District. 

1.  Cynthia  Byrd  filed  the  Accusation  and  the  First  Amended  Accusation  in  her 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

  

2.  Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

3.  On  March  3,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  20-08,  to  discontinue  or 

reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008/2009  school  year  as  follows: 

10  elementary  (K-6)  multiple  subject  classroom  teachers 

10  FTE 

1  middle  school  (6-8)  multiple  subject  classroom  teachers 

1  secondary  French  classroom  teacher 

1  secondary  history/social  studies  classroom  teacher 

3  secondary  English  studies  classroom  teachers 

2  secondary  mathematics  studies  classroom  teachers 

3  counselors 

5  Student  Achievement  Resource  teachers 

1  ELD  resource  teacher 

1  secondary  PE  teacher  on  special  assignment 

3  child  development  classroom  teachers 

2  education  specialists  mild/moderate  classroom  teachers 

1  mild/moderate  credentialed  special  education  specialist 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

3  FTE 

2  FTE 

3  FTE 

5  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

3  FTE 

2  FTE 

1  FTE 

34  FTE 

  

TOTAL 

The  Board  further  determined  that  based  on  the  discontinuance  or  reduction  of 
services,  it  would  be  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certified  employees  at  the  close  of 
the  present  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions.  The 
Board  resolution  also  included  exemptions  from  the  order  of  lay  off  and  tie-breaking  criteria 
for  certificated  employees  with  the  same  date  of  first  paid  service. 

5.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in 

Factual  Finding  3,  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.

  

6.  On  March.6,  2008,  Ms.  Byrd  notified  respondents  in  writing  that  she  had 
recommended  to  the  governing  board  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next 
school  year.  The  mailing  included  the  reasons  for  the  notification  and  stated  that  “A  request 
for  hearing  must  be  in  writing  and  must  actually  be  received  by  me  at  the  District  Office  no 
later  than  4:00  p.m.  on  March  17,  2008.”  All  but  two  of  the  noticed  certificate  employees 
requested  a  hearing. 

7.  At  some  point  during  the  layoff  process,  the  District  was  notified  by  a 

representative  of  the  Bassett  Teachers’  Association  that  the  collective  bargaining  agreement 
currently  in  force,  includes  a  provision  that  seniority  among  certificated  employees  with  the 
same  first  day  of  paid  service  is  to  be  determined  by  lottery. 

8.  On  April  17,  2008,  based  on  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the 
District  and  the  Bassett  Teachers’  Association,  the  Board  reaffirmed  resolution  20-08  but  set 
forth  new  tie-breaking  criteria  to  comply  with  section  7  of  the  collective  bargaining 
agreement.  Section 7  states: 

7.  Seniority  is  established  by  the  initial  date  of  uninterrupted 
credentialed  service  to  the  district  in  probationary  status.  Those 
unit  members  whose  first  day  of  service  tot  (sic)  the  district  is 
the  same,  shall  have  their  seniority  established  by  lot.  The 
district  shall  conduct  the  lottery  in  a  fair,  equitable  and 
reasonable  manner  in  consultation  with  the  association  and  with 
association  representation  present. 

respondent. 

for  leave,  in  determining  the  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  employees. 

10.  The  Board  considered  attrition,  including  resignations,  retirements  and  requests 

11.  The  District  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

9.  On  April  24,  2008,  Ms.  Byrd  made  and  filed  an  Amended  Accusation  against  each 

(the  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position),  current  assignments  and  locations, 
advanced  degrees,  credentials,  and  authorizations. 

   

13.  Based  on  the  District’s  decision  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  the 
respondents  named  in  Factual  Finding  12,  the  District  submitted  a  revised  list  of  reductions 
as  follows: 

respondents  Lynda  Doerner,  Vanessa  Chavez,  Jessica  Gallo-Ramirez,  Meghan  Lerma, 
Denise  Strickland,  Kerry  Honey,  John  Mamea,  Wendy  Max,  Nona  Watson  and  Jennifer 
Avila.  The  motion  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  these  respondents  was  granted. 

12.  During  the  hearing,  the  District  made  a  motion  to  dismiss  the  accusations  against 

10  elementary  (K-6)  multiple  subject  classroom  teachers 

10  FTE 

  

1  middle  school  (6-8)  multiple  subject  classroom  teachers 

1  secondary  history/social  studies  classroom  teacher 

1  secondary  English  studies  classroom  teacher 

1  secondary  mathematics  studies  classroom  teacher 

3  counselors 

1  ELD  resource  teacher 

1  secondary  PE  teacher  on  special  assignment 

2  education  specialists  mild/moderate  classroom  teachers 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

3  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

2  FTE 

21  FTE 

  

TOTAL 

14.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  the 
revised  reduction  list  (Factual  Finding  13),  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

15.  Four  of  the  named  respondents  (Maria  Herrera,  Jimmy  Lima,  Dora  Carrillo  and 

Estela  Peregrina)  are  counselors.  However,  the  Board  resolution  calls  for  a  reduction  of  only 
three  counselors.  Although  respondent  Herrera  is  the  most  senior  of  the  four  counselors  who 
received  notice,  respondent  Lima  is  only  tenured  counselor  on  the  list,  while  respondents 
Herrera,  Carrillo  and  Peregrino  are  probationary  employees.  Therefore,  the  accusation 
against  respondent  Jimmy  Lima  should  be  dismissed. 

16.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a 

more  senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1.  All  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955 
were  met.  Therefore,  jurisdiction  was  established  for  this  proceeding  as  to  all  respondents. 

2.  The  utilization  by  the  District  of  a  lottery  as  a  tie-breaking  procedure  was  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  authority  and  discretion  under  the  facts  of  this  case.  The  Education  Code  does 
not  specifically  prohibit  a  lottery  procedure  to  establish  seniority  when  the  parties  agree  to 
such  a  procedure  pursuant  to  their  collective  bargaining  agreement.  In  this  case,  the  District 
and  the  Bassett  Teachers’  Association  agreed  that  seniority  would  be  established  through  a 
lottery  for  teachers  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service.  In  fact,  it  was  at  the  behest  of  the

  

  

Bassett  Teachers’  Association  that  he  District  changed  its  tie-breaking  criteria  to  a  lottery. 
Finally,  respondents  did  not  object  to  the  lottery  procedure  at  the  hearing. 

3.  Cause  was  established  as  required  by  Education  Code  section  44955  to  reduce  the 
number  of  certificated  employees  due  to  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds 
of  services  as  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  13.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  eliminate 
the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious.  The  decision  relates  solely  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  the  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44949, 

4.  No  junior  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more 

senior  employee  subject  to  layoff  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

5.  Cause  exists  to  layoff  respondents  Amy  Arreola,  Jessica  Barajas,  Dora  Carillo, 

Carlos  Castellanos,  Veronica  Cueva,  Jesus  Fuentes,  Kim  Fuentes,  Martha  C.  Garcia,  Maria 
Herrera,  Melodie  Arin  McDonald,  Estela  Peregrina,  Margarita  Perez,  Moncia  Portugal, 
Isabel  Reyes,  Bernice  Rios,  Kimberly  Thompson,  and  Rene  Tiscareno. 

6,  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  Accusations  against  respondents  Lynda  Doerner, 

Vanessa  Chavez,  Jessica  Gallo-Ramirez,  Meghan  Lerma,  Denise  Strickland,  Kerry  Honey, 
John  Mamea,  Wendy  Max,  Nona  Watson  and  Jennifer  Avila,  pursuant  to  Factual  Finding  12. 

7.  Cause  exists  to  dismiss  the  Accusation  against  respondent  Jimmy  Lima  pursuant  to 

Factual  Finding  15. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  Amy  Arreola,  Jessica  Barajas,  Dora  Carillo, 
Carlos  Castellanos,  Veronica  Cueva,  Jesus  Fuentes,  Kim  Fuentes,  Martha  C.  Garcia,  Maria 
Herrera,  Melodie  Arin  McDonald,  Estela  Peregrina,  Margarita  Perez,  Moncia  Portugal, 
Isabel  Reyes,  Bernice  Rios,  Kimberly  Thompson,  and  Rene  Tiscareno,  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school-year. 

2.  The  Accusations  and  Amended  Accusations  against  respondents  Lynda  Doerner, 
Vanessa  Chavez,  Jessica  Gallo-Ramirez,  Meghan  Lerma,  Denise  Strickland,  Kerry  Honey, 
John  Mamea,  Wendy  Max,  Nona  Watson,  Jennifer  Avila  and  Jimmy  Lima  are  dismissed. 

Dated: 

HUMBERTO  FLORES 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

