BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
JOHN  SWETT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-Reemployment  of 
6.0  Full  Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  Certificated 
Employees 

OAH  No.  2008030270 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  matter  was  heard  before  Michael  C.  Cohn,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  State  of 

California,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  in  Rodeo,  California,  on  April  14,  2008. 

Jonathan  A.  Pearl,  Attorney  at  Law,  Miller  Brown  &  Dannis,  750  B  Street,  Suite 

2310,  San  Diego,  California,  represented  the  John  Swett  Unified  School  District. 

Dale  Brodsky,  Attorney  at  Law,  Beeson,  Taylor  &  Bodine,  1404  Franklin  Street,  Fifth 

Floor,  Oakland,  California  94612,  represented  respondents. 

The  matter  was  deemed  submitted  for  decision  on  April  14,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  February  28,  2008,  the  governing  board  of  the  John  Swett  Unified  School 

District  adopted  Resolution  No.  (07-08)15,  in  which  the  board  resolved  to  reduce  or 
eliminate  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  and  directed  the  superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate  notice 
to  employees  whose  positions  might  be  lost  by  virtue  of  this  action: 

  

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 
Kindergarten  Teacher 
6"  grade  teacher  (5  instructional sections) 
1  section  6th  grade  —  PE 
1  section  7"  grade  —  PE 
1  section  Art  —  Middle  School 
1  section  8"  grade  History 
1  section  8"  grade  PE 
1  section  7"  grade  Pre-Algebra 
1  section  8"  grade  Math 
2  sections  High  School  English 

FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENT  POSITIONS 
1.0  FTE 
1.0  FTE 
.2  FTE 
.2  FTE 
.2FTE 
.2FTE 
.2  FTE 
.2  FTE 
.2  FTE 
4  FTE 

  

 

  

1  section  High  School  English  Language  Development 
1  section  World  History 
1  section  Chemistry 
1  section  High  School  Algebra 
2  sections  of  High  School  PE 
2  sections  High  School  Art 
Independent  Study 

.2FTE 
.2FTE 
.2  FTE 
.2  FTE 
AFTE 
4  FTE 
.6  FTE 

2. 

Prior  to  March  15,  2008,  the  superintendent  gave  written  notice  to  respondents 
that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  it  was  being  recommended  that 
their  services  would  be  reduced  or  eliminated  at  the  close  of  the  2007-2008  school  year. 
Each  of  the  respondents  —  Deborah  Burdette,  Megan  De  La  Mater,  Kelly  Hanson,  Cherie 
Horton,  Addi  Murray,  Steve  Trotter,  and  Deborah  Ynda — filed  a  timely  request  for  a 
hearing. 

3. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  district  rescinded  the  layoff  notice  that 

had  been  sent  to  Megan  De  La  Mater.  As a result,  she  is  no  longer  a  respondent  in  this 
proceeding. 

4. 

The  service  reductions  were  recommended  because  of  concerns  about  the  state 

budget  and  an  expected  reduction  in  revenue.  Most  of  the  reductions  are  fractional  cuts  in 
programs,  i.e.,  the  elimination  of  one  or  two  sections  of  a  particular  subject.  None  of  the 
reductions  will  prevent  the  district  from  providing  mandated  services.  Nor  will  the 
reductions  cause  the  district  to  fall  below  class  size  mandates.  Students  will  still  be  able  to 
meet  graduation  requirements.  The  reductions  are  in  the  interest  of  the  schools  and  their 
students. 

5. 

Kelly  Hanson  is  the  most  junior  PE  teacher  in  the  district.  She  is  one  of  two 

PE  teachers  at  the  high  school  and  the  only  female  PE  teacher  there.  There  are  three  PE 
teachers  at  the  middle  school,  which  is  across  the  street  from  the  high  school.  Hanson’s 
position  is  being  eliminated  because  of  the  reduction  of  two  sections  of  PE  at  the  high  school 
and  three  sections  at  the  middle  school.  (Each  section  represents  0.2  FTE.)  The  district 
intends  to  cover  the  remaining  three  sections  of  Hanson’s  high  school  PE  assignment  by 
sharing  a  teacher  with  the  middle  school.  Although  the  schools  are  on  different  bell 
schedules,  this  shared  teaching  arrangement  is  currently  being  utilized  in  Spanish  classes  at 
the  two  schools. 

Hanson’s  office  is  adjacent  to  the  girls’  locker  room  and  her  duties  include 

managing  the  locker  room  and  maintaining  good  behavior  during  the  seven-minute  changing 
periods  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  each  class  session.  Hanson  asserts  that  because  of  the 
differing  bell  schedules  at  the  middle  and  high  schools  and  the  time  it  will  take  a  PE  teacher 
to  get  from  one  school  to  another,  the  girls’  locker  room  will  invariably  not  be  under  a 
teacher’s  supervision  at  all  times  as  it  is  now.  Thus,  it  is  argued,  the  district  should  retain 
their  only  female  high  school  PE  teacher. 

 

Hanson’s  argument  is  unavailing.  While  not  having  a  full-time  female  PE 
teacher  at  the  high  school  may  well  cause  some  supervision  problems,  the  district  is  not 
mandated  to  have  both  male  and  female  PE  teachers  at  all  schools.  Hanson’s  gender  does 
not  require  the  district  to  skip  her  in  the  layoff  process. 

6. 

Hanson  also  asserts  that  the  district  is  equitably  estopped  from  terminating  her 

services.  Hanson  was  employed  as  a  temporary  teacher  in  the  Benicia  Unified  School 
District  for  the  2006-2007  school  year.  In  August  2007  Hanson  began  working  under  a 
probationary  contract  as  a  first  grade  teacher  with  the  Vallejo  Unified  School  District.  At 
about  the  same  time,  a  female  PE  teacher  at  John  Swett  High  School  suddenly  resigned.  A 
friend  gave  Hanson’s  name  to  Robert  Bass,  the  high  school  principal,  suggesting  Hanson 
might  be  interested  in  the  position.  In  late  August  2007  Bass  invited  Hanson  for  an  interview 
with  him  and  vice  principal  Jeff  Brauning.  Hanson  maintains  that  Bass  and  Brauning  told 
her  they  were  looking  for  someone  to  fill  the  position  long-term  and  sought  assurances  from 
her  that  she  would  remain  in  the  position.  Bass  and  Brauning  referred  Hanson  to 
Superintendent  Michael  Roth,  who  met  with  her  the  next  day.  Roth  told  Hanson  that  the 
district  could  not  hire  her  until  Vallejo  released  her  from  her  probationary  contract.  Hanson 
signed  a  salary  placement  form  accepting  the  position,  contingent  upon  Vallejo’s  releasing 
her.  Roth  does  not  specifically  recall  telling  Hanson the  job  might  only  last  for  one  year,  but 
it  is  his  practice  to  tell  all  new  probationary  teachers  that  they  can  be  released  without  cause 
during  their  first  two  years  of  service. 

The  Vallejo  Unified  School  District  would  not  release  Hanson  until  they  found 

a  replacement  for  her  position.  She  was  not  released  from  her  position  in  that  district  until 
the  beginning  of  December  2007.  During  the  intervening  time,  Roth  made  several  calls  to 
Vallejo’s  human  relations  department  trying  to  find  out  when  Hanson  would  be  released.  At 
one  point,  he  placed  a  call  to  Vallejo’s  superintendent.  Hanson  was  in  frequent  contact  with 
Roth  or  Bass  and  was  repeatedly  assured  the  district  was  working  to  get  her  released  from 
Vallejo.  Hanson  concedes  that  no  one  in  the  district  made  any  specific  promises  that  she 
could  remain  long-term  (although  she  says  Bass  did  tell  her,  “You  owe  me  five  years.”)  But 
she  asserts  that  the  circumstances  of  the  situation  —  the  district’s  solicitation  of  her,  the 
district’s  efforts  to  get  her  released  from  Vallejo,  and  the  fact  she  would  be  the  only  female 
PE  teacher  at  the  high  school,  which  she  thought  insured  job  security  —  all  induced  her  to 
give  up her  job  at  Vallejo.  Had  she  known  she  would  be  laid off  two  and  a half  months  after 
starting,  she  would  not  have  switched  jobs. 

Hanson  began  working  at  John  Swett  High  School  on  December  3,  2007.  On 

December  11,  2007,  she  signed  a  probationary  contract  that  showed  the  period  of  the  contract 
to  be  “December  3,  2007  —  June  30,  2008.”  Hanson  maintains  she  signed  this  contract 
because  she  believed  it  was  a  standard  probationary  contract  and  that  the  terms  were  non- 
negotiable.  She  nevertheless  believed  that  as  the  only  female  PE  teacher  at  the  high  school 
she  would  be  immune  from  layoff  and  would  have  the  position  for  the  long  term. 

Hanson  has  failed  to  demonstrate  sufficient  facts  to  estop  the  district  from 

laying  her  off.  As  respondents  point  out,  a  party  seeking  to  apply  the  doctrine  of  equitable 

  

 

estoppel  must  prove  the  following  four  elements:  “(1)  the  party  to  be  estopped  must  be 
apprised  of  the  facts;  (2)  he  must  intend  that  his  conduct  shall  be  acted  upon,  or  must  so  act 
that  the  party  asserting  the  estoppel  had a  right  to  believe  it  was  so  intended;  (3)  the  other 
party  must  be  ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  facts;  and  (4)  he  must  rely  upon  the  conduct  to his 
injury.”  City  of  Long  Beach  v.  Mansell  (1970)  3  Cal.3d  462,  488-489,  quoting  Driscoll  v. 
City  of  Los  Angeles  (1967)  67  Cal.2d  297,  305.  The  salient  point  in  this  case  is  that  Hanson 
was  not  ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  facts.  She  knew  generally  that  teachers  are  subject  to 
layoff,  especially  newer  ones.  She  knew  that  she  could  be  dismissed  from  her  position,  albeit 
she  believed  only  for  cause.  And  she  knew  that  the  contract  she  signed  ran  only  through  the 
2007-2008  school  year.  Under  those  circumstances,  her  contention  that  she  was  led  to 
believe  she  would  have  a  permanent  home  in  the  district  cannot  estop  the  district  from 
terminating  her  based  upon  her  lack  of  seniority. 

7. 

Steve  Trotter  holds  a  Social  Science  credential  that  entitles  him  to  teach 

history,  geography  and  social  studies.  He  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  social  studies  and  is 
subject  to  a  reduction  of  0.4  of  his  full-time  position  due  to  the  reductions  in  high  school  and 
eighth  grade  history.  Crystal  Lopez,  who is  junior  to  respondent,  also  holds  a  Social  Science 
credential.  However,  Lopez  also  has  a  supplemental  credential  in  Literature  and  her 
assignment  is  as  an  English  teacher.  Trotter  has  in  the  past  taught  journalism  and  PE  classes 
for  the  district.  Although  these  are  outside  the  scope  of  his  credential,  it  appears  the 
governing  board  granted  waivers  permitting  him  to  teach  these  subjects.  Trotter,  who  has 
been  in  the  district  since  he  was  a  student,  told  the  administration  he  was  willing  to  teach 
“anything”  to  remain.  Discussions  were  held  in  early  April  in  which  the  possibility  of 
granting  Trotter  a  waiver  to  permit  him  to  teach  English  was  put  forth.  However,  no  such 
waiver  has  yet  been  issued.  Trotter  asserts  that  the  district  has  routinely  granted  waivers  to 
permit  teachers  to  teach  outside  their  credential  (or  has  allowed  teachers  to  do  so  without 
waivers)  and  maintains  he  should  be  retained  to  teach  English  under  a  waiver. 

As  of  the  date  of  the  hearing,  Trotter  has  no  authorization  to  teach  English. 

While  it  appears  quite  likely  that  the.  board  will  grant  him  a  waiver  at  some  time  in  the  future, 
perhaps  the  very  near  future,  there  is  no  legal  basis  for  requiring  the  district  to  consider 
Trotter  authorized  to  teach  English  and  therefore  exempt  from  the  layoff  process. 

8. 

Deborah  Ynda  is  the  least  senior  teacher  in  the  district,  with  a  seniority  date  of 

January  22,  2008.  Ynda  teaches  first  grade.  She  is  subject  to  layoff  due  to  the  reduction  of 
1.0  FTE  of  kindergarten  as  she  is  being  bumped  by a  senior  teacher.  Ynda  believes  she  has 
special  skills  that  should  cause  the  district  to  retain  her.  In  particular,  Ynda  has  a  BCLAD 
and  in  June  2007  received  a  master’s  degree  in  education.  In  addition,  she  has  been  very 
involved  in  church  and  civic  affairs  since  moving  to  the  community.  While  all  this  is  to 
Ynda’s  credit,  the  district  has  not  adopted  any  skipping  criteria  and  the  evidence  does  not 
establish  that  the  district  must  retain  Ynda  despite  her  lack  of  seniority. 

9. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  district  is  seeking  to  terminate  the  services  of  more 

employees  than  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  PKS  reduction.  The  superintendent  testified 
that  several  of  the  service  reductions  were  being  effectuated  through  attrition.  In  particular, 

 

    

the  0.6  reductions  in  middle  and  high  school  math  and  algebra  are  being  accounted  for  by  the 
pre-March  15  resignation  of  a  math  teacher,  the  0.6  high  school  English  reductions  are  being 
accounted  for  by  the  non-reelection  of  a  probationary  English  teacher,  and  the  0.2  chemistry 
reduction  is  being  accounted  for  by  the  non-reelection  of  a  probationary  science  teacher. 
Respondents  maintain  that  this  1.4  FTE  “over  noticing”  requires  the  retention  of  Kelly 
Hanson  for  a  1.0  position  and  of  Cherie  Horton  for  a  0.4  position.  However,  this  overstates 
the  situation. 

The  board  resolved  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  by a  total  of  6.0  FTE. 

As  set  forth  above,  of  that  amount,  a  1.4  FTE  reduction  has  been  effectuated  through 
attrition,  leaving  4.6  FTE  to  be  accounted  for  through  the  layoff  of  respondents.  Deborah 
Ynda  and  Deborah  Burdette  are  the  two  most  junior  Multiple  Subject  teachers  in  the  district 
and  are  subject  to  layoff  due  to  the  1.0  FTE  reductions  in  kindergarten  and  sixth  grade. 
Kelly  Hanson,  the  next  most  junior  teacher  is  subject  to  layoff  due  to  the  total  of  1.0  FTE 
reductions  in  PE.  Addi  Murray,  a  0.4  FTE  employee  is  entitled  only  to  teach  art.  She  is 
subject  to  layoff  because  of  the  0.4  reduction  in  high  school  art.  Steve  Trotter  is  subject  to 
layoff  of  0.4  of  his  position  due  to  the  two  history  reductions.  These  reductions  equal  3.8 
FTE,  leaving  only  an  additional  0.8  position  to  be  eliminated,  which  results  from  a  0.6  FTE 
reduction  in  independent  study  and  a  0.2  FTE  reduction  in  middle  school  art.  The  seniority 
list  shows  that  both  of  these  subjects  are  being  taught  by  senior  teachers  holding  Multiple 
Subject  credentials  who  would  be  entitled  to  bump  the  only  remaining  respondent,  Cherie 
Horton,  when  their  positions  are  reduced.  But  this  still  leaves  Horton  with  a  0.2  FTE 
position.  It  is  unclear  how  the  district  would  utilize  a  Multiple  Subject  credentialed  teacher 
in  such  a  fractionalized  position,  but  there  was  no  showing  it  could  not  be  accomplished. 
Horton  is  entitled  to  be  retained  for  0.2  FTE. 

10. 

Any  other  assertions  put  forth  by  respondents  at  the  hearing  and  not  addressed 

above  are  found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

11. 

No  junior  employee  is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  that  any  of  the 

respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  6.0  FTE  positions  exists  in  accordance  with  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Cause  further  exists  to  give  respondents  Deborah  Burdette, 
Kelly  Hanson,  Addi  Murray,  and  Deborah  Ynda  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Cause  also  exists  to  give  respondents  Cherie  Horton  and 
Steve  Trotter  notice  that  their  positions  will  be  reduced  by  0.8  FTE  and  0.4  FTE, 
respectively,  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  This  cause  relates  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools 
and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

 

  

Notice  may  be  given  respondents  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for 

e@ 

the  2008-2009  school  year  to  the  extent  shown  above. 

ORDER 

DATED:  Fran 

dS  woe 

  

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

