 
a

  

BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
HEALDSBURG  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Non-reemployment  of 
35.8  Full  Time  Equivalent  Certificated 
Employees, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030352 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  David  L.  Benjamin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Healdsburg,  California,  on  April  23,  2008. 

Lawrence  W.  Schoenke,  Attorney  at  Law,  Miller  Brown  and  Dannis,  represented 

complainant  Robert  J.  Carter,  Superintendent,  Healdsburg  Unified  School  District. 

Michael  A.  Fiumara,  Attorney  at  Law,  Law  Offices  of  Michael  A.  Fiumara,  and  Evan 

Livingstone,  Attorney  at  Law,  Of  Counsel  to  the  Law  Offices  of  Michael  A.  Fiumara, 
represented  respondents  Mike  Berry,  Brandi  Dickey,  Marisol  Hernandez,  Tom  Kirkpatrick, 
Kristen  Koenig,  Lisa  Lidyoff,  Christy  Lubin,  Aida  Pacheco,  Connie  Petereit,  Ann  Rasella, 
Kathy  Robinson,  Denise  Rose,  Julie  Stockly,  Raeann  Valladao,  Jeanne  Van  der  Zee,  and  Kay 
Webb. 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondent  Lise  Melin. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  23,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Robert  J.  Carter  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as 

Superintendent of the  Healdsburg  Unified  School  District. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees of  the  district. 

3. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  district’s  governing  board  adopted  Resolution  No.  08- 
04  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  superintendent  to  give  appropriate 
notices  to  certificated  employees  whose  positions  will  be  affected  by  the  action  (PKS 
resolution). 

 

  

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  Superintendent  Carter  gave  written  notice  to  43 
certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

5. 

Each  of  the  17  respondents  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  is  cause  for  terminating  his  or  her  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

6. 

An  accusation  was  served  on  each  of  the  17  respondents.  All  prehearing 

jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  as  to  each  respondent. 

7. 

With  the  exception  of  respondent  Melin,  each  of  the  respondents  filed  a  notice 

of  defense. 

8. 

In  its  PKS  resolution,  the  governing  board  took  action  to  reduce  the  following 

particular  kinds of  service  for  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICE- 
Reductions  and  Eliminations 

NUMBER  OF  FULL-TIME 
EQUIVALENT  (FTE) 
POSITIONS  (including 
preparation  and  travel  periods 
where  applicable) 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Agricultural  teaching  position  at  Healdsburg 
High  School 

: 

Elective  teaching  positions  at  Healdsburg 
High  School 

English  teaching  positions  at  Healdsburg 
High  School  —  Grades  9-12 

Social  Science  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  High  School 

World  Language  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  High  School 

Vocational  Education  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  High  School 

.2  FTE 

.8  FTE 

1.2  FTE 

.6  FTE 

4  FTE 

AFTE 

7.  Mathematics  teaching  positions  at 

1.6  FTE 

Healdsburg  High  School 

 

  

Chemistry  teaching  position  at  Healdsburg 
High  School 

1.0  FTE 

Physical  Education  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  High  School 

10. 

ll. 

Nurse  position  at  Healdsburg  High  School 

Health  teaching  position  at  Healdsburg 
High  School 

12. 

Special  Education  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  High  School 

13. 

Independent  Study  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  High  School 

14. 

English/History  Core  (Multiple  Subject) 
teaching  positions  at  Healdsburg  Junior 
High  School 

.  Math  teaching  position  at  Healdsburg  Junior 
High  School 

16. 

Math/Science  Core  (Multiple  Subject) 
teaching  position  at  Healdsburg  Junior 
High  School 

.  Physical  Education  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  Junior  High  School 

19. 

Special  Education  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  Junior  High  School 

20. 

Home  Study  teacher  position  at  Healdsburg 
Junior  High  School 

21, 

Reading  teaching  positions  at  elementary 
schools  (categorically  funded) 

22. 

Reading  First  teaching  positions  at 
elementary  schools  (categorically  funded) 

-3- 

.2  FTE 

8  FTE 

.2  FTE 

AFTE 

1.0  FTE 

2.4  FTE 

.8  FTE 

4  FTE 

.6  FTE 

FTE 

4  FTE 

2.0  FTE 

2.0  FTE

17. 

Elective  teaching  positions  at  Healdsburg 
Junior  High  School 

1.8  FTE 

  

  

23.  Resource  Teacher  teaching  position  at 
Healdsburg  Elementary  Schools 
(categorically  funded) 

2.0  FTE 

24,  Elementary  class  teaching  positions  at 

3.0  FTE 

Healdsburg  Elementary  Schools 

25.  Counselor  positions  District  wide 

2.2  FTE 

(categorically  funded) 

26.  Music  teaching  position  District  wide 

1.0  FTE 

27.  Teaching  positions  held  by  persons  without 
authorization  to  teach  English  Language 
Learners 

4.0  FTE 

28.  Continuation  Principal  at  MBA  and  Vice 
Principal  at  Healdsburg  High  School 

1.0  FTE 

29.  Vice  Principal  at  Healdsburg  Junior 

1.0  FTE 

High  School 

30.  Principal  at  Healdsburg  Elementary  Schools 

1.0  FTE 

31.  Director  of  Curriculum  and  Instruction  at 

1.0  FTE 

Healdsburg  District  Office 

9. 

The  total  reduction  of  FTE  positions  in  the  PKS  resolution  is  35.8. 

10. 

The  reductions  called  for  by  the  PKS  resolution  are  based  upon  the  district’s 

analysis  of  its  enrollment  and  its  budget. 

11. 

At  hearing,  complainant  dismissed  the  accusation  against  respondents  Mike 
Berry  and  Tom  Kirkpatrick,  who  were  given  layoff  notices  pursuant  to  item  27  of  the  PKS 
resolution.  Complainant  also  dismissed  the  accusation  against  Aida  Pacheco.  As a  result, 
Berry,  Kirkpatrick,  and  Pacheco  are  no  longer  respondents  in  this  matter. 

12. 

Lois  Gause  is  the  district’s  human  resources  manager.  Gause  testified  that  the 
district  intends  to  effect  the  reductions  called  for  by  item  14 of  the  PKS  resolution  —  2.4  FTE 
in  English/History  Core  teaching  at  the district’s  junior  high  school  —  by  the  termination  of  a 
1.0  FTE  temporary  employee,  termination  of a second  employee  whom  the  district  was 
planning  to  non-reelect,'  and  a  reduction  in  the  0.8  FTE  position  occupied  by  respondent 
Jeanne  Van  der  Zee.  Part  of  Van  der  Zee’s  0.8  FTE  position  is  devoted  to  English/History 

"  Gause  did  not  identify  this  employee  by  name.  The  employee  has  resigned. 

-4- 

 

Core,  and  the  other  part  involves  teaching  students  in  the  elective  AVID  program;  the  AVID 
portion  of  Van  der  Zee’s  position  is  being  eliminated  under  item  17  (elective  teaching 
positions).  The  evidence  does  not  establish  how  Van  der  Zee  split  her  time  between 
English/History  Core  and  AVID. 

Van  der  Zee  argues  that  the  English/History  Core  portion  of  her  position  cannot  be 

eliminated  because  the  district  has  failed  to  take  into  account  the  attrition  caused  by  the 
resignation  of  the  second  employee.  The  evidence,  however,  fails  to  support  her  argument. 
If  anything,  the  evidence  demonstrates  that  the  district  did  take  attrition  into  account:  it 
appears  that  to  achieve  the  2.4  FTE  reduction  in  English/History  Core,  the  district  planned  to 
terminate  two  employees  and  eliminate  a  portion  of  respondent  Van  der  Zee’s  0.8  position. 
That  one  of  those  employees  has  chosen  to  resign  does  not  affect  the  district’s  need  to  reduce 
a  portion  of  Van  der  Zee’s  position. 

13. 

Respondent  Ann  Rasella  teaches  English  Language  Development  (ELD)  and 

speech  at  the  district’s  high  school.  Her  position  is  being  reduced  by  0.4  FTE,  0.2  under  item 
2  of  the  PKS  resolution  (elective  teaching)  and  0.2  under  item  5  (World  Language). 
Respondent  Rasella  questions  whether  ELD  is  a  mandated  service.  She  offers  no authority 
for  the  proposition  that  it  is;  she  argues,  however,  that  having  raised  the  issue,  the  burden 
shifts  to  the  district  to  prove  that  it  is  not  a  mandated  service  or  that,  if  it  is,  the  district  will 
still  meet  mandated  levels  of  service. 

Respondent’s  argument  is  not  accepted.  Under  Education  Code  section  44955,  it  is 

the  district’s  burden  to  prove  that  its  governing  board  has  determined  that  particular  kinds  of 
service  must  be  reduced  or  discontinued;  that,  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance,  it 
is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  or  probationary  employees  of  the  district; 
and  that,  (with  certain  exceptions  not  applicable  here)  no  employee  with  less  seniority  than 
respondent  Rasella  is  being  retained  to  perform  services  that  respondent  is  certificated  and 
competent  to  render.  It  is  true  that,  in  reducing a  particular  kind  of  service,  a  district  may  not 
reduce  a  mandated  service  below  its  statutorily  required  level.  (California  Elementary 
Teachers  Assn.,  Inc.  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796,  811,  Degener  v.  Governing  Board 
(1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689,  696.)  But  it  is  respondent’s  obligation  to  prove  that  such  an 
impermissible  reduction  will  occur;  without  evidence  to  support  respondent’s  claim,  it  is 
presumed  that  the  district  has  complied  with  the  law.  (Evid.  Code,  §  664.)  No  evidence  was 
offered  to  establish  that  ELD  is  a  mandated  service  or  that,  by  reducing  respondent’s  position 
by  0.2  FTE,  the  district  will  reduce  ELD  below  a  statutorily-required  level. 

14. 

Respondent  Julie  Stockly  is  a  1.0  FTE  physical  education  teacher  at 

Healdsburg  Junior  High  School.  A  more  senior  physical  education  teacher  at  Healdsburg 
High  School,  whose  services  are  being  reduced  by  0.2  FTE  under  item 9  of  the  PKS 
resolution,  has  the  right  to  bump  into  Stockly’s  position.  The  district  proposes  to  layoff 
Stockly  completely,  instead  of  by  0.2  FTE,  and  have  more  senior  teachers  from  the high 
school  pick  up  the  remaining  0.8  FTE of  her  position. 

  

 

  

Stockly  asserts  that  she  cannot  be  terminated  from  her  1.0  FTE  position  to 
accommodate  the  bumping  right  of  a  more  senior  teacher  whose  services  are  only  being 
reduced  by  0.2  FTE.  Stockly  is  correct.  Under  Education  Code  section  44955,  the  district 
may  terminate  her  services  only  “when  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of”  a 
reduction of  a  particular  kind of  service.  Section  44955  does  not  prohibit  partial  bumping, 
and  there  is  no  evidence  that  partial  bumping  would  be  impractical  in  this  case.  On  the 
contrary,  it  appears  that  partial  bumping  would  be  practical,  as  the  district  proposed  to  use 
high  school  teachers  to  cover  all  of  Stockly’s  duties  at  the  junior  high  school.  The  district 
may  only  reduce  Stockly’s  position  by  0.2  FTE.  To  eliminate her  job  completely  would,  in 
effect,  eliminate  more  jobs  than  required  by  the  PKS  resolution. 

15. 

Any  other  assertions  put  forth  by  respondents  at  the  hearing  and  not  addressed 

above  are  found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

16. 

|  No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  for  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Cause  for  the  elimination  of  35.8  FTE  exists  in  accordance  with  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  Except  as  set  forth  below,  cause  further  exists  to  give 
respondents  notice  that  their  services  will  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  This  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the 
meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

2. 

In  accordance  with  Finding  14,  cause  does  not  exist  to  give  respondent  Julie 
Stockly  notice  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Cause 
exists  only  to  give  Stockly  notice  that  her  services  will  be  reduced  from  1.0  FTE  to  0.8  FTE. 

ORDER 

1. 

In  accordance  with  Finding  14  and  Legal  Conclusion  2,  the  district  may  give 
notice  to  respondent  Julie  Stockly  only  that  her  services  will  be  reduced  by  0.2  FTE  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year. 

2. 

Notice  may  be  given  to  the  remaining  respondents  that  their  services  will  be 

reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

DATED: 

A 

14,  1006 AEM 0) fy — 

DAVID  L.  BENJAMIN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

