  

e 

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
OF  THE 
YUCAIPA-CALIMESA  JOINT  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2008020559 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Barbara  Caballero,  Scott  Colin,  Jennifer 
Eldridge,  Hillary  Gosselaar,  Barbara 
Grainge,  Scott  Pearne,  Paul  Reynolds, 
Amanda  Stodelle,  Kerry  Vizzini,  and 
Charissa  Wieldin, 

Respondents. 

e 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Yucaipa,  California  on  April  14,  2008. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

represented  the  Yucaipa-Calimesa  Joint  Unified  Schoo!  District. 

Jean  Shin,  Attorney  at  Law,  Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  represented  respondents 

Barbara  Caballero,  Hillary  Gosselaar,  Scott  Pearne,  Amanda  Stodelle,  Kerry  Vizzini,  and 
Charissa  Wieldin. 

Robert  E.  Lindquist,  Attorney  at  Law,  California  Teachers  Association,  represented 

respondents  Scott  Colin,  Barbara  Grainge,  and  Paul  Reynolds. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondent  Jennifer  Eldridge. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  14,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Melissa  Moore,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources  of  the  Yucaipa- 

Calimesa  Joint  Unified  School  District,  made  and  filed  the  accusation  dated  February  27, 

  

1   

2008,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  designee  of  Dr.  Sherry  Kendrick,  Superintendent  of  the 
District. 

Respondents!  are  certificated  District  employees. 

2. 

3. 

In  February  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  District  Board  of  Education  in  writing  of  her 
recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  upcoming 
school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 

4. 

On  February  26,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  9,  determining  that  it 

would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the 
current  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must  be 
reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Physical  Education  Teachers 
High  School  Agriculture  Teacher 
Secondary  English  Teacher 
Middle  School  Math/Science  Core  Teacher 
Elementary  Classroom  Teachers 

17  FTE’s 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  17  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

5. 

The  Board  further  determined  in  Resolution  No.  9  that  it  would  be  necessary 

to  retain  certificated  employees  who  possess  special  training  and  competency  that  other 
certificated  employees  with  more  seniority  might  not  possess,  to  wit:  Teachers  who  have 
authorization  to  teach  English  Learner  (EL)  students,  as  determined  by  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience  that  comes 
therewith. 

6. 

The  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  determine  which 

employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  the 
reduction  of  the  aforementioned  particular  kinds of services.  The  Board  further  directed  the 
Superintendent  or  her  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  of 
the  District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction of these  particular  kinds  of 
services, 

' 
‘The  accusation  named  16  respondents,  six  of  whom  were  subsequently  dismissed  by  the  District. 
collective  references  to  “respondents”  in  this  Proposed  Decision  encompass  the  remaining  ten  respondents,  whose. 
names  appear  in  the  case  caption. 

All 

  

  

 

  

7. 

Subsequent  to  the  action  the  Board  took  on  February  26,  2008  to  reduce 
particular  kinds  of  services  by  17  FTE  positions,  the  District  continued  to  evaluate  its 
personnel  needs.  After  taking  into  consideration  upcoming  positively  assured  attrition, 
resignations,  and  retirements,  the  District  has  now  determined  it  can  meet  its  fiscal  needs  by 
reducing  services  by  a  total  of  ten  FTE  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  To 
accomplish  this  reduction  of  services,  the  District  must  give  final  notices  of  termination  to 
the  ten  certificated  employees,  all  of  whom  are  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

8. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  on  respondents  a 

written  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  their  services  not  be  required 
for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The 
notice  advised  respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each  respondent  had  to  deliver  a 
request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  person  sending  the  notice  by  the  date  specified  in  the 
notice  (a  date  which  in  each  case  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice  was  served),  and 
that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing.  The 
recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to  their 
competency  as  teachers. 

9. 

Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there 
was  cause  for  not  reemploying  that  respondent  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  accusation 
was  thereafter  timely  served  on  each  respondent.  Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of 
Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

10. 

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  9  were  “particular  kinds 

of  services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

11. 

|  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 

welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

12. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

13. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

14. 

Respondent  Paul  Reynolds  has  a  standard  secondary  credential,  with 

authorization  to  teach  physical  education.”  Other  certificated  employees  with  such  a 
credential  and  with  less  seniority  than  Mr.  Reynolds  were  retained.  The  District 

The  credential  also  authorizes  Mr.  Reynolds  to  teach  English.  Mr.  Reynolds  also  holds  a  designated 

2 
teaching  credential  with  authorization  to  teach  safety  and  accident  prevention. 

3

  

  

demonstrated  a  specific  and  immediate  need  for  personnel  to  teach  physical  education.  The 
District  also  demonstrated  that  all  retained  certificated  employees  junior  to  Mr.  Reynolds  had 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  physical  education,  which  Mr. Reynolds 
did  not  possess.  Specifically,  such  junior  certificated  employees  all  have  authorization  to 
teach  English  Learner  students,  as  determined  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience  that  comes  therewith. 

15. 

Respondent  Scott  Colin  has  a  multiple  subject  (elementary  school)  credential. 

Other  certificated  employees  with  such  a  credential  and  with  less  seniority  than  Mr.  Colin 
were  retained.  The  District  demonstrated  a  specific  and  immediate  need  for  personnel  to 
teach  at  the  elementary  school  level.  The  District  also  demonstrated  that  all  retained 
certificated  employees  junior  to  Mr.  Colin  had  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to 
teach  at  that  level,  which  Mr.  Colin  did  not  possess.  Specifically,  such  junior  certificated 
employees  all  have  authorization  to  teach  English  Learner  students,’  as  determined  by  the 
California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience 
that  comes  therewith. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notice and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Certain  respondents  challenged  the  adequacy  of  the  preliminary  notices  they 
received,  on  the  basis  that  such  notices  inaccurately  described  the  proposed  layoff  as  based 
on a  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  when  in  reality  it  was  based  on  a  decline  in 
average  daily  attendance.  In  support  of  respondents’  position,  evidence  was  presented  that 
the  District  was  overstaffed  in  certain  respects,  that  fewer  teachers  would  be  needed  for 
certain  positions  in  the  upcoming  (2008-2009)  school  year,  and  that  the  proposed 
terminations  may  have  been  motivated  in  part  or  related  in  some  sense  to  a  decline  in 
enrollment.’  However,  Board  Resolution  No.  9  clear  and  unambiguously  provided  that  the 
proposed  layoffs  were  based  on  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services,  not  a  decline  in 
average  daily  attendance.  Accordingly,  the  preliminary  notice  issued  to  respondents  was 
accurate,  and  thus  adequate.* 

‘This  Factual  Finding  is  based  on  the  testimony of Assistant  Superintendent  Melissa  Moore.  Mr.  Colin 
5 
testified  generally  that  “many”  less  senior  employees  who  did  not  possess  “CLAD”  — one  particular  type  of  EL 
authorization  —  were  retained. 
multiple  subject  credential  were  retained  who  did  not  possess  some  kind  of  EL  authorization. 

Mr.  Colin  did  not,  however,  testify  that  any  less  senior  employees  holding  a 

‘ 

This  evidence  was  not,  however,  undisputed. 

Neither  of  the  two  cases  cited  by  respondents  are  on  point  or  require  a  different 

5 
Weaverville  Elementary  School  District  (1994)  24  Cal.App.4th  1846  held  that  a  certificated  probationary  employee 
could  not  be  terminated  based  on  economic  considerations  unless  the  district  complied  with  the  economic  layoff 
procedures  prescribed  in  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  It  was  undisputed  that  the  employee  was  in 
fact  terminated  for  economic  reasons.  Under  those  circumstances,  the  district  could  not  avoid  complying  with  the 
economic  layoff  procedures  under  sections  44949  and  44955  by  serving  the  employee  with  a  notice  of  nonreelection 

result.  Cousins  v. 

   

4 

 

  

  

3. 

Respondents  Colin  and  Reynolds  challenged  their  layoffs  on  the  basis  that 

they  were  not  afforded  adequate  notice  or  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  secure  EL 
authorization,  that  they  were  misled  with  regard  to  the  likelihood  that  they  would  be  laid  off, 
and  that  they  are  presently  in  the  process  of  securing  such  authorization.  The  evidence 
established,  however,  that  these  respondents  were,  in  fact,  afforded  both  adequate  notice  and 
a  reasonable  opportunity  to  secure  EL  authorization  during  the  course  of  their  employment 
with  the  District,  and  that  they  were  not  misled  with  regard  to  the  likelihood  that  they  would 
be  laid  off.°  No  legal  authority  was  presented  in  support  of  any  due  process,  estoppel  or 
other  similar  legal  challenge  to  their  terminations.  Finally,  the  District’s  determination  as  to 
which  employees  held  EL  authorization  on  March  15,  2008  —  the  statutory  deadline  for 
serving  certificated  employees  with  written  preliminary  notices  —  and  without  regard  to  the 
fact  that  some  employees  were  then  in  the  process  of  securing  such  authorization,  was 
proper. 

4. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  respondents  notice  before  May  15,  2008, 
that  their  services  are  longer  be  required  by  the  District. 

  

under  section  44929.21.  Karbach  v.  Board  of Education  of  the  Lawndale  School  District  (1974)  39  Cal.App.3d  355 
held  that  a  school  board  had  no  power  to  terminate  teachers  for  any  reason  not  specified  in  the  preliminary  notice. 
Since  the  only  ground  cited  in  the  notice  was  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance,  the  board  thus  could  not  later 
amend  the  accusation  and  seek  to  terminate  teachers  based  on  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  court 
reasoned  that  to  hold  otherwise  would  deprive  at  least  some  certificated  employees  of  meaningful  notice  that  their 
jobs  were  in  jeopardy,  so  that  such  employees  could  then  immediately  begin  to  seek  new  employment.  Neither  the 
holding  nor  the  interests  sought  to  be  protected  in  these  two  cases  support  respondents’  contention  that  District 
concerns  about  overstaffing  or  a  decline  in  enrollment  in  essence  converts  proposed  terminations  based  on  a 
reduction  of  particular  kinds of  services,  as  deliberately,  explicitly  and  unambiguously  identified  as  such  in  the 
Board  resolution,  into  a  proceeding  based  on  a  decline  in  average  daily  attendance. 

Mr.  Reynolds  testified  that  in  September  2007,  he  was  assured  by  the  Superintendent  that  his  job  was  not  in 

° 
jeopardy  on  the  basis  that  he  lacked  EL  authorization.  However,  this  assurance  was  provided  long  before  the 
Governor’s  proposed  budget  cuts  led  the  District  in  early  2008  to  determine  that  a  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary,  and  cannot  be  found  to  constitute  a  guarantee  that  at  no  future  time  and  under  no  future 
circumstances  —  including  specifically  an  unanticipated  state  budget  crisis  —  could  the  District  identify  EL 
authorization  as  a  criterion  on  which  to  seek  exemption  from  layoff  of  certificated  employees.

  

ORDER 

The  accusation  served  on  respondents  Barbara  Caballero,  Scott  Colin,  Jennifer 

Eldridge,  Hillary  Gosselaar,  Barbara  Grainge,  Scott  Pearne,  Paul  Reynolds,  Amanda 
Stodelle,  Kerry  Vizzini,  and  Charissa  Wieldin  is  sustained  and  notice  shall  be  given  to  these 
respondents  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  in  the  next  school 
year  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of  particular  services  as  indicated. 

DATED:  Y-3— 

Libel. 

DONALD  P.  COLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

