BEFORE  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE  VAL  VERDE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  RIVERSIDE,  STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Certificated  Layoff 
Hearing  of: 

OAH  No.  L2008030625 

KATHLEEN  LENNING 
MYCHELLE  BLANDIN 
RAMON  GONZALEZ 
KARA  BRENNAN 
LARISSA  BARRICKMAN 
KATHERINE  BURNS 
MICHAEL  GREGORY,  JR. 
JANICE  HOAG, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

This  case  came  on  regularly  for  hearing  on  April  29,  2008,  before  Janis 
S.  Rovner,  Administrative  Law  Judge  of  the  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 
of  California,  in  Perris,  California. 

Parker  and  Covert,  LLP,  by  Spencer  Covert,  Attorney  at  Law, 

represented  the  Val  Verde  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Reich,  Adell  &  Cvitan,  by  Marianne  Reinhold,  Attorney  at  Law, 

represented  Kathleen  Lenning,  Mychelle  Blandin,  Larissa  Barrickman,  Katherine 
Burns,  Michael  Gregory,  Jr.,  and  Janice  Hoag  (Respondents),  all  of  whom  were 
present  during  the  hearing. 
themselves  at  the  hearing. 

Ramon  Gonzalez  and  Kara  Brennan  represented 

The  District  has  decided  to  reduce  or  discontinue  certain  educational 
services  and  has  given  Respondents  and  other  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
notice  of  its  intent  not  to  reemploy  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Respondents 
requested  a  hearing  for  a  determination  of  whether  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying 
them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

  

  

 

The  record  was  left  open  for  written  closing  arguments  which  were 

submitted  on  May  1,  2008.  Respondents’  closing  argument  is  identified  as  Exhibit  E 
and  the  District’s  closing  argument  is  identified  as  Exhibit  15. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence,  and  evidence  by  way  of  stipulation, 
was  presented  and  received.  The  case  was  submitted  for  decision  on  May  1,  2008. 
The  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  factual  findings,  legal 
conclusions  and  order: 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District’s  Superintendent  or  his 

designee  gave  written  notice  to  the  District’s  Governing  Board  (Board) 
recommending  that  certificated  employees  of  the  District  be  given  notice  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  based  on  the  Board’s 
decision  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services. 

2. 

On  March  13,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-26,  in 

which  it  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year:  Thirty  (30)  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  elementary 
classroom  teachers  (kindergarten  through  5"  grade  (K-5)).  In  the  resolution,  the 
Board  also  directed  the  Superintendent’s  designee  to  serve  notice  of  layoff  on 
certificated  employees  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955,  as a  result  of  the  resolution  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  service. 

3. 

The  District  established  that  the  need  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of 

services  was  based  on  the  uncertainties  caused  by  the  State’s  proposed  budget  cuts  to 
education  funding  and  a  decline  in  enrollment  in  the  District. 

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  Superintendent’s  designee, 

acting  in  his  official  capacity,  caused  to  be  personally  served  on  each  of  15 
certificated  employees  of  the  District,  written  notice  recommending  that  notice  be 
given  to  them  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year 
(March  15""  notice).  The  written  notice  informed  the  employees  that  the  Board  had 
passed  a  resolution  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year. 

5. 

The  Board  and  the  District  took  into  account  assured  attrition  when  it 
served  March  15"  notices  on  only  15  teachers,  notwithstanding  the  reduction  of  30 
FTEs  in  grades  K-5.  Before  the  District  served  the  March  15"  notices,  it  had  received 
notice  that  15  elementary  teachers  intended  to  resign  or  retire  at  the  end  of  the  current 
school  year. 

  

   

6. 

The  certificated  employees  who  received  the  March  15"  notice  were 

given  an  opportunity  to  request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  year.  Eight  of  the  15  employees  who  received 
notice  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  hearing  with  the  District. 

7. 

David  Marshall,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Education  Services/Human 

Resources  for  the  District,  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity.  On  or  about 
April  4,  2008,  the  Accusation,  with  required  accompanying  documents,  was  properly 
served  on  each  of  the  eight  certificated  employees  who  requested  a  hearing. 

8. 

The  eight  certificated  employees  on  whom  the  Accusation  was  served 

each  filed  a  notice  of  defense  and  they  are  the  Respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

9. 

Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-31,  adopted  April  8,  2008  established  a 

priority  list  for  determining  the  relative  seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date.  The  resolution  applies  by  its 
terms  to  the  “priority  ranking”  of  certificated  employees  who  share  seniority  dates. 
The  resolution  also  provides  that  it  is  to  be  applied  to  those  certificated  employees 
with  the  same  seniority  date  who  received a  notice  of  layoff  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  The  resolution  includes  the  following  criteria  listed  in  order  of  ranking:! 

(1)  Certificated  personnel  whose  primary  assignment  for  the  2007-2008 
school  year  is  not  being  discontinued  or  reduced  pursuant  to  the 
layoff  resolution. 

(2)  Credentialed  teachers  (not  including  interns). 

(3)  If  there  is  more  than  one  certificated  employee  qualifying  for  any 
criteria  with  the  same  date  of  first  paid  service  in  a  probationary 
position,  then  the  order  of  tie-breaking  shall  be  based  upon  the 
certificated  seniority  list  heretofore  drawn  for  the  employee  per 
Section  15.5  of  the  Val  Verde  Teachers  Association  (VVTA) 
Agreement. 

(4)  Teachers  whose  primary  assignment  for  the  2007-2008  school  year 
is  grades  kindergarten  through  6"  grade  (K-6)  and  who  are  serving 
as  teacher  interns  in  grades  K-6. 

'  The  District’s  criteria  are  referred  to  interchangeably  throughout  this  decision  as  prioritization  criteria  or 
tie  breaking  criteria. 

 

10. 

The  VVTA  Agreement  is  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  entered 
into  between  the  Board  and  the  VVTA  (the  teachers’  union).  The  current  agreement 
covers  the  period  from  July  1,  2005  through  June  30,  2008.  Section  15.5  of  the 
agreement  provides  for  a  lottery  to  determine  the  seniority  of  teachers  with  the  same 
first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District,  as  follows: 

15.5 

Development  of  the  Certificated  Seniority  List 

On  May  1,  1992,  representatives  of  the  District  and  VVTA 
mutually  participated  in  the  development  of  a  Certificated 
Seniority  List  to  determine  the  order  of  seniority  for  all  unit 
members.  The  order  of  seniority  for  unit  members  who  first 
rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date  was  determined  by  a 
random  selection  process  agreed  to  and  conducted  by  the 
parties.  The  certificated  seniority  list  shall  be  revised 
annually  to  include  new  unit  members  and  delete  unit 
members  who  have  been  separated  from  district 
employment.  During  any  revision,  a  random  selection 
process  agreed  to  and  conducted  by  the  parties  shall  be 
utilized  to  determine  the  order  of  seniority  for  new 
employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date. 
The  certificated  seniority  list  shall  be  revised  prior  to  the 
implementation  of  any  lay-off. 

11. 

Beginning  in  or  before  1992,  the  Board  has  developed  a  seniority  list  in 
the  fall  of  each  year  to  break  seniority  ties  using  a  lottery,  as  authorized  and  provided 
by  the  VVTA  agreement.  The  “tie-breaking”  seniority  list  based  on  the  lottery  (the 
lottery  list)  was  established  in  November  of  2007  for  this  layoff  proceeding  (Exhibit 
B). 

12. 

David  Marshall,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Education  Services/Human 
Resources  for  the  District,  was  responsible  for  implementing  the  technical  aspects  of 
the  layoff.  In  preparing  the  District’s  seniority  list,  less  senior  employees  holding 
credentials  or  other  indicia  of  competence  were  “skipped,”  and  conversely,  more 
senior  employees  who  were  credentialed  and  competent  to  fill  a  position  being  held 
by  a  junior  employee  were  retained.  By  this  process,  the  District  identified 
Respondents  for  layoff. 

  

 

13. 

The  District  applied  the  prioritization  criteria  in  the  Board  Resolution 

No.  07-08-31  on  April  18,  2008  to  create  its  seniority  list.  The  District  gave 
significant  weight  to  the  lottery  list  in  formulating  the  District’s  seniority  list  for 
purposes  of  the  layoff.” 

14.  _  The  District’s  seniority  list  ranked  77  teachers  who  share  August  13, 

2007  as  their  date  of  hire,  in  ranks  #3  through  #80.  In  compiling  the  seniority  list  for 
the  77  teachers,  the  District  started  with  the  lottery  list.  The  lottery  list  ranked  the 
same  77  teachers  within  the  range  of  #804  to  #892. 

15. 

(a) 

Inranking  the  August  13,  2007  hires,  the  District  gave 

employees  teaching  high  school,  middle  school  (above  6"  grade),  single  subjects  in 
middle  school  (any  grade),  and  special  education  priority  on  the  District’s  seniority 
list  (Ranks  #3  through  #66).  Their  priority  ranking  within  the  seniority  list  was 
commensurate  with  their  priority  on  the  lottery  list. 

(b) 

Elementary  school  teachers  and  6""  grade  middle  school  teachers 

teaching  core  subjects  in  a  block  classroom  (core  classroom)  were  grouped  into 
rankings  lower  on  the  seniority  list  (Ranks  #67  through  #80)  and  their  seniority  list 
rankings  were  also  arranged  in  a  manner  commensurate  with  their  lottery  list  ranking. 
The  District  placed  the  6"  grade  core  classroom  teachers  in  the  same  seniority 
grouping  with  elementary  teachers  in  grades  K-5  because  their  multiple  subject 
credentials  allow  them  to  teach  in  grades  K-5  in  addition  to  6"  grade  core  classrooms. 

16. 

|  Of  the  77  teachers  who  are  listed  on  the  District’s  seniority  list  with  the 

August  13,  2007  date  of  hire,  the  District  sent  March  15"  notices  to  three  teachers:° 
Respondents  Hoag  and  Gregory,  who  requested  a  hearing,  and  a  high  school  teacher, 
who  did  not  request  a  hearing.  *  Respondents  Hoag  and  Gregory  were  ranked  last  on 
the  seniority  list  for  teachers  hired  on  August  13,  2007,  at  #79  and  #80,  respectively. 
Like  the  high  school  teacher,  both  Hoag  and  Gregory  possess  SB  2042  Preliminary 
Multiple  Subject:  General  Subjects  credentials.  Respondent  Gregory  teaches  in  a  6" 
grade  middle  school  core  classroom.  He  has  the  lowest  lottery  list  ranking  of  the 

?  Throughout  this  decision,  lottery  list  refers  to  the  list  created  pursuant  to  the  lottery  in  November  2007.  It 
was  received  into  evidence  as  Exhibit  B.  Seniority  list  refers  to  the  District’s  seniority  list  that  was  created 
on  or  about  April  18,  2007  and  was  received  into  evidence  as  Exhibit  6. 
*  Respondent  Lenning  also  received  a  March  15"  notice.  Although  her  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the 
District  is  listed  on  the  seniority  list  as  August  13,  2007,  the  District  placed  her  at  the  bottom  of  the 
seniority  list  based  upon  on  her  intern  credential.  Respondent  Lenning’s  situation  is  addressed  below. 
‘  The  high  school  teacher  had  a  rank of  #63  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  He  is  a  math  teacher  with  an  SB 
2042  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential:  general  subjects  and  a  limited  assignment  single  subject 
credential:  mathematics. 

  

 

  

teachers  who  share  August  13,  2007  seniority  date  at  #892.  The  high  school  teacher 
and  Respondent  Hoag  also  lacked  priority  on  the  lottery  list  at  #887  and  #888, 
respectively.  Respondents  Hoag,  Gregory,  and  the  high  school  teacher  received 
layoff  notices  by  virtue  of  their  general  subject  credentials  and  their  position  at  the 
bottom  of  the  lottery  list. 

17, 

There  are  at  least  9  elementary  school  teachers  on  the  seniority  list  who 

did  not  receive  a  March  15"  notice.  Those  elementary  school  teachers  are  ranked 
between  #66  and  Respondent  Gregory’s  #80.  One  of  the  elementary  teachers  has  the 
same  SB  2042  Preliminary  Multiple  Subject:  General  Subjects  credential  as  the  high 
school  teacher  and  Respondent  Gregory  have.  That  elementary  teacher  was  ranked 
#73  on  the  seniority  list,  lower  than  the  high  school  teacher,  but  she  had  a  better 
lottery  number,  #855,  than  either  Respondent  Gregory  or  the  high  school  teacher.  All 
nine  elementary  teachers  on  the  seniority  list  (Exhibit  6)  in  the  ranks  between  #67  and 
#80  were  retained  on  the  basis  of  their  lottery  list  priority. 

18. 

In  breaking  ties  for  the  August  13,  2007  hires,  the  District  applied  two 
criteria:  the  type  of  credentials  possessed  by  the  teachers  and  the  teachers’  lottery  list 
ranking.  In  doing  so,  the  District  deviated  from  its  own  tie  breaking  criteria  with 
respect  to  Respondent  Gregory.  The  District’s  tie  breaking  criteria  was  to  be  applied 
in  order  of  its  ranking  according  to  the  Board  resolution.  Respondent  Gregory  was 
not  credited  with  either  the  first  tie-breaker  or  the  second  tie  breaker.  As  to  the  first 
tie-breaker,  Respondent  Gregory  teaches  6""  grade  in  middle  school.  He  is  not  a  K-5 
teacher  so  he  is  not  rendering  the  particular  kind  of  service  that  is  being  reduced.  As 
to  the  second  tie  breaker,  Respondent  Gregory  is  a  “credentialed  teacher”  and  he  is 
not  an  intern.  The  second  tie  breaker  does  not  call  for  the  District  to  distinguish 
between  types  of  credentials  in  breaking  ties  based  on  this  criterion.  Had  the  tie 
breaking  criteria  been  applied  appropriately,  Respondent  Gregory  would  have  been 
given  priority  on  the  seniority  list  over  several  elementary  school  teachers  who  did 
not  receive  a  layoff  notice.  The  District  did  not  act  appropriately  in  giving  sole 
weight  to  the  third  criterion,  Respondent  Gregory’s  low  lottery  listing,  to  justify 
sending  a  March  15"  notice  to  him.  Respondent  Gregory  must  therefore  be  retained. 

19. 

Respondent  Hoag  is  an  elementary  school  teacher.  She  is  the  most 

senior  of  eight  elementary  school  teachers  who  received  layoff  notices.  She  shares 
the  same  seniority  date  with  nine  other  elementary  school  teachers.  Based  on  the 
Board’s  prioritization  resolution,  Respondent  Hoag  is  subject  to  layoff  solely  on  the 
basis  of  her  low  lottery  listing.  There  are  nine  elementary  teachers  who  have  priority 
over  her  on  the  seniority  list.  This  makes  evident  the  lack  of  substance  in  the  Board’s 
first  two  prioritization  criteria  in  determining  who  should  be  laid  off  as  between 
similarly  situated  teachers.  It  is  solely  the  lottery  ranking  that  determined  which 
elementary  school  teacher  was  given  priority.  Respondent  Hoag  must  be  retained 
because  as  applied  to  her,  the  lottery  did  not  take  into  account  the  needs  of  the  District 
and  its  students.

  

20. 

The  District  ranked  Respondent  Lenning  last  on  the  seniority  list  based 
upon  her  intern  credential  (Rank  #97).  The  District  acknowledges,  however,  that  her 
first  date  of  service  was  August  13,  2007.  With  an  August  13,  2007  date  of  hire,  she 
is  entitled  to  accrue  seniority  in  her  position.  Respondent  Lenning  teaches  6"  grade 
in  middle  school.  In  applying  the  District’s  prioritization  criteria,  she  should  have 
been  given  priority  using  the  first  criterion  because  her  primary  assignment  for  the 
school  year  is  not  being  discontinued  or  reduced.  It  is  true  that  the  lowest 
prioritization  criterion  applies  to  her  because  her  primary  assignment  for  the  2007- 
2008  school  year  is  in  grades  K-6  as  an  intern.  However,  she  also  has  priority  based 
on  her  lottery  list  ranking,  #843.  In  applying  the  priority  criteria  to  Respondent 
Lenning,  she  must  be  retained. 

21. 

Respondents  Burns  and  Blandin  have  seniority  dates  of  August  17, 

2007  and  December  18,  2007,  respectively.  Both  teach  in  the  sixth  grade  at  middle 
school.  Respondent  Burns  teaches  in  a  core  classroom  and  Respondent  Blandin 
teaches  reading.  They  received  March  15"  notices.  They  are  correct  in  contending 
that  they  are  employed  in  an  assignment  that  is  not  one  of  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  being  reduced.  However,  the  District  properly  sent  notice  to  Burns  and 
Blandin.  Senior  teachers  with  multiple  subject  credentials  will  be  able  to  “bump”  into 
the  positions  of  Respondents  Burns  and  Blandin. 

22. 

Consistent  with  the  factual  findings  and  legal  conclusions  regarding 

Respondents  Hoag,  Gregory  and  Lenning,  no  other  permanent  certificated  employee 
with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to  render  a  service  that  the  Respondents  are 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code 

sections  44944  and  44945  were  met. 

2. 

The  services  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  07-08-26  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious; 
rather,  it  was  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion. 

3. 

Cause  for  the  reduction  of  the  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 

District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

4. 

No  services  are  being  reduced  or  eliminated  below  legally  mandated 

levels.  (See,  e.g.,  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d 
627.) 

 

  

5. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District  acted  improperly  in  applying  a 

random  selection  process  or  lottery  as  one  criterion  to  be  applied  in  ranking  the 
seniority  of  teachers  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service.  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b)  provides: 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof. 

At  one  time,  the  statute  included  language  specifically  allowing a  lottery  to 
determine  relative  seniority  ranking.  That  language  was  replaced  with  the  current 
language.  (See  Alexander  v.  Bd.  of  Trustees  of Delano  Joint  Union  High  School 
District  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567,  573.)  Because  the  criteria  must  be  based  upon 
“the  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof,”  it  is  improper  for  a  district  simply 
to  use  a  lottery  to  break  ties. 
breaker  after  applying  other  objective  criteria  that  is  based  on  the  needs  of  the  district 
and  students,°  but  the  prioritization  criteria  in  Resolution  No.  07-08-31,  lacked 
substance  as  conceived  and  applied.  The  result  in  applying  the  criteria  was  that 
relative  seniority  ranking  was  determined  based  upon  the  lottery  ranking  and  not  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students. 

It  may  be  permissible  to  use a  lottery  as  a  final  tie- 

Although  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  does  provide  for  a  random 
selection  process,  the  bargaining  agreement  cannot  be  applied  to  contravene  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code.  (See  Board  of Education  v.  Round  Valley 
Teachers  Assn.  (1996)  13  Cal.4"  269.) 

6. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  give  notice  to  Respondents  Gregory,  Hoag,  or 

Lenning  based  on  Factual  Findings  16  through  20.  Respondent  Lenning  is  entitled  to 
seniority  commensurate  with  her  seniority  date  of  August  13,  2007.  (See  Bakersfield 
Elementary  Teachers  Assn  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  Dist.  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4" 
1260.) 

7. 

Except  as  provided  in  Legal  Conclusion  6,  cause  exists  to  reduce  the 

number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  District  identified  the  certificated 
employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be 
reduced  or  discontinued. 

*  Typical  tie-breaking  criteria  have  included  years  teaching  outside  of  the  District,  type  of  credential, 
certificates,  authorizations,  language  skills,  degrees  or  salary  steps.  Some  districts  weigh  the  criteria  by 
assigning  points  to  each  category  based  on  importance. 

  

 

8. 

Considering  Legal  Conclusion  6,  no  junior  certificated  employee  is 

scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

ORDER 

1. 
Lenning. 

The  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  Respondents  Gregory,  Hoag,  and 

2. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  as  to  Respondents  Burns,  Barrickman, 

Gonzalez,  Brennan,  and  Blandin.  The  District  may  notify  the  Respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated:  May  7,  2008 

Janis  S.  Rovner 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

