BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
BEARDSLEY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  KERN 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

  

In  The  Matter  Of  The  Accusation  Against: 

OAH  No.  L2008040026 

Carleen  Bolinger-Orr;  Kristen  Goree; 
Shelley  Kennemer;  William  Michael 
Kimberlin;  Ashley  Ortiz;  Barry  Sarver; 
Holly  Smith;  Lilburn  Tracy;  Monica  West; 
and  Jamie  Winter, 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Mark  E,  Harman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  25,  2008,  in  Bakersfield,  California. 

Peter  C,  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Beardsley  School  District  (District). 

Paul  A.  Welchans,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Respondent  Kristen  Goree,  who  was 

present.  No  other  Respondents  appeared. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  was  taken.  The  record  was  closed,  and  the  matter 

was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  25,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Dean  C.  Bentley  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  filed  the  Accusation 

in  his  official  capacity. 

2. 

3. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  District. 

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing  Board)  adopted  Resolution 

Number  4  on  February  12,  2008,  reducing  or  eliminating  particular  kinds  of  services  equal  to 
14.5  Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE)  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  particular 
kinds  of  services  that  will  be  reduced  or  eliminated  are: 

 

  

  

  

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 

NUMBER  OF  FTE 
POSITIONS 

  

K-6 
Self-Contained  Classroom  Instruction 

13.0 

7-8 
Departmentalized  Instruction 
Junior  High: 

  
    
  

Total 

14.5 

1.5 

4. 

On  or  before  March  13,  2008,  the  District  personally  served  on  each 

Respondent  a  written  “reduction  in  force”  notice  (RIF  notice)  pursuant  to  Education  Code! 
sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year. 
Each  written  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board 
had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  14.5  FTE  positions. 

5. 

Respondents  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6. 

Assuming  that  all  certificated  employees  would  file  a  request  for  hearing,  the 

District  issued  and  personally  served  the  Accusation  on  each  Respondent.  All  notices  of 
defense  were  timely  filed  or  were  treated  as  if  timely  filed. 

7. 

All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

8. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  indicated  that  the  District  had  withdrawn  and 
rescinded  the  RIF  notices  as  to  Respondents  Carleen  Bolinger-Orr,  Shelley  Kennemer, 
William  Michael  Kimberlin,  Ashley  Ortiz,  Barry  Sarver,  Holly  Smith,  Lilburn  Tracy, 
Monica  West,  and  Jamie  Winter. 

9. 

The  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

10. 

The  Governing  Board  took  action  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  set  forth 
in  factual  finding  number  3  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  State  funding.  The  decision 
to  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious  but  is  rather  a  proper 
exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

'  All  further  statutory  references  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  specified  otherwise. 

 

  

11. 

The  reduction  of  services  set  forth  in  factual  finding  number 3 is  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils,  and  it  has  become  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 
certificated  employees  as  determined  by  the  Governing  Board. 

12. 

Kristen  Goree  (Goree)  holds  a  preliminary  single  subject  credential  in  Music. 

She  also  has  a  Cross-Cultural,  Language,  and  Academic  Development  Certificate.  In  her 
current  assignment,  she  teaches  choir  and  the  color  guard  at  the  junior  high  level.  Goree  has  a 
seniority  date  of  August  17,  2006,  which  is  senior  to  at  least  two  employees  who  received  RIF 
notices  but  whose  notices  have  been  withdrawn  and  rescinded  by  the  District.  Goree  contends 
that  certificated  employees  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  by  the  District  in  the  ensuing 
school  year.  For  example,  the  District  has  withdrawn  and  rescinded  the  RIF  notice  served  on 
Lilburn  Tracy  (Tracy),  who  has  a  single  subject  credential  in  physical  education  and  is  assigned 
to  7th  and  8th  grade  boys’  physical  education.  Tracy’s  seniority  date  is  August  16,  2007,  which 
makes  Tracy  nearly  one  year  junior  to  Goree.  The  District,  however,  established  the  need  for 
the  services  of  the  retained  employees,  and  Goree  did  not  show  that  she  was  certificated  and 
competent  to  perform  the  services  that  Tracy  or  the other  junior  certificated  employee  were 
retained  to  perform. 

13. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  Respondent  was  retained  to  render  a  service 

which  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and 

44955,  by  reason  of  factual  finding  numbers  1  through  8. 

2. 

The  services  listed  in  factual  finding  number 3  are  particular  kinds  of  services 

that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955. 

3. 

Cause  exists  for  the  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  listed  in  factual  finding  number  3,  which  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District's  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949,  as  set  forth  in  factual  finding 
numbers  1|  through  13. 

4. 

Cause  exists  to  terminate  the  services  of  Respondent  Kristen  Goree  for  the  2008- 

2009  school  year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  by  reason  of  factual 
finding  numbers  1  through  13,  and  legal  conclusion  numbers  |  through  3. 

  

 

  

ORDER 

The  Accusation  is  sustained  as  to  Respondent  Kristen  Goree  and  the  District  may  notify 

Respondent  Kristen  Goree  that  her  services  will  not  be  needed  during  the  2008-2009  school 
year  due  to  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

Dated: 

  

MARK  E.  HARMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

