BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OF 
THE  MOUNTAIN  EMPIRE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 
Certificated  Employees: 

OAH  No.  L  2008030394 

Amborn,  Piper 
Barboza,  David 
Doane,  Michael 
Macrorie,  Tanya 
Ponce,  Leticia 
Robbins,  Angie 
Sandford,  Beth 
Sandoval,  Briana 
Sullivan,  Rebekah 
Webster,  Koby 
Wheaton,  Kristina 
Taylor,  Deborah 

And  Temporary  Employees: 

    

Lindsey,  James 
Richter,  Robin 
Ward,  Cheryl 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Chris  Ruiz,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ)  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  May  2,  2008,  in  Lakeside,  California. 

William  A.  Diedrich,  Esq.,  represented  the  Mountain  Empire  Unified  School  District 

(District). 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Esq.,  represented  all  of  the  Respondent  teachers  (Respondents). 

The  District  served  a  Notice  of  Layoff  on  each  of  the  teacher  Respondents.  At  the 

conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  District  withdrew  the  Accusation  as  to  Respondents  Macrorie 

  

 

  

and  Robbins.  Therefore,  Respondents  Macrorie  and  Robbins  are  retained  as  employees. 
Additionally,  Respondent  Taylor  has  a  more  junior  seniority  date  than  some  or  all  of  the 
remaining  Respondents.  However,  at  the  hearing  all  of  the  remaining  Respondents  decided 
to  not  “bump”  Respondent  Taylor.  Thus,  she  is  also  retained  as  an  employee. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

his 
Donald  G.  Haught,  Interim  Superintendent  of  the  District, 
official  capacity,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be  filed  and  served  upon 
each  Respondent  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 
The  parties,  by  and  through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing  jurisdictional 
requirements  have  been  met. 

acting  in 

2. 

Respondents  are  employed  by  the  District  as  permanent,  probationary,  intern, 
pre-intern,  emergency  permitted,  waiver,  and/or  temporary  certificated  employees  of  the 
District. 

3. 

On  March  5,  2008,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  the 
Board  of  Education  of  the  District  (Board)  issued  a  written  Resolution  which  approved  the 
recommendation  by  the  Superintendent  that  notice  be  given  to  Respondents  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that 
recommendation. 

4. 

On  or  about  March  15,  2008,  Respondents  were  given  written  notice  of  the 
given  to  Respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
recommendation  that 
sections  44949  and  44955,  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year 
and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation. 

notice 

be 

5. 

It  was  established  that  cause  exists,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955,  for  not  reemploying  Respondents  for  the  ensuing  school  year  for 
all  of  the  reasons  set  forth  below. 

6. 

The  District  decided  the  following: 

The  following  particular  kinds of services of  the  District  will  be 
reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-09  school 
year: 

  

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full  time  Equivalents 

Discontinuance  or 
Reduction 

Reduction 

  

Classroom  teaching  services, 
grades  kindergarten  though  6 

  

  

  

5.0 

  

  

  

 

  

  

  

  

  

  

1.0 

1.0 

0.2  (1/5  FTE*; 
one  section) 
0.2  (1/5  FTE*; 
one  section) 
0.2  (1/5  FTE*; 
one  section) 
1/6  FTE*  (one  section) 

Reduction 

Reduction 

Reduction 

Reduction 

Reduction 

Reduction 

Continuation  school  teaching 
services 
Independent  study  teaching 
services 
Spanish  teaching  services 
(Spanish  III) 
Study  hall  teaching  services, 
grades  9  through  12 
Peer  tutoring  teaching  services, 
grades  9  through  12 
Sports  teaching  services,  grades  7 
and  8 
English  enrichment  teaching 
services,  grades  7  and  8 
Math  projects  teaching  services, 
grades  7  and  8 

  

  

Reduction 

1/6  FTE*  (one  section) 

  

Reduction 

1/6  FTE*  (one  section) 

8  3/30ths* 

  

  

  

  

Discontinuance 

SUBTOTAL  FTE’s: 

Categorically  funded  services  as 
follows**; 

Classroom  teaching  services, 
grades  kindergarten  though  6  (in 
addition  to  the  above) 

  
  
    
  

SUBTOTAL  OF 
CATEGORICALLY 
FUNDED  FTE’s: 
TOTAL  FTE’s 

Reading  specialist  pullout 
services,  grades  kindergarten 
though  6 

Algebra  teaching  services 

2.1  (2  3/30ths)* 

Discontinuance 

Discontinuance 

  

  

  

(grade  9) 

10  1/5  th 

0.6 

0.5 

1.0 

The  difference  as  to  fractions  results  from  the  differences  in  the  number  of  periods  at  the 

* 
secondary  school  sites  in  the  school  District.  The  District  administration  is  authorized  and 
directed,  as  the  Resolution  is  applied,  to  round  the  one-sixth  up  to  the  one-fifth,  and  to 
reduce  the  one-fifth  to  one-sixth,  if  necessary  in  the  process  of  bumping/displacement 
rights. 

Inclusion  of  categorically  funded  services  within  the  Resolution  is  not  intended  to  grant 

** 
those  individuals  who  are  impacted  any  rights  greater  than  provided  by  law,  nor  to  nullify 
any  provisions  within  each  impacted  individual’s  employment  contract,  nor  to  supersede 
any  other  Resolution  by  this  Board  to  release  or  otherwise  terminate  the  services  of  any 
impacted  individual. 

 

e@ 

7. 

The  Board  decided  that  it  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  services.  These  services  are  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  rather,  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion.  The 
District  presently  faces  an  $800,000  budget  deficit.  The  District’s  annual  budget  is  presently 
16.5  million  dollars.  Thus,  the  deficit  equates  to  approximately  five  percent  of  the  District’s 
annual  budget.  The  District  employees  approximately  100  teachers  at  twelve  schools.  Thus, 
the  10  positions  at  issue  equate  to  approximately  10  per  cent  of  the  workforce.  The  District 
established  that  this  reduction  is  necessary  because  some  categorically  funded  services  can 
not  be  reduced  by  law  and  85  percent  of  the  annual  budget  is  expended  on  personnel. 
Further,  the  District  established  that  it  plans  to  also  reduce  its  administrative  workforce  and 
also  its  temporary  employee  workforce. 

8. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  is  related 

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District 
as  determined  by  the  Board. 

9. 

The  Board  properly  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements 
and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees  as  of  March  15,  2008.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.  3d  627  at  636.)  The  District  further  stated  its  intent  to  withdraw  layoff 
notices  to  the  most  senior  teachers  laid  off  if  additional  attrition  occurs. 

e 

10. 

The  District  properly  created  its  seniority  list  by  determining  the  first  date  of 

paid  service  of  each  certificated  employee  and  properly  utilized  reasonable  “tie-breaker” 
criteria  when  necessary. 

“Skipping”  Respondent  Taylor 

11. 

The  District  retained,  or  “skipped”,  Respondent  Taylor  because  she  works  at 
Cottonwood  Community  Day  School,  a  school  for  at-risk  students.  A  teacher  must  consent 
to  work  at  this  type  of  challenging  school.  At  the  hearing,  all  qualified  Respondents  were 
offered  the  opportunity  to  “bump”  Respondent  Taylor  and  obtain  her  job.  All  Respondents 
declined.  Thus,  Respondent  Taylor  is  not  subject  to  layoff  and  is  retained. 

Temporary  Teachers 

12. 
subject  to  layoff. 

Respondents  Richter,  Ward,  and  Lindsey  are  temporary  employees  and  are 

  

 

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  these  proceedings  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Findings  5-7  is  a  particular  kind of service 

which  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law. 

3. 

The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  is  neither 

arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion. 

4, 

Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  District's  teaching  positions  as  described  above  and 
to  give  notice  to  the  affected  teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955.  (Campbell 
v.  Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d 
689).  Based  on  the  above  Findings,  including  the  preamble  to  this  Proposed  Decision,  the 
names  of  the  affected  teachers,  those  as  to  whom  final  notices  of  layoff  may  be  given,  as 
requested  and  listed  by  the  District  in  exhibit  10,  are  as  follows: 

Amborn,  Piper 
Barboza,  David  (4/5  FTE)! 
Doane,  Michael 
Lindsey,  James 
Ponce,  Leticia  (4/6  FTE) 
Richter,  Robin 
Sandford,  Beth 
Sandoval,  Briana 
Sullivan,  Rebekah  (2/6  FTE) 
Ward,  Cheryl 
Webster,  Koby 
Wheaton,  Kristina 

' 

As  indicated,  some  Respondents  are  only  to  be  laid-off  for  a  percentage  of  their 

employment,  as  indicated  next  to  their  names,  where  applicable.  For  example,  Respondent 
Barboza  is  subject  to  lay-off  for  four-fifths  of  his  employment. 

 

ORDER 

Because  of  the  reductions  of  services,  the  District  may  give  notice  to  the  teachers 
identified  in  Legal  Conclusion  No. 4  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year. 

Dated:  May  _,  2008. 

CHRIS  RUIZ 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

