@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
ELK  GROVE  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
COUNTY  OF  SACRAMENTO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of: 

CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED  BY  THE  ELK  GROVE 
UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

OAH  No.  2008020722 

Respondents. 

  

  

Administrative  Law  Judge  Stephen  J.  Smith,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

@ 

of  California  heard  this  matter  in  Elk  Grove,  California  on  April  14,  15  and  16,  2008. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Xavier  De  La  Torre,  Ed.D.,  Assistant  Superintendent  for  Human  Resources  and 

Karen  M.  Rezendes,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Leah  Won,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Lozano  Smith, 
Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Margaret  Geddes,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Beeson,  Tayer  and  Bodine,  Attorneys,  and  A. 

Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  certain  certificated  District 
employees  receiving  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school 
year  are  members. 

Respondents  Eric  Saragoza,  Shannon  Barchus,  Michelle  Dallas,  Justin  Jones, 
Katherine  Smiley,  Erin  Goldman,  Hilary  Heckman,  Taber  Perry,  Grace  Gelvoria  and  Tammy 
Skarset  appeared  in  pro  per.  These  unrepresented  respondents  received  either  a  preliminary 
or  precautionary  notice  of  layoff.  The  unrepresented  respondents  selected  Shannon  Barchus 
to  serve  as  spokesperson. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Xavier  De  La  Torre,  Ed.D.  (Assistant  Superintendent)  made  and  filed  the 

e@ 

It  was  not  disputed  that  the  Assistant  Superintendent  was  duly 

Accusation  in  his  official  capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent,  Human  Resources,  Elk  Grove 
Unified  School  District. 
delegated  and  authorized  by  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  to  make  the  Accusations  and 
issue  the  notices  set  forth  in  this  Decision. 

  

 

  

2. 

Respondents  are  and  at  all  times  relevant  to  this  Decision  were  certificated 

employees of the  District. 

3. 

On  or  just  before  March  4,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections 

44949  and  44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (the 
Board)  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  certain  particular  kinds  of 
services  would  have  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The 
Superintendent’s  notice  specified  the  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated, 
as  set  forth  below.  The  Superintendent  also  notified  the  Board  that  a  corresponding  number 
of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  would  have  to  be  laid  off  to  effectuate  the  reduction 
or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  that 
respondents  had  been  identified  as  persons  to  whom  notice  should  be  given  that  their  services 
would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  recommendation  that  respondents’ 
services  for  the  District  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  was  not  related 
to  their  skills,  abilities  or  competencies  as  teachers. 

4. 

The  Board  adopted  three  Resolutions  regarding  these  proceedings.  Resolution 

56,  adopted  March  4,  2008,  resolved  to  follow  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to 
reduce  137.00  full  time  equivalent  (“FTE”)  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Resolution 
authorized  and  directed  the  Superintendent  to  give  notice  to  an  equivalent  number  of 
certificated  employees  of  the  District  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
upcoming  school  year  in  order  to  effectuate  the  reduction.  The  Resolution  authorized  the 
elimination  of  the  following  services  now  offered  in  the  District: 

 

A. 
B. 
Cc. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
I. 
J. 
K. 

High  School  Counselors 
High  School  English 
High  School  Math 
High  School  Life  Sciences 
High  School  Social  Studies 
High  School  Business 
World  Language 
High  School  Physical  Education 
K-6  Elementary  Multiple  Subject 
Instructional  Coaches 

3.00  FTE 
17.00  FTE 
17.00  FTE 
6.00  FTE 
6.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
1.00  FTE 
2.00  FTE 
56.00  FTE 
28.00  FTE 

: 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  caused  each  of  the  respondents  to  be  served  with 

a  written  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  (the  preliminary  notice)  on  March  11,  2007.  The 
Assistant  Superintendent  also  caused  another  group  of  respondents,  separately  identified, 
with  a  written  Precautionary  Notice  of  Intention  to  Dismiss  (precautionary  notice),  also  on 
March  11,  2008.  The  written  preliminary  and  precautionary  notices  advised  respondents  of 
the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  to  the  Board  that  their  services  would  not  be  required 
for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  preliminary  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation,  a  copy  of  Resolution  56  with  the  list  of  the  PKS  the  Board  has  determined 
to  reduce  or  eliminate,  a  blank  copy  of  a  Request  for  a  Hearing,  copies  of  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955,  and  a  copy  of  a  worksheet  showing  detail  of  the  location  by 
school  sites  where  the  particular  kinds  of  services  slated  for  reduction  or  elimination  will 
take  place.  The  precautionary  notices  had  the  same  attachments,  except  the  addition  of  a  list 
of  those  District  employees  receiving  a  precautionary  notice,  and  omitting  the  worksheet. 

6. 

Respondents  each  timely  filed  written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if 

there  was  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  ensuing  year. 

7. 

The  District  timely  served  Accusations  on  each  respondent  following  receipt 

of  their  Requests  for  a  Hearing.  Each  respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to  the 
Accusation.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

8. 

During  the  evidentiary  hearing,  the  District  moved  to  withdraw  the 

preliminary  notices  of  layoff  served  on  employees  as  follows: 

 
S
N
L
A
N
A
 
N
I
E
P

Ann  Filios; 
Saody  Tep; 
Jennifer  Fassett; 
Rebecca  Forcum, 
Teresa  Hansen; 
Tara  Higishino; 
Joel  Johnson; 
Jessica  Payne; 
.  Lisa  Radonjic, 
10.  Nicole  Roschak; 
11.  Terri  Hock; 
12.  Jennifer  Wega; 
13.  Monica  Dal-Ben; 
14,  Grace  Galvoria; 
15.  Dylan  Moria; 
16.  Kerri  Flock; 
17.  Jason  Coppola; 
18.  Michael  Simmons; 
19.  David  Kjargaard; 
20.  Cristin  Gianetti; 
21.  Laureen  Fox; 
22.  Sharon  Zankier; 
23.  Sheryl  Draper; 
24.  Joel  Goldwaithe, 
25.  Cristine  Tabernia; 
26.  Graham  Stewart; 
27.  Shirley  Arroyo; 
28.  Michelle  Newell;  and 
29.  Lisa  Crummey 

    

 

  

After  the  taking  of  evidence  was  closed,  the  District  moved  to  rescind  the  notices  of 

@ 

the  following  additional  certificated  employees  who  had  received a  preliminary  notice: 

1. 
2. 

Michele  Abriani;  and 
Taber  Perry. 

9. 

In  addition,  the  District  moved  to  correct  seniority  dates  and/or  status  of  the 

following  certificated  employees: 

1.  Lisa  Crummy:  seniority  date  corrected  to  08/20/07; 
2.  Kristen  Emlet:  seniority  date  corrected  to  11/26/07;  status  to  probationary; 

The  motions  were  granted  without  opposition.  Those  certificated  employees 

identified  above  were  dismissed  following  the  District’s  decision  to  withdraw  the 
preliminary  notices  issued  to  them. 

TIE  BREAKING 

10. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  its  Resolution  No.  58,  to 
determine  criteria  to  be  applied  in  case  of  ties.  Pursuant  to  provisions  of  Education  Code 
section  44955,  the  Board  determined,  as  reflected  in  the  Resolution,  the  District  needs, 
should  it  become  necessary  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  for  employees  who  first 
rendered  paid  probationary  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  day.  The  Board  determined, 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year  only,  that  the  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  would  be 
best  met  by  establishing  a  rating  system  to  be  applied  in  determining  the  order  of  termination 
of  certificated  employees: 

e@ 

A. 

B. 

Multiple  and  Single  Subject  Credentials:  Rating  +1  per  credential 

Earned  degrees  beyond  the  BA/BS  level:  Rating  +1  per  credential 

In  the  event  that  common  day  hires  have  equal  qualifications  based  on  application  of 

the  above  criteria,  the  District  will  then  break  ties  by  utilizing  a  lottery. 

11. 

No  additional  guidance  was  provided  regarding  how  to  conduct  such a lottery. 

No  direction  was  provided  regarding  how  to  group  employees  potentially  affected  by  the 
application  of  the  tie-breaker  rating  system  and  criteria.  By  necessary  implication,  the  Board 
delegated  discretion  to  the  Superintendent  and  his  delegates  to  implement  the  rating  and  tie 
breaking  criteria  in  any  fashion  consistent  with  the  adopted  criteria,  as  long  as  the 
implementation  was  fair  and  impartial. 

12. 

As  it  happened,  application  of  the  tie  breaker  criteria  and  rating  system 

became  critical  in  determining  which  District  employees’  preliminary  notices  should  be 
sustained.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  and  his  assistants  summoned  the  representatives  of 
the  Elk  Grove  School  Employees’  Association  (Association)  to  watch  the  process.  All  but  a 

@ 

 

tiny  number  of  respondents  subject  to  this  action  are  members  of  the  Association.  The 
President  of  the  Association  and  an  associate  met  with  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and 
watched  as  the  criteria  and  ratings  were  applied  to  individual  employees.  The  President  and 
his  associate  became  involved  in  the  process  and  were  praised  by  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  for  helping  to  correct  numerous  mistakes.  Despite  some  efforts  to  imply 
otherwise,  it  is  not  assumed  here  that  by  voluntarily  participating  with  the  Assistant 
Superintendent  in  the  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  that  the  Association 
representatives  endorsed  the  manner  in  which  the  Assistant  Superintendent  chose  to  apply 
the  Board’s  criteria.  Nevertheless,  the  Association’s  role,  through  its  elected  representatives, 
was  substantially  more  than  merely  passive  observation. 

13. 

Asa precursor  to  the  meeting  where  the  tie  breaker  criteria  and  rating  system 

was  applied,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  directed  a  District  wide  effort  to  update  and 
validate  the  District’s  Certificated  Seniority  List  (Seniority  List),  With  more  than  3200 
certificated  employees,  this  was  no  small  feat,  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  District  has 
been  growing  enrollment  for  the  past  10  consecutive  years.  Little  attention  was  paid  to 
making  certain  the  Seniority  List  was  accurate  and  up  to  date. 

14.  |  When  it  became  evident  in  late  January  2008  that  suspension  of  Proposition  98 

and  the  threatened  $4.5  billion  in  cuts  to  school  funding  were  imminent  and  would  directly 
impact  the  District,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  ordered  the  District  wide  solicitation  of 
updated  information  from  all  certificated  employees.  The  canvass  was  accomplished  by  the 
Assistant  Superintendent  giving  each  site  administrator  in  the  District  an  employee 
information  form  and  directions  to  copy  the  form,  provide  a  copy  to  each  employee  and 
instruct  each  to  verify  the  employee’s  credentials  and  seniority  date  with  the  District  Office. 

15. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  was  deluged  with  responses  to  the  solicitation  in 

the  following  weeks,  piled  in  a  stack  he  described  as  a  foot  thick.  Responses  were  also 
received  by  e-mail  and  other  means  of  communication.  At  the  time  of  the  evidentiary 
hearing,  responses  were  still  being  submitted.  Although  the  form  has  a  deadline  date,  the 
District  is  considering  every  submission,  regardless  of  when  it  was  filed. 

16.  —  The  District  has  investigated  and  attempted  to  verify,  or  is  in  the  process  of, 

investigating  and  verifying,  the  assertions  made  by  each  employee  on  each  response. 
Hundreds  of  addenda  and  corrections  to  the  Seniority  List  were  made  using  these  inputs, 
when  found  to  be  warranted  and  verified.  This  updated  and  augmented  Seniority  List  was 
the  tool  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  his  staff  used  in  creating  the  lists  of  employees 
identified  where  ties  needed  to  be  broken  and  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria. 

17. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  elected  to  group  employees  subject  to  the  tie 

breaking  process  by  subject  matter  taught  and  the  employee’s  eligibility  to  teach  in  that 
subject  matter  area  due  to  having  the  appropriate  credentials.  If,  after  crediting  each  with  the 
points  authorized  by  the  Resolution  one  or  more  employees  were  still  tied,  the 
Superintendent  and  his  staff  drew  numbered  poker  chips  from  a  hat  in  alphabetical  order  for 
each  employee  still  tied  in  the  particular  group.  Some  such  groups  had  more  than  10 

  

 

  

persons.  The  number  drawn  for  each  employee  represented  the  employee’s  relative  seniority 
within  the  group  of  ties,  for  example,  three  ties  in  the  Physical  Education  grouping  were 
assigned  numbers  based  upon  a  drawing  between  those  three,  with  the  lowest  number  drawn 
receiving  the  highest  relative  seniority. 

18. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent  did  not  group  all  District  employees  with  the 

same  first  date  of  paid  probationary  service  together  in  one  general  group  for  the  application 

of the  lottery.  No  employee  became  subject  to  the  lottery  until  the  criteria  specified  by  the 
Board  had  been  applied,  all  possible  eligible  points  had  been  credited  and  the  employees 
were  still  tied. 

19. 

Respondents  contend  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  application  of  the  tie 

breaking  process  was  unfair,  constituted  an  inappropriate‘exercise  of  discretion,  violated  the 
criteria  set  by  the  Board  for  tie  breaking,  and  violated  the  law.  Respondents  failed  to 
mention  what  law  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  actions  violated,  other  than  claiming  that 
failure  to  group  all  respondents  together  in  one  large  group  caused  the  Seniority  List  to 
become  inherently  unreliable  due  to  “the  associative  law  of  mathematics.”  Counsel  failed  to 
elaborate  on  that  claim. 

20. 

 Unrepresented  respondents  also  contended  the  District  failed,  in  enacting  the 
tie  breaking  criteria,  to  credit  factors  the  District  has  highly  emphasized  with  its  certificated 
employees;  for  example,  the  District  failed  to  give  credit  in  the  tie  breaking  for  possession  of 
CLAD  or  BCLAD  certification,  or  possession  of  certification  as  a  Highly  Qualified 
Instructor  under  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act. 

21. 

None  of  the  contentions  have  merit.  The  Assistant  Superintendent’s 

methodology  for  the  assembly  and  application  of  the  lottery  was  not  proved  to  be  unfair, 
arbitrary,  capricious  or  other  than  even  handed.  The  methodology  was  fair,  even-handed  and 
transparent.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  individual  or  group  of  employees  subject  to  the 
process  gained  any  advantage  over  any  other  due  to  the  methodology.  The  methodology 
selected  may  not  have  been  the  most  efficient  or  effective  possible  under  the  circumstances, 
but  no  one  pointed  out  any  better  or  more  even  handed  method.  In  fact,  the  method  claimed 
by  respondents  that  should  have  been  applied  may  have  actually  disadvantaged  some 
respondents  relative  to  others  within  the  group  subject  to  the  process. 

22. 

The  Assistant  Superintendent’s  methodology  actually  combined  separate  steps 

of  a  process  that  would  ultimately  be  required  in  the  tie  breaking  process,  even  if 
respondent’s  “all  in  one  group”  approach  was  followed.  Had  all  employees  with  the  same 
points  and  the  same  first  date  of  paid  probationary  service  to  the  District  been  lumped 
generally  together,  as  contended  by  respondents,  the  subject  matter  selection  process 
employed  would  still  have  been  required  to  determine  whether  any  tied  employee  would  be 
able  to  bump  another  tied  employee  or  one  less  senior  into  a  potentially  available  position.  It 
makes  no  sense  for  an  employee  to  claim  he  or  she  has  been  disadvantaged  due  to  not  being 
subject  to  a  general  lottery,  obtaining  a  better  number  than  another,  then  not  being  able  to 
displace  that  other  employee,  despite  faring  poorer  in  the  lottery,  because  the  employee 

 

  

making  the  claim  with  the  higher  rank  does  not  have  the  certifications  and  credentials 
necessary  for  the  available  position  or  to  be  able  to  displace  another  less  senior  employee. 
Such  a  raw  number  flowing  from a  general  lottery  is  meaningless  outside  the  context  of  the 
certifications  and  qualifications  necessary  to  attain  displacement  rights  and  fill  any  given 
available  slot. 

23. 

 Respondent’s  contentions  that  the  Board  failed  to  recognize  and  give  credit  for 
qualifications  otherwise  highly  valued  by  the  District  also  fails.  The  selection  or  rejection  of 
any  such  criteria  is  entirely  in  the  discretion  of  the  Board.  It  may  be  that  in  the  future  that  the 
Board  will  want  to  include  possession  of  CLAD  or  BCLAD,  cleared  credentials,  highly 
qualified  certification,  or  a  host  of  other  valued  additional  qualifications,  when  determining 
how  to  rank  employees  against  one  another  who  have  the  same  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the 
District  as  probationary  employees.  But  the  fact  that  the  Board  elected  to  not  include  these 
criteria  in  this  year’s  tie  breaking  creates  no  factual  of  legal  deficit.  The  selection  and 
application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  was  not  arbitrary  and  took  into  consideration  the  needs 
of  the  District.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  testified  that  the  Board  considered  adding  some 
of  the  other  criteria  suggested  by  respondents,  but  elected  not  to  do  so  due  to  a  desire  to  keep 
the  process  as  simple  and  conflict  free  as  possible.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  revealed  that 
that  the  selection  and  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria  was  an  appropriate  exercise  of 
the  Board’s  and  the  District’s  discretion. 

FINANCIAL  AND  BUDGET  REASONS  FOR  THE  ACTION 

24. 

Respondents  contend  the  layoff  should  fail  because  “the  District  has  failed  to 

show  any  link  between  revenue  loss  and  137  FTE  reduced  or  for  56  respondents.” 
Respondents  also  contend  the  layoff  should  fail  to  those  receiving  precautionary  notices 
because  the  District  has  failed  to  show  any  loss  of  categorical  funding  for  the  upcoming 
school  year.  Both  contentions  wholly  lack  merit  and  are  contrary  to  long  settled  law. 

25. 

 Asnoted  above,  the  District  is  facing  multi-faceted  financial  pressure  that  has 

placed  the  District  into  a  fiscal  condition  that  could  lead  to  an  operating  deficit  for  the 
upcoming  school  year.  Districts  were  all  warned  by  the  Governor’s  budget  projections  in 
January  2008  to  expect  one  or  both  of  the  suspension  of  Proposition  98  (mandatory  school 
funding  as  a  percentage  of  the  total  budget)  and/or  ten  per  cent  across  the  board  cuts.  The 
District’s  fiscal  condition  has  markedly  shifted  almost  overnight  from  rapid  growth  to 
anticipated  contraction.  Suspension  of  Proposition  98  would  certainly  place  the  District  into 
an  operating  deficit,  as  would  the  threatened  ten  percent  across  the  board  cuts.  Regardless  of 
the  ultimate  mechanism,  the  District  expects  a  substantial  reduction  in  funding  in  the 
upcoming  school  year.  The  Board  has  concluded  it  is  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District 
and  the  welfare  of  its  students  to  operate  at  a  deficit  and  have  to  run  its  finances  through  the 
County  Office  of  Education  and  have  its  fiscal  decisions  subject  to  the  review  and  approval 
of  the  County  Superintendent.  The  Board  and  the  Superintendent  have  considered  myriad 

'  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  632,  citing  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  841.

  

  

methods  to  deal  with  the  anticipated  reductions  in  expected  funding.  One  of  these  responses 
is  a  contraction  in  the  range  of  non-mandated  the  services  the  District  will  be  able  to  offer  in 
the  upcoming  school  year.  Respondents  were  repeatedly  reminded  during  the  Assistant 
Superintendent’s  testimony  that  reducing  or  eliminating  certain  classes  and  programs  offered 
in  the  District’s  educational  portfolio  was  only  one  of  a  multitude  of  belt-tightening  measures 
the  District  has  undertaken,  with  most  being  focused  upon  trying  to  save  as  many  classes, 
programs  and  teacher’s  jobs  as  fiscally  possible  and  prudent. 

26. 

The  District  does  not  know  at  present  whether  it  will  be  terminating  any 

categorically  funded  program  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  Continuation  of  any  and  all 
categorically  funded  programs  is  entirely  dependent  upon  the  continuity  of  outside  sources  of 
funding,  for  which  there  is  no  guarantee.  In  such  uncertain  financial  circumstances  as  are 
facing  the  District  and  many  of  its  outside  funding  sources  for  such  programs,  it  is  simply 
impossible  to  predict  with  any  reasonable  degree  of  certainty  whether  any  of  those  funding 
sources  will  continue  to  fund  categorical  programs  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  No  one 
knows  what  the  funding  situation  will  be  for  categorical  funding  in  the  upcoming  year. 
Sources  of  extra-District  funding  for  earmarked  programs  widely  vary,  both  in  nature  and 
solvency.  It  is  unlikely  all  categorically  funded  programs  will  terminate  in  the  upcoming 
school  year.  It  is  equally  unlikely  all  the  categorically  funded  programs  the  District  offered 
this  school  year  will  again  be  offered  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 

27. 

The  District  is  not  required  factually  or  legally  to  prove  the  links  between  the 
proposed  reductions  and  anticipated  revenue  declines  respondents  contend  are  mandatory. 
The  District  is  legally  required  to  operate  with  a  balanced  budget.  Since  the  exact  amount  of 
revenue  and  categorical  funding  that  will  be  actually  provided  to  the  District  for  the 
upcoming  school  year  cannot  be  known  with  any  precision  at  the  time  preliminary  notices 
are  legally  required  to  be  given,  the  legislature  and  the  courts  have  never  required  Districts  to 
link  proposed  reductions  to  anticipated  revenue  shortfalls  other  than  in  a  very  general  fashion 
at  the  present  stage  of  the  layoff  process,  which  the  District  did  here  quite  satisfactorily. 

ATTRITION 

28. 

The  Superintendent,  on  behalf  of  the  District,  considered  all  known  attrition, 

resignations,  retirements  and  requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of 
necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees.  In  fact,  one  employee,  Michele 
Abriani,  had  her  preliminary  notice  rescinded  because  the  District  discovered  another 
position  made  available  by  attrition  after  the  commencement  of  the  evidentiary  hearing. 

"Id. 
*  Since  the  March  15  notice  is  only  the  initial  step  in  the  termination  process  it  is  not  required  that  it  specify  the 
precise  number  of  teachers  to  be  terminated  or  the  specific  positions  to  be  eliminated.  The  preliminary  notice  is 
sufficient  if  it  specifies  the  statutory  grounds  set  forth  in  section  44955.  The  specific  positions  to  be  eliminated  need 
not  be  identified.  San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  632,  citing  Santa  Clara 
Federation of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831,  841. 

 

STATE  AND  FEDERAL  MANDATES 

29. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  District  proposes  to  eliminate  any  services  that 

are  State  or  federally  mandated. 

TEMPORARY  AND  CATAGORICAL  PROGRAM  EMPLOYEES 

30. 

The  District  employs  certificated  personnel  as  temporary  employees  pursuant 

to  two  types  of  temporary  contracts.  The  first  is  for  those  filling  in  for  permanent  or 
probationary  employees  on  leave,  short  or  long  term,  pursuant  to  section  44920.  The  other  is 
for  those  filling  categorically  funded  positions,  or  filling  in  for  permanent  or  probationary 
employees  who  are  staffing  a  categorically  funded  position,  pursuant  to  section  44909.  The 
District  carefully  contracted  with  each  of  these  employees  according  to  the  requirements  of 
sections  44909  and  44920.  Each  employee  working  under  a  temporary  contract  received  a 
notice  before  commencing  work  that  they  were  temporary  employees,  that  they  would  not 
acquire  status  or  seniority,  and  were  given  such  notice  in  writing.  There  was  no  evidence 
that  any  temporary  employee  working  in  the  District  under  a  temporary  employment  contract 
did  not  receive  these  notices  or  was  not  aware  of  the  limitations  to  status  and  seniority  the 
position  entailed. 

31. 

|  Some  of  the  District’s  temporary  employees  were  hybrids,  teaching  under  both 

sections  44909  and  44920,  due  to  both  filling  in  for  another  employee  teaching  in  a 
categorically  funded  program  or  by  back-filling  for  another  employee  in  such  status,  who 
was  also  on  a  short  or  long  term  leave  of  absence. 

32. 

A  few  District  employees  were  hired  on  contingent  temporary  contracts 

(contingent  temporary).  These  employees  were  offered  employment  contingent  upon  the 
presence  of  sustaining  enrollment.  The  contingent  temporary  employee’s  status  in  such 
circumstances  was  temporary  at  hiring,  contingent  upon  sufficient  enrollment  arriving  in  the 
classes  assigned  to  the  employee  to  support  the  position.  If  the  enrollment  arrived,  such 
employees  were  reclassified  to  probationary  and  their  seniority  date  was  back  dated  to  the 
first  day  they  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  under  the  temporary  contract.  If  the 
sustaining  enrollment  did  not  materialize,  the  contingent  temporary  employee’s  contract  was 
terminated,  and  every  effort  was  made  to  find  another  position  for  the  employee  in  the 
District,  dependent  upon  the  employee’s  credentials  and  competencies.  At  times  this 
reassignment  was  successful,  and  at  others  the  contingent  temporary  employee  was 
terminated.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  such  contingent  temporary  employee  in  the 
District  accepted  such  a  temporary  contract  position  without  full  knowledge  of  their  status  or 
the  effects  of  the  contingency,  or  the  potential  for  termination  if  sustaining  enrollment  failed 
to  materialize  and  the  employee  did  not  have  credentials  and  competencies  to  permit 
reassignment  to  another  open  position  in  the  District. 

33. 

All  District  temporary  contract  employees  are  tracked  on a list  that  reflects  the 
temporary  employee’s  “hire  date.”  The  Assistant  Superintendent  made  it  clear  that  the  “hire 

  

 

  

date”  is  not  a  seniority  date,  and  does  not  necessarily  reflect  an  employee’s  “first  day  of  paid 
service  to  the  District  as  a  probationary  employee.” 

34. 

 Atno  time  did  the  number  of  temporary  employees  in  the  District  exceed  the 

number  of  permanent  or  probationary  employees  on  leaves  of  absence  and  those  staffing 
categorically  funded  positions.  In  fact,  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  direction  to  all  Human 
Resources  staff  throughout  his  three  and  a  half  year  tenure  in  the  District  has  consistently 
been  to  make  certain  that  these  numbers  “never  get  close.” 

35. 

Respondents  contend  that  the  District  has  adopted  a  practice,  as  reflected  in 

the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  testimony,  that  all  District  employees  hired  initially  as 
substitutes  or  on  temporary  contracts,  are  given  “back-dated”  seniority  dates.  Respondents 
contend  the  District  has  treated  these  employees’  first  day  of  service  in  any  capacity  as  the 
employees’  first  day  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee,  when  the  employee  later 
becomes  probationary.  Respondents  contend  that  since  the  District  has  done  so  with  its 
employees  in  the  past,  it  has  adopted  this  back-dating  as  a  practice  and  is  now  obligated  to 
follow  it  with  respect  to  all  the  other  temporary  employees  who  have  become  probationary  or 
permanent,  but  did  not  receive  extra  seniority  credit  for  such  substitute  or  temporary  contract 

service, 

36. 

The  contention  is  factually  and  legally  lacking  in  merit  and  misconstrues  the 

facts  adduced  during  the  evidentiary  hearing.  The  Assistant  Superintendent  made  it  quite 
clear  in  his  testimony  that  the  District  lacks  legal  authority  to  back-date  seniority  dates  as 
respondents  suggest,  and  credibly  denied  that  any  such  practice  exists  or  existed  in  the  past, 
except  in  the  case  of  the  contingent  temporary  employee  described  above.  Under  these  very 
limited  circumstances,  the  Education  Code  gives  the  District  discretion  to  credit  or  deny 
credit  for  the  period  of  service  under  the  temporary  portion  of  the  contingent  temporary 
contract.  In  this  narrow  instance,  the  District  does  have  the  practice  of  trying  wherever 
possible  to  reward  the  employee  by  exercising  its  discretion  in  favor  of  the  employee.  In  all 
other  instances,  employees  working  pursuant  to  temporary  contracts  acquire  no  status  or 
seniority  for  the  temporary  contract  service.  Otherwise,  the  District  is  bound  by  law  and 
lacks  the  legal  capacity  to  back  date  any  employee’s  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District, 
despite  a  variety  of  claims  of  other  extenuating  circumstances. 

37. 

Education  Code  section  44909  provides  that  employment  of  certificated 
employees  in  categorically  funded  programs  which  are  not  required  by  federal  or  state 
statutes  are  classified  as  temporary  and  do  not  acquire  any  status  or  tenure  during  such 
service,  including  the  right  to  a  sections  44949/44955  evidentiary  hearing  to  challenge  the 
termination.  Section  44909  provides:  “Such  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods  which  are 
less  than  a  full  school  year  and  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or 
specially  funded  project  without  regard  to  other  requirements  of this  code  respecting  the 
termination  of probationary  or  permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918.”  [Emphasis 
added.] 

10 

 

38. 

The  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association’  decision  added  opacity  to 

this  issue.  The  Bakersfield  court,  in  dicta’,  when  considering  the  rights  of  19  employees 
hired  under  Education  Code  section  44909  to  teach  in  categorically  funded  programs,  or  fill 
in  for  permanent  or  probationary  employees  who  had  taken  such  assignments,  who  had  been 
classified  as  temporary,  indulged  itself  in  some  legislating  by  its  own  additional  requirement 
to  section  44909’s  provisions,  by  concluding  that  these  employees  are  not  entitled  to  these 
due  process  layoff  protections  unless  the  categorical  program  or  its  funding  had  expired.° 
The  court  found  the  District’s  classification  of  such  employees  as  temporary  was  erroneous, 
because  although  such  employees  are  “treated  like”  temporary  employees  in  certain  respects 
(ie.,  not  crediting  service  toward  permanent  classification)  they  are  presumptively 
probationary  employees  and  entitled  to  notice  and  a  hearing  in  the  event  of  layoff  under 
Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.”  In  apparent  reliance  upon  the  language  of 
Education  Code  section  44909,  the  Fifth  District  Court  of  Appeal  explained: 

Thus,  certificated  teachers  assigned  to  a  categorically  funded  program  may  be  laid  off 
without  the  procedural  formalities  due  a  permanent  and  probationary  employee  only  if 
the  program  has  expired.  (Hart  Federation  of  Teachers,  supra,  73  Cal.App.3d  at  pp. 
215-216;  Zalac,  supra,  98  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  852.)  Here,  so  far  as  the  record 
discloses,  none  of  the  programs  to  which  the  19  laid-off  employees  were  assigned  had 
expired. 

39. 

The  Zalac’  court  did  not  decide  the  status  of  Ms.  Zalac  based  upon  the 

expiration  of  the  categorical  funding  for  the  position  she  occupied.  The  Zalac  court  found 
that  upon  the  expiration  of  the  categorical  program  Ms.  Zalac  had  been  teaching  in  for  two 
years,  when  the  District  reemployed  her  in  her  third  year  of  teaching,  and  then  tried  to  lay  her 
off  after  that  third  year,  she  should  have  been  classified  as  probationary  and  could  not  be  laid 
off  without  notice  and  a  hearing.  Her  termination  at  the  end  of  her  third  year  of  teaching  in 
the  District  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  end  of  a  categorically  funded  program  or  teaching  as  a 
temporary  teacher,  because  she  had  not  been  teaching  in  a  categorically  funded  program  or 
under  a  temporary  contract  for  more  than  a  year  and  was  a  regular  certificated  employee  of 
the  District  at  the  time  the  District  tried  to  lay  her  off.  Zalac  then  inexplicably  cites  Hart,  in 
what  appears  to  be  dicta,  even  though  the  citation  to  Hart  is  entirely  unrelated  to  Ms.  Zalac 

    

“  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teacher's  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4"  1260, 
1285-1287. 
5  The  issue  before  the  court  in  Bakersfield  was  whether  the  District  could  lawfully  treat  its  employees  who  did  not 
have  completed  credentials  as  temporary.  The  key  holding  in  the  decision  is  that  certification  (credentialing)  and 
status  (seniority  and  classification)  are  legally  unrelated  and  credentialing,  or  lack  thereof,  cannot  be  used  as  a  factor 
to  determine  an  employee’s  status  and  seniority.  The  comment  about  44909  categorically  funded  positions  was  not 
essential  to  the  holding  and  is  a  gratuitous  afterthought  fortunately  not  required  to  be  given  any  deference  here, 
especially  due  to  the  problem  it  unwittingly  creates  as  set  forth  in  footnote  6  below. 
©  Id.  at  p.  1287.  Although  giving  a  blush  to  the  Santa  Barbara  and  Paulus  decisions  (below)  which  specifically  held 
Districts  are  not  required  to  engage  in  the  one  to  one  matching  of  employee  with  position  or  funding  that  would  be 
required  if  this  alleged  new  rule  were  implemented,  the  Bakersfield  court  goes  on  to  ignore  these  holdings  and  the 
obvious  conflict  it  creates. 
"Id. 
8  Id. 
°  Zalac  v.  Governing  Board  of Ferndale  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4"  8438,  849. 

BI

  

or  her  status.  The  Bakersfield  court  picked  up  on  this  dicta  in  Zalac  in  its  own  dicta,  leading 
to  the  “rule”  respondents  advocate  here.  The  Bakersfield  court  thus  miscited  Zalac  for  the 
proposition  quoted  above.  This  dicta  upon  dicta  is  not  binding  or  persuasive  in  this  matter. 

40. 

The  all  out  warfare  against  Districts  classifying  teachers  as  temporaries,  under 

the  banner  of  probationary  status  being  the  presumptive  classification  for  all  certificated 
employees,  ignores  the  Legislature’s  creation  of  temporary  classifications  pursuant  to 
sections  44909  and  44920.  Temporary  classification  is  specifically  statutorily  permitted  to 
allow  Districts  flexibility  in  staffing  short  term  vacancies  and  meeting  District  needs  without 
having  to  provide  status  toward  tenure  and  benefits.'°  Whether  employees  may  be  classified 
as  temporary,  if  the  requirements  of  sections  44909  or  44920  are  observed,  as  opposed  to 
being  required  to  be  classified  as  presumptively  probationary,  is  a  matter  for  the  Legislature, 

not  judicial  fiat.  There  is  one  caveat,  however,  that  Districts  may  not  abuse  the  temporary 
contract  tool  to  solve  staffing  problems  in  Districts  in  derogation  of  certificated  employee 
rights.  This  abuse  is  curbed  by  the  rule  the  District  has  relied  on  in  hiring  all  its  temporary 
teachers,  that  Districts  may  not  employ  more  temporary  teachers  than  there  are  permanent  or 
probationary  employees  on  leave  plus  the  number  of  categorically  funded  positions.''  Both 
these  decisions  make  clear  that  there  need  be  no  one  to  one  correspondence  between  any 
particular  temporary  employee  in  a  District  and  any  particular  leave  of  absence  position  or 
categorically  funded  position,  as  long  as  the  aggregate  total  of  such  positions  did  not  exceed 
the  total  number  of  temporary  employees  in  the  District.  The  District  proved  it  complied  with 
all  the  requirements  of  sections  44909  and  44920  and  Santa  Barbara  and  Paulus  in  dealing 
with  its  temporary  employees. 

PRECAUTIONARY  NOTICES 

41. 

The  District  not  only  served  the  identified  probationary  and  permanent 
respondents  subject  to  this  action  with  preliminary  notices  of  lay  off,  but  also  served 
employees  teaching  under  Education  Code  section  44909  and  44920  temporary  contracts 
with  “precautionary”  notices  of  lay  off.  There  was  no  showing  that  the  giving  of 
precautionary  notices  of  layoff  to  employees  who  arguably  have  no  right  to  this  hearing  was 
legally  or  factually  inappropriate.  These  precautionary  notices  are  the  product  of  District 
(not  just  this  one)  reactions  to  conflicting  and  confusing  Court  of  Appeal  rulings  in  several 
recent  cases,  primarily,  but  not  exclusively  out  of  the  Fifth  District  Court  of  Appeal.'’?  These 
rulings  have  made  the  status  of  employees  teaching  under  temporary  contracts  pursuant  to 
sections  44909  or  44920  in  any  District  very  unclear,  regardless  of  how  closely  the  District 
adheres  to  the  statutory  requirements  for  entering  into  temporary  contracts  with  teachers  and 
under  the  circumstances  permitted  by  sections  44909  and  44920.  Even  close  and  faithful 
adherence  to  these  statutory  requirements,  as  is  the  case  in  this  District,  is  no  guarantee 
against  claims  of  temporary  employees  to  presumptive  probationary  status  and  the  right  to  an 

ld.  p.  851. 

"'  Santa  Barbara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Santa  Barbara  High  School  District  (1977)  76  Cal.App.3d  227-228, 
Paulus  v.  Board of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  59,  62-63. 
”  California  Teacher's  Association  v.  Governing  Board of  Golden  Valley  Unified  School  District  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4"  369,  375-6,  Bakersfield,  at  1286-7. 

12 

 

  

evidentiary  hearing  at  the  termination  of  their  temporary  contracts,  as  is  the  case  here.  Thus, 
in  an  abundance  of  caution  and  in  response  to  uncertainty  created  by  these  decisions,  the 
District  felt  compelled  to  serve  its  temporary  employees  with  “precautionary  notices,”  and 
proceeded  forward  with  plans  to  include  them  in  a  hearing  and  contemplating  their  possible 
participation,  not  really  knowing  whether  these  employees  are  entitled  to  an  evidentiary 
hearing  or  not. 

42. 

Respondents  contend  that  each  employee  listed  as  teaching  in  a  categorically 
funded  position,  as  well  as  employees  filling  in  for  tenured  teachers  moved  to  categorically 
funded  positions,  are  entitled  to  participate  in  the  layoff  process,  to  be  given  a  seniority  date 
as  presumptively  probationary  employees  of  the  District  and  to  be  afforded  rehire  rights. 
The  District  believes  these  teachers  have  been  correctly  classified  as  temporary  employees, 
subject  to  release  under  Education  Code  section  44954,  and  that  these  employees  have 
acquired  no  status  or  attendant  rights  in  this  process. 

43. 

The  District  served  83  respondents  in  this  category  with  precautionary  layoff 

notices,  and  rescinded  one  just  before  the  evidentiary  hearing. 

44. 

The  District  moved  at  the  outset  of  the  case  for  a  ruling  seeking  a 
determination  from  the  undersigned  that  the  employees  receiving  precautionary  notices  were 
indeed  section  44909  and/or  44920  temporary  teachers  (some  teachers  served  in  both 
capacities),  and  a  ruling  that  these  employees  were  not  entitled  to  an  evidentiary  hearing. 
Ruling  on  the  motion  was  deferred  for  a  variety  or  reasons,  mostly  related  to  the  expeditious 
use  of  time  for  the  parties  to  resolve  as  many  issues  as  possible  among  themselves,  which 
proved  to  be  time  very  well  spent.  Due  to  very  professional  and  efficient  work  on  both  sides, 
a  great  number  of  the  pending  issues  regarding  the  layoff  and  the  status  and  rights  of  many 
employees  were  resolved  without  further  litigation,  as  the  stipulations  above  reflect.  The 
practical  effect  of  the  deferral  was  that  as  many  of  the  temporary  employees  who  received 
precautionary  notices  as  elected  to  do  so  were  present  throughout  the  entire  evidentiary 
portion  of  the  hearing.  No  one  who  sought  to  be  heard,  whether  noticed  with  a preliminary 
or  precautionary,  was  denied  the  opportunity  to  be  heard. 

    

motion  to  exclude  the  employees  receiving  precautionary  notices,  and  declined  to  rule  one 
way  or  the  other  that  these  employees  had  no  right  to  a  hearing  as  a  matter  of  law.  The 
Administrative  Law  Judge  ruled  that  it  was  the  District’s  decision  whether  to  afford  these 
employees  an  evidentiary  hearing  or  deny  them  same,  and  not  the  province  of  the  ALJ  to 
make  that  determination  as  a  matter  of  law.  The  ALJ  ruled  that  the  District  is  legally 
required  to  determine  the  status  of  each  District  employee,  and,  on  that  basis,  determine 
whether  to  give  them  notice  and  an  opportunity  to  be  heard  upon  the  termination  of  their 
employment.  If  the  District  elects  to  give  employees  a  precautionary  notice,  it  must 
determine  whether  to  give  any  such  employee  a  hearing,  or  rescind  the  notice  and  leave  the 
employee  to  seek  his  or  her  remedies,  if  any  are  available,  elsewhere.  In  this  instance,  the 
matter  was  mooted  by  the  fact  that  all  persons  receiving  either  a  preliminary  or  precautionary

After  the  close  of  the  evidence,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  denied  the 

45. 

  

notice  were  afforded  a  right  to  be  heard  and  participate  in  the  evidentiary  hearing  process, 
and  by  the  fact  that  the  District  ultimately  rescinded  all  the  precautionary  notices. 

INDIVIDUAL  RESPONDENTS 

46. 

Individual  respondents  Digisare,  Weidner,  Schroeder,  Smith,  Bridges,  Jones, 

Hemsworth  each  made  individual  presentations.  Each  respondent  articulately  pointed  out 
individual  circumstances  that,  although  persuasive  and  compelling  of  recognition, 
nevertheless  raise  no  viable  issues  regarding  the  efficacy  of  their  first  dates  of  paid  service, 
status,  seniority,  or  the  Board’s  selection  of  criteria  for  tie-breaking. 

47. 

Ms.  Abriani  successfully  proved  her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District 
should  be  backed  up  one  day,  to  August  20,  2007,  which  moves  her  ahead  of  a  significant 
number  of  other  District  employees,  many  subject  to  layoff,  who  had  their  first  day  of  paid 
service  on  August  21,  2007.  There  was  evidence  that  Ms.  Abriani  was  ordered,  as  were  a 
number  of  other  new  teachers,  to  attend  an  orientation  the  day  before  her  contract  began. 
Respondents  claimed  other  teachers  also  attended  the  orientation,  and  they  attempted  to 
identify  these  persons  by  looking  for  all  employees  at  the  same  school  site  as  Ms.  Abriani 
with  the  same  August  21  first  day  of  paid  service.  Respondents  contend  all  these  employees 
should  have  their  first  day  of  paid  service  rolled  back  to  August  20,  as  was  Ms.  Abriani’s,  for 
the  same  reasons.  The  contention  fails.  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  of  these  employees 
actually  attended  on  August  20.  On  the  other  hand,  Ms.  Abriani  did  so  convincingly, 
credibly  testifying,  with  corroboration,  that  she  was  physically  present,  worked  the  day  and 
was  paid  for  her  service  on  August  20. 

48. 

Ms.  Hemsworth  made  what  appeared  to  be  a  similar  claim,  but  it  actually  was 

not.  She  was  paid  a  stipend  for  short  term  service  in  the  summer  before  her  first  service 
under  her  contract.  She  and  other  mathematics  teachers  new  to  the  District  were  required  to 
meet  for  two  days  in  the  summer  to  develop  the  curriculum,  and  were  paid  a  stipend  for  the 
two  days.  There  was  no  other  service  between  the  two  day  period  and  the  commencement  of 
her  contract.  Under  these  circumstances,  she  is  not  entitled  to  have  the  first  of  the  two  days 
in  the  summer  treated  as  her  first  day  of  paid  service  to  the  District. 

49. 

Mr.  Williams’  contention  is  that  he  was  incorrectly  placed  on  the  English 

group  list  for  application  of  the  tie  breaking  criteria,  and  not  on  the  Physical  Education  list. 
It  was  not  disputed  that  Mr.  Williams  has  a  single  subject  credential  in  Physical  Education 
and  no  credentials  in  English.  His  assignment  has  been  .33  FTE  of  OCS,  which  can  be 
taught  by  any  credentialed  person  without  specification,  and  .67  of  Physical  Education  at 
Sheldon  High  School.  Mr.  Williams  is  a  probationary  1  teacher.  It  was  not  disputed  that 
placing  Mr.  Williams  in  the  English  group  and  not  in  the  Physical  Education  group  was  an 
error.  There  was  also  no  dispute  that  he  can  be  bumped  by  any  one  of  a  myriad  of  more 
senior  employees  facing  layoff  for  the  .33  FTE  of  OCS,  which  requires  no  specific 
credential.  It  was  not  proved  that  he  should  be  displaced  for  the  remaining  .67  FTE  of 
Physical  Education.  It  was  not  proved  that  Mr.  Williams  is  senior  to  any  certificated 
employee  being  retained  to  teach  Physical  Education  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  However, 

14 

 

  

the  error  is  one  that  can  be  easily  rectified  by  reapplying  the  criteria  with  Mr.  Williams  in  the 
proper  Physical  Education  group,  to  determine  whether  he  can  displace  anyone  junior  to  him 
that  is  being  retained  to  teach  Physical  Education  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  If  the  error 
cannot  be  corrected  before  May  15,  2008,  Mr.  Williams  must  be  retained  for  .67  FTE. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1, 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 
The  District  has  the  burden  of  proving  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence  that  the  proposed 
reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff 
served  on  respondent  is  factually  and  legally  appropriate.'* 

2. 

The  services  the  District  seeks  to  eliminate  in  this  matter,  as  set  forth  in  its 
Resolution  and  enumerated  in  the  Factual  Findings,  are  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that 
may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not  arbitrary 
or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  Legal  cause 
therefore  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Elk  Grove 
Unified  School  District  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  81.00  FTE  remaining  of  particular  kinds 
of  services  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  56  FTE  of  Elementary  Teaching,  as  set  forth  in  the 
District’s  Resolution  and  identified  in  the  Factual  Findings. 

3. 

4. 

The  District  is  facing  a  significant  projected  deficit  related  to  the  loss  of 

Education  Code  section  44955  requires  layoffs  to  take  place  in  inverse  order  of 

funding  and  expected  declines  in  enrollment.  The  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services 
proposed  is  necessary  to  avert  the  District  operating  in  a  deficit  in  the  upcoming  school  year. 
The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  identified  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely 
to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

    

seniority,  with  some  notable  exceptions.  “Thus,  the  statute  provides  that  seniority 
determines  the  order  of  dismissals,  and  that  as  between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of 
paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district 
and  its  students.  Senior  employees  are  given  "bumping"  rights  in  that  they  will  not  be 
terminated  if  there are  junior  employees  retained  who  are  rendering  services  which  the  senior 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  Conversely,  as  in  this  case,  a  district  may 
move  upward  from  the  bottom  of  the  seniority  list,  "skipping"  over  and  retaining  junior 
employees  who  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render  services  which  more  senior 
employees  are  not.”'*  There  was  no  evidence  that  any  certificated  employee  of  the  District  is 

8  Education  Code  section  44944. 
"Alexander  v.  Board of Trustees of  the  Delano Unified  School  District  (1983)  139  Cal.  App.  3d  567,  571-2; 
Moreland  Teacher's  Association  v.  Kurze  (1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  655. 

15

being  retained  to  provide  a  service  any  of  the  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Special  Education  teachers  are  being  skipped,  but  none  of  the  respondents  is 
certificated  to  teach  Special  Education  classes. 

e@ 

5. 

Legal  cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to 

give  the  remaining  respondents  final  notice  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  school 
year  2008/2009,  with  the  possible  exception of Mr.  Williams,  for  .67  FTE,  as  set  forth  below. 
Legal  cause  exists  to  sustain  the  Accusations.  The  Board  may  give  respondents  final  notices 
that  their  services  will  not  be  required  by  the  District  in  the  upcoming  school  year,  in  inverse 
order  of  seniority. 

ORDER 

lL. 

The  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  District  action  to  reduce  or  eliminate  81.00 

FTE  of  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008/2009  school  year  is  AFFIRMED. 

2. 

The  Accusations  with  respect  to  respondent  certificated  employees  of  the  Elk 

Grove  Unified  School  District  who  received  preliminary  notices  of  layoff  and  were  not 
rescinded,  as  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings,  are  SUSTAINED. 

3. 

The  District  shall  apply  the  tie  breaking  criteria  to  Mr.  Williams  relative  to 

other  Physical  Education  employees  in  the  tie  breaker  grouping  for  .67  FTE  of  Physical 
Education.  The  District  shall  determine  whether,  with  the  corrected  application  of  his 
credential  grouping,  he  is  able  to  bump  any  employee  junior  to  him  otherwise  being  retained 
to  teach  English  in  the  upcoming  school  year.  If  so,  Mr.  Williams  must  be  retained  for  .67 
FTE of  Physical  Education.  If  not,  his  preliminary  notice  and  Accusation  are  sustained  and 
he  is  laid  off  for  his  full  1.0  FTE.  Even if he  is  retained  for  the  .67  FTE  of  Physical 
Education,  he  is  still  laid  off  for  the  .33  FTE  of  OCS,  and  final  notice  shall  be  given  to  him 
for  this  portion  of  his  position.  If  the  determination  cannot  be  made  before  the  May  15 
deadline  for  issuing  final  notices  of  layoff,  Mr.  Williams  shall  be  retained  for  .67  FTE  of 
Physical  Education. 

4, 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  by  the  District  that  their  services  will 

not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority. 

e@ 

@ 

| 

Sila  dae 

STEPHEN  J.  SMI7H1 
Administrative  On Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

16

  

