   BEFORE  THE 

GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
ANTELOPE  VALLEY  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

OAH  No.  L2008030389 

The  Reduction  in  Force  of  35.8  Full-Time 
Equivalent  Positions, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

David  B.  Rosenman,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  24,  2008,  at  the  Antelope  Valley  Union  High 
School  District,  Lancaster,  California. 

Fagen  Friedman  &  Fulfrost,  by  Howard  A.  Friedman,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 

the  Antelope  Valley  Union  High  School  District  (District). 

Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrman  &  Sommers,  by  Michael  R.  Feinberg,  Attorney  at 

Law,  represented  the  following  four  respondent  teachers:  Rachel  Norton,  Ryan  Rivas,  Carol 
Smith  and  David  Wolter  who,  except  for  Mr.  Wolter,  were  present  at  the  hearing.  On  the  day 
of  the  hearing,  the  Accusation  against  Carol  Smith  was  withdrawn. 

Evidence  was  received  by  way  of  stipulation,  testimony  and  documents.  The  record 
was  held  open  for  receipt  of  briefs,  which  were  received  on  April  30,  2008,  and  marked  for 
identification  as  follows:  The  District’s  brief,  Exhibit  12;  the  Respondents’  brief,  Exhibit  F. 
The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  30,  2008. 

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

  

   

The  Governing  Board  of  the  District  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 
kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  teachers  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was 
not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed 
to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 

review  of  credentials  and  seniority.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code. 

  

 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  District  provides  educational  services  for  students  in  grades  nine  through 

twelve  in  the  following  settings:  eight  comprehensive  high  schools,  two  continuation  high 
schools,  one  CDC/expulsion  school,  one  adult  education  school  and  one  ROP.  The  District 
employs  approximately  1150  certificated  staff. 

2.  David  Vierta  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  Tim  Azevedo  is  the 

Assistant  Superintendent,  Personnel  Services  of  the  District.  Their  actions  were  taken  in 
those  official  capacities. 

3.  Before  March  15,  2003,  the  District  personally  served  on  each  respondent  a 

written  notice  (notice)  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their  services  would  not  be 
required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation 
and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  Resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by  35.8  full- 
time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions.  In  the  District,  each  period  of  scheduled  class  instruction  or 
other  assignment  is  the  equivalent  of  0.2  FTE,  with  five  periods  per  day  being  the  usual  load 
for  teachers. 

4.  Notices  were  personally  served.  Nine  certificated  employees  each  timely 
requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

5.  The  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  these  nine 

employees.  On  April  8,  2008,  the  District  served  these  employees  by  mail  with  an 
Accusation  along  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense. 

6.  Six  employees  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense:  Michelle  Klein,  Rachel  Norton,  Ryan 

Rivas,  Carol  Smith,  Tenecia  Takamatsu  and  David  Wolter  (Respondents).  By  the  time  of  the 
hearing,  Michelle  Klein  and  Tenecia  Takamatsu  were  no  longer  Respondents  in  the  matter. 
As  to  them,  it  is  presumed  that  the  Accusations  were  withdrawn. 

7.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  certificated  employees  of  the 

8.  On  March  5,  2008,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  (Board)  was  given  notice 
of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  35.8  FTE  employees  be  given  notice  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons  therefore. 

District. 

// 

 

9.  Board  Revised  Resolution  2007-2008-24,  adopted  on  March  5,  2008,  proposed  a 

layoff  of  35.8  FTE  certificated  employees  (Resolution).  Specifically,  the  Resolution 
provided  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

FTE 

Services 

19.2 
4 
7.8 
1.6 
3.2 

Senior  Project 
Administrative  Intern 
Instructional  Coach 
Site  Coordinators 
Intervention 

10.  These  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  were  described  as  follows: 

(a)  Senior  Project:  a  program  where  high  school  seniors  take  courses  to 
research  and  produce  a  project  portfolio  and  presentation,  proposed  to  be  eliminated. 

(b)  Administrative  Intern:  if  a  teacher  is  interested  in  becoming  an 

administrator,  each  school  may  release  a  teacher  for  two  periods  to  shadow  an  administrator 
in  the  performance  of  administrative  duties. 

(c)  Instructional  Coach:  a  program  where  teachers  are  released  for  a  period  to 

help  colleagues  who  need  assistance  in  teaching  style,  technique  or  methodology. 

(d)  Site  Coordinators:  the  athletic  directors  assigned  to  each  site  who  have 

been  released  in  the  past  for  two  periods  to  attend  to  paperwork,  proposed  to  be  reduced  to 
one  period. 

(e)  Intervention:  a  program  paid  for  from  the  general  fund  to  support  smaller 

classes  in  literacy  and  math. 

11.  The  Resolution  also  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 

seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date.  It 
provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  in 
accordance  with  the  criteria  stated  therein. 

12.  Assistant  Superintendent  Azevedo  stated  that  the  Resolution  was  required  by  the 

District’s  fiscal  crisis  and  need  to  reduce  services  to  balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of 
students.  More  specifically,  the  Board  received  information  about  the  next  state  budget 
leading  the  Board  to  believe  that  it  needed  to  recapture  approximately  $1,968,000  to  its 
general  fund. 

13.  The  decision  to  eliminate  or  reduce  services  was  not  related  to  the  competency 
and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

 
  

  

14.  The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  credentials. 

15.  Assistant  Superintendent  Azevedo  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the 

technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

16.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced.  The  District  then 
determined  whether  the  least  senior  employees  held  credentials  in  another  area  and  were 
entitled  to  displace,  or  “bump,”  other  employees.  In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for 
each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the  District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by 
the  known  vacancies,  and  determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority.  The  District  then  checked  the  credentials  of  affected  individuals  and  whether  they 
could  “bump”  other  employees.  The  District  has  a  high  rate  of  attrition  and,  therefore,  did 
not  need  to  send  out  as  many  notices  as  the  number  of  FTEs  identified  in  the  Resolution. 

17.  ‘The  District  used  information  from  the  seniority  list  to  apply  the  tie-breaker 

criteria  of  the  Resolution. 

18.  The  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 

could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s 
decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  decisions  were  based  on  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

19.  The  District  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated 
employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

20.  Respondents’  contend  that  the  FTEs  identified  in  the  Resolution  do  not  constitute 

“particular  kinds  of  services”  under  Education  Code  section  44955  and,  as  a  result,  fewer 
Respondents  should  be  subject  to  lay  off. 

21.  In  support  of  this  contention,  the  following  evidence  was  submitted. 

(a)  Senior  project  classes  are  taught  by  teachers  in  various  disciplines,  while 
senior  composition  classes  are  taught  by  English  teachers  and  satisfy  requirements  to  obtain 
an  English  credit.  Some  seniors  take  senior  composition  class  as  part  of  their  senior  project, 
and  others  do  not.  Respondents  contend  that  these  two  types  of  classes  are  not  the  same 
particular  kind  of  service,  that  the  Resolution  makes  no  distinction  between  them  and,  as  a 
result,  the  total  FTEs  being  eliminated  must  be  reduced  by  the  4.6  FTEs  identified  as  English 
teachers  teaching  senior  composition,

  

(b)  Administrative  interns  are  not  required  to  have  any  particular  credential, 
and  are  certificated  teachers  who  perform  as  administrative  interns  for  a  period,  rather  than 
as  a  full-time  assignment.  Respondents  contend  that  this  is  no  more  than  a  nonspecific 
teacher  on  special  assignment  which  is  not  a  particular  kind  of  service.  Therefore,  the  total 
FTEs  being  eliminated  must  be  reduced  by  the  0.8  FTE  administrative  interns  identified  as 
English  teachers. 

(c)  Instructional  coaches,  although  described  in  some  job  postings  as  full-time 

positions,  are  mostly  teachers  doing  such  functions  on  a  part-time  basis—only  two  are  full 
time.  The  job  postings  denote  more  areas  of  responsibility  than  testified  to  by.  Mr.  Azevedo. 
Respondents  contend  that  the  Resolution  to  reduce  7.8  FTEs  does  not  distinguish  between 
part-time  or  full-time  positions  or  the  limited  duties  described  in  testimony  as  opposed  to  the 
more  extensive  duties  in  the  job  postings.  As  a  result,  Respondents  contend  that  the  total 
FTEs  being  eliminated  must  be  reduced  by  the  2.8  FTE  instructional  coaches  identified  as 
English  teachers. 

(d)  The  District  does  not  have  a  job  description  for  site  coordinators. 

Respondents  contend  that  it  therefore  cannot  constitute  a  particular  kind  of  service  amenable 
to  layoff  and,  as  a  result,  the  total  FTEs  being  eliminated  must  be  reduced  by  the  0.2  FTE  site 
coordinators  identified  as  English  teachers. 

(e)  Respondents  contend  that  the  intervention  service  is  no  more  than 

specialized  or  intensive  remedial  math  or  English  classes,  however,  the  District  has  not 
identified  math  or  English  as  particular  kinds  of  services  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 
Therefore,  the  layoffs  have  been  improperly  noticed  and,  as  a  result,  the  total  FTEs  being 
eliminated  must  be  reduced  by  the  1.6  FTE  intervention  providers  identified  as  English 
teachers. 

(f)  As  a  result  of  the  contentions  noted  above,  and  some  differences  between 
the  numbers  of  FTEs  identified  in  the  Resolution  as  opposed  to  the  actual  number  of  FTEs 
noticed  for  layoff,'  and  the  effects  of  attrition,  Respondents  contend  that  there  should  be  no 
more  than  a  4.0  FTE  reduction  in  English  teachers.  When  applied  to  the  seniority  list,  this 
would  justify  giving  notice  to  Respondent  Rachel  Norton  but  not  to  Respondent  Ryan  Rivas. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1,  Education  Code”  section  44944,  subdivision  (a),  states  in  pertinent  part: 

“No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 

'  For  example,  the  Resolution  indicates  19.2  FTEs  for  senior  project  and  1.6  for  site 

coordinator,  while  the  District’s  computations  in  Exhibit  9  indicate  actual  layoffs  of  19.6 
FTEs  for  senior  project  and  1.4  for  site  coordinator. 

?  All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code. 

 

    

  

board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons  speci- 
fied  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written  notice  by 
the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee  . 
.  that  it  has  been  recommended  that 
the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.” 

. 

2.  Section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 

than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive, 
and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as 
specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

“(b)  Whenever  . 

. 

.  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 

. 

later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  . 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing 
board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 

date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order 
of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than 
five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement... . 

“(c)  ...  [S]ervices  of  such  employees  shall  be  shall  be  terminated  in  the  reverse  order 
in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  Sections  44844 
and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices 
and a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 

that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render... . 

 

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

“(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 

course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 
certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

3.  Sections  44949  and  44955 establish  jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding. 

The  notice 

and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  sections  44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual 
Findings  3  through  9.) 

4,  A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955,  subdivision 
(b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter,  be 
performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 
As  long  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  method  of  teaching,  the  layoff  can  proceed.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.)  Particular  kinds  of  services,  as  that 
phrase  is  used  in  section  44955,  means  a  specific  offering  or  service,  and  can  include  specific 
curricular  offerings,  such  as  physical  education,  or  services  that  will  not  be  offered  in  the 
same  way  or  method,  such  as  eliminating  a  traveling  art  teacher  but  maintaining  art 
instruction  generally.  (See  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76 
Cal.App.3d  796,  811,  and  Davis  v.  Berkeley  School  Dist.  (1934)  2  Cal.2d  770.) 

In  San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  at  page  632,  the 

notices  “gave  designations  of  categories  of  services  to  be  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated  but  did 
not  identify  the  specific  positions  subject  to  notice.”  The  court  determined  that  this  met  the 
statutory  requirements,  and  approved  the  use  of  categories  such  as  “Administration  (Building 
and  Central  Office),”  “Counseling,”  “Department  Chairpersons”  and  “Elementary 
Instrumental  Music  Program,”  among  others. 

5.  There  was  sufficient  information  describing  the  categories  to  conclude  that  the 
particular  kinds  of  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  are  sufficient  under  the  applicable 
statutes.  Respondents’  contentions  to  the  contrary  are  rejected.  (Factual  Findings  8,  9,  10, 
20  and  21.) 

6.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 
the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  section  44949, 

  

 

7.  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

8.  No  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  Respondent  is  being  retained  to  render  a 

service  which  any  Respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

9.  The  difficulty  faced  by  school  districts  in  laying-off  teachers  in  anticipation  of  cuts 
in  the  budgets  of  the  state  and  the  district  is  specifically  acknowledged  in  San  Jose  Teachers 
Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  at  pages  632-33.  Nevertheless,  proceeding 
under  sections  44949  and  44955  was  acknowledged  as  proper  and  appropriate,  absent  a 
legislative  change  in  the  process.  Under  the  present  statutory  scheme,  the  District  and  the 
Board  acted  properly  in  sending  notices  to  Respondents  that  they  would  not  be  reemployed 
due  to  a  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  by  the  District. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  employees  occupying  35.8  full-time  equivalent  certificated 
positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Such  notices  may  be  given  to 
the  following  employees:  Rachel  Norton,  Ryan  Rivas  and  David  Wolter. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  Each  Respondent  shall  receive 

such  a  notice. 

DATED:  May  2,  2008. 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

