BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OF  THE 
GARVEY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of: 

OAH  No.  L2008030648 

The  Layoffs  of  26  Full-Time  Equivalent 
Positions  of  the  Certificated  Employees  of  the 
District, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

David  B.  Rosenman,  Administrative  Law  Judge  (ALJ),  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  May  5,  2008,  at  the  Garvey  School 
District,  Rosemead,  California. 

Garcia  Calderon  Ruiz,  by  James  R.  Lynch,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Garvey 

School  District  (District)  and  its  Superintendent,  Virginia  Peterson. 

Rothner,  Segall  &  Greenstone,  by  Emma  Leheny,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented 
Respondent  teachers.  A  list  of  Respondents  is  attached  as  Attachment  A.  An  explanation  of 
the  notes  on  that  list,  including  the  Respondents  who  were  present  at  the  hearing,  is  found  in 
Factual  Finding  7,  below. 

Evidence  was  received  by  way  of  stipulation,  testimony  and  documents.  The  record 

remained  open  for  briefs  which  were  received  as  follows:  Respondents’  brief,  on  May  6, 
2008,  marked  for  identification  as  Exhibit  A;  and  District’s  brief,  on  May  8,  2008,  marked 
for  identification  as  Exhibit  4.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  May 
8,  2008.  Pursuant  to  stipulation  of  the  parties  and  an  Order  (Exhibit  2),  the  time  limits  for 
certain  acts  under  the  Education  Code  have  been  extended. 

It  was  subsequently  discovered  that  some  documentary  evidence  was  incomplete. 

More  specifically,  the  copy  of  a  resolution  of  the  Board  of  Education  contained  within 
Exhibit  1  was  missing  several  pages.  In  a  telephone  conference  call  on  May  9,  2008,  both 
counsel  agreed  that  a  complete  copy  of  the  resolution  could  be  received  in  evidence  as 
Exhibit  5. 

 

  

SUMMARY  OF  PROPOSED  DECISION 

The  Board  of  Education  for  the  District  determined  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular 

kinds  of  services  provided  by  certificated  teachers  for  budgetary  reasons.  The  decision  was 
not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication  of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed 
to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

District  staff  carried  out  the  Board’s  decision  by  using  a  selection  process  involving 

review  of  credentials  and  seniority.  The  selection  process  was  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Education  Code,  except  to  the  extent  that  the  District’s  action  denied  due 
process  to  one  Respondent.  For  three  other  employees,  corrections  were  made  to  their 
seniority  dates  and  classifications,  resulting  in  changes  to  the  layoff  process.  The  District 
withdrew  the  Accusation  as  to  other  employees.  The  affected  employees  will  have  the 
Accusations  against  them  dismissed.  Otherwise,  the  Board  may  proceed  as  indicated  herein. 

Jurisdiction  and  Parties 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1.  The  District  provides  educational  services  for  approximately  5900  students  in 
preschool  through  grade  eight,  at  twelve  school  sites  and  one  child  development  center. 

2.  Virginia  Peterson  is  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  and  Genaro  Alarcon  is  the 
Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  of  the  District.  Their  actions  were  taken  in 
those  official  capacities.  Mr.  Alarcon  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  technical 
aspects  of  the  layoff. 

3.  Before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  served  on  a  number  of  certificated  employees, 

including  Respondents,  a  written  notice  (notice)  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended 
that  notice  be  given  to  them  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for 
the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had  passed  a  resolution  reducing  the 
certificated  staff  by  26  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

In  his  official  capacity  as  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  Mr. 

4.  Twenty  four  certificated  employees,  referred  to  as  Respondents,  submitted  timely 
written  requests  for  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

    

Alarcon  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the  Respondents.  The  District  timely 
served  the  Respondents  with  an  Accusation  along  with  required  accompanying  documents 
and  blank  Notices  of  Defense. 

6.  Respondents  timely  served  Notices  of  Defense  on  the  District.

5. 

7a.  Attachment A 

is  incorporated  by  reference.  The  24  names  listed  are  Respondents 

who  submitted  timely  Notices  of  Defense.  The  District  stipulated  that  its  notices  and 
Accusations  were  withdrawn  as  to  all  names  with  the  designation  “+”.  Respondents  whose 
names  have  the  designation  “*”  appeared  at  the  hearing.  Ms.  Leheny  represented  the  13 
Respondents  who  did  not  have  a  “+”  designation. 

7b.  A  roll  call  was  taken  to  determine  the  presence  of  any  of  the  Respondents  at  the 

commencement  of  the  first  hearing  session  on  May  5,  2008,  at  about  12:05  p.m.  Respondent 
Kristen  Cheng  did  not  appear  at  that  time.  In  its  brief  (Exhibit  4),  the  District  contends  that 
Respondent  Cheng  attended  the  second  session  of  the  hearing  that  began  at  about  2:15  p.m., 
however  there  was  no  indication  made  either  on  the  record  or  to  the  ALJ  of  Respondent 
Cheng’s  attendance. 

8.  Respondents  in  this  proceeding  are  probationary  and  permanent  certificated 

employees  of  the  District. 

The  Governing  Board  and  the  Lay  Off Resolution 

9.  On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  of  Education  for  the  District  (Board)  was  given 

notice  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  26  FTE  employees  be  given  notice  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year  and  stating  the  reasons 
therefore. 

10.  Board  Resolution  number  07-08-23,  adopted  on  March  6,  2008,  proposed  a  layoff 
of  26  FTE  certificated  employees  (Resolution).  Specifically,  the  Resolution  provided  for  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services: 

FTE 

Services 

23 
1 
1 
1 

K-6  classroom  teaching 
Special  Day  Class  teaching 
Resource  Specialist 
Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (Physical  Education  Teacher 
Incentive  Grant) 

11.  The  Resolution  also  established  tie-breaker  criteria  for  determining  the  relative 

seniority  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date. 
It 
provided  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the 
students  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  stated  therein.  More  specifically,  the  tie-breaker 
criteria  provide  for  points  to  be  awarded  for  certain  credentials,  certificates,  authorizations  or 
salary  steps.  The  more  points  awarded  to  a  teacher,  the  higher  the  seniority  within  the  shared 
date  of  first  paid  service.  In  the  event  of  a tie  after  reference  to  all  listed  criteria,  additional 
criteria  applied  relating  to  the  dates  that  certain  credentials,  certificates  or  authorizations 
were  received. 

  

 

  

12.  The  decision  to  reduce  services  was  not  related  to  the  competency  and  dedication 

of  the  individuals  whose  services  are  proposed  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

The  Seniority  List  and  the  Lay  Offs 

13.  The  District  maintains  a  seniority  list  which  contains  employees’  seniority  dates 

(first  date  of  paid  service),  current  assignments  and  credentials.  The  seniority  list  in  evidence 
(Exhibit  3)  is  a  partial  list,  only  including  the  seniority  dates  affected  by  the  Resolution. 

14.  By  agreement  of  the  parties  on  the  day  of  the  hearing,  the  following  changes  were 

made  to  the  seniority  list: 

a.  Respondent  Tran  Ma,  number  11b  on  the  list,  had  her  seniority  date 

changed  from  September  5,  2006,  to  September  26,  2005,  and  her  classification  changed 
from  probationary  to  permanent.  As a  result,  she  changed  position  on  the  list  from  11b  to 
below  number  23,  Kristen  Cheng. 

b.  Respondent  Michelle  M.  Mendoza,  number  13  on  the  list,  had  her  seniority 

date  changed  from  March  3,  2006,  to  September  19,  2005,  and  her  classification  changed 
from  probationary  to  permanent.  As a  result,  she  changed  position  on  the  list  from  13  to 
below  number  23,  Kristen  Cheng. 

c.  Respondent  Cecile  Chavez,  number  14  on  the  list,  had  her  seniority  date 

changed  from  December  1,  2005,  to  October  28,  2005,  and  her  classification  changed  from 
probationary  to  permanent.  As  a  result,  she  changed  position  on  the  list  from  14  to  below 
number  23,  Kristen  Cheng. 

15.  At  the  hearing,  the  parties  stipulated  to  the  underlying  bases  for  the  proceedings 

and,  by  agreement,  limited  their  evidentiary  presentations  to  the  circumstances  of  the  four 
Respondents  noted  in  Factual  Finding  14;  i.e.,  Respondents  Tran  Ma,  Michelle  M.  Mendoza, 
Cecile  Chavez  and  Kristen  Cheng.  Therefore,  although  there  was  no  specific  evidence  to 
support  Factual  Findings  16,  18  and  19  below,  neither  was  there  any  contention  by 
Respondents  that  such  acts  did  not  occur.  Pursuant  to  Evidence  Code  section  664,  it  is 
presumed  that  the  actions  or  official  duties  of  a  public  entity,  such  as  the  District  and  Board 
herein,  have  been  regularly  performed.  Further,  based  on  the  ALJ’s  experience  and 
specialized  knowledge  of  teacher  layoff  procedures,  these  actions  are  standard  in  such  cases. 
Pursuant  to  Government  Code  section  11425.50,  subdivision  (c),  the  ALJ’s  experience  and 
specialized  knowledge  may  be  used  in  evaluating  the  evidence. 

16.  The  District  used  the  seniority  list  to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least 

senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the  various  services  being  reduced. 

17.  Respondent  Michelle  M.  Mendoza  was  slated  for  non  reemployment  due  to  the 
one  FTE  reduction  in  a  resource  specialist  position,  for  which  she  had  been  the  most  junior 
employee  before  the  change  in  her  seniority  date.  Mr.  Alarcon  stated  that,  if  Respondent 

  

    

Mendoza  was  retained  due  to  the  change  in  her  seniority  date,  the  District  would  look  within 
its  special  education  staff  to  identify  an  employee  with  a  regular  teaching  credential  and 
transfer  that  person  so  as  to  accomplish  the  FTE  reduction,  and  that  such  person  would  be 
more  senior  to  anyone  on  the  present  seniority  list.  This  was  the  only  instance  in  evidence  of 
a  less  senior  employee  holding  credentials  in  an  area  who  is  entitled  to  displace,  or  “bump,” 
another  employee  in  any  FTE  position  slated  for  layoff. 

18. 

In  determining  who  would  be  laid  off  for  each  kind  of  service  reduced,  the 

District  counted  the  number  of  reductions  not  covered  by  the  known  vacancies,  and 
determined  the  impact  on  incumbent  staff  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

19.  The  District  used  information  from  the  seniority  list  and  personnel  files  to  apply 

the  tie-breaker  criteria  of  the  Resolution. 

20.  The  services  identified  in  the  Resolution  are  particular  kinds  of  services  that 

could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Board’s 
decisions  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  were  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  were  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  The  decisions  were  based  on  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils. 

21.  The  District  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds 

of  services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated 
employee  is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is 
certificated  and  competent  to  render,  except  as  discussed  more  specifically  in  Factual 
Findings  23f  and  23g,  and  in  Legal  Conclusions  6,  7,  8  and  9,  below. 

Respondents’  Contentions 

22.  Respondents  contend  that  the  Accusations  must  be  dismissed  as  to  Respondents 

Tran  Ma,  Michelle  M.  Mendoza  and  Cecile  Chavez  due  to  the  changes  in  their  seniority 
dates.  Respondent  Kristen  Cheng  contends  that  the  Accusation  against  her  must  be 
dismissed  because  the  District  notified  her  that  it  would  not  proceed  against  her.  Further, 
Respondents  Ma,  Mendoza  and  Chavez  contend  that  they  must  be  retained  because  they  are 
permanent  employees  while  the  District  is  retaining  probationary  employees  who  hold  the 
same  credential.  Finally,  Respondents  Ma  and  Chavez  contend  that,  if  Respondent  Cheng  is 
retained,  they,  too,  should  be  retained  because  they  are  more  senior  to  Respondent  Cheng. 

23.  In  support  of  the  contention  of  Respondent  Cheng,  the  following  evidence  was 

submitted. 

a.  The  Board  met  on  May  1,  2008,  and  voted  not  to  reduce  the  Class  Size 

Reduction  program  at  the  third  grade  level.  As  a  result,  the  number  of  employees  to  be  laid 
off  was  reduced. 

 

  

b.  Based  on  this  action,  on  Friday,  May  2,  2008,  Mr.  Alarcon  verbally  notified 

twelve  Respondents  that  they  were  no  longer  included  in  the  layoff  proceedings.  These  are 
the  eleven  Respondents  indicated  on  Attachment  A  with  “+”,  and  Respondent  Cheng. 

c.  The  District  revised  its  seniority  list  to  indicate  that  the  Accusations  were 

withdrawn  as  to  these  twelve  Respondents. 

d.  On  the  morning  of  the  hearing,  Monday,  May  5,  2008,  counsel  for  the 

District  and  for  Respondents  met  for  many  hours  to  confer  on  relevant  matters,  including 
consideration  of  the  underlying  information  that  resulted  in  the  changes  made  to  the  seniority 
list  set  forth  in  Factual  Finding  14.  When  the  District  realized  that  these  changes  resulted  in 
three  Respondents  being  moved  on  the  list  to  now  be  more  senior  to  Respondent  Cheng  and 
that  Respondent  Cheng  was  now  the  most  junior  employee  for  whom  withdrawal  of  the 
Accusation  had  been  considered,  it  determined  to  reverse  its  decision  to  withdraw  the 
Accusation  against  her. 

e.  Mr,  Alarcon  telephoned  Respondent  Cheng  in  the  morning  of  the  hearing, 

May  5S,  2008,  and  notified  her  of  this  decision  and  tell  her  that  she  was  again  subject  to  being 
laid  off  and  could  attend  the  hearing  that  day. 

f.  Sandra  Luz  Armenta,  number  19  on  the  seniority  list  with  a  date  of 

September  7,  2004,  is  a  probationary  employee  of  the  District,  holds  the  same  credential  in 
special  education  as  Respondent  Mendoza,  and  was  not  noticed  for  layoff. 

g.  Respondents  Ma  and  Chavez  possess  multiple  subject  credentials.  Robert 

Richardson,  number  5  on  the  seniority  list,  is  a  probationary  employee  of  the  District,  holds  a 
multiple  subject  credential,  and  was  not  noticed  for  layoff.  Mr.  Richardson  also  holds  a 
supplemental  authorization  in  introductory  English  and  uses  that  authorization  in  his  present 
assignment  teaching  Language  Arts  at  a  middle  school.  Kate  Tran,  tied  at  number  11  on  the 
seniority  list,  is  a  probationary  employee  of  the  District,  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential, 
and  was  not  noticed  for  layoff.  Ms.  Tran  also  holds  a  supplemental  authorization  in  math 
and  uses  that  authorization  in  her  present  assignment  teaching  math  at  a  middle  school. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1.  Education  Code'  section  44944,  subdivision  (a),  states  in  pertinent  part: 

“No  later  than  March  15  and  before  an  employee  is  given  notice  by  the  governing 

board  that  his  or  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  year  for  the  reasons 
specified  in  Section  44955,  the  governing  board  and  the  employee  shall  be  given  written 
notice  by  the  superintendent  of  the  district  or  his  or  her  designee  . 
recommended  that  the  notice  be  given  to  the  employee,  and  stating  the  reasons  therefor.” 

.  that  it  has  been 

. 

'  All  citations  are  to  the  Education  Code,  unless  noted  otherwise. 

  

 

2.  Section  44955  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

“(a)  No  permanent  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  causes  other 

than  those  specified  in  Sections  44907  and  44923,  and  Sections  44932  to  44947,  inclusive, 
and  no  probationary  employee  shall  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  position  for  cause  other  than  as 
specified  in  Sections  44948  to  44949,  inclusive. 

“(b)  Whenever  . 

. 

.  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not 

. 

later  than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  . 
.  and  when  in  the  opinion  of  the 
governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become  necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these 
conditions  to  decrease  the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the  governing 
board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more  than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the 
certificated  employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as  probationary,  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no  permanent  employee 
may  be  terminated  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary  employee,  or 
any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is  retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 

date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any  employee  whose  order 
of  termination  is  so  determined,  the  governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than 
five  days  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  held  in  accordance  with  Section  44949,  a 
statement  of  the  specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and  the 
application  of  the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative  to  the  other  employees  in  the 
group.  This  requirement  that  the  governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 
reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be  interpreted  to  give  affected 
employees  any  legal  right  or  interest  that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement.  ..  . 

“(c)  ...  [Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  shall  be  terminated  in  the  reverse  order 
in  which  they  were  employed,  as  determined  by  the  board  in  accordance  with  Sections  44844 
and  44845.  In  the  event  that  a  permanent  or  probationary  employee  is  not  given  the  notices 
and  a  right  to  a  hearing  as  provided  for  in  Section  44949,  he  or  she  shall  be  deemed 
reemployed  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

“The  governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and  reassignments  in  such  a  manner 

that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications 
entitle  them  to  render...  . 

“(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating  a 

certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 

“(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 

course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by a  services  credential  with  a 
specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the 

 

  

certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or 
course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

3.  Sections  44949  and  44955  establish  jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding. 

The  notice 

and jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  sections  44944  and  44945  were  met.  (Factual 

Findings  3  through  8.) 

4.  A  school  district  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to 
the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District’s  schools  and  pupils 
within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

6a.  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

In  doing  so,  the 
continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

6b.  The  District  may  retain  more  junior  employees,  even  if  probationary,  over  more 
senior  employees  who  are  permanent,  even  if  they  share  the  same  credentials  where,  as  here, 
the  more  junior  employees  have  additional  authorizations,  and  are  using  those  authorizations 
in  their  assignments,  as  the  more  senior  employees  would  be  unable  to  teach  in  those 
assignments.  Therefore,  the  contention  of  Respondents  Ma  and  Chavez  that  they  should 
bump  Robert  Richardson  and  Kate  Tran,  is  rejected.  See  Factual  Finding  23g. 

7.  The  three  instances  where  seniority  dates  have  been  corrected  will  have  an  affect 
on  the  order  of  layoff.  The  most  senior  of  the  three,  Respondent  Mendoza,  revised  seniority 
date  of  September  19,  2005,  holds  a  special  education  credential  and  is  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  District.  However,  a  probationary  employee  with  the  same  credential, 
Sandra  Luz  Armenta  (number  19  on  the  seniority  list  with  a  date  of  September  7,  2004)  was 
not  noticed  for  layoff.  Under  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  as  applied  here,  no  permanent 
teacher  (Mendoza)  may  be  terminated  while  any  probationary  employee  (Armenta)  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  (Mendoza)  is  certificated  and

    

competent  to  render.  Therefore,  Respondent  Mendoza  must  be  retained,  and  the  Accusation 
against  her  will  be  dismissed.  See  Factual  Findings  13,  14,  16,  17,  21  and  23f. 

8a.  Respondent  Cheng  presents  an  unusual  situation.  While  Respondents  argue  that 
the  District  cannot  now  proceed  against  her  because  it  rescinded  its  Accusation  against  her, 
the  District  presents  a  stronger  argument  that,  in  the  context  of  the  statutes  applicable  to  these 
proceedings  found  in  the  Education  Code  and  the  Government  Code,  something  more  is 
needed  than  an  oral  communication,  such  as  that  made  by  Mr.  Alarcon  to  Ms.  Cheng,  to 
enforce  a  withdrawal  of  the  Accusation  against  her.  (See  the  briefs,  Exhibits  4  and  A.) 

8b.  A  larger  issue,  not  addressed  by  the  parties’  briefs,  is  to  what  extent  the  District’s 

actions  resulted  in  a  denial  of  due  process  to  Ms.  Cheng.  Unfortunately,  the  District’s 
argument  that  she  was  present  for  the  second  session  of  the  hearing  is  not  born  out  by  the 
record.  The  ALJ  has  no  way  of  knowing  if  any  of  the  people  present  during  the  second 
session  was  Ms.  Cheng,  as  the  roll  call  was  only  taken  during  the  first  session  and  no 
mention  of  Ms.  Cheng’s  presence  was  made  during  the  second  session.  Therefore,  the  record 
reflects,  in  brief,  that  Ms.  Cheng  received  a  notice  and  an  Accusation,  was  notified  by  Mr. 
Alarcon  on  Friday,  May  2,  2008,  that  the  Accusation  was  being  withdrawn,  and  was  then 
notified  by  Mr.  Alarcon  on  Monday,  May  5,  2008,  the  date  of  the  hearing,  that  the 
Accusation  was  not  being  withdrawn.  See  Factual  Findings  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  22  and  23. 

8c.  Notice  and  an  opportunity  to  be  heard  are  the  bedrocks  of  due  process,  found  in 

the  Administrative  Adjudication  Bill  of  Rights  at  Government  Code  section  11425.10, 
subdivision  (a)(1),  and  cases  too  numerous  to  list.  An  essential  ingredient  of  the  right  to  be 
heard  is  the  opportunity  to  present  a  defense,  including  presenting  evidence,  giving  testimony 
under  oath  and  confronting  and  cross-examining  witnesses.  (Cal.  Administrative  Hearing 
Practice  (Cont.Ed.Bar  2nd  ed.  2007)  §1.71,  pp.50,  51.)  On  the  present  record,  these  rights 
have  not  been  properly  afforded  to  Ms.  Cheng  and  it  is  concluded  that  she  has  suffered  a 
significant  denial  of  due  process.  The  District’s  argument  that  Respondent  Cheng  did  not 
prove  any  prejudice  is  beside  the  point.  The  appropriate  action,  so  as  to  be  fully  protective  of 
Ms.  Cheng’s  due  process  rights,  is  to  dismiss  the  Accusation  against  her. 

9a.  As  a  result  of  the  retention  of  Respondent  Cheng,  who  is  more  junior  to 
Respondents  Ma  and  Chavez  under  the  now-revised  seniority  list,  Respondent  Ma  must  also 
be  retained.  By  virtue  of  the  requirement  to  retain  Respondent  Cheng,  the  District  must 
lower  —  by  one  —  the  number  of  FTE  positions  to  be  eliminated  in  the  category  of  K-6 
classroom  teaching  as  identified  in  the  Resolution.  And  it  must  retain  the  most  senior  K-6 
classroom  teacher  who  could  be  laid  off,  were  it  not  for  the  District’s  failure  to  provide  due 
process  to  Respondent  Cheng. 

9b.  The  language  of  subdivision  (b)  of  section  44955  of  the  Code  might  be  read 

as  requiring  that  —  if  the  District  were  to  retain  Respondent  Cheng  as  a  teacher  —  it  would  be 
required  to  retain  all  Respondents  who  are  K-6  classroom  teachers  and  who  are  permanent 
employees  with  more  seniority  than  that  of  Respondent  Cheng  (which  would  be  Respondents 
Ma  and  Chavez).  That  subdivision  says,  in  part:  “[T]he  services  of  no  permanent  employee

  

     

. 

. 

.  while  any  . 

.  other  employee  with  less  seniority  is  retained  to  render 

may  be  terminated  . 
a  service  which  said  permanent  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.”  In 
Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of the  Delano  Joint  Union  High  School  District  (1983)  139 
Cal.App.3d  567,  the  court  spoke  of  a  similar  circumstance  in  terms  of  which  teachers  had 
and  which  had  not  suffered  prejudicial  error.  The  Alexander  court  said:  “Because  at  least 
some  of  the  persons  skipped  should  have  received  the  notices,  a  corresponding  number  of  the 
most  senior  of  the  employees  who  were  not  reemployed  must  have  been  improperly  given 
notices.  The  trial  court  must  determine  which  of  the  Teachers  suffered  prejudicial  error  in 
this  case.”  (/d.  at  p.  576.)  By a  parity  of  reasoning,  if  the  District  retains  Respondent  Cheng, 
a  corresponding  number  of  other  K-6  classroom  teachers  must  be  retained.  The  most  senior 
K-6  classroom  teacher  to  receive  a  notice  is  now  Respondent  Ma,  who  will  be  retained. 

ORDER 

1.  Notice  may  be  given  to  employees  occupying  26  full-time  equivalent  certificated 

positions  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because  of  the 
reduction  and  discontinuance  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Such  notices  may  be  given  to 
the  following  employees:  Jose  Cardenas,  Suzana  Carlos,  Cynthia  D.  Chan,  Cecile  Chavez, 
Candice  Felix,  Lucina  Gaeta,  Gloria  Guzman,  Eva  Lau,  Jeanie  Lin,  Michelle  Mendoza  and 
John  Montes. 

2.  Notice  shall  be  given  in  inverse  order  of  seniority.  Each  Respondent  may  receive 

3.  The  Accusations  are  dismissed  as  to  the  following  Respondents,  and  no  final 

layoff  notices  may  be  sent  to  them:  Claudia  Barajas,  Thi  Bui,  Kristin  Cheng,  Tina  Cuan, 
Jenny  Duque,  Sandra  Seonah  Lee  Hong,  Tran  Ma,  Romelia  V.  Morales,  Tai  Le  Phan,  Blanca 
Rios-Quiroz,  Irma  Salcedo,  Tonie  Lam  Tran  and  May  Yan. 

   

such  a  notice. 

DATED:  May  12,  2008. 

DAVID  B.  ROSENMAN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

10 

 

Attachment  A  to  Proposed  Decision 
Garvey  School  District;  OAH  Case  No.  2008030648 
List  of  Respondents 

+  Claudia  Barajas 

+  Thi  Bui 

Jose  Cardenas 

Suzana  Carlos 

Cynthia  D.  Chan 

Cecile  Chavez 

Kristen  Cheng 

+  Tina  Cuan 

+  Jenny  Duque 

Candice  Felix 

Lucina  Gaeta 

Gloria  Guzman 

Sandra  Seonah  Lee  Hong 

Eva  Lau 

Jeanie  Lin 

Tran  Ma 

Michelle  Mendoza 

John  Montes 

Romelia  V.  Morales 

Tai  Le  Phan 

Blanca  Rios-Quiroz 

Irma  Salcedo 

Tonie  Lam  Tran 

May  Yan 

 
+
 
+
 
+
 
+

 
+
+

 

11 

