BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SONOMA  VALLEY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

  

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

PAMELA  NADEAU  , 

Respondent, 

OAH  No.  2008040017 

  

  

_  PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  22,  2008,  in  Santa  Rosa,  California,  within  the  facilities  of  the 
County  Office  of  Education  at  5340  Skylane  Boulevard,  Santa  Rosa,  California, 
Perry  O.  Johnson,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings  (OAH). 
State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

| 

Noel  J.  Shumway,  Attorney  at  Law,  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of 
California,  5350  Skylane  Boulevard  ,  Santa  Rosa,  California  95403,  represented 
Superintendent  Barbara  Young,  Sonoma  Valley  Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  726  College  Avenue,  Santa  Rosa,  California 

95404,  represented  Respondent  Pamela  Nadeau. 

On  April  22,  2008,  the  parties  submitted  the  matter  and  the  record closed. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

On  April 8,  2008,  in  her  official  capacity,  Barbara  Young,  Superintendent 

(the  Superintendent),  Sonoma  Valley  Unified  School  District  (the  District),  made  and  filed 
the  Accusation  regarding  Pamela  Nadeau  (Respondent  Nadeau). 

2. 

Respondent  Nadeau  is  fully  credentialed  and  certificated  employee  of  the 

District.  The  District  extends  designation  to  Respondent  Nadeau  as  a  permanent 
teacher. 

3, 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Superintendent  presented  the  District’s  Board  of 
Trustees  a  recommendation  that  the  District  give  notice  that  particular  kinds  of  services 
(PKS),  then  offered  through  the  District,  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  the  District  for  the 
ensuing  school  year  (2008-2009).

  

  

4, 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  District’s  Governing  Board  unanimously  adopted 

Resolution  number  08-14. 

The  subject  resolution  recites  that  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  District  to 
reduce  and/or  to  eliminate,  no  later  than  the  beginning of  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  form of  6.2  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated 
positions  as  follows: 

0.20 
0.20 
0.40 
0.40 
1.00 
1.00 
0.60 
140 
0.60 
0.40 

FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 
FTE 

German  language  at  the  high  school  level; 
Library  Services  at  the  high  school  level; 
Music  at  the  high  school  level; 
Independent  Study  at  the  high  school  level; 
Science  at  the  high  school  level; 
Physical  Education  at  the  high  school  level; 
Computer  Graphics  at  the  high  school  level; 
English  at  the  high  school  level; 
Social  Science  at  the  middle  school  level; 
Music  at  the  elementary  school  level 

5. 

By  a  letter,  dated  March  13,  2008,  the  District’s  Superintendent 
dispatched  preliminary  notices  to  a  number of  FTE  position  holders,  including 
Respondent  Nadeau,  that  the  District’s  Board  of  Trustees  had  an  intention  to  reduce  or  to 
eliminate  the  particular  service  provided  by  each  person  who  received  the  notice. 
Hence,  due  to  the  prospective  elimination  or  reduction  of  the  particular  kind  of  service 
now  rendered  to  the  District,  Respondent  Nadeau  learned  the  District  would  not 
reemploy  her  in  the  certificated  position  she  had  worked  over  the  past  school  year. 

Also  the  letter,  dated  March  13,  2008,  which  had  attached  to  it  the  Board’s 
resolution  and  other  pertinent  documents,  conveyed  to  Respondent  Nadeau  that  no 
certificated  employee  of  the  District  having  less  seniority  than  Respondent  Nadeau 
would  be  retained  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  to  render  a  service  that  she  was 
credentialed  and  competent  to  render  to  students. 

   

Superintendent  and  the  District  Board’s  resolution  set  out  legally  sufficient  reasons 
of  the  District  Board’s  intent  to  eliminate  the  elementary  school  teacher  position  held  by 
Respondent  Nadeau. 

Respondent  Nadeau  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine 
whether  or  not  cause  exists  for  not  reemploying  Respondent  Nadeau  for  the  ensuing 
school  year. 

Accusation,  dated  April  8,  2008,  and  related  documents.  Respondent  Nadeau  filed  a 
timely  notice  of  defense. 

The  Superintendent  timely  served  upon  Respondent  Nadeau  the 

The  written  preliminary  notice  to  Respondent  Nadeau  from  the 

8. 

6. 

7. 

9. 

All pre-hearing jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

Motion  to  Dismiss  Due  to  the  District's  Failure  to  Comply  with  Respondent's  Discovery  Request 

10. 

At  the  hearing,  Respondent  Nadeau  made  a  motion  for  dismissal  of  the 
Accusation  on  the  ground  that  Complainant  had  failed  to  comply  with  her  Request  for 
Discovery  in  accordance  with  Government  Code  section  11507.6. 

Complainant,  through  counsel,  persuasively  conveyed  that  Respondent  Nadeau’s 
discovery  request  was  not  received  within  the  offices  of  its  attorneys.  Only  on  the  day  of 
the  proceeding  was  Complainant’s  counsel  aware  of  the  dispatch  of  the  discovery 
request.  The  proof  of  service  on  Respondent  Nadeau’s  discovery  request,  dated  April  8, 
2008,  shows  only  the  addressee  as  being  “Barbara  Young,  Superintendent,  Sonoma 
Vallwy  (sic)  Unified  School  District,  17850  Railroad  Avenue,  Sonoma,  CA  95476.” 

In  the  declaration  by  counsel  for  Respondent  Nadeau,  a  representation  was  made 

that  “legal  counsel  for  the  school  district  contacted  [respondent’s  lawyer  and  the 
lawyers]  held  a  discussion  about  Ms.  Nadeau.  ..  .  ,”  thereafter  he  placed  in  the  mail  a 
true  and  correct  copy  of  the  request  for  discovery.  But,  Respondent  Nadeau,  through  her 
lawyer,  did  not  send  the  request  for  discovery  to  Complainant’s  lawyer. 

More  important  at  the  hearing,  Respondent  Nadeau  did  not  show  the prejudice 

that  was  dealt  her  by  reason  of  Complainant’s  failure  to  provide  a  response  to 
respondent’s  request  of  discovery. 

Complainant's  Evidence 

11. 

Mr.  Ashley  Halliday  (Mr.  Halliday),  in  his  capacity  as  the  District’s 

Director  of  Human  Resources,  offered  evidence  at  the hearing. 

Mr.  Halliday  established  that  the  prospective  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  directly  results  from  a  prospective  shortfall  in 
money  for  the  District’s  budget.  In  order  to  partially  aid  the  District  in  crafting  a 
reasonable  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  the  District’s  Superintendent 
recommended  that  certain  certificated  positions  be  eliminated-due  to  lack of  funds. 
Also,  the  prospective  elimination of particular  kinds  of  service  is  due  to  the declining 
pupil  census  for  the  District’s  high  school  for  the  ensuing  school  year  because  the 
enrollment  is  anticipated  to  fall  by  about  one  hundred  students. 

12. 

Mr.  Halliday  further  established  that  on  learning  that  the  District  was 

required  to  initiate  lay-off  proceedings  for  teacher  employees  of  the  District,  the 
Superintendent,  with  her  staff,  took  steps  to  develop  the  District’s  seniority  list  for  the 
District’s  teachers.  The  Superintendent  identified  the  District’s  teachers  who were 
properly  designated  as  District  teachers.  She  studied  teachers’  records  and  set  forth  on 

  

 

  

the  District’s  seniority  list  dates  calculated  as  the  hire  dates  or  first  date  of  paid  service 
for  each  teacher of  the  District.  On  March  13,  2008,  the  Superintendent  caused  to  be 
delivered  to  teachers  who  were  affected  by  the  Board’s  resolution,  certain  notices  to 
affected  certificated  teachers,  including  Respondent  Nadeau,  that  their  services  would 
not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  next  school  year. 

@ 

13. 

During  the  immediate  school  year,  the  Board  found  that  the  District  faces 
a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State  of  California 
may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board  has 
determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  fund  the  same  number  of  teacher 
positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number of  FTE of  particular  kinds  of  services, 
including  the  position  held  by  Respondent  Nadeau. 

14. 

Under  the  proposed  lay-off  action  0.4  FTE  of  Respondent  Nadeau’s 
teacher  position  as  a  music  teacher  at  five  elementary  schools of the  District  will  be 
eliminated. 

. 

15. 

Mr.  Halliday  noted  that  for  the  ensuing  year  the  District  will  retain  Mr. 

Robert  Gossett  to  teach  music  at  elementary  school  classes,  for  which  Respondent 
Nadeau  is  also  qualified  to  teach.  Mr.  Gossett  has  a  higher  placement  on  the  seniority 
list  than  Respondent  Nadeau  because  he  has  a  first  date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  of 
August  31,  1984.  (Mr.  Gossett  has  17  years  of  seniority  with  the  District  when 
measured  against  Respondent  Nadeau.) 

e@ 

As  of  the  date  of  the  issuance  of  the  preliminary  notice  of  lay-off  that  is  germane 
to  this  matter,  Mr.  Gossett  held  a  multiple  subject  credential  with  a  “limited  assignment 
Music  TCC,”  which  is  set  to  expire  on  April  30,  2008. 

The  District’s  seniority  list  shows  Mr.  Gossett  to  occupy  two  distinct 
assignments.  He  holds  a  0.8  FTE  as  an  “iterant”  (district-wide)  elementary  school 
classroom  music  teacher,  as  well  as  a  0.2  FTE  in a  position  as  a  “teacher  on  special 
assignment,”  through  which  he  has  spent  time  as  a liaison  with  a  non-profit  entity  that 
assisted  the  District  in  raising  money  for  the  District’s  music  programs. 

16. 

Mr.  Halliday  described  the  limited-assignment-music  TCC,  as  held  by  Mr. 
Gossett,  is  a  form  of  credential  issued  by  the  County  Office  of  Education.  Yet,  he  noted 
that  Mr.  Gossett  does  not  possess  a  music  credential  that  is  issued  by  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

17. 

Mr.  Robert  Gossett  (Mr.  Gossett)  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing  of  this 

matter  to  provide  evidence  regarding  his  experience  education  in  music,  his  record  of 
teaching  music  or  his  progress  in  completing  courses  of  instruction  that  will  enable  him 
to  secure  a  teaching  credential. 

@ 

 

18. 

Mr.  Halliday  was  not  persuasive  regarding  the  credential  to  teach  music 
by  Mr.  Gossett.  The  Director  of  Human  Resources  for  the  District  was  not  compelling 
in  his  testimony  in  the  matter  of  Mr.  Gossett’s  current  authorization  to  teach  music  and 
his  progress  towards  attaining  a  valid,  single-subject  credential  in  music  was  grounded  in 
speculation  or  unreliable  information.  Mr.  Halliday  offered  no  documents  or  other 
corroborating  data  that  by  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  school  year  Mr.  Gossett  will 
have  completed  sufficient  courses  of  instruction  so  that  he  will  have  gained  a  credential 
in  music.  Moreover,  Mr.  Halliday,  who  was  not  shown  to  be  an  expert  witness  on  the 
matter  of  credentials,  was  not  persuasive  that  Mr.  Gossett’s  “limited  assignment  music 
TCC!  [that  expires  on]  4/30/2008”  has  the  weight  of  a  credential,  or  even  emergency 
permit,  that  issued  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

Mr.  Halliday  engaged  in  conjecture  when  he  proclaimed  at  the  hearing  that  even 
though  the  temporary  county  certificate  (TCC)  as  issued  to  Mr.  Gossett  will  expire  on 
April  30,  2008,  the  “limited  assignment”  designation  for  Mr.  Gossett  will  expire  in 
November  2008.  (Mr.  Gossett’s  knowledge  rests  solely  upon  the  representations  of  Mr. 
Gossett  as  made  during  a  meeting  on  the  day  before  the  date  of  the  hearing  in  this 
matter.) 

At  the  hearing,  Complainant,  through  Mr.  Halliday,  did  not  offer  any  document  to 
demonstrate  that  Mr.  Gossett  has  such  music  teaching  certificate  that  will  expire  in 
November  2008  when  the  District’s  seniority  list  show  the  temporary  county  certificate 
expires  on  April  30,  2008.  Nor  did  Complainant  show  that  Mr.  Gossett  is  assured  to 
have  a  credential  to  teach  music  by  the  date  (May  15,  2008)  that  the  District  is 
compelled  to  give  a  final  lay-off  notice.  Rather,  Mr.  Halliday  conveyed  that  only  by  his 
“understanding”  that  Mr.  Gossett  is  enrolled  in  a  course  of  study  that  may  provide  him 
with  a  single  subject  credential  to  teach  music. 

19. 

Absent  evidence  from  Mr.  Gossett  or  a  supervisory  at  the  elementary 

school  level,  evidence  is  lacking  the  Mr.  Gossett  has  equal  competency  as  Respondent 
Nadeau  to  teach  music,  Mr.  Halliday  speculated  that  Mr.  Gossett  may  have  taught  music 
for  the  District  for  three  school  years.  But  the  evidence  did  show  that  Mr.  Gossett  has  a 
multiple  subject  credential,  that  he  has  more  than  a  decade  and  one half  tenure  with  the 
District  and  that  he  has  taught  music  to  the  District  elementary  school  students  for  a  few 
years. 

District’s  Bases  to  Proceed  against  Respondent  Nadeau 

20. 

During  the  immediate  past  school  year,  the  Board  has  found  that  the 

District  faces  a  prospective  budget  shortfall  in  that  the  amount  of  funding  from  the  State 
of  California  may  be  markedly  reduced  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Hence,  the  Board 
has  determined  that  sufficient  money  is  not  available  to  operate  the  same  number  of 

 

  

TCC”  connotes  “temporary  county  certificate.” 

  

  

teacher  positions  and  programs  during  the  ensuing  school  year  so  that  the  District  must 
prospectively  reduce  or  eliminate  a  number  of  FTE of  particular  kinds of  services, 
including  the  position  held  by  Respondent  Nadeau. 

21. 

The  District’s  proposed  elimination  or  discontinuation  of a number  of  FTE 

positions,  for  the  ensuing  school  year  is  related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its 
overall  student  population 

Respondent  Nadeau's  Contentions  and  Arguments 

22. 

Respondent  Nadeau  contends  the  District’s  action  is  procedurally 

of the  subject  credentialed 
defective  and  improper  insofar  as  the  prospective  layoff 
employee  does  not  fully  account  for  her  possession  of  a  “single  subject  music  Life” 
credential  coupled  with  her  extensive  teaching  experience  in  music  in  light  of  the 
District’s  retention  of  teacher,  Mr.  Gossett,  who  although  holding  a  higher  position  on 
the  seniority  list  lacks  a  credential  issued  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing  (CTC)  for  the  provision  of  teacher  services  in  music. 

The  contentions  and  arguments  by  Respondent  Nadeau  are  not  persuasive.  The 
weight  of  evidence  establishes  that  the  Superintendent  has  met  her  burden  of  proof  so  as 
to  sustain  the  Accusation  against  Respondent  Nadeau  because  Mr.  Gossett  has a  first 
date  of  paid  service  to  the  District  that  is  nearly  two  decades  longer  Respondent’s 
Nadeau’s  position  on  the  District’s  seniority  list.  Also,  Mr.  Gossett  has  taught  music  for 
a  few  years  and  he  holds  a  county  issued  temporary  certificate  to  teach  music. 

Evidence  on  Behalf of Individual  Respondent  Nadeau 

23. 

Respondent  Nadeau  offered  credible  and  persuasive  evidence  at  the 

hearing  of  this  matter.  By  her  demeanor,  the  consistency  of  her  manner  and  presentation 
and  her  attitude  towards  the  proceeding,  Respondent  Nadeau  established  that  she  was  a 
credible’  and  reliable  witness. 

Respondent  Nadeau  has a first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  as  a 
probationary  teacher  as  of  August  29,  2001.  Currently,  Respondent  occupies  a  0.8  FTE 
position  as  music  teacher  for  the  District. 

Respondent  Nadeau  holds  a  life,  single-subject  credential  in  music.  Also  she 

hold  an  Orff-Schulwerk  certificate,  which  connotes  that  she  has  training  in  a  particular 
method  teaching  music  in  a  classroom  setting  that  entails  a  balance  of  singing,  reading 
music,  dancing,  engaging  in  some  drama  functions,  and  playing  musical  instruments, 
particularly  xylophones.  (She  proclaims  her  understanding  that  no  other  teacher 
employed  by  the  District  possesses  the  Orff-Schulwerk certificate.) 

- 

Government  Code  section  11425.50,  subdivision  (b),  third  sentence. 

 

  

  

Respondent  Nadeau  has  taught  music  since  1982.  She  has  taught  music  from  the 

’ 

pre-school  level,  elementary  school  level,  high  school  level  and  college  level.  During 
her  career  Respondent  Nadeau  has  taught  voice  and  choral  music  as  well  as  instrumental 
music. 

Currently  the  District  employs  Respondent  Nadeau  as  a  music  teacher  at  the 

elementary  school  level.  As  a  “district-wide  employee,”  Respondent  Nadeau  teaches 
music  at  five  elementary  schools,  namely:  Presswood  School,  Sassarini  School, 
El  Verano  School,  Flowery  School,  and  Dunbar  School. 

Ultimate  Findings 

24.  —  As  to  Respondent  Nadeau,  the  recommendation  of  the  Superintendent  and 

the  Board’s  decision  to  eliminate  or  discontinue  the  0.4  FTE  position  teacher  in  music 
was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  Superintendent’s  recommendation  and  the  Board’s 
decision  were  within  the  proper  exercise  of  the  District’s  discretion  insofar  as  the 
elimination  of  0.4  FTE  position  to  teach  music  by  Respondent  Nadeau. 

25. 

The  District’s  layoff  action  against  Respondent  Nadeau  was  not  erroneous 

and  may  be  sustained. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 
44949  and  44955. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 

2. 

The  District  provided  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  Education 

Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  This  conclusion  of  law  is  made  by  reason  of  the 
matters  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  9,  inclusive. 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  establishes  that  no 

certificated  employee  of  a  school  district  may  be  laid off  if  another  employee  with  less 
seniority  is  retained  to  render  a  service  that  the  noticed  employee  is  “certificated  and 
competent  to  render.” 

The  District’s  Superintendent  believes  discretion  could  be  exercised  to  issue  the 
preliminary  determination  to  give  Respondent  Nadeau  notice  that  her  teaching  services 
would  not  be  retained  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

Although  the  law  has  long  recognized  that  where  competency  is  not  demonstrated 

by  a  senior  employee,  a  junior  employee,  who  has  the  ability  to  service  the  needs of  a 
program,  may  be  retained  by  a  school  district  even  though  such  action  may  result  with 
the  senior  employee,  who  lacks  such a  valid  credential,  being  terminated.  (King  v. 
Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  98  Cal.App.3d  1016,  1023;  Moreland  v.  Kurze 

-7- 

 

  

  

(1980)  109  Cal.App.3d  648,  655;  Brough  v.  Governing  Board of  El  Segundo  Unified 
School  District  (1981)  118  Cal.App.3d  702.)  The  paramount  rule  is  that  no  person  may 
be  terminated  while  someone  junior  to  that  person  is  to  be  retained  by  a  school  district  to 
perform a service  that  the  senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Ed. 
Code  §  44955.)  But  in  this  matter,  a  teacher,  with  many  years  of  service  to  the  District, 
has  taught  music  albeit  with  a  county  issued  certificate  as  opposed  to  possessing  a 
credential  issued  by  the  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

e@ 

Respondent  Nadeau  is  not  unduly  burdened  by  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  to  retain  a  teacher  who  possesses  only  a  county  issued  certificate  to 
teach  music  at  the  elementary  school  level.  Such  recommendation  does  not  discount 
Respondent  Nadeau’s  high  qualifications  and  competency  or  the  fact  that  currently  she 
possesses  of  a  valid,  life  single-subject  credential  in  music.  Rather,  the  decision  to  retain 
Mr.  Gossett  rests  solely  upon  his  position  on  the  District’s  seniority  list. 

4. 

Cause  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  to 

give  Respondent  Nadeau  notice  of  the  discontinuation  of  full-time  equivalent  position  in 
the  particular  kinds  of  services  (music)  as  rendered  by  Respondent  Nadeau,  by  reason  of 
the  matters  set  out  in  Factual  Findings  11  through  15  inclusive  19,  20,  24  and  25. 

5. 

Respondent  made  a  motion  to  dismiss  the  Accusation  on  the  ground  that 
Complainant  had  failed  to  meet  Respondent  Nadeau’s  request  for  discovery,  under  the 
provisions  of  Government  Code  section  11507.6. 

e 

Respondent  offered  inadequate  evidence  that  her  due  process  rights  were 
impaired  by  reason  of  Complainant’s  non  response  to  Respondent’s  discovery  request. 
More  importantly,  Respondent  did  not  serve  the  request  for  discovery  upon  lawyers  for 
Complainant  even  though  Respondent’s  attorney  had  conversed  with  Complainant’s 
attorney  of  record.  And,  Respondent  did  not  subpoena  any  witness  for  the 
Superintendent’s  office  to  elicit  evidence  regarding  the  office  system  for  handling 
important  mail  or  regarding  the  specific  disposition,  if  any,  of  Respondent’s  request  for 
discovery. 

ORDER 

1. 

The  Accusation  is  sustained. 

  

 

| 

  

2. 

Final  notice  may  be  given  to  Respondent  Nadeau  that  her  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  because of the  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
the  particular  kinds  of  services  as  offered  by  Respondent  Nadeau  for  students  of  the 
District  during  the  current  year. 

DATED:  May  6,  2008 

  

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

