  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
NUVIEW  UNION  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2008020580 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Lester  Bernard,  Alberto  Camarena,  Elizabeth 
Everett,  Russ  Firestone,  Ellen  Gordon-Ross, 
Mary  Hambly,  Lesli  Houston,  Esther  Jones, 
James  Kelton,  Rita  Koski,  Blanca  Martinez, 
Holly  Newton,  Marla  Niffen,  Sandra  Otero, 
Mary  Riley,  and  Jermaine  Williams, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Donald  P.  Cole,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Nuevo,  California  on  April  24,  2008. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  Attorneys  at  Law, 

represented  the  Nuview  Union  School  District. 

Jesus  E.  Quitionez,  Holguin,  Garfield  &  Martinez,  represented  respondents  Lester 

Bernard,  Marcy  Boatman,  Alberto  Camarena,  Penny  Casey,  Elizabeth  Everett,  Russ 
Firestone,  Ellen  Gordon-Ross,  Linda  Guss,  Mary  Hambly,  Lesli  Houston,  Esther  Jones, 
James  Kelton,  Blanca  Martinez,  Holly  Newton,  Marla  Niffen,  Mary  Riley,  Sarah  Schaeffer, 
and  Jermaine  Williams. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondents  Rita  Koski  and  Sandra 

Otero. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  24,  2008.

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Joe  Koski,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Educational  Services  of  the  Nuview 

Union  School  District,  made  and  filed  the  accusation  dated  March  12,  2008,  in  his  official 
capacity  as  the  designee  of  Dr.  Jay  N.  Hoffman,  Superintendent  of  the  District. 

Respondents!  are  certificated  District  employees. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  Nuview  Union  School 
District  in  writing  of  his  recommendation  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation. 

4. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  031108A,  determining 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of 
the  current  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must 
be  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  were  the  following  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
positions: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full-Time  Equivalent 

Teacher  on  Special  Assignment  (TOSA)  -  ELD 
TOSA  -  Reading/Physical  Education 
TOSA  —  Child  Welfare  and  Attendance/Discipline 
TOSA  — Literacy  Coach 
TOSA  —  Language  Coach 
Physical  Education  Teacher 
Middle  School  Social  Studies  Teacher 
Middle  School  Math/Science  Teacher 
Elementary  Teacher 

1  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
2  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
1  FTE 
5S  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  totaled  14  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions. 

5. 

The  Board  further  determined  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  retain  certificated 

employees  who  possess  special  training  and  competency  that  other  certificated  employees 
with  more  seniority  might  not  possess,  to  wit:  teachers  who  have  authorization  to  teach 
English  Learner  (EL)  students,  as  determined  by  the  California  Commission  on  Teacher 
Credentialing,  and  the  special  training  and  experience  that  comes  therewith. 

The  accusation  named  22  certificated  personnel  as  respondents,  20  of  whom  filed  requests  for  hearing;  the 

' 
other  two,  Krista  Brown  and  Meghan  Joseph,  though  timely  served  with  the  accusation  and  with  the  notice  described 
below  in  Factual  Finding  7,  did  not  file  requests  for  a  hearing  and  thus  did  not  become  parties  to  this  proceeding.  At 
the  hearing,  the  District  dismissed  respondents  Marcy  Boatman,  Penny  Casey,  Linda  Guss,  and  Sarah  Schaeffer.  All 
collective  references  to  “respondents”  in  this  Proposed  Decision  encompass  the  remaining  16  respondents,  who  are 
named  in  the  caption. 

  

 

6. 

The  Board  directed  the  Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  determine  which 

employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  the 
reduction  of  the  foregoing  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Board  further  directed  the 
Superintendent  or  his  designee  to  send  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  of  the 
District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of 
Services. 

7. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  on  respondents  a 

written  notice  that  the  Assistant  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  The  notice  advised  respondents  of  their  right  to  a  hearing,  that  each 
respondent  had  to  deliver  a  request  for  a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  Superintendent  by  the  date 
specified  in  the  notice,  a  date  which  in  each  case  was  more  than  seven  days  after  the  notice 
was  served,  and  that  the  failure  to  request  a  hearing  would  constitute  a  waiver  of  the  right  to 
ahearing.  At  the  same  time,  the  District  timely  served  the  accusation  on  respondents. 

The  recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not 

related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

8. 

Respondents  timely  filed  written  requests  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was 

cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  upcoming  school  year.  Respondents  timely  filed 
notices  of  defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

9. 

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  the  Resolution  were  “particular  kinds  of 

services”  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion.  No 
particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated  by  state  or 
federal  law. 

10. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the District  and its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

ll. 

The  Board  considered  attrition,  resignations,  and  retirements  in  determining 

the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its  employees.  No  evidence 
was  presented  that  any  known  attrition  was  not  considered. 

12. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  which  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render.

  

Precautionary  Layoff Notices 

13. 

Though  Resolution  No.  031108A  provided  for  the  reduction  of  14  FTE 

positions,  the  District  served  layoff  notices  on  22  certificated  employees.  Eleven  of  these  22 
employees  were  properly  served  with  “precautionary”  layoff  notices,  because  the  District  did 
not  know  in  advance  to  what  extent  the  skipping  and  bumping  directives  prescribed  in  the 
Resolution  would  be  challenged  and,  if  challenged,  would  be  upheld  in  this  proceeding.  In 
the  event  that  the  District’s  layoff  decisions  were  for  any  reason  not  upheld  in  their  entirety, 
so  that  its  proposed  layoff  of  certain  certificated  staff  could  not  be  effectuated,  the  District 
would,  by  virtue  of  having  sent  additional  layoff  notices  on  a  precautionary  basis,  still  be  in  a 
position  to  lay  off  additional  certificated  employees,  so  as  to  keep  in  balance  its  (proposed 
reduced)  budget  for  the  upcoming  school  year. 

Bumping  Issues 

14. 

The  Resolution  defined  “competency,”  for  purposes  of  bumping,  to 

“necessarily  include  possession  of  a  valid  credential  in  the  relevant  subject  matter  area,  an 
appropriate  EL  authorization  (if  required  by  the  position),  and  at  least  one  (1)  year  of 
experience  in  the  position  or  assignment  within  the  last  three  (3)  years.”  Respondents  have 
challenged  the  second  and  third  of  these  three  criteria. 

a. 

The  Board’s  requirement  that  certificated  staff  have  “appropriate  EL 

authorization”  in  order  to  bump a less  senior  colleague  drew a  distinction  between:  (i)  Staff 
who  presently  possess  a  formal  EL  authorization;  and  (2)  those  who  do  not  possess  formal 
authorization,  but  who  instead  possess  an  “emergency”  authorization,  are  presently  in  the 
process  of  acquiring  formal  authorization,  and/or  have  experience  teaching  English  learners. 
Included  in  the  latter  category  are  respondents  James  Kelton,  Mary  Riley,  Mary  Hambly,  and 
Leslie  Houston.  The  Board’s  decision  to  grant  bumping  rights  only  to  individuals  with 
formal  EL  authorization,  and  the  District’s  application  of  that  criterion  to  deny  bumping 
rights  to  Mr.  Kelton,  Ms.  Riley,  Ms.  Hambly,  and  Ms.  Houston,  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.’ 

In  early  January  2008,  these  four  respondents,  and  every  other  District  teacher  who  did  not  yet  possess 

2 
formal  EL  authorization,  received  a  letter  from  the  District,  which  stated,  “Effective  immediately,  all  credentialed 
teachers  needing  an  EL  authorization  will  be  required  to  apply  for  an  Emergency  CLAD  certificate  by  January  31, 
2008.”  The  letter  also 
stated,  “It  is  expected  that  you  will  obtain  certification  by  August  15,  2008.”  The  letter  was 
written  before  the  District  became  aware of  the  State’s  fiscal  crisis,  announced  publicly  by  the  Governor  later  that 
month,  and  the  resulting  proposed  severe  across-the-board  public  school  (and  other)  spending  cuts  that  precipitated 
the  District’s  decision  to  institute  this  layoff  proceeding.  Similarly,  District  staff  told  at  least  one  respondent,  Ms. 
Riley,  at  a  time  not  specified  in  the  record,  that  she  would  not  be  fired  on  the  basis  that  she  did  not  yet  possess 
formal  EL  authorization.  There  is  no  evidence,  however,  that  any  such  representations  were  made  at  the  time  or  in 
the  context  of  the  present  budget  crisis  or  a  possible  economic  layoff.  Under  the  circumstances,  neither  the  matters 
stated  in  the  January  2008  letter  nor  any  representations  that  were  made  to  respondents  can  be  found  to  constitute  a 
guarantee  that  at  no  future  time  and  under  no  future  circumstances  —  including  specifically  an  unanticipated  state 
budget  crisis  —  could  the  District  identify  EL  authorization  as  one  of  the  criteria  on  which  the  right  to  bump  less 
senior staff  would  be  based. 

 

  

b. 

The  Board’s  requirement  that  certificated  staff  have  “at  least  one  (1) 
year  of  experience  in  the  position  or  assignment  within  the  last  three  (3)  years”  in  order  to 
bump a less  senior  colleague  drew a  distinction  between:  (i)  individuals  with  recent 
experience  in  a  formal  assignment;  and  (ii)  those  with  experience  that  was  more  remote  in 
time  and/or  did  not  occur  in  the  context  of  a  formal  assignment  to  the  position  in  question. 
Included  in  the  latter  category  is  respondent  Ellen  Gordon-Ross,  a  long-time  District 
employee  presently  teaching  middle-school  science  and  math,  who  during  the  period  from 
2002  to  2004  performed,  in  addition  to  her  teaching  duties,  a  wide  range  of  counseling 
services  as  an  intern  in  the  process  of  earning  a  (pupil  personnel  services  or  “PPS”) 
counseling  credential,  and  who  was  awarded  that  credential  in  December  2005.  The  Board’s 
decision  to  grant  bumping  rights  only  to  individuals  with  at  least  one  year  of  experience 
within  the  last  three  years,  and  the  District’s  application  of  that  criterion  to  deny  bumping 
rights  to  Ms.  Gordon-Ross,  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  constituted  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion.‘ 

Seniority  Issue 

15. 

Alberto  Camarena  has  been  a  District  fifth  grade  teacher  since  2006.  He 
signed  his  employment  contract  on  August  21,  2006.  The  contract  provides  that  “your 
.  will  begin  August  22,  2006.”  He  was  required  to  and  did  report  to  his  school 
services  .. 
site  on  August  21,  2006,  received  his  keys  and  did  some  preparatory  work.  Students  were 
not  present  in  school  on  that  day.  Mr.  Camarena  was  paid  for  his  work  on  August  21.  All 
other  teachers  also  worked  that  day. 

The  District  introduced  employment  contracts  of  several  other  teachers  whose 
seniority  date  was  determined  to  be  August  21,  2006.  In  those  instances,  however,  and  in 
contrast  to  Mr.  Camarena’s  case,  the  contractual  starting  date  was  explicitly  stated  to  be 
August  21. 

Mr.  Camarena’s  seniority  date  was August  21,  2006.° 

3———-Respondents  cited  Duax  v.  Kern  Community  College  District  (1987)  196-Cal-App.3d-555;-567  in-support  of 
their  contention  that  “a  one  year  in  three”  recency  requirement  is  a  too  narrow  and  an  improper  definition  of 
competency.  However,  the  suggestion  in  Duax  that  one  year  of  experience  in  “the  last  two  or  three”  is  too  narrow  a 
definition  of  competency:  (a)  was  at  most  implied  dictum;  and  (b)  cannot  properly  be  extracted  from  the  context, 
evidence  and  facts  there  in  question  and  mechanically  applied  to  the  context,  evidence  and  facts  of  the  present 
proceeding.  More  important  is  the  actual  holding  in  Duax  that  a  governing  board  is  to  “establish  a  standard  of 
competency  that  relates  to  the  skills  and  qualifications  of  the  teacher.”  (Jbid.) 

The  District  also  denied  Ms.  Gordon-Ross  the  right  to  bump  into  another  /eaching  position,  because  she 
4 
currently  lacks  formal  EL  authorization.  EL  authorization  is  not  required  with  respect  to  a  counselor  assignment, 
and  the  denial  to  Ms,  Gordon-Ross  of  an  opportunity  to  bump  into  the  counselor  position  was  thus  not  based  on  her 
jack  of  formal  EL  authorization. 

However,  Mr,  Camarena  is  not  in  fact  subject  to  lay  off,  since  he  is  not  included  among  the  11  certificated 

° 
employees  identified  in  Factual  Finding  16  whom  the  District  proposes  to  lay  off,  if,  as  is  in  fact  the  case, 
respondents’  challenges  to  the  District’s  actions  are  without  merit. 

  

 

Ultimate  Factual  Findings 

16. 

Of  the  22  individuals  who  received  layoff  notices,  the  District  proposes  to  lay 

off  the  following  11°  individuals  in  order  to  accomplish  the  reduction  of  14  FTE  positions  set 
forth  in  Resolution  No.  031108A:  Ellen  Gordon-Ross,  Mary  Hambly,  Lesli  Houston,  James 
Kelton,  Rita  Koski,  Blanca  Martinez,  Marla  Niffen,  Sandra  Otero,  Mary  Riley,  Krista 
Brown,  and  Meghan  Joseph.  As  noted  above,  the  first  nine  are  respondents  in  this 
proceeding;  the  latter  two  are  not. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  District 

to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and 
the  pupils  thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the 
accusation.  It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  before  May  15,  2008  to  the  nine 
respondents  identified  above  in  Factual  Finding  16  that  their  services  are  no  longer  required 
by  the  District. 

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  respondents  Ellen  Gordon-Ross,  Mary  Hambly,  Lesli 
Houston,  James  Kelton,  Rita  Koski,  Blanca  Martinez,  Marla  Niffen,  Sandra  Otero,  and  Mary 
Riley  are  sustained.  Notice  shall  be  given  to  these  respondents  before  May  15,  2008,  that 
their  services  will  not  be  required  because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular 
services  as  indicated.  Such  notice  shall  also  be  given  to  certificated  employees  Krista  Brown 
and  Meghan  Joseph,  who  were  properly  on  the  layoff  list  due  to  their  failure  to  file  hearing 
requests. 

patep: 

9% 

2  9-0P 

DONALD  P.  COLE 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

° 

The  reduction of  the  last  three  FTE  positions  has  been  accomplished  via  attrition.

    

