@ 

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
SACRAMENTO  CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
_  COUNTY  OF  SACRAMENTO 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Reduction  in  Force  of: 

CERTAIN  CERTIFICATED  PERSONNEL 
EMPLOYED  BY  THE  SACRAMENTO 
CITY  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030078 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Catherine  B.  Frink,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California  heard  this  matter  in  Sacramento,  California  on  April  21-25,  2008. 

Margaret  Geddes,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Eileen  Bissen,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Beeson, 

Alison  C.  Neufeld,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  Okhee  Shim,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Ruiz  and 

Sperow,  L.L.P.,  represented  the  Sacramento  City  Unified  School  District  (District). 

Tayer  and  Bodine,  Attorneys,  represented  the  Sacramento  City  Unified  Teacher’s 
Association  (Association),  which  represented  133  of  the  certificated  District  employees 
receiving  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  school  year  are 
members,  as  identified  in  Exhibit  A  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein  by  reference. 

The  following  respondents  represented  themselves;  despite  the  fact  that  they  are 
members  of  the  Association,  due  to  potential  conflicts  of  interest:  Whitney  Cole,  Sarah 
Wagner,  Louise  Lofton,  Renae  Hering,  Sarah  Garrett,  Marcel  Noffal,  Terresa  Guerin,  Oriana 
Wehner,  Beth  Conklin,  Jennifer  Havey,  Krystyna  Bayley,  and  William  Maddox. 

    

Evidence  was  received,  the  hearing  was  closed,  and  the  record  was  held  open  for  the 
submission  of  written  closing  argument.  The  District’s  Post-Hearing  Brief  was  received  on 
April  30,  2008,  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  33.  The  Association’s  Post-Hearing  Brief  was 
received  on  April  30,  2008,  and  was  marked  as  Exhibit  S.  The  record  was  closed  and  the 
matter  submitted  on  May  1,  2008.

  

Resolution  of  Motions  Pending  From  Prehearing  Conference 

1. 

The  District’s  Motion  for  an  Order  as  a  Matter  of  Law  Re:  Classification  of 
Temporary  Certificated  Employees  was  rendered  moot  by  the  fact  that  the  District  did  not 
serve  any  temporary  employees  with  preliminary  notices  of  layoff;  instead,  these  teachers 
received  Notices  of  Release,  effective  at  the  end  of  the  2007-08  school  year.  Thus, 
temporary  teachers  were  not  parties  to  this  layoff  proceeding.  To  the  extent  that  individual 
respondents  were  challenging  their  placement  on  the  seniority  list,  issues  of  seniority  and 
classification  were  addressed  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  and  only  to  the  extent  relevant  to  the 
issue  of  layoff. 

2. 

The  District’s  Motion  to  Exclude  Employees  Who  Failed  to  Submit  a  Timely 

Request  for  Hearing  was  rendered  moot  by  the  fact  that  no  such  employees  asserted  a  right  to 
participate  in  the  layoff  hearing. 

3. 

The  District  did  not  pursue  its  Motion  to  Exclude  Evidence  Barred  by  Res 

Judicata  and/or  Collateral  Estoppel  at  the  administrative  hearing. 

4. 

The  District’s  motion  to  seal  three  confidential  Resolutions  of  the  Governing 

Board  of  the  District  (Board),  one  regarding  nonreelection  of  probationary  teachers  in  the 
District,  and  two  regarding  the  possible  release/reassignment  of  certificated  administrative 
employees  was  granted.!  The  Resolutions  were  ordered  sealed,  not  to  be  opened  except  by  a 
duly  designated  and  authorized  representative  of  the  Board,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge 
(ALJ)  or  another  ALJ  assigned  to  preside  over  further  proceedings  in  the  matter,  or  by  a 
reviewing  court  of  competent  jurisdiction. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

The  District  is  a  large  urban  school  district  that  provides  services  to 

approximately  48,000  students  at  92  school  sites  in  and  surrounding  the  City  of  Sacramento. 
The  District  employs  approximately  2,200  certificated  employees. 

2. 

Carol  Mignone  Stephen  is  the  Associate  Superintendent,  Human  Resource 
Services,  of  the  District.  M.  Magdelena  Carillo  Mejia,  Ed.D.,  is  the  Superintendent  of  the 
District. 

3. 

The  District  has  experienced  declining  enrollment  over  the  last  several  years 
and  increasing  costs,  as  well  as  projected  funding  cuts  from  the  State.  In  January  2008,  the 

'  Resolution  No.  08-C,  Resolution  for  Non-Reelection  of  Temporary  Certificated  Employees,  although  labeled 
“Confidential,”  was  not  sealed  at  the  hearing. 

 

  

Board  was  advised  that  the  District  faces  a  projected  $24  million  budget  shortfall  for  the 
upcoming  school  year,  if  services  offered  and  staffing  remain  the  same  during  the  upcoming 
school  year.  The  Associate  Superintendent  and  her  staff  met  and  developed  proposals  for 
programs  and  services  to  be  reduced  and/or  eliminated  to  address  the  anticipated  budget 
deficit.  The  Associate  Superintendent  presented  her  findings  and  alternative 
recommendations  to  the  Board  at  a  meeting  in  February  2008,  along  with  a  proposed 
resolution  specifying  criteria  to  be  used  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  with  equal  seniority  (tiebreaker  criteria).  As  a  result  of  the  District’s  current 
financial  situation,  the  Board  determined  that  it  must  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services 
throughout  the  organization. 

4, 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Associate  Superintendent  recommended  to  the  Board 

that  particular  kinds  of  services  being  offered  by  the  District  be  discontinued  or  reduced. 
The  Associate  Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  Board 
approved  the  recommendations  and,  following  the  adoption  of  the  Resolution  set  forth 
below,  directed  the  Associate  Superintendent  to  implement  the  recommendations.  The 
Board  also  charged  the  Associate  Superintendent  and  her  staff  to  identify  an  equivalent 
number  of  certificated  personnel  and  give  those  certificated  employees  notice  in  writing  of 
the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the 
ensuing  school  year.  The  recommendation  of  certificated  personnel  to  be  identified  for 
layoff  from  employment  with  the  District  was  not  related  to  their  skills  or  competence  as 
teachers. 

5. 

In  response  to  the  Associate  Superintendent’s  recommendation  above,  the 

Board  adopted  Resolution  #  2507  on  March  6,  2008.  The  Board  resolved  that  the  District 
needs  to  reduce  or  eliminate  particular  kinds  of  services  as  recommended  by  the  Associate 
Superintendent,  and  accordingly,  it  was  resolved  that  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  the 
employment  of  an  equivalent  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the 
reductions.  Resolution  #2507  authorized  the  Associate  Superintendent  to  take  action  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  for  the  2008-09  school  year: 

Particular  Kind  of  Service  (PKS) 

Full-Time  Equivalent  (FTE) 

Administrators 
High  School  Assistant  Principals 
School  Improvement  Facilitators 

L 

I. 

Teachers 
Elementary  Teachers 
K-8  Teachers 
Middle  School  Teachers 
Home  Economics 
Art 
Music 
PE. 

4.0 
7.0 

52.0 
14.8 

1.0 
1.2 
1.0 
2.0

  

  

  

 

High  School  Teachers 

Home  Economics 
Social  Science 
PE. 
Music 

Alternative  Education  Teachers, 
Continuation  High  School 
Social  Science 
P.E. 

Other  Teachers 
Elementary  Teachers-Class  Size  Reduction 
Auto  Shop,  High  School 
Business 
Nurse,  Health  Services 
Music  Teachers,  Traveling 
Counselor 
Social  Worker 

Wd. 

Iv. 

Special  Education  Teachers 
PH/OI  Teacher 
SDC/LD  Teacher 
SD/DD  Teacher 
RSP  Teacher 
SDC/VI  Teacher 

Adult  Education  Teachers 
CBET  Specialist 
Carpentry 

2.0 
3.0 
4.4 
1.0 

2.0 
3.0 

© 

55.0 
1.0 
1.0 
4.0 
6.0 
2.0 
4.0 

1.0 
6.0 
1.0 
7.0 
1.0 

1.0 
1.0 

189.4  FTE 

The  proposed  reductions  total  189.4  FTE,  with  an  equivalent  number  of  certificated 

positions. 

6. 

Resolution  #2507  specified  a  “direct  and  specific  need  within  the  District  for 
certificated  employee  [sic]  qualified  to  serve  the  needs  of  K-12  students  with  respect  to  the 
following  programs  and  services:  English  Language  Learners  (ELL)  and  classes  requiring 
Bilingual  Cross-Cultural  Language  and  Development  (BCLAD),  which  are  highly 
specialized  programs  requiring  the  possession  of  additional  specialized  credentials  and/or 
training  or  experience  possessing  these  credentials  and/or  certifications  in  the  2008-09  school 
year.”  The  Board  noted a  special  need  to  retain  employees  with  these  specialized  credentials, 
regardless  of  seniority. 

  

7. 

At  the  same  meeting,  the  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  #2508.  This 

Resolution  set  forth  criteria  for  breaking  ties  when  two  or  more  certificated  employees  with 
the  same  first  day  of  paid  service  were  facing  potential  layoff.  The  Board  listed  categories 
for  consideration,  and  assigned  weights  to  each  category,  as  follows:  Category  I  -  English 
Language  Learner  (ELL)  Certifications;  Category  II  —  Professional  Preparation,  including  K- 
12  credentials  (3  points  each),  added  authorizations  (1  point  each),  limited  supplemental 
authorizations  (1/2  point  each),  master’s  degrees  (1/2  point  each),  National  Board 
Certification  (1  point),  and  Doctoral  Degree  (1  point);  and  Category  III  —  certificated 
experience  under  contract  with  the  District  not  reflected  by  the  employee’s  date  of  hire  (e.g., 
an  employee  who  may  have  resigned  and  was  later  rehired  by  the  District)  (1  point  for  each 
year  of  service).  In  case  of  ties  continuing  through  listed  criteria,  Category  IV  —  Lottery,  was 
to  be  used  to  break  such  ties. 

8. 

The  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2507  are  “particular  kinds  of  services” 
that  may  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  the  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular 
kinds  of  services  was  arbitrary  or  capricious.  The  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular 
kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2507  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s 
discretion,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955. 

9. 

On  March  14,  2008,  the  District  personally  served  a  written  preliminary  notice 

that  advised  the  respondents,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955,  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  The  preliminary  notices  were 
served  on  189  certificated  employees  of  the  District.  Each  written  notice  set  forth  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  noted  that  the  Board  had  adopted  Resolution  #2507, 
which  was  attached  to  the  preliminary  notice. 

10. 

Each  preliminary  notice  was  served  by  certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested. 

Of  the  189  employees  served  a  preliminary  notice,  141  certificated  employees  timely 
requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not  reemploying  them  for  the 
ensuing  school  year. 

11. 

The  Associate  Superintendent  made  and  filed  Accusations  against  each  of  the 
141  certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  timely  requested  a  hearing  after  receipt  of  the 
preliminary  notice.  It  was  not  disputed  that  the  Accusations,  with  required  accompanying 
documents  and  blank  Notices  of  Defense,  as  well  as  Notices  of  Hearing,  were  timely  served 
on  the  responding  employees. 

12. 

Of  the  141  District  employees  served  with  Accusations,  six  failed  to  timely 

file  a  Notice  of  Defense  requesting  an  evidentiary  hearing. 

13. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955. 

  

 

  

14. 

Prior  to  or  at  the  hearing,  the  District  rescinded  the  preliminary  notices  of 

layoff  to  the  following  11  certificated  employees:  Joan  Cochrane;  Jennifer  Walker;  Jocelyn 
Stewart;  Tracy  Elliott;  Irene  Moore;  Kari  Zimny;  Kelly  Graves;  Angela  Lopez;  Rachel 
Webb;  Olivia  Alvarado;  and  Carol  Lambert.”  These  employees  shall  be  retained  for  the 
2008-09  school  year. 

15.  |  As  aconsequence  of  the  rescission  of  notices  to  Jennifer  Walker,  Jocelyn 

Stewart,  and  Tracy  Elliott,  the  4.0  FTE  PKS  reduction  in  RSP  services  was  reduced  to  1.8 
FTE. 

16. 

Pursuant  to  Confidential  Board  Resolution  #08-C,  the  District  sent  Notices  of 
Release  to  92  temporary  certificated  employees  by  certified  mail  on  March  10,  2008.  Those 
employees  are  not  parties  to  this  proceeding. 

Temporary  Employees 

Probationary  Nonreelects 

17. 

The  Board  acted  pursuant  to  Confidential  Resolution  #08-B  to  not  reelect 

certain  first  and  second  year  probationary  teachers  in  the  District.  These  nonreelections  were 
an  appropriate  exercise  of  the  Board’s  absolute  right  not  to  reelect  probationary  teachers. 

Method  of  Effectuating  the  Reduction  in  Services  and  Identifying  Affected  Employees 

18. 

|  The  Board’s  Resolutions  delegated  to  the  Associate  Superintendent  and  her 
designees  the  authority  to  implement  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  the  listed  particular 
kinds  of  services,  to  identify  and  determine  which  District  employees  would  be  affected  by 
the  reductions  and  to  draft  and  serve  the  preliminary  notices  upon  those  identified 
employees.  The  District  divides  its  schools  into  four  geographic  learning  service  units 
(LSUs)  and  assigns  a  personnel  analyst  from  the  Human  Resources  Department  to  each. 
Immediately  following  the  passage  of  the  Resolutions,  the  Associate  Superintendent  met 
with  the  four  personnel  analysts  during  the  first  week  of  March,  2008,  and  instructed  them  to 
work  together  to  identify  employees  of  the  District  who  would  be  affected  by  the  reduction 
or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  set  forth  in  the  Resolution. 

19. 

Except  as  specifically  noted  below,  the  analysts  were  not  given  specific 

instructions  about  how  to  implement  the  layoff.  The  Associate  Superintendent  testified  that 
the  analysts  had  considerable  experience  between  them  in  analyzing  the  District’s  master 
seniority  list  and  effectuating  District  reductions  in  force  in  previous  years.  The  analysts 
were  provided  with  copies  of  the  Resolutions  for  reference,  and  obtained  the  master  seniority 
list  for  the  District  in  two  formats,  by  alphabetical  order  and  by  inverse  seniority  order.  The 
analysts  were  also  able  to  obtain  “sublists,”  which  were  lists  of  certificated  employees  in  a 

>  The  issue  of  whether  a  change  should  be  made  to  the  seniority  dates  of  employees  Rachel  Webb,  Olivia  Alvarado, 
and  Caro]  Lambert,  is  not  addressed  herein. 

 

particular  PKS,  such  as  elementary  teachers,  or  traveling  music  teachers.  In  addition,  the 
analysts  had  access  to  the  District’s  ESCAPE  computerized  data  system,  which  contained 
information  about  certificated  employees  such  as  education,  advanced  degrees,  status  as  full 
or  part-time  employees,  and  compliance  with  the  “highly  qualified”  (HQ)  teacher 
requirements  of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  of  2001  (NCLB). 

20. 

The  team  of  analysts  identified  the  positions  to  be  eliminated  pursuant  to 

Resolution  #2507,  and  identified  the  certificated  employees  to  receive  preliminary  notices  of 
layoff  based  on  seniority. 

Administrators 

21. 

The  Board  adopted  Confidential  Resolution  #08-A  for  possible 
release/reassignment  of  certificated  administrative  employees.  As  a  result  of  the  reduction  of 
11.0  FTE  PKS  District  administrators,  some  administrators  had  return  rights  to  classroom 
teacher  positions.  Analysts  Joyce  Compton  and  Janet  Fong  calculated  the  seniority  of 
administrators  using  the  District’s  ESCAPE  computerized  data  system,  and  personnel 
records.  There  was  no  issue  regarding  whether  any  reassignments  of  administrators  were 
appropriate,  or  whether  any  of  the  administrators  being  reassigned  were  certificated  and 
competent  to  take  the  reassignments  made. 

Verification  of  Employment  Status  and  Seniority 

22. 

Tenure  is  the  relationship  between a  teacher  and  the  District  which  gives  the 

teacher greater  job  security. 

Seniority  is  the  relationship  between  the  teachers  within  a  school  district.  Among  the 

teachers  credentialed  to  provide  a  given  service,  greater  seniority  in  the  District  gives  a 
greater  legal  entitlement  to  a  position.  (See  Ferner  v.  Harris  (1975)  45  Cal.App.3d  363.) 

Seniority  date  is  defined  as  the  date  upon  which  and  employee  first  rendered  paid 

service  in  a  probationary  position.  (Ed.  Code  §  44845.) 

23. 

Employees  were  given  the  opportunity  to  correct  and  verify  their  seniority 

dates.  On  December  14,  2007,  the  Associate  Superintendent  transmitted  to  all  site  and 
department  administrators  of  the  District  a  list  of  all  certificated  employees  at  each  site  or 
department;  verification  statements  for  each  certificated  employee,  for  distribution  to  the 
named  employee;  and a  proof  of  service,  to  be  signed  and  returned  when  all  employees  had 
received  and  returned  their  Seniority  Verification  Statements  to  the  site  or  department 
administrator.  The  deadline  for  submission  of  the  completed  verifications  sheets  was 
January  28,  2008. 

24. 

|  The  Employee  Information  Verification  Statement  for  each  employee  listed 

the  employee’s  name,  seniority  date;  classification  (first  year  probationary,  second  year 
probationary,  or  permanent);  school  assignment;  position  (e.g.  elementary  teacher,  high 

 

  

  

  

school,  nurse);  and  credential  (including  issue  date,  expiration  date,  and  “subjects 
authorized”).  The  Employee  Information  Verification  Statement  stated,  in  part: 

Our  records  indicate  the  information  shown  regarding  seniority, 
credentials,  address  and  phone  number.  Please  make  any 
corrections  as  needed.  Attach  a  copy  of  the  credential(s)  to  this 
form,  to  correct  or  update  our  records.  Please  return  this  form 
no  later  than  January  28,  2008. 

I  certify  the  information  shown  is  true  and  correct. 

The  Employee  Information  Verification  Statement  contained a  line  for  the  employee 

to  sign  and  date,  certifying  the  truth  of  the  information  provided. 

25. 

If  employees  made  corrections  to  the  Employee  Information  Verification 

statements,  salary  technicians  would  check  the  information  and,  if  correct,  enter  the  corrected 
information  into  the  District’s  ESCAPE  data  system;  these  corrections  were  reflected  in  the 
master  seniority  list. 

26. 

The  District  relied  on  the  verifications  provided  by  certificated  employees  in 

updating  the  District’s  seniority  list,  which  it  used  to  determine  the  order  of  layoff. 

Bumping  and  Skipping 

27. 

Economic  layoffs  are  generally  to  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  seniority.  A 
teacher  with  more  seniority  typically  has  greater  rights  to  retain  employment  than  a  junior 
teacher.  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  a  position  held  by  a 
junior  teacher  if  the  senior  teacher  is  properly  credentialed.  That  displacement  of  a  junior 
teacher  is  known  as  “bumping.”  In  general,  the  District  has  an  affirmative  obligation  to 
reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions  held  by  junior  teachers 
if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The 
seniority  rule  is  not  absolute,  and  a  junior  teacher  with  a  needed  credential  or  skills  may  be 
retained  even  if  a  more  senior  teacher  is  terminated.  Such  “skipping”  is  recognized  by 
statute  (Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1))  and  appellate  law  (Santa  Clara 
Federation  of  Teachers,  Local  2393  v.  Governing  Board  of the  Santa  Clara  Unified  School 
District  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831).  In  order  to  depart  from  a  seniority-based  economic 
layoff,  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1),  requires  the  District  to 
“demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study... 
and  that  the  certificated  employee  (to  be  skipped)  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study...  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not 
possess.” 

28. 

Resolution  #2507  proposed  to  retain  teachers  with  ELL  and  BCLAD 

certifications.  The  analysts  determined  that  all  of  the  teachers  in  the  District  held  ELL 
certifications.  They  further  determined  that  two  employees  who  would  otherwise  have  been 

 

  

subject  to  layoff  held  BCLAD  certifications  that  were  required  for  their  classroom  teaching 
assignments:  Shannon  Zavala  (seniority  date  2/5/07)  and  Teresa  Martinez  (seniority  date 
9/6/05).  The  analysts  “skipped”  these  two  teachers  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
Resolution  #2507,  and  neither  received  a  notice  of  layoff.  The  analysts  did  not  “skip”  any 
employees  who  were  slated  for  layoff  who  held  BCLAD  certifications  if  those  teachers  were 
not  assigned  to  classrooms  in  which  BCLAD  certification  was  required.  As  a  result,  there 
are  respondents  with  greater  seniority  than  Ms.  Zavala  and  Ms.  Martinez  who  hold  BCLAD 
certifications  who  received  layoff  notices. 

29. 

The  District  acted  reasonably  in  implementing  Resolution  #2507  by 

“skipping”  only  those  teachers  with  BCLAD  certifications  who  were  actually  using  the 
credential  in  their  classroom  assignments.  (See  Alexander  v.  Delano  Jt.  Union  High  School 
Dist.  (1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567,  576.) 

30. 

The  District  cannot  be  compelled  to  split  full-time  positions  in  order  to  offer 

“partial”  bumping  rights  to  senior  employees  who  occupy  less  than  1.0  FTE  positions. 
(Murray  v.  Sonoma  County  Office  of Education  (1989)  208  Cal.App.3d  456,  460;  King  v. 
Berkeley  Unified  School  District  (1979)  89  Cal.App.3d  1016.)° 

31. 

The  District’s  implementation  of  “bumping”  rights  of  senior  teachers  is 

32. 

Application  of  District’s  Tiebreaker  Criteria  —  Generally 

addressed  in  reference  to  specific  PKS  reductions,  as  set  forth  below. 

The  analysts  applied  the  tiebreaker  criteria  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2508  based 

on  past  District  practice.  They  were  provided  information  in  a  spreadsheet  format  for  each 
category  of  PKS  in  which  the  tiebreaking  criteria  needed  to  be  applied.  The  data  for  the 
tiebreaker  spreadsheets  and  assignment  of  points  was  supplied  by  Velma  Cole,  Personnel 
Supervisor,  and  Terri  Lauzon,  Credential  Specialist.  Under  Category  I  of  the  tiebreaker 
criteria,  no  employee  was  given  points  on  any  of  the  tiebreaker  spreadsheets,  because  all 
District  employees  so  evaluated  held  ELL  certifications.  Likewise,  none  of  the  employees 
who  were  subjects  of  the  tiebreaker  criteria  had  previous  in-district  certificated  experience 
under  contract  that  was  not  reflected  in  the  employees’  date  of  hire,  and  therefore  no  points 
were  awarded  to  any  employee  under  Category  III  of  the  tiebreaker  criteria. 

 
    

tiebreaking  criteria.  Where  individual  employees  had  the  same  number  of  points  after 
application  of  all  other  criteria,  the  analysts  conducted  a  lottery  within  each  PKS  category  to 
determine  which  employee(s)  would  be  subject  to  layoff. 

3  Although  both  of  these  cases  were  decided  under  Education  Code  section  44956  concerning  reinstatement  rights  of 
certificated  employees  laid  off  under  section  44955,  the  application  of  the  standard  "certificated  and  competent"  to 
render  the  service  is  the  same. 

The  analysts  determined  the  order  of  seniority  based  on  points  awarded  under  the 

33. 

The  District’s  decision  to  apply  the  tiebreaker  criteria  by  PKS,  rather  than  as  to 

all  employees  with-the  same  credential  and  seniority  date,  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious, 
and  did  not  constitute  an  abuse  of  discretion. 

Elementary  —  Special  Subjects 

34. 

A  teacher  with  a  single  subject  credential  can  teach  middle  school  (grades  7-8) 

or  high  school  (grades  9-12).  In  addition,  the  District  utilizes  certain  teachers  with  single 
subject  P.E.  or  music  credentials  as  elementary  “prep  period”  teachers.  These  teachers  teach 
P.E.  or  music  to  students  during  their  classroom  teacher’s  preparation  period.  Unlike  middle 
school  or  high  school  music  and  P.E.,  “prep  period”  music  and  P.E.  teachers  are  not  assigned 
to  teach  “periods”  of  music  or  P.E;  rather,  they  are  assigned  to  particular  schools  on  a  daily 
basis.  The  District  categorizes  “prep  period”  teachers  as  “Elementary  —  Special  Subjects,” 
and  considers  them  to  be  a  PKS  separate  and  distinct  from  elementary  teachers  (due  to 
differences  in  credentialing),  and  from  middle  school  and/or  high  school  music  teachers  and 
P.E.  teachers  (due  to  the  manner  in  which  work  is  assigned).  The  District’s  treatment  of 
elementary  —  special  subjects  as  a  separate  PKS  is  reasonable,  and  does  not  constitute  an 
abuse  of  discretion. 

35. 

The  District  did  not  reduce  or  eliminate  elementary  —  special  subjects  PKS  as 

part  of  Resolution  #2507. 

36. 

During  the  course  of  hearing,  three  part-time  elementary  —  special  subjects 

37. 

The  analysts  were  instructed  by  the  District’s  legal  counsel  not  to  allow  a  more 

Mr.  Lobese  teaches  two  days  per  week.  Ms.  Nouchi  teaches  four  days  per  week,  split 

teachers  were  identified:  Robert  Lobese  (seniority  date  8/30/07)  (.4  FTE  P.E.  prep);  Nadine 
Nouchi  (seniority  date  8/3/07)  (.8  FTE  P.E.  prep);  and  Merri  Sue  Brown  (seniority  date 
11/13/07)  (.5  FTE  music  prep). 

between  two  schools.  The  exact  nature  of  Ms.  Brown’s  assignment  was  not  established  by 
the  evidence,  except  that  she  is  assigned  by  day(s)  of  the  week,  rather  than  by  periods,  as  are 
middle  school  and  high  school  music  teachers. 

10    

senior  full-time  employee  to  “bump”  a  more  junior  part-time  employee  out  of  his  or  her 
position.  The  District  justified  its  position  due  to  the  differences  in  scheduling  between  high 
school  or  middle  school  subjects  such  as  P.E.  or  music,  as  compared  with  elementary  — 
special  subject  P.E.  prep  or  music  prep.  However,  noted  in  Finding  27  above,  the  District 
must,  where  practicable,  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into  positions 
held  by  junior  teachers  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and  competence  to 
occupy  such  positions.  Therefore,  the  District  abused  its  discretion  when  it  did  not  permit 
full-time  employees  slated  for  layoff  in  P-E.  and  music  to  “bump”  less  senior  part-time  P.E. 
prep  or  music  prep  teachers,  as  further  set  forth  below. 

Elementary  Teacher  and  Elementary  Teacher  —  Class  Size  Reduction  PKS  Reductions 

38. 

|  Elementary  teacher  and  elementary  teacher  —  class  size  reduction  (CSR)  are 

both  “particular  kinds  of  services”  that  may  be  reduced  by  the  District.  (See  San  Jose 
Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  630.)  Regarding  the  elimination  of  55.0 
FTE  CSR,  the  District  proposes  to  eliminate  CSR  in  one  grade  level,  but  had  not  determined 
which  grade  level  (kindergarten,  first,  second,  or  third)  would  be  affected  by  the  elimination 
of  CSR  as  of  the  date  of  hearing. 

39. 

In  effectuating  the  reduction  in  Elementary  Teachers  and  Elementary  CSR 

teachers  FTEs,  the  analysts  did  not  distinguish  between  the  two  groups  for  purposes  of 
seniority.  Both  groups  hold  MS  credentials,  for  a  total  of  107  FTE  reduction.  The  analysts 
identified  the  least  senior  elementary  teachers  occupying  107  FTE  using a  seniority  sublist  of 
elementary  teachers.  In  addition,  some  less  senior  elementary  teachers  were  “bumped”  by 
more  senior  teachers  who  were  certificated  and  qualified  to  fill  the  positions  of junior 
teachers.  The  analysts  also  considered  whether  elementary  teachers  slated  for  layoff  could 
be  reassigned  to  “bump” a  less  senior  teacher  if  the  elementary  teacher  held  another 
credential  in  addition  to  an  MS  credential. 

40. 

In  implementing  the  layoff  of  teachers  with  MS  credentials,  the  analysts 
checked  the  ESCAPE  data  system  for  all  teachers  with  supplemental  authorizations  to 
determine  if  they  were  “highly  qualified”  and  therefore  possibly  eligible  to  “bump”  a  less 
senior  teacher  in  a  subject  that  the  more  senior  teacher  was  qualified  to  teach. 

K-8  PKS  Reduction 

41. 

The  District  operates  six  K-8  schools,  and  one  K-12  school.  The  teachers  at 

these  schools  who  teach  in  grades  K-6  hold  MS  credentials.  The  teachers  who  teach  grades  7 
and  8,  whether  in  a  K-8  school  or  in  middle  school,  generally  hold  single  subject  credentials 
or  supplemental  authorizations  in  specific  subjects.  A  teacher  with  a  MS  credential  can  teach 
grades  7  and  8  ina  K-8  school  or  in  a  middle  school  if  the  teacher  is  in  a  “core”  setting,  in 
which  the  same  teacher  teaches  two  or  more  subjects  (e.g.  English  and  social  studies,  or 
science  and  mathematics)  to  the  same  students,  for  two  or  more  periods,  provided  that  the 
teacher  is  “highly  qualified”  in  compliance  with  NCLB  in  each  of  the  subjects  taught. 

42. 

The  District’s  credential  specialist,  Terri  Lauzon,  was  responsible  for 

determining  whether  middle  school  teachers  currently  teaching  in  “core”  settings  were 
NCLB-compliant. 

43. 

Resolution  #2507  proposed  to  reduce  the  number  of  K-8  certificated 

employees  by  14.8  FTE.  To  effectuate  this  layoff,  the  analysts  identified  the  15  least  senior 
K-8  teachers  occupying  14.5  FTE,  and  they  determined  whether  the  identified  teachers  could 
be  reassigned  based  on  their  seniority  and  qualifications. 

  

11

  

44. 

The  analysts  determined  that  all  of  the  identified  K-8  teachers  held  MS 

credentials.  Fourteen  of  the  teachers  were  believed  to  be  able  to  “bump”  less  senior  teachers 
and  were  retained  by  the  District.  However,  in  one  case,  the  analysts  erroneously  permitted 
K-8  teacher  Veasna  Nim  (seniority  date  10/11/04)  to  “bump”  elementary  teacher  Bertha 
Udell  (seniority  date  9/7/04),  who  received  a  layoff  notice  and  is  a  respondent  herein.  Ms. 
Nim  was  not  served  with  a  preliminary  notice  of  layoff.  Since  Ms.  Udell  has  greater 
seniority  than  Ms.  Nim  and  is  certificated  and  qualified  to  render  the  services  for  which  Ms. 
Nim  is  being  retained,  Ms.  Udell  shall  likewise  be  retained  by  the  District,  and  her  notice  of 
layoff  shall  be  rescinded. 

45. 

The  Association  contended  in  its  Post-Hearing  Brief  that  Resolution  #2507 

was  vague  and  ambiguous  in  that  it  “does  not  specify  at  what  grade  levels  the  District  was  to 
reduce  services  in  the  K-8  schools.”  In  this  case  the  analysts  testified  that  they  identified  the 
most  junior  employees  assigned  to  K-8  schools  to  the  14.8  PKS  reduction  in  K-8  pursuant  to 
Resolution  #2507.  They  further  testified  that  they  identified  teachers  with  MS  credentials 
assigned  to  the  K-6  grades  at  the  K-8  schools,  and  determined  that  most  were  senior  to 
elementary  teachers  with  MS  credentials  and  therefore  able  to  bump  into  elementary 
positions,  resulting  in  the  proposed  layoff  of  additional  elementary  teachers.  The  analysts 
reasonably  interpreted  Resolution  #2507  to  determine  K-8  PKS  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated. 

46. 

In  effectuating  the  layoff,  the  analysts  did  not  identify  middle  school  teachers 

that  held  only  MS  credentials  as  potential  employees  for  layoff  or  “bumping.”  The 
Association  identified  three  employees  with  MS  credentials  and  seniority  dates  of  September 
4,  2007,  who  were  not  given  preliminary  notices  of  layoff,  while  similarly-credentialed 
respondents  with  greater  seniority  were  slated  for  layoff.  These  junior  employees  are  Ruth 
Lindahl,  Alf  Ballard,  and  Melissa  Lucchesi.°  The  District  did  not  provide  specific 
information  about  the  teaching  assignments  of  these  three  individuals,  other  than  to  establish 
that  they  were  teaching  at  Sam  Brannan  Middle  School.  Although  District  personnel 
speculated  that  these  teachers  were  assigned  to  “core”  settings,  and  that  they  were  HQ 
teachers  in  those  assignments,  the  District  did  not  produce  corroborating  evidence  to 
establish  these  facts.  In  the  absence  of  proof  to  the  contrary,  the  Association’s  contention 
that  these  teachers  are  providing  services  which  respondents  with  greater  seniority  are 
credentialed  and  qualified  to  render  has  merit.  Consequently,  the  District  shall  be  required  to 
retain  the  services  of  the  three  most  senior  teachers  with  MS  credentials  currently  slated  for 
layoff. 

   

5  The  Association’s  Post-Hearing  Brief  lists  a  fourth  employee,  “Joan  Cooperman.”  However,  there  is  no  employee 
named  Joan  Cooperman  with  a  seniority  date  of  September  4,  2007.  Employee  Joan  Cochrane  has  a  September  4, 
2007  seniority  date;  she  was  sent  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  which  was  later  rescinded,  because  she  had  single 
subject  credentials  in  English  and  Social  Science  that  allowed  her  to  be  reassigned.  Employee  Jody  Cooperman  has 
a  seniority  date  of  September  7,  2004. 

“  The  tiebreaker  criteria  was  applied  to  elementary  teachers  holding  MS  credentials  with  the  seniority  date  of 
September  7,  2004,  due  to  the  fact  that  similarly  credentialed  K-8  teachers  with  more  seniority  were  allowed  to 
“bump”  more  junior  elementary  teachers. 

12 

  

   

47. 

Angela  Cleavenger-Artz  (seniority  date  11/1/99),  occupies  .5  FTE  position  in 
an  elementary  classroom  at  Genevieve  Didion  Elementary,  a  K-8  school.  She  holds  an  MS 
credential.  Ms.  Cleavenger-Artz  was  the  fifteenth  “least  senior”  K-8  teacher  identified  by 
the  analysts  for  layoff  under  the  K-8  PKS  reduction.  The  analysts  were  instructed  by  legal 
counsel  not  to  “carve”  out  a  half-time  position  for  Ms.  Cleavenger-Artz  by  splitting  the 
position  of  a  junior  full-time  elementary  teacher.  The  District  properly  determined  that  there 
was  no  less  senior  teacher  occupying  .5  FTE  position  that  Ms.  Cleavenger-Artz  could  bump 
(see  Finding  30). 

Music  Teachers 

48. 

The  services  of  music  teachers  in  the  District  were  affected  by  three  PKS 

reductions:  middle  school  music  teacher  (1.0  FTE),  high  school  music  teacher  (1.0  FTE), 
and  traveling  music  teachers  (6.0  FTE).  The  employee  classification  of  “traveling  music 
teacher”  reflects  the  fact  that  some  or  all  of  the  teachers  so  designated  are  or  could  be 
assigned  to  more  than  one  school. 

49. 

An  additional  classification  of  music  teachers,  elementary  —  special  subjects 
elementary  music  “prep”  teachers  (music  prep)  was  not  part  of  the  PKS  reduction  in  music, 
so  none  of  the  teachers  serving  in  those  positions  were  initially  identified  by  the  analysts  for 
possible  layoff.  However,  more  senior  full-time  music  teachers  were  able  to  “bump”  junior 
full-time  music  prep  teachers  holding  single  subject  credentials. 

50. 

To  effectuate  the  layoffs  in  high  school  music  and  middle  school  music,  the 

analysts  identified  the  least  senior  high  school  music  teacher  and  the  least  senior  middle 
school  music  teacher.  The  two  least  senior  high  school  music  teachers,  Daniel  Almanzo  and 
Martin  Beal,  had  the  same  seniority  date  (9/5/06).  The  analysts  applied  the  tiebreaker  criteria 
to  them,  and  Mr.  Almanzo  was  “saved”  by  lottery,  and  Mr.  Beal  was  slated  for  1.0  FTE  high 
school  music  layoff.  However,  Mr.  Almanzo  was  “bumped”  by  a  more  senior  traveling 
music  teacher,  Penny  Elliott  (seniority  date  3/10/04). 

51. 

Juliette  Turner  (seniority  date  9/2/97)  was  a  traveling  music  teacher  who  did 

not  receive  a  notice  of  layoff,  while  Kari  Zimny  (seniority  date  9/12/86)  was  slated  for 
layoff.  The  District  rescinded  Ms.  Zimny’s  layoff  notice,  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  a  less 
senior  employee  had  been  retained  to  provide  a  service  that  Ms.  Zimny  was  certificated  and 
qualified  to  perform  (Finding  14). 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  36,  Merri  Sue  Brown  (seniority  date  11/13/07)  serves 

as  a  music  prep  teacher  occupying  .5  FTE.  She  did  not  receive  a  preliminary  notice  of  layoff 
from  the  District.  There  are  several  full-time  music  teachers  with  greater  seniority  than  Ms. 
Brown  who  are  certificated  and  qualified  to  serve  in  the  half-time  position  occupied  by  Ms. 
Brown.  Therefore,  the  District  shall  be  required  to  retain  the  services  of  the  most  senior 
music  teacher  currently  slated  for  layoff  for  .5  FTE  (see  Finding  37). 

52. 

   

 

13 

  

  

P.E.  Teachers 

53. 

The  services  of  P.E.  teachers  in  the  District  were  affected  by  three  PKS 

reductions:  middle  school  P.E.  teachers  (2.0  FTE),  high  school  P.E.  teachers  (4.4  FTE),  and 
alternative  education  teachers,  continuation  high  school  (3.0  FTE). 

54. 

An  additional  classification  of  P-E.  teachers,  elementary  —  special  subjects 
elementary  P.E.  “prep”  teachers  (P.E.  prep)  was  not  part  of  the  PKS  reduction  in  P.E.,  so 
none  of  the  teachers  serving  in  those  positions  were  initially  identified  by  the  analysts  for 
possible  layoff.  However,  less  senior  full-time  P.E.  prep  teachers  were  subject  to  layoff  if 
they  could  be  “bumped”  by  a  more  senior  full-time  P.E.  teacher  slated  for  layoff  as  a  result 
of  reductions  in  P.E.  PKS.° 

55. 

Although  Resolution  #2507  called  for  a  reduction  of  3.0  FTE  P.E.  Alternative 

Education  Teachers,  the  evidence  established  that  there  was  only  one  alternative  education 
teacher,  Thomas  Crocker,  and  1.0  FTE  vacant  position.  Therefore,  while  Resolution  #2507 
reflects  a  total  of  9.4  FTE  layoffs  of  P.E.  teacher  positions,  only  8.4  FTE  positions  were 
actually  reduced. 

56. 

To  effectuate  the  layoffs  in  high  school  P.E.,  the  analysts  identified  the  least 

senior  high  school  P.E.  teachers  occupying  4.4  FTE  positions.  The  analysts  determined  that  it 
was  necessary  to  utilize  the  tiebreaker  criteria  to  determine  the  relative  seniority  of  three  high 
school  P.E.  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  date  (9/5/06):  William  Maddox,  Marcel  Noffal, 
and  Nathan  Oltmanns.  After  applying  the  criteria,  the  three  were  tied,  and  the  analysts 
conducted a  lottery.  As  a  result  of  the  application  of  the  tiebreaker  criteria,  Mr.  Maddox  was 
retained  for  .6  FTE  high  school  P.E.,  and  was  slated  for  layoff  of  .4  FTE.  Mr.  Noffal  and 
Mr.  Oltmanns  were  each  slated  for  layoff  of  1.0  FTE. 

57. 

To  effectuate  the  layoffs  in  middle  school  P.E.,  the  analysts  identified  the  least 

senior  middle  school  P.E.  teachers  occupying  2.0  FTE  positions,  and  determined  that  it  was 
necessary  to  utilize  the  tiebreaker  criteria  to  determine  the  relative  seniority  of  six  middle 
school  P.E.  teachers  with  the  same  seniority  (9/5/06).  Two  of  the  employees  were  “saved” 
because  they  had  more  “points”  than  the  others  under  the  tiebreaker  criteria.  Among  the  four 
remaining  employees,  the  analysts  conducted a  lottery,  which  “saved”  Jesse  Hernandez, 
Michel  Karas,  and  Chance  Peterson.  Renae  Hering  was  slated  for  layoff  of  1.0  FTE. 

58. 

|  Thomas  Crocker  (seniority  date  9/5/06)  holds  a  single  subject  P.E.  credential, 

but  was  not  included  in  either  the  middle  school  tiebreaker  or  the  high  school  tiebreaker, 
because  he  teaches  at  Capital  City  School,  an  independent  study  school.  He  was  slated  for 
layoff  pursuant  to  the  PKS  reduction  in  alternative  education  P.E. 

°  Maria  Clayton  (seniority  date  9/6/05),  a  high  school  P.E.  teacher,  “bumped”  Mary  Vielleux  (seniority  date 
11/16/06),  a  less  senior  P.E.  prep  teacher. 

14 

 

59. 

The  Association,  and  individual  respondents  representing  themselves, 

contended  that  the  District  erred  when  it  did  not  combine  all  similarly-credentialed  single 
subject  P.E.  teachers  with  the  same  date  of  paid  service  in  a  single  lottery  to  determine  the 
order  of  layoff  8.4  FTE  P.E.  positions  in  the  District.  Had  the  District  done  so,  it  would  have 
increased  the  chances  that  high  school  teachers  Mr.  Noffal  and  Mr.  Oltmanns,  and  alternative 
high  school  teacher  Mr.  Crocker,  had  of  being  retained  by  the  District  to  provide  services  (in 
middle  school  P.E.)  that  they  were  certificated  and  qualified  to  render.  However,  as 
previously  set  forth  in  Finding  33,  the  District’s  decision  to  apply  the  tiebreaking  criteria 
separately  to  each  PKS  was  within  its  discretion. 

60. 

Asset  forth  in  Finding  36,  Robert  Lobese  (seniority  date  8/30/07)  serves  as  a 
P.E.  prep  teacher  occupying  .4  FTE,  and  Nadine  Nouchi  (seniority  date  8/3/07)  serves  as  a 
P.E.  prep  teacher  occupying  .8  FTE.  Neither  received a  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  from  the 
District.  As  set  forth  in  Finding  56,  William  Maddox  is  slated  to  be  laid  off  for  .4  FTE  and 
retained  as  a  high  school  P.E.  teacher  for  .6  FTE.  He  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
displace  Ms.  Nouchi  in  her  .8  FTE  P.E.  prep  position.  Therefore,  the  District  shall  be 
required  to  retain  the  services  of  Mr.  Maddox  for  an  additional  .2  FTE,  for  a  total  of  .8  FTE. 
(See  Finding  37.) 

61. 

There  were  several  P.E.  teachers  (Mr.  Crocker,  Ms.  Hering,  Mr.  Noffal,  and 

Mr.  Oltmanns)  with  the  same  seniority  date  (9/5/06)  who  each  received  layoff  notices  for  1.0 
FTE.  Each  of  these  teachers  has  greater  seniority  than  Nadine  Nouchi,  and  are  certificated 
and  qualified  to  render  the  service  for  which  she  has  been  retained  by  the  District  for  .4  FTE. 
In  addition,  as  a  consequence  of  the  retention  of  Mr.  Maddox  in  the  .8  FTE  P.E.  prep 
position,  a  “vacancy”  of  .6  FTE  exists  in  high  school  P.E.  Therefore,  the  District  shall  be 
required  to  apply  its  tiebreaker  criteria  to  the  above-listed  employees  and  shall  retain  two 
teachers  who  are  currently  slated  for  layoff,  one  in  .6  FTE  high  school  P.E.  position,  and  one 
in  .4  FTE  PE  prep  position.  (See  Finding  37.) 

Individual  Respondents 

62. 

Whitney  Cole 

The  District  agreed  that  Ms.  Cole  (seniority  date  9/6/05)  should  be  classified  as  a 

permanent  employee  of  the  District.  This  change  did  not  affect  her  status  as  a  certificated 
employee  slated  for  layoff. 

63. 

Sarah  Wagner 

The  District  agreed  to  change  Ms.  Wagner’s  seniority  date  to  January  24,  2005,  and  to 
change  her  classification  to  “permanent.”  The  change  in  her  classification  and  seniority  date 
does  not  affect  her  status  as  a  certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff. 

  

  

15 

 

  

64. 

Sarah  Garrett 

e 

The  District  agreed  to  change  Ms.  Garrett’s  seniority  date  to  September  5,  2006,  and 
to  change  her  classification  to  “second  year  probationary.”  The  change  in  her  classification 
and  seniority  date  does  not  affect  her  status  as  a  certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff. 

The  District  agreed  to  change  Ms.  Bayley’s  seniority  date  to  September  6,  2005  and 
to  change  her  classification  to  “permanent.”  The  change  in  her  classification  and  seniority 
date  does  not  affect  her  status  as  a  certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff. 

The  District  agreed  to  change  Ms.  Feliciano’s  seniority  date  to  January  8,  2007.  The 

change  in  her  seniority  date  does  not  affect  her  status  as  a  certificated  employee  slated  for 
layoff,  and  it  does  not  impact  the  layoff  status  of  any  other  certificated  employee  of  the 
District. 

65. 

Krystyna  Bayley 

66.  —  April  Feliciano 

67. 

Jennifer  Havey 

68. 

William  Maddox 

The  parties  stipulated  that  Ms.  Havey’s  correct  seniority  date  is  September  5,  2006. 

This  correction  does  not  affect  her  status  as  a  certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff. 

@ 

Mr.  Maddox  (seniority  date  9/5/06)  is  a  high  school  P.E.  teacher  and  holds  a  single 
subject  P.E.  credential.  As  a  result  of  the  application  of  the  District’s  tiebreaker  criteria  to 
high  school  P.E.  teachers  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District,  he  was 
slated  to  be  laid  off  for  .4  FTE  of  his  1.0  FTE  position.  Mr.  Maddox  contends  that  the 
District  erred  when  it  conducted  separate  lotteries  for  middle  school  and  high  school  P.E. 
teachers  with  the  same  seniority  date,  in  that  he  is  credentialed  and  qualified  to  teach  middle 
school  P.E.,  and  there  were  a  greater  number  of  middle  school  P.E.  teachers  “saved”  as  a 
result  of  the  District  conducting  separate  lotteries.  As  set  forth  in  Findings  33  and  59  above, 
the  District’s  initial  application  of  the  tiebreaker  criteria  by  separate  PKS  was  not  an  abuse  of 
discretion. 

In  addition,  he  believes  he  should  be  able  to  “bump”  one  of  the  two  part-time 
elementary  P.E.  prep  teachers  who  have  less  seniority  than  Mr.  Maddox.  This  contention  has 
merit,  and  is  addressed  in  Finding  60  above. 

  

16

69. 

Jeremy  Hammond 

Mr.  Hammond  (seniority  date  9/6/05)  is  classified  as  a  traveling  music  teacher. 
However,  he  is  assigned  to  only  one  school,  and  has  been  so  assigned  since  his  first  date  of 
paid  service  to  the  District.  He  was  not  aware  of  any  less  senior  music  teacher  with  a  single 
subject  music  credential  who  is  being  retained  by  the  District. 

70. 

Rosario  Ruiz 

Ms.  Ruiz  (seniority  date  9/6/05)  works  as  a  kindergarten  teacher  in  a  regular 
classroom.  She  holds  a  MS  credential  and  a  BCLAD  certification  in  Spanish.  She  teaches 
only  in  English,  but  she  speaks  Spanish  to  many  of  her  students  who  are  English  language 
learners.  Her  position  does  not  require  a  BCLAD  certification.  Therefore,  Ms.  Ruiz  was  not 
entitled  to  be  “skipped”  under  Resolution  #2507. 

Ms.  Ruiz  disagrees  with  the  manner  in  which  the  district  “skipped”  junior  teachers 

who  hold  a  BCLAD  which  is  necessary  for  their  job  assignment.  She  believes  the  most 
senior  teachers  holding  BCLAD  certifications  should  be  retained  by  the  District. 

Ms.  Lofton  (seniority  date  9/7/04)  holds  a  multiple  subject  credential.  She  was  one  of 

the  elementary  teachers  to  whom  the  tiebreaker  criteria  was  applied,  and  she  was  “bumped” 
by  amore  senior  teacher.  Ms.  Lofton  objected  to  the  District’s  tiebreaker  criteria,  because  it 
does  not  take  into  account  her  extra-curricular  activities  for  the  school,  or  additional 
classwork  she  has  completed,  or  her  status  as  a  master  teacher. 

71. 

Louise  Lofton 

72. 

Renae  Hering 

Ms.  Hering  (seniority  date  9/5/06)  holds  a  single  subject  P.E.  credential.  Prior  to  the 

first  day  of  school,  on  August  30  and  31,  2006,  Ms.  Hering  attended  training  (4.0  hours  each 
day)  in  the  following  subjects:  “Department  Articulation  —  Access  to  Standards,”  and 
“Climate/Instruction/Management  Inservice.”  Ms.  Hering  received a  letter  from  the 
principal  of  Einstein  Middle  School,  to  which  she  was  assigned,  dated  August  9,  2006, 
informing  her  of  available  workshops  being  held  within  the  District  in  August  of  2006,  and 
encouraging  her  to  attend.  Ms.  Hering  was  not  paid  for  this  service,  but  instead  received  18 
hours  of  professional  development  credit.  She  has  recently  been  informed  by  the  Human 
Resources  Department  that  she  could  be  paid  for  this  service.  Even  if  she  were  to  be  paid, 
this  service  was  not  “mandatory,”  or  otherwise  required  as  a  condition  of  her  employment, 
and  would  not  result  in  a  change  in  her  seniority  date  from  September  5,  2006  to  August  30, 
2006. 

Ms.  Hering  also  objected  to  the  District’s  tiebreaking  criteria,  in  that  it  did  not  give 
“points”  for  possession  of  a  clear  credential.  She  felt  an  employee  with  a  clear  credential 

  

17

  

should  be  given  preference  over  employees  with  intern  credentials,  for  purposes  of 
application  of  the  tiebreaking  criteria. 

73. 

Terresa  Guerin 

Ms.  Guerin  (seniority  date  9/7/04)  holds  a  MS  credential  and  teaches  grades  4-6  ina 

self-contained  classroom  at  Success  Academy  Community  Day  School.  She  worked  as  a 
long-term  substitute  for  the  District  from  February  to  June  2003,  and  from  February  to  June 
2004.  She  did  not  work  more  than  75  percent  of  the  days  in  the  2003-04  school  year  to  allow 
her  to  obtain  an  additional  year  of  seniority  with  the  District. 

Ms.  Wehner  (seniority  date  9/7/04)  holds  a  MS  credential,  and  received  a  notice  of 

layoff.  She  objects  to  the  District’s  tiebreaker  criteria  because  it  awards  1/2  point  for  a 
master’s  degree,  but  no  points  for  additional  education.  Ms.  Wehner  has  103.5  units  over  her 
B.A.  degree,  in  subjects  which  she  believes  benefit  her  students  more  than  the  courses  she 
would  have  needed  for  a  master’s  degree. 

74. 

Oriana  Wehner 

75. 

Marcel  Noffal 

Mr.  Noffal  signed  an  Employee  Information  Verification  Statement  on  February  8, 

2008,  certifying  that  his  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006  was  true  and  correct.  The 
District  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  certification  when  the  preliminary  notices  were  sent 
(Findings  23-26). 

Mr.  Noffal  (seniority  date  9/5/06)  holds  a  single  subject  P.E.  credential,  and  teaches 
high  school  P.E  at  Arthur  A.  Benjamin  Health  Professions  High  School.  Due  to  the  unique 
curriculum  at  the  school,  Mr.  Noffal  received  special  training  on  the  integrated  healthcare 
curriculum  on  August  21-23,  2006.  He  testified  that  he  was  not  paid  for  this  training  through 
the  District.  He  then  participated  in  Freshman  Induction  and  other  District  activities  during 
the  week  of  August  28-31,  2006,  for  which  he  was  paid  by  the  District.  As  a  new  teacher,  he 
was  told  that  “you  need  to  work  these  two  weeks.”  He  did  not  question  whether  his 
participation  was  mandatory  or  voluntary,  and  assumed  that  it  was  required,  in  that  all  of  the 
other  teachers  were  present. 

   

7  If  the  District  were  to  determine  that  his  work  during  the  week  of  August  28-31,  2006  was  paid  service  in  a 
probationary  position,  it  would  change  his  seniority  date  with  the  District  to  August  28,  2006.  As  such,  he  would 
have  greater  seniority  than  high  school  P.E.  teacher  William  Maddox,  who  was  retained  by  the  District  for  .6  FTE, 
and  middle  school  P.E.  teachers  Preston  Jackson,  Jesse  Hernandez,  Michel  Karas,  Chance  Peterson,  and  Aprille 
Cochrane-Jenkins,  all  of  whom  have  seniority  dates  of  September  5,  2006,  and  did  not  receive  notices  of  layoff. 

If  there  is  an  error  in  Mr.  Noffal’s  seniority  date,  the  District  is  obligated  to  correct  it, 

but  not  as  part  of  these  proceedings.” 

18 

 

76. 

Beth  Conklin 

Ms.  Conklin  (seniority  date  9/6/05)  holds  a  MS  credential.  She  began  employment  as 

a  classified  employee  with  the  district  in  1994,  and  worked  as  an  instructional  aide  from  at 
least  1999  to  2005.  Ms.  Conklin  also  taught  summer  school  from  June  2005  to  September  3, 
2005  at  Shriner’s  Hospital,  in  a  program  that  is  part  of  a  contract  between  the  hospital  and 
the  District.  Ms.  Conklin  asserts  that  her  seniority  date  should  reflect  her  summer  school 
teaching  assignment.  There  is  insufficient  evidence  in  the  record  to  determine  whether  Ms. 
Conklin’s  seniority  date  should  be  changed. 

Ms.  Conklin  signed  an  Employee  Information  Verification  Statement  on  January  8, 

2008,  certifying  that  her  seniority  date  of  September  6,  2005  was  true  and  correct.  The 
District  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  certification  when  the  preliminary  notices  were  sent 
(Findings  23-26). 

If  there  is  an  error  in  Ms.  Conklin’s  seniority  date,  the  District  is  obligated  to  correct 

it,  but  not  as  part  of  these  proceedings.  In  any  event,  it  would  not  affect  her  status  as  a 
certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff. 

77. 

Debra  Sanchez 

Ms.  Sanchez  (seniority  date  9/5/06)  has  an  MS  credential.  She  does  not  hold  any 

credentials  in  special  education.  From  February  2000  until  November  2004,  she  worked  as 
an  instructional  aide  and/or  assistant  in  special  education  classrooms  at  the  District.  She  was 
employed  by  the  District  from  February  to  June  2005  as  long-term  substitute  replacing  a 
teacher  who  died.  From  September  26,  2005  to  the  end  of  the  2005-06  school  year,  Ms. 
Sanchez  was  employed  by  the  District  as  a  long-term  substitute  teacher  at  Hiram  Johnson 
High  School.  She  replaced  a  teacher  who  resigned  from  employment  with  the  District.  Her 
assignment  was  to  prepare  learning  disabled  students  to  take  the  California  High  School  Exit 
Examination  (CAHSEE).  The  Assistant  Principal  at  Hiram  Johnson  High  School  who  hired 
Ms.  Sanchez  to  fill  the  long-term  substitute  special  education  assignment  knew  she  only 
possessed  an  MS  credential.  The  evidence  did  not  establish  that  she  applied  for  an 
emergency  credential  or  permit  to  teach  special  education. 

Ms.  Sanchez  signed  an  Employee  Information  Verification  Statement  on  January  11, 
2008,  certifying  that  her  seniority  date  of  September  5,  2006,  and  her  status  as  a  second  year 
probationary  employee  were  true  and  correct.  The  District  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the 
certification  when  the  preliminary  notices  were  sent  (Findings  23-26). 

If  there  is  an  error  in  Ms.  Sanchez’s  seniority  date,  the  District  is  obligated  to  correct 

it,  but  not  as  part  of  these  proceedings.  In  any  event,  it  would  not  affect  her  status  as  a 
certificated  employee  slated  for  layoff. 

78. 

Except  as  specifically  addressed  above,  the  arguments  of  the  individual 

respondents  were  considered  but  were  not  persuasive. 

19 

  

  

  

Additional  Arguments  Raised  in  Association’s  Post-Hearing  Brief 

A. 

Failure  of  District  to  Meet  Its  Burden  of  Proof  as  to  FTE  and  HQ  Data 

79. 

The  Association  contended  that  the  District  did  not,  in  most  cases,  provide 
“direct  evidence  of  the  FTE  status  of  Respondents,...and  no  direct  evidence  as  to  in  what 
subject  areas  employees  were  deemed  highly  qualified  (‘HQ’)  pursuant  to  the  requirements 
of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  ((NCLB’).”  The  Association  referred  to  the  District’s  tie- 
breaking  spreadsheets  and  “bumping  chart”  as  “demonstrative  evidence”  which  it 
characterized  as  hearsay.  The  Association’s  contention  is  without  merit.  The  testimony  of 
District  personnel  (analysts,  personnel  technicians,  administrators,  and  credential  specialist) 
constituted  direct  evidence.  To  the  extent  that  documentary  evidence  is  “hearsay,”  it 
supplements  and  explains  the  testimony  of  District  witnesses,  and  is  admissible  under 
Government  Code  section  11513,  subdivision  (d).* 

80. 

To  the  extent  that  the  Association  raised  specific  challenges  to  District  actions, 

the  evidence  was  evaluated  on  a  case-by-case  basis. 

81. 

|  The  Association  contended  that  respondents  were  prejudiced  by  the  District’s 

82. 

The  Association  further  contended  that  the  District  failed  to  give  notice  to 

failure  to  produce  information  and  evidence  about  the  HQ  and  part-time  FTE  status  of 
District  employees  prior  to  the  hearing,  so  that  the  Association  could  “confirm  that  the 
District  had  correctly  identified  individuals  for  layoff  rather  than  reassignment.”  This 
contention  is  not  persuasive.  District  personnel  testified  that,  after  elementary  teachers  with 
MS  credentials  and  supplemental  authorizations  were  identified  for  possible  layoff,  their 
compliance  with  NCLB  and  HQ  status  was  considered  in  determining  if  any  teacher  could  be 
retained.  The  Association,  in  its  Exhibit  R,  identified  respondents  with  supplemental 
authorizations.  The  Association  could  have  requested  additional  information  about  the  HQ 
status  of  specific  respondents  at  hearing,  but  did  not  do  so. 

teachers  that  HQ  status  would  be  a  determining  factor  for  layoff  purposes,  and  that  their  right 
to  reassignment  would  be  conditioned  on  their  prior  submission  of  documents  to  verify  HQ 
status  under  supplemental  authorizations  and/or  multiple  credentials.  The  Association 
argued  that  this  failure  constituted  a  denial  of  due  process,  because  it  deprived  them  of  the 
opportunity  to  establish  NCLB  compliance  prior  to  issuance  of  preliminary  notices  of  layoff. 
This  contention  is  without  merit.”  Teachers  have  an  obligation  to  inform  the  District  of 

   

§  Government  Code  section  11513,  subdivision  (d)  states:  “(d)  Hearsay  evidence  may  be  used  for  the  purpose  of 
supplementing  or  explaining  other  evidence  but  over  timely  objection  shall  not  be  sufficient  in  itself  to  support  a 
finding  unless  it  would  be  admissible  over  objection  in  civil  actions.  An  objection  is  timely  if  made  before 
submission  of  the  case  or  on  reconsideration.” 
°  In  its  Post-Hearing  Brief,  the  Association  asked  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  to  “take  judicial  notice  of  an  earlier 
due  process  notice  issue  in  a  layoff  proceeding  conducted  by  this  School  District,  as  reported  in  the  Proposed 
Decision  issued  in  the  2004  layoff  hearing...”  The  Association  attached  the  Proposed  Decision  (PD)  of  ALJ  M. 
Amanda  Behe  to  the  Post-Hearing  Brief.,  but  did  not  cite  a  particular  finding  or  legal  conclusion  in  support  of  its 
argument.  In  fact  ALJ  Behe’s  PD  does  not  support  the  Association’s  position.  In  Legal  Conclusion  5,  ALJ  Behe 

20 

matters  such  as  credentials  and  supplemental  authorizations  held,  and  additional  education 
and/or  degrees  obtained.  Indeed,  these  matters  may  have  an  effect  on  the  pay  scale  to  which 
teachers  are  assigned.  Likewise,  teachers  must  establish  that  they  are  NCLB-compliant  for 
the  subjects  in  which  they  are  teaching  or  for  which  they  claim  to  be  qualified  to  teach.  It  is 
the  District’s  obligation  to  assure  that  teachers  are  assigned  to  teach  subjects  or  classes  in 
which  they  are  highly  qualified. 

B. 

Resolution  #2507  did  not  Authorize  the  “skipping”  of  full-time  Junior 
Employees  and  Layoff  of  Part-Time  Senior  Employees 

83. 

The  Association  attempted  to  characterize  the  District’s  decision  to  lay  off 

part-time  employee  Angela  Cleavenger-Artz  while  retaining  full-time  junior  employees  with 
MS  credentials,  and  to  retain  part-time  employees  Robert  Lobese,  Nadine  Nouchi,  and  Merri 
Sue  Brown,  while  laying  off  more  senior  full-time  employees,  as  unauthorized  “skipping”  of 
junior  employees.  However,  the  issues  pertaining  to  these  employees  are  more  appropriately 
considered  in  the  context  of  “partial  bumping,”  and  the  Association’s  assertions  to  the 
contrary  are  not  persuasive. 

Welfare  of  the  District  and  Its  Students 

84. 

Other  than  that  set  forth  particularly  above,  the  Associate  Superintendent’s 

analysts  correctly  identified  the  certificated  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  that  the  Board  directed  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  No  junior  certificated  employee 
is  scheduled  to  be  retained  to  perform  services  which  a  more  senior  employee  is  certificated 
and  competent  to  render,  unless  skipped,  as  set  forth  above. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  sections  44949  and 
44955  were  met. 

2. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”!°  The  burden  is  on  the  District  to  demonstrate  that  the 
reduction  or  elimination  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  is  reasonable  and  that  the  District 
carefully  considered  its  needs  before  laying  off  any  certificated  employee.’ 

  

stated:  “Respondents  argue  that  the  District  should  have  notified  respondents  to  obtain  emergency  CLAD  or 
equivalent  credentials  to  avoid  layoff.  The  argument  is  without  merit...” 
'°  Rutherford  v.  Board of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179. 
"  Campbell  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Abbott  (1978)  76  Cal.App.  3d  796,  807-808 

  

21

    

  

3. 

Legal  cause  exists  to  reduce  or  eliminate  189.4  FTE  of  particular  kinds  of 

services  offered  by  the  District  as  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  Factual  Findings.  Cause  for  the 
reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  District's  schools  and 
pupils,  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

4, 

Legal  cause  also  exists  to  accordingly  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 

employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  exists  to  retain  two  teachers  who  are  currently  occupying  positions  in  which 
BCLAD  credentials  are  required,  as  set  forth  in  Resolution  #2507,  regardless  of  seniority, 
and  as  set  forth  in  Findings  6,  28,  and  29. 

Hearing  Issues 

5. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  14,  the  preliminary  notices  of  layoff  issued  to  Joan 

Cochrane,  Jennifer  Walker,  Jocelyn  Stewart,  Tracy  Elliott,  Irene  Moore,  Kari  Zimny,  Kelly 
Graves,  Angela  Lopez,  Rachel  Webb,  Olivia  Alvarado,  and  Carol  Lambert,  are  rescinded, 
and  the  above-named  teachers  shall  be  retained  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  44,  the  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  issued  to  Bertha 

Udell  shall  be  rescinded,  and  she  shall  be  retained  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  46,  the  District  shall  rescind  the  preliminary  notices  of 

layoff  of  the  three  most  senior  teachers  with  MS  credentials  currently  slated  for  layoff.  If 
there  are  more  than  three  MS-credentialed  respondents  with  the  same  seniority  date,  the 
District  shall  apply  the  tiebreaker  criteria  to  determine  which  respondents  shall  be  retained 
for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

8. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  52  the  District  shall  rescind  the  preliminary  notice  of 

layoff  of  the  most  senior  music  teacher  currently  slated  for  layoff  for  .5  FTE,  and  the  teacher 
so  identified  shall  be  retained  for  .5  FTE  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

9. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  60,  the  District  shall  rescind  the  preliminary  notice  of 

layoff  issued  to  William  Maddox  for  an  additional  .2  FTE,  and  he  shall  be  retained  by  the 
District  for  a  total  of  .8  FTE  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

10.  _  As  set  forth  in  Finding  61,  the  District  shall  apply  its  tiebreaker  criteria  to 

employees  Thomas  Crocker,  Renae  Hering,  Marcel  Noffal,  and  Nathan  Oltmanns,  and  shall 
rescind  .6  FTE  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  and  .4  FTE  preliminary  notice  of  layoff  to  the 
two  most  senior  employees  identified  by  the  tiebreaker,  who  shall  be  retained  in  .6  FTE  high 
school  P.E.  position,  and  in  .4  FTE  PE  prep  position,  for  the  2008-09  school  year. 

11. 

Asset  forth  in  Finding  62,  Whitney  Cole  is  classified  as  a  permanent 

employee  of  the  District. 

22 

 

  

12. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  63,  Sarah  Wagner’s  correct  seniority  date  is  January 

24,  2005,  and  she  is  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District. 

13. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  64,  Sarah  Garrett’s  correct  seniority  date  is  September 

5,  2006,  and  she  is  classified  as  a  second  year  probationary  employee  of  the  District. 

14. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  65,  Krystyna  Bayley’s  correct  seniority  date  is 

September  6,  2005,  and  she  is  classified  as  a  permanent  employee  of  the  District. 

15. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  66,  April  Feliciano’s  correct  seniority  date  is  January  8, 

2007. 

16. 
September  5,  2006. 

As  set  forth  in  Finding  67,  Jennifer  Havey’s  correct  seniority  date  is 

17. 

Other  than  the  foregoing,  no  employee  with  less  seniority  than  any  respondent 

is  being  retained  to  render  a  service  which  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render.  Except  as  set  forth  above,  the  Board  may  give  the  remaining  respondents  whose 
preliminary  notices  have  not  been  rescinded  final  notice  before  May  15,  2008,  that  their 
services  will  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year,  2008-09. 

ORDER 

The  District  shall  comply  with  Legal  Conclusions  5  through  16. 

1. 

2. 

Except  as  noted  above,  notices  shall  be  given  to  respondents  identified  in 

attached  Exhibit  A  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year 
because  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Notice  shall  be 
given  to  respondents  in  inverse  order  of  seniority. 

3. 

All  other  contentions  and  claims  not  specifically  mentioned  were  considered 

and  are  DENIED. 

DATED:  May  6,  2008 

23  

-ATHERINE  B.  F 

K 

Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

EXHIBIT  A 

RESPONDENTS 

Acton,  Chris 
Alvarado,  Olivia 
Arnott,  Michele 
Bachman-Tavianini,  Theresa  A. 
Baron,  Christy 
Bayley,  Krystyna 
Beal,  Martin 
Boakeye-Donkor,  Toneiya 
Boettner,  Julie  George 
Brown,  Amy 
Brown,  Anne  L. 
Brown,  James  E. 
Bruce,  Michael  J. 
Budge,  Peter 
Bujalski,  Lisa 
Cabanlit,  Ma.  Lanie 
Carr,  Victoria 
Cerezo,  Diana  L. 
Choy,  David 
Cleavenger-Artz,  E.  Angela 
Cole,  Whitney 
Conklin,  Beth  W. 
Conner,  Brandie 
Crocker,  Thomas  D. 
Crumbley,  Jane 
Davis,  Brandy 
Feliciano,  Alice 
Feliciano,  April 
Fernald,  Ryan 
Fernandez,  Chelsey 
Fine,  Cassandra 
Flores,  Mia  M. 
Galvan,  Katrina 
Garrett,  Sarah 
Goodwin,  Michelle  C. 
Gordon,  Julie  Ann 
Graves,  Kelly 
Guerin,  Terresa 
Hammond,  Jeremy 

Hanafee,  Jennifer 
Harms,  Kelly  J. 
Havey,  Jennifer 
Hering,  Renea  L. 
Herzog  Kruse,  Joy  S. 
Hunt,  Pamela 
Jackson,  Adriane 
Jarvis,  Lisa 
Johnston,  Ryan 
Jones,  Art 
Jones,  Ginger  J. 
Kingston,  Kesha 
Krier,  Miles 
Kuroda,  Stephanie 
Lam,  Christina  Li-Ling 
Lamb,  Ron 
Lambert,  Carol 
Lawrence  Jr.,  David 
Lee,  Mary 
Lemos,  Tiffany 
Lofton,  Kristi 
Lofton,  Louise 
Lopez,  Angela 
Lopez,  Nancy 
Luong,  Amie 
Maddox,  William  S. 
Mahoney,  Meghan 
Mar,  Kimberly 
Marshall,  Audrey 
Martinez,  Juan 
Mashinini-Nigl,  Siphiwe 
Matolo,  Hazel 
McFall,  Tarik 
Moore,  Irene  E. 
Moua,  Houa 
Moua,  Mai  P. 
Moua,  Si 
Murphy,  Brendon 
Ngo,  Lily

  

Nguyen,  Kim 
Nguyen,  Phuong 
Nishimura,  Michelle 
Noffal,  Marcel 
Ochoa,  Claudia 
Oltmanns,  Nathan 
Pedley,  Sandra 
Peltz  Planchon,  Tiffany 
Perez,  Rafael 
Phelps,  Boyd 
Phillips,  Katherine,  T. 
Power,  Deborah  A. 
Pullano,  Jacquelyn 
Reinke,  Jennie 
Richey,  Randall 
Roldan,  Abigail 
Romanini-Heisler,  Judi 
Rouse,  Jennifer  A. 
Ruiz,  Rosario  G. 
Ryan,  Kelly  J. 
Saechin,  Nai 
Sakakihara,  Robyn. 
Sanchez,  Debra 
Schlager,  Matthew 
Schon,  Julie 
Shankar,  Preeti 
Smith,  Diana 
Solis,  Sylvia  A. 

  

Stinson,  Lisa  M. 
Tamanaha,  Fumi 
Thao,  Shoua 
Udell,  Bertha  R. 
VanderKlay,  Beth 
Vang,  Jade 
Vang,  Pang 
Vang-Her,  Yee 
Vecchio,  Dana 
Victa,  Joycelyn 
Villegas,  Laura 
Wagner,  Sarah 
Walker,  Bonita  R. 
Webb,  Rachel 
Wehner,  Oriana 
Wells-Artman,  Christie 
Whaley,  Margo 
White  Hibbs,  Heather 
White,  Rhiannon 
Willover,  Valerie  T. 
Wilson,  Cinnamon 
Yaangh,  Stacy 
Yang,  Chong 
Yang,  Julia 
Yip  Tek,  Chanh 
Younglove,  Laura 

Zimny,  Kari  Lyn  

