BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
BANNING  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

RESPONDENTS  LISTED  ON 
EXHIBIT  A, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008020563 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Greer  D.  Knopf,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Banning,  California,  on  April  16,  2008. 

Mark  W.  Thompson,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &Romo,  attorneys  at  law, 

represented  complainant  Banning  Unified  School  District. 

Carlos  Perez,  attorney  at  law,  represented  all  29  respondents  present  at  the  hearing  as 
well  as  two  respondents,  Linda  Arizmendi  and  Jeffery  Martinez  who  were  not  present  at  the 
hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  16,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Victor  Palmer,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  (the 
Assistant  Superintendent)  of  the  Banning  Unified  School  District,  made  and  filed  the 
accusations  dated  March  13,  2008  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Assistant  Superintendent, 
Human  Resources,  Banning  Unified  School  District.  The  accusations  were  filed  against  the 
respondents  identified  in  Attachment  A  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein. 

2. 

The  respondents  are  all  certificated  employees  of  the  Banning  Unified  School 

District  (the  District). 

3. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  made  a  motion  to  dismiss  Scott  Otis,  Manuel 

Jarvis,  and  Monica  Mendyk  as  respondents  from  the  accusation  and  that  motion  was  granted.

  

  

4, 

On  March  10,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955,  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  notified  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  (the 
Board)  in  writing  of  his  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  that  their 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated  the 
reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The  Superintendent  recommended  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds of services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

5. 

On  March  12,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-22  determining 
that  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the  current  school  year. 
The  Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must  be  reduced  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  were  the  following  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

Coordinator  of  Student  Assistance  Program 

1  FTE 

Curriculum  Coaches 

Middle  School  Counselors 

Deans 

K-6  Classroom  Teachers 

Middle  School  Core  Teachers 

Secondary  English  Teachers 

Secondary  Social  Science  Teachers 

Secondary  Physical  Education  Teacher 

Resource  Specialist 

3  FTE 

1  FTE 

0  FTE 

10  FTE 

4  FTE 

2  FTE 

2  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

The  reductions  adopted  by  the  Board’s  resolution  totaled  25  FTE  positions. 

6. 

The  Board  further  determined  in  Resolution  No.  07-08-22  that  due  to  the  fact 

that  the  District  has  a  significant  population  of  English  language  learners  with  special 
educational  needs,  it  would  be  necessary  to  retain  certificated  employees  who  possess  special 
training  and  competency  to  teach  English  learner  (EL)  students  that  other  certificated 
employees  with  more  seniority  might  not  possess. 

7. 

The  Board  directed  the  Superintendent,  or  his  designee,  to  determine  which 
employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  the 
reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services..  The  Board  further  directed  the  Superintendent 

 

to  send  the  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated  employees  of  the  District  who  would  be  laid 
off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction of  these  particular  kinds  of  services. 

8. 

Subsequent  to  the  action  the  Board  took  on  March  12,  2008  to  reduce  services 
by  25  FTE  positions,  the  District  continued  to  evaluate  personnel  needs  in  the  District.  Since 
the  Board’s  action,  after  taking  into  consideration  upcoming  positively  assured  attrition, 
resignations,  and  retirements,  the  District  continues  to  believe  it  can  meet  its  fiscal  needs  by 
reducing  services  by  a  total  of  25  FTE  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  To 
accomplish  this  reduction  of  services,  the  District  began  by  giving  notices  of  termination  to 
the  36  certificated  employees  listed  in  Attachment  A,  but  it  now  has  determined  it  can 
accomplish  the  necessary  reductions  by  giving  final  notices  of  layoff  to  24  of  the  certificated 
employees  listed  in  Attachment  B  named  as  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

9. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  a  written  notice  on 

each  of  the  respondents  herein  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  had  recommended  not 
to  re-employ  them  in  the  upcoming  2008-2009  school  year.  The  written  notice  notified 
respondents  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming  2008-2009 
school  year.  The  written  notice  to  respondents  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation. 
The  recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not  related  to 
their  competency  as  teachers. 

10. 

Some  certificated  employees  given  written  notice  that  they  would  not  be  re- 

11. 

Subsequently,  the  District  filed  and  then  timely  served  the  Accusation  herein, 
a  Notice  to  Respondent,  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and  relevant  Education  Code  and 
Government  Code  sections,  upon  each  of  the  remaining  respondents  herein  who  had  timely 
requested  a  hearing  in  this  matter.  Each  of  these  respondents  herein  filed  a  timely  Notice  of 
Defense.  All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

employed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  did  not  file  a  Request  for  Hearing.  Certificated 
employees  Jeannette  Anderson,  Chris  Degonia,  Isaac  Nelson,  and  Ezekiel  Stear  did  not 
submit  a  Request  for  a  Hearing  after  receiving  the  written  notice  that  they  would  not  be  re- 
employed  in  the  next  school  year.  The  District  declined  to  waive  the  requirement  that  a 
noticed  employee  timely  file  a  Request  for  Hearing.  However,  each  of  the  remaining 
respondents  herein  timely  filed  a  written  Request  for  Hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause 
for  not  reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

    

kinds  of  services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code 
section  44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  and  reasonable  exercise  of 
its  discretion.  The  Board’s  decision  to  make  these  cuts  was  the  result  of  consideration  of  the 
necessary  cuts  in  the  District’s  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Board’s  action  to 
reduce  services  is  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion  to  address  the  need  for  budget  cuts  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year.

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  07-08-22  are  “particular 

12. 

13. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely 

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  recognizes  the  high  level  of 
dedication  and  service  these  respondents  have  given  to  the  District,  but  it  faces  difficult 
financial  times  due  to  proposed  state  budget  cuts.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees 
of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

14. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and 
requests  for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be 
delivered  to  its  employees. 

15. 

Several  respondents  herein  share  the  same  first  hired  date.  Between  these 

employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  District  on  the  same  date,  the  District 
determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the 
students.  On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07-08-23  that  established 
specific  criteria  to  be  used  to  resolve  ties  in  seniority  between  certificated  employees.  The 
tie-breaking  criteria  were  applied  uniformly  and  objectively  in  order  to  determine  the  order 
of  termination  for  any  of  the  employees  with  a  shared  seniority  date.  The  criteria  were  fairly 
applied  to  rank  those  employees  hired  on  the  same  date  and  to  determine  who  would  be 
given  notice  that  their  services  would  no  longer  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

16. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  that  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

1. 

2. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Banning 
Unified  School  District  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils 
thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the  accusations 
herein.  Therefore,  cause  exists  for  the  Board  to  give  the  remaining  respondents  notice  before 
May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 

  
school  year.  

  

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  respondents  herein  are  sustained  and  notice  shall  be  given 
to  the  24  respondents  listed  in  Attachment  B  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will  not 
be  required  in  the  next  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  services  as 
indicated. 

DATED: 

LeJA.  faopap  —— 

GREER  D.  KNOPF 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

ATTACHMENT  A 

BANNING  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT--RESPONDENTS  LISTED  IN  ACCUSATION 

Joseph  Almaraz 
Jeannette  Anderson 
Shara  Andrade 
Linda  Arizmendi 
Ligaya  Beasley 
Jacquelyn  Bridges 
Colette  Burgess 
Maria  Campos 
Eloy  Castro 
Chris  Degonia 
Stephanie  Dodd 
Rayleen  Dyke 
John  Evinger 
Jeannine  Gibbs 
Erica  Gore 
Guena  Gray 
Alla  Haupin 
Manuel  Jarvis 
Richard  Johnson 
Kathryn  Kaiser 
Ann  King 
Kyle  Kloncz 
April  Makin 
Alberto  Maldonado 
Jeffrey  Martinez 
Nicole  Mendyk 
Isaac  Nelson 
Jami  Norman 
Michael  ONeill 
Scott  Otis 
Ezekiel  Stear 
Ronnie  Stevens 
Sarah  Teran 
Melissa  Theriault 
Dennis  To 
Maria  Vilte 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

    

1 
NOTICE  OF  HEARING 

 

  

  

e@ 

ATTACHMENT  B 

BANNING  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT--FINAL  LAYOFF  LIST 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 

Almaraz 
Andrade 
Beasley 
Bridges 
Campos 
De  Goina 
Dodd 
Evinger 
Gore 
Haupin 
Johnson 
Kaiser 
King 
Kloncz 
Makin 
Martinez 
Mendyk 
Nelson 
Norman 
 O’Neill 
Stevens 
Teran 
‘Theriault 
To 

Joseph 
Shara 
Ligaya 
Jacquelyn 
Maria 
Chris 
Stephanie 
John 
Erica 
Alla 
Richard 
Kathryn 
Ann 
Kyle 
April 
Jeffrey 
Monica  Nicole 
Isaac 
Jami 
Michael 
Ronnie 
Sarah 
Meslissa 
Dennis 

e 

 

    

005005.00022/92613v1 

