BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
VALLEY  CENTER-PAUMA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

OAH  No.  2008030666 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 
Maria  Cordero,  Jascha  Dolan,  Satya  Fleck, 
Michelle  Inigo,  Andres  Monreal,  Christy 
Harkins  (Newburg),  Violeta  Rios,  Eva  Rosa, 
Jennifer  Rubio,  Jaime  Shuford,  and  Amanda 
Walford,  Each  of  Whom  Received  a 
Preliminary  Layoff  Notice  for  the  2008-2009 
School  Year  and  Requested  a  Hearing, 

Respondents. 

Individuals  Who  Received  a  Preliminary 
Layoff  Notice  for  the  2008-2009  School 
Year  But  Did  Not  Request  a  Hearing: 

Karla  Dempsey,  Denise  McAndrews,  and 
Leslie  Patronik. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Abler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Valley  Center,  California,  on  April  17,  2008. 

Clifford  D.  Weiler,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Valley  Center-Pauma  Unified 

School  District. 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Maria  Cordero,  Jascha 
Dolan,  Satya  Fleck,  Michelle  Inigo,  Andres  Monreal,  Christy  Harkins  (Newburg),  Violeta 
Rios,  Eva  Rosa,  Jennifer  Rubio,  Jaime  Shuford,  and  Amanda  Walford,  each  of  whom 
received  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  requested  a  hearing. 

  

 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  Karla  Dempsey,  Denise  McAndrews,  or 
Leslie  Patronik,  each  of  whom  received a  preliminary  layoff  notice  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year,  but  did  not  request  and  waived  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  17,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Valley  Center-Pauma  Unified  School  District 

1. 

The  Valley  Center-Pauma  Unified  School  District  (the  District)  is  located  in 

Valley  Center,  California.  The  District  was  formed  in  July  2000  when  the  Valley  Center 
Union  Elementary  School  District  unified  with  the  Pauma  Elementary  School  District  and 
with  Valley  Center  High  School  (previously  a  part  of  the  Escondido  Union  High  School 
District).  The  District  occupies  approximately  300  square  miles  in  North  San  Diego  County 
upon  hilly  topography  filled  with  citrus  and  avocado  groves.  The  District  serves  the 
educational  needs  of  kindergarten  through  twelfth  grade  students.  The  community  supports 
many  active  civic  and  youth  organizations,  and  the  schools  enjoy  a  high  level  of  community 
involvement. 

The  District  currently  maintains  and  operates  Valley  Center  High  School  (grades  9- 

12),  Oak  Glen  High  School  (grades  10-12),  an  adult  education  program,  an  independent 
study  program  (grades  kindergarten-12),  Valley  Center  Middle  School  (grades  6-8),  Pauma 
School  (grades  kindergarten-8),  Palomar  Mountain  School  (kindergargen-8),  Valley  Center 
Elementary  Upper  School  (grades  5-6),  Valley  Center  Elementary  Lower  School  (grades  2- 
4),  Lilac  School  (grades  kindergarten-6),  and  Valley  Center  Primary  (grades  kindergarten-2). 

The  District  employs  approximately  250  certificated  employees,  most  of  whom  are 

teachers. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  a  five  member  Board  of  Trustees  (the  Board),  each 

member  being  an  elected  official.  The  Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Lou  Obermeyer, 
EdD,  Superintendent  of  Schools.  Peggy  Johnson  is  the  District’s  Director  of  Personnel. 
Pamela  Moe  is  the  District’s  Business  Manager. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  -  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition of local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  the 
passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of 
California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  necessary  funding. 

   

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 
state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  the  school 

  

  

 

district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet if  the  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops. 

A  school  board’s  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some  teachers, 

administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff  notices, 
warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  certificated 
employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential,  special 
training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services  which  more 
senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District's  Response 

4, 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  budget  deficit 
and  its  fiscal  impact.  As  a result  of  the  budget  crisis,  the  District  projected  a  budget  deficit  of 
about  $1.82  million  for  the  2007-2008  school  year,  about  $0.83  million  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  and  about  $0.83  million  for  the  2009-2010  school  year. 

The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  trim  its  budget.  The  operation  of  two 

schools  ~  Palomar  School  and  Valley  Center  Upper  Elementary  School  — had  to  be 
terminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  the  foreseeable  future.  In  addition,  the  District 
looked  into  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  Johnson  and  Moe 
played  a  key  role  in  reviewing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  the  District  was  providing. 

5. 

The  District’s  administrative  staff  prepared  a  recommendation  that  was  given  to 
the  Board  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services  to  meet  the 
budgetary  shortfall.  In  accordance  with  this  recommendation,  Resolution  2008-02  was  drafted. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  2008-02,  which  provided: 

VALLEY  CENTER-PAUMA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESOLUTION  REGARDING  COMMENCEMENT  OF  CERTIFICATED  LAYOFF  AND 
DISCONTINUANCES  AND  REDUCTIONS  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES  (AS 

SPECIFIED  HEREIN)  DIRECTION  TO  NOTIFY  AFFECTED  EMPLOYEES  OF 
RECOMMENDATION  OF  LAYOFF;  AND  RELATED  ACTIONS 

Resolution  Number  2008-02

  

WHEREAS,  because  of  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being  insufficient  to 

maintain  current  levels  of  programs  and  services,  including  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services, 
and  it  being  necessary  to  commence  implementing  program  changes  in  a  timely  fashion  within  the 
current  structure  of  the  law,  this  District’s  Governing  Board  determines  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests 
of  the  District  and  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof,  to  commence  certificated  layoff 
proceedings  to  discontinue  and  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  (“PKS”)  as  hereinafter 
enumerated  and  to  reduce  the  corresponding  number  of  certificated  staff  no  later  than  the  beginning 
of  the  2008-2009  school  year  (in  addition  to  the  release  of  temporary  certificated  employees  and/or 
the  expiration  of  their  contracts  without  renewals  or  re-issuances); 

WHEREAS,  this  discontinuance  and  reduction  of  certificated  services  shall  result  in  layoffs 

of  certificated  personnel  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44955  and  44949  which 
provide  a  process  whereby  particular  decisions,  actions  and  notifications  must  be  undertaken 
beginning  no  later  than  March  15  of  each  school  year  regarding  layoffs  of  certificated  personnel  in 
order  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated  staff,  and  this  Board  desires  to  reduce  certificated  staff  as 
permitted  by  law; 

WHEREAS,  this  Governing  Board  desires  to  discontinue  and  reduce  the  particular  kinds  of 

certificated  services  as  listed  in  Exhibit  A,  attached,  and  to  that  extent  of  full  time  equivalents 
(“FTEs”)  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year  (in  addition  to  the  release  of 
temporary  certificated  employees  and/or  the  expiration  of  their  contracts  without  renewals  or 
reissuances); 

WHEREAS,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Governing  Board,  it  will  be  necessary  as  a result  of  the 

discontinuances  and  reductions  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  reflected  in  Exhibit  A  to 
decrease  the  number  of  certificated  permanent  and/or  probationary  employees  by  a  corresponding 
number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions; 

WHEREAS,  in  determining  the  extent  of  staff  FTE  reductions  and  services  to  be 
discontinued  and  reduced,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  assured  and/or  known  attrition 
as  of  this  time  to  the  extent  required  by  law  (including  as  to  the  release  of  temporary  certificated 
employees  and  the  expirations  of  their  contracts),  so  that  the  total  referenced  above  and  in  Exhibit 
A  have  already  accounted  for  such  attrition;  but  for  that  attrition,  this  Board  would  have  found  it 
necessary  to  discontinue  and  reduce  additional  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  and/or  full 
time  equivalents; 

NOW,  THEREFORE  BE  IT  RESOLVED,  DETERMINED  AND  ORDERED  by  this 

Governing  Board,  as  follows: 

1. 

All of the  above  recitals  are  true  and  correct; 

2. 

The  particular  kinds of services  as  listed  in  Exhibit  A  are  to  be  and  will  be 
discontinued  and  reduced  and  otherwise  eliminated  to  the  described  extent  no  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year; 

It 

3. 

is  the  opinion of this  Governing  Board,  in  view of the  discontinuances  and 
is  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of 

reductions  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services,  that  it 
permanent  and/or  probationary  employees  serving  in  positions  requiring  certification  qualifications 
within  this  school  district  at  the  close  of  this  school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time 
equivalent  positions  as  set  forth  within  Exhibit  A; 

  

 

  

@ 

4. 

Subject  to  requirements (if  any)  within  the  Educational  Employment  Relations  Act, 
that  for  purposes  of  “bumping”  (displacement)  rights  and  the  determination  of  “competency”  within 
the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955(b),  to  the  extent  such  might  apply,  “competency” 
shall  be  based  upon  possession  and  current  filing  (no  later  than  March  6,  2008)  of a  preliminary  or 
clear  credential  for  the  subject  matter  into  which  the  employee  would  bump  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year,  highly  qualified  status  within  the  meaning  of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act  and  an 
appropriate  EL  certification; 

5. 

For  purposes  of  seniority  tie-breaking  criteria  within  the  meaning  of  Education 

Code  sections  44955,  subdivision  (b)  (third  paragraph)  and  section  44846  (second  paragraph),  the 
Governing  Board  determines  that  seniority  ties  shall  be  broken  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  listed 
within  Exhibit  B,  said  criteria  being  based  solely  upon  the  needs of  the  District  and  the  students 
thereof; 

The  Superintendent  or  the  Superintendent’s  designee(s)  is(are)  instructed  to  take 

the  steps  necessary  pursuant  to  the  Education  Code  including,  in  part,  sections  44955  and  44949,  to 
implement  the  above  and  to  reduce  the  certificated  staff  as  set  forth  hereinabove; 

The  actions of  this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be  considered  to 

prejudice  the  rights  of  any  certificated  employee  to  whom  notice  will  be  given of  the 
superintendent’s  recommendations,  should  any  employee  request  a  hearing  to  contest  this  matter. 

IN  WITNESS  of  the  adoption  of  the  foregoing  Resolution,  we,  the  members  present  and 

voting  thereof,  have  hereunto  set  our  hands  this  Sth  day  of  March,  2008.  Executed  in  Valley  Center, 
San  Diego  County,  California. 

6. 

7. 

GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
VALLEY  CENTER-PAUMA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

I,  Lou  Obermeyer,  Superintendent  and  Secretary  to  the  Governing  Board of the  Valley 

Center-Pauma  Unified  School  District  of  San  Diego  County,  California,  do  hereby  certify  that  the 
foregoing  is  a  full,  true,  and  correct  copy of  a  Resolution  duly  adopted  by  said  Board  at  a  meeting 
thereof,  the  vote  above  stated,  which  Resolution  is  on  file  and  of  record  in  the  office  of  the 
Superintendent. 

Date: 

3-6 

;  2008 

/Signed  by  Dr.  Obermeyer/ 

Superintendent/Secretary  to  Governing  Board 
Valley  Center-Pauma  Unified  School  District 

6. 

Exhibit  A  provided: 

IDENTIFICATION  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES  (PKSs)  AND 
FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENCIES  (FTEs)  TO  BE  DISCONTINUED  AND  REDUCED  NO  LATER 
THAN  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  ENSUING  SCHOOL  YEAR  (2008-2009)

@ 

/Signed  by  all  Board  Members/ 

  

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Full  time  Equivalents 

     

Discontinuance  or 
Reduction 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Counseling  services  (grades  9-12) 
Counseling  services  (grades  7-8) 
Classroom  teaching  services  (grades 
kindergarten  through  6) 
Middle  school  math  teaching 
services  -math  standards  grade  7 
Middle  school  math  teaching 
services-  algebra  1  standards 
Middle  school  math  teaching 
services-  algebra  A  support 
High  school  math  teaching  services 
-algebra  A 
High  school  math  teaching  services 
-  geometry 
High  school  math  teaching  services 
-  algebra  1 
High  school  math  teaching  services 
-  applied  math 
High  school  AVID  services 
High  school  Earth  science  teaching 
services 
Coordinator  of  Adult  Education 
Categorically  funded  teaching  services*: 
--  middle  school: 

language  arts  (0.2  FTE) 
social  studies  (0.2  FTE) 
ELD  support  services  (0.2  FTE) 

-  high  school: 

reading  fundamentals  (0.4  FTE) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

reduction 
reduction 
reduction 

reduction 

discontinuance 

discontinuance 

reduction 

reduction 

reduction 

reduction 

reduction 
reduction 

reduction 
discontinuances 

  

: 

TOTAL  FTEs 

11.1 

  

1.0 
1.0 
5.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.4 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 
0.6 

0.5 
1.0 

  

  

*  Inclusion  of  categorically  funded  services  within  this  Resolution  is  not  intended  to 

grant  those  individuals  who  are  impacted  any  rights  greater  than  provided  by  law,  nor  to  nullify 
any  provisions  within  each  impacted  individual’s  employment  contract,  nor  to  supersede  any 
other  action  by  this  Board  to  release  or  otherwise  terminate  the  services  of  any  impacted 
individual. 

7. 

Exhibit  B,  the  tie-breaking  criteria,  provided: 

CRITERIA  FOR  BREAKING  SENIORITY  TIES 

Subject  to  requirements  (if  any)  within  the  Educational  Employment  Relations  Act,  this 
Governing  Board  determines,  based  solely  on  the  needs of  this  District  and  the  students  of  this 
District,  that  seniority  ties  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44955,  subdivision  (b) 
(third  paragraph)  and  section  44846,  shall  be  resolved  by  applying  the  following  criteria,  to  be 
applied  in  the  following  order,  one  step  at  a  time.  Such  criteria  shall  be  applied  to  rank  the  order 
of  individuals  for  purposes  of  layoff  and  reemployment,  subject  to  exceptions  allowed  by  law. 

 

  

The  criteria  are  as  follows: 

1. 

2. 

Possession  and  filing  of a BCLAD  authorization; 

*  Possession  and  filing  of a CLAD  authorization  wins  over  possession  and 

filing  of  an  Emergency  CLAD  authorization; 

3. 

Completion  of,  and  filing  of proof  of,  a  Masters  degree; 

4, 

Duration  of  continuous  active  teaching  service  in  this  district  using  a 
preliminary  or  clear  credential,  in  the  current  assignment  from  which  the  individual  is 
being  removed,  displaced  or  “bumped”,  with  the  longest  duration  winning  the  tie; 

5. 

Earliest  date  of  paid  teaching  service  as  certificated  long  term  substitute 
or  temporary  certificated  employee  in  this  district  not  to  include  day-to-day  substitute 
service; 

Total 

years  of  teaching  experience  as  documented  in 

this 

district’s 

Scope  of  clear  or  preliminary  credentials  as  can  be  applied  within  this 
to  which  the  individual  is  highly  qualified 

school  districts  current  curriculum  and  as 
within  the  meaning of the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act, 

8. 

If  a  tie  still  exists,  the  tie  would  be  broken  by  drawing  numbers,  with 
number  one  winning,  then  number  two  winning,  and  continuing  so  forth  numerically. 

official  files; 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Under  Johnson’s  direction,  a  seniority  list  was  prepared.  The  list  contained 
each  employee’s  name,  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  District  (or  its  predecessor),  the 
types  of  credentials  held  by  the  employee,  the  employee’s  current  assignment,  and  the  extent 
to  which  the  employee  occupied  a  full  time  equivalent  position.  The  information  set  forth  in 
the  seniority  list  was  obtained  from  the  San  Diego  County  Department  of  Education  and  the 
District’s  personnel  files. 

9. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  respondents  Maria  Cordero,  Jascha  Dolan, 

Satya  Fleck,  Michelle  Inigo,  Andres  Monreal,  Christy  Harkins  (Newburg),  Violeta  Rios,  Eva 
Rosa,  Jennifer  Rubio,  Jaime  Shuford,  Amanda  Walford,  Karla  Dempsey,  Denise 
McAndrews,  and  Leslie  Patronik  were  District  employees.  Each  respondent  was  served  with 
a  preliminary  layoff  notice  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  advising  that  his  or  her  services 
would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year.  The  notice  advised  each 
respondent  of  the  right  to  request  a  hearing. 

All  respondents,  except  for  Karla  Dempsey,  Denise  McAndrews,  and  Leslie  Patronik, 

requested  a  hearing. 

10. 

On  March  31,  2008,  Johnson,  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  Superintendent’s 

designee,  signed  the  accusation.  Thereafter,  the  accusation  (together  with  other  required 
jurisdictional  documents)  was  served  on  each  certificated  employee  who  requested  a  hearing. 

 

Respondents  Cordero,  Dolan,  Fleck,  Inigo,  Monreal,  Harkins  (Newburg),  Rios,  Rosa, 

Rubio,  Shuford  and  Walford  filed  notices  of  defense. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

11. 

On  April  17,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened. 

Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented.  The  District  withdrew  the  accusations  previously 
filed  and  served  on  Cordero,  Dolan,  Fleck,  Monreal,  Rios  and  Rubio.  There  was  no 
objection.  The  hearing  was  limited  to  the  layoff  notices  issued  to  Inigo,  Harkins  (Newburg), 
Rosa,  Shuford,  and  Walford.  Stipulations  were  recited,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary 
evidence  was  received,  closing  argument  was  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter 
was  submitted. 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

12. 

No  factual  issue  was  raised  to  dispute  the  District’s  contention  that  the  services 

identified  in  Exhibit  A  were  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  or  discontinued.  The 
elimination  of  those  positions  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper 
exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  extent  to  which  these  particular  kinds  of  services  were 
reduced  or  eliminated  was  well  within  the  Board’s  discretion.  Each  certificated  employee 
providing  a  particular  kind  of  service  who  was  the  subject  of  the  layoff  resolution  was  given  a 
preliminary  notice  of  the  reduction  of  this  particular  kind  of  service  in  accordance  with  law. 

Before  issuing  preliminary  layoff  notices,  the  staff  considered  all  known  positive 

attrition  including  resignations,  retirements  and  probationary  non-reelects  in  determining  the 
number  of  layoff  notices  that  needed  to  be  served.  As a  result  of  several  retirements  since 
March  15,  2008,  the  District  was  able  to  maintain  the  employment  of  six  senior  employees 
previously  served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  and  an  accusation. 

No  particular  kinds  of  services  were  lowered  to  levels  less  than  those  levels  mandated 

by  state  or  federal  law. 

The  Seniority  List 

13. 

The  District  assigned  seniority  dates  to  all  credentialed  employees.  All  seniority 

dates  related  to  the  employee’s  first  day  of  paid  service  with  the  District  or  its  predecessor. 

A. 

Christy  Harkins  (Newburg):  Harkins  (Newburg)  had a  seniority  date  of 

August  28,  2006.  She  was  given  notice  that  her  employment  would  not  be  continued  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year.  Harkins  (Newburg)  taught  Geometry  (0.2  FTE),  Algebra  I  (0.6  FTE), 
and  AVID  (0.2  FTE)  full  time  (1.0  FTE)  in  high  school.  Geometry,  Algebra,  and  AVID  were 
some  of  the  services  the  Board  decided  to  reduce. 

Rita  Favreau,  whose  seniority  date  was  August  31,  1988,  and  Kate  Johnson, 

whose  seniority  date  was  September  3,  1985,  displaced  (bumped)  Harkins  (Newburg)  to  teach 
Algebra  I,  Hawkins  (Newburg)  had  a  seniority  date  that  was  the  same  day  as  Eva  Rosa,  but 

8 

 

Hawkins  (Newburg)  lost  a  tie-breaker  to  Rosa  under  the  District’s  criteria  because  Rosa  held  a 
full  professional  clear  single  subject  credential  in  Math,  while  Hawkins  (Newburg)  held  a 
preliminary  credential. 

No  employee  junior  to  Harkins  (Newburg)  was  retained  to  render  services  that 

Harkins  (Newburg)  was  competent  and  highly  qualified  to  provide. 

B. 

Jaime  Shuford:  Shuford  had  a  seniority  date  of  September  22,  2003.  She 

was  given  notice  that  her  employment  would  not  be  continued  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
Shuford  taught  third  and  fourth  grade  full-time  in  elementary  school  (1  FTE).  General 
elementary  school  teaching  was  a  particular  kind  of  service  the  Board  reduced.  Shuford  was  the 
least  senior  teacher  within  the  District  at  the  elementary  school  level. 

No  employee  junior  to  Shuford  was  retained  to  render  services  that  Shuford  was 

competent  and  highly  qualified  to  provide. 

Cc. 

Eva  Rosa:  Rosa  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2006.  She  was  given 
notice  that  0.8  FTE  of  her  employment  would  not  be  continued  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
Rosa  taught  Applied  Geometry  (0.4  FTE),  Algebra  II/Trigonometry  (0.4  FTE),  and  CASHEE 
(0.2  FTE)  full-time  in  high  school  (1.0  FTE).  Geometry  and  Algebra  were  some  of  the  services 
the  Board  decided  to  reduce. 

’  Rita  Favreau,  whose  seniority  date  was  August  31,  1988,  and  Rich  Horne,  whose 
seniority  date  was  August  28,  1995,  displaced  (bumped)  Rosa  (Newburg)  to  teach  Math  (Middle 
School),  Math  Standards,  and  Algebra  A  Support.  Lee  Thor,  whose  seniority  date  was 
August  31,  2004,  displaced  (bumped)  Rosa  to  teach  Algebra  A  (High  School). 

No  employee  junior  to  Rosa  was  retained  to  render  services  that  Rosa  was 

competent  and  highly  qualified  to  provide. 

D. 

Amanda  Walford:  Walford  had  a  seniority  date  of  August  27,  2002.  She 

was  given  notice  that  0.2  FTE  of  her  employment  would  not  be  continued  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  Walford  taught  Geometry  (0.6  FTE),  Algebra  B  (0.4  FTE)  full-time  in  high  school 
(1.0  FTE).  Susie  Britsch,  whose  seniority  date  was  August  26,  1996,  displaced  (bumped) 
Walford  to  teach  .02  FTE  Algebra  because  the  AVID  program  was  discontinued  and  because 
Geometry  and  Algebra  were  two  services  the  Board  reduced. 

Walford  lost  a  tie-breaker  to  Roger  McEImell,  who  had  the  same  seniority  date  as 

Walford  because  McEImell  held  a  master’s  degree  and  Walford  did  not. 

In  conducting  this  tie  breaker,  other  credentialed  elementary  school  teachers  who 

had  the  same  seniority  date  as  Walford  and  McElmell  were  not  included  in  the  tie-breaking 
process.  These  teachers,  Tina  Villalobos,  Kirsten  Stuckey,  Nicole  Scott,  Michelle  Saccuzzo, 
Christine  J.  Mac  Neil,  Mary  Galanos,  Lisa  Eaton,  Antoinette  Costello,  and  Angie  Arguello,  all 
taught  elementary  schoo!  within  a  single  classroom.  Johnson  concluded  that  they  should  not  be 
included  in  the  tie-breaker  because  it  “was  not  practical”  for  a  high  school  teacher  who  taught 

  

9

blocked  classes  80  percent  of  the  day  to  drive  an  elementary  school  that  was  at  least  15  minutes 
away  and  displace  a  teacher  the  students  had  been  with  in  the  classroom  continuously  from  the 
start  of  the  school  day. 

Walford  was  aware  of  one  English  teacher  within  the  District  who  concurrently 

taught  reading  support  at  high  school  and  at  a  middle  school.  She  was  aware  of  another  District 
teacher  who  taught  English  Language  Development  in  elementary  school  and  middle  school. 
These  teachers  provided  services  in  “pull  out”  programs.  Walford  also  expressed  concern  that 
the  method  by  which  some  colleagues  teaching  Math  at  the  high  school  level  were  authorized  to 
select  courses  to  teach  may  have  contributed  to  her  potential  but  unnecessary  loss  of  0.2  FTE. 

Although  the  “not  practical”  criteria  was  not  specifically  expressed  in  the 

District’s  tie-breaking  criteria,  it  is  concluded  that  the  exclusion  of  elementary  school  teachers 
from  the  tie-breaking  process  for  a  high  school  Math  position  and  the  application  of  the 
District’s  tie-breaking  process  leading  to  the  reduction  of  .02  FTE  to  Walford  was  not  arbitrary, 
capricious,  or  unlawful,  and  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  its  students. 

No  employee  junior  to  Walford  was  retained  to  render  services  that  Walford  was 

competent  and  highly  qualified  to  provide. 

E. 

Michelle  Inigo:  Inigo  had a  seniority  date  of  August  28,  2001.  She  was 

given  notice  that  0.6  FTE  of  her  employment  would  not  be  continued  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  Inigo  taught  Biology  (0.4  FTE)  and  Earth  Sciences  (0.6  FTE)  full-time  in  high  school  (1.0 
FTE).  Earth-Sciences  was  a  particular  kind  of  service  the  Board  reduced. 

Inigo  is  currently  a  probationary  employee  with  a  single  subject  teaching 

credential  in  Biology.  Inigo  does  not  hold  tenure  because  she  taught  under  an  emergency 
credential  for  several  years  until  she  became  fully  credentialed  in  May  2005,  and  the  time  spent 
teaching  under  the  emergency  credential  did  not  count  towards  tenure.  In  addition,  Inigo  was  on 
maternity  leave  during  a  portion  of  one  year,  spending  less  than  75%  of  the  school  year  in  the 
classroom,  so  that  her  time  spent  teaching  that  year  did  not  count  towards  tenure. 

The  full  credential  Inigo  now  possesses  authorizes  her  to  teach  Biology  and 

Physical  Science,  disciplines  in  which  she  is  highly  qualified,  but  she  is  not  credentialed  to  teach 
Earth  Sciences.  Inigo  was  not  aware  until  very  recently  that  her  credential  did  not  authorize  her 
to  teach  Earth  Sciences  without  further  authorization. 

Michael  Barnett  has  a  seniority  date  of  August  31,  2004.  Barnett  is  a  tenured  teacher  and 

he,  thus,  has  rights  of  retention  that  are  superior  to  those  held  by  Inigo. 

No  probationary  employee  junior  to  Inigo  was  retained  to  render  services  that  Inigo  was 

competent  and  highly  qualified  to  provide. 

 

  

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  in  the  layoff  list. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
is  within  a  board’s  discretion  to 
district’s  decision  as  to  how  many  services  to  reduce.  It 
determine  the  extent  to  which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  Because  elementary  schools 
are  limited  in  identifying  a  particular  kind  of  service,  the  use  of  the  term  “classroom 
teaching”  is  recognized  as a  particular  kind  of  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.  App.  3d  627.) 

3. 

Subjects  taught  in  secondary  schools  and  community  colleges  by  designated 

teachers  at  particular  hours  permit  easy  identification  for  purposes  of  PKS  reductions.  In 
elementary  schools,  however,  a  district  cannot  easily  identify  the  amount  by  which  particular 
subjects  are  to  be  reduced  because  many  subjects  are  taught  to  the  same  students  by  the  same 
teachers  in  the  same  classroom  at  unspecified  times  during  the  day.  Because  elementary 
schools,  for  the  most  part  provide  “classroom  teaching,”  this  must  be  recognized  as  a 
particular  kind  of  service  in  order  that  elementary  schools  are  able  to  reduce  the  only  service 
they  provide.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn. 

v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

. 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  determining a  certain  type  of  services  or  by 

reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  who  perform  such  services.  A  school  board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper 
because  the  school  board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board 
of  Trustees of  Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

A  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  exists  where  senior  employees  will 

continue  to  provide  the  same  educational  services  by  establishing  larger  classes  or 
regrouping  classes.  (Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838.) 

4. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute. 

5. 

For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b)  provides: 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.” 

11 

 

6. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  who  render  services  which  the 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  A  district  may  move  a  junior 
employee  upward  from  the  bottom  of  a  seniority  list,  “skipping”  over  more  senior 
employees,  so  long  as  the  junior  employee  being  retained  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render  services  which  more  senior  employees  are  not.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
y.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

A  school  district  may  properly  terminate  one  of  several  teachers,  all  of  whom  began 
service  on  same  day,  where  the  terminated  employee,  unlike  the  others,  did  not  possess  an 
equivalent  elementary  teaching  credential  when  the  layoff  notice  was  issued.  (Brough  v. 
Governing  Board of  El  Segundo  Unified  School  District  (1981)  118  Cal.App.3d  702.) 

7. 

As  a  result  of  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  service, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  Christy  Harkins 
(Newburg)  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and  to  give 
notice  to  Jaime  Shuford  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
and  to  give  notice  to  Eva  Rosa  that  0.8  FTE  of  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year,  and  to  give  notice  to  Amanda  Walford  that  0.2  FTE of her  services  will  not 
be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  and  to  give  notice  to  Michelle  Inigo  that  0.6  FTE 
of  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

 

12 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Valley  Center-Pauma  Unified  School  District  give  notice 
to  Christy  Harkins  (Newburg)  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year,  to  Jaime  Shuford  that  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
to  Eva  Rosa  that  0.8  FTE  of  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
to  give  notice  to  Amanda  Walford  that  0.2  FTE  of  her  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-2009  school  year,  and  to  Michelle  Inigo  that  0.6  FTE  of  her  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

f 

DATED: 

4:  aH}  OF 

   Scions 

JAMES  AHLER 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

13 

  

  

