BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
CARUTHERS  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

LINDA  LEASURE  GILL 

OAH  No.  2008031028 

Respondent. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative 
Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  Fresno,  California,  on  April  15, 
2008. 

Robert  Piacente,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  the  Caruthers  Unified  School 

Emest  H.  Tuttle  III,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondent  Linda  Leasure 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  15,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1, 

Dwight  Miller,  Superintendent  of  the  Caruthers  Unified  School 

District,  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  in  his  official  capacity. 

Linda  Leasure  Gill  is  a  certificated  District  employee. 

District. 

Gill. 

2. 

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949 

and  44955,  the  Superintendent  notified  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (the 
Board)  and  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  in  writing  of  the  Superintendent’s  recommendation  that 
Ms.  Leasure  Gill  be  notified  that  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing 
school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation.  The 

  

 

  

  

recommendation  that  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  be  terminated  from  employment  was  not 
related  to  her  competency  as  a  teacher. 

4. 

On  March  12,  2008,  a  notice  of  termination  was  delivered  to  Ms. 

Leasure  Gill  by  personal  delivery.  The  written  notice  of  termination  specifically 
stated  that  Ms.  Leasure  Gill’s  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year.  The  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  included  a 
copy  of  the  Board  Resolution  authorizing  the  reduction  in  services.  The  notice 
advised  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  of  her  right  to  a  hearing,  that  she  had  to  deliver  a  request  for 
a  hearing  in  writing  to  the  Superintendent  by  March  20,  2008,  which  was  more  than 
seven  days  after  the  notice  of  termination  was  served,  and  that  the  failure  to  request  a 
hearing  would  constitute  the  waiver  of  the  right  to  a  hearing. 

5. 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  timely  filed  a  written  request  for  a  hearing  to 

determine  if  there  was  cause  for  not  re-employing  her  for  the  ensuing  year.  An 
Accusation  was  timely  served  on  her  and  she  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense.  All 

pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

6. 

On  March  10,  2008,  the  Board  took  action,  through  Resolution  #2008-  + 
05,  to  discontinue  or  reduce  certain  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the  2007- 
2008  school  year.  The  Board  resolved  to  eliminate  one  full  time  equivalent  music 
teacher.  The  designated  music  service  was  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  could  be 
reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955.  The 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  this  particular  kind  of  service  was  not 
arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion. 

7. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kind  of  service 

related  to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  Board  was  faced  with 
significant  budget  cuts  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that 
budget  cuts  necessitated  that  services  be  reduced.  The  Board  determined  to  non- 
reelect  certain  teachers  and  not  to  fill  positions  vacated  by  resignations  and 
retirements.  Additionally,  the  Board  determined  that  music  services  should  be 
discontinued  because  there  was  declining  enrollment  in  the  music  and  band  classes, 
and  there  were  not  enough  students  in  these  classes  to  justify  retaining  a  music 
position  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Board  determined  that  elimination  of  the 
music  classes  did  not  effect  the  District’s  State  mandate  to  provide  visual  and 
performing  arts  education.  The  Board  will  retain  high  school  art  and  drama  classes 
that  meet  the  State’s  requirements,  and  elementary  school  classroom  teachers  will 
provide  music  instruction  in  their  self-contained  classes. 

8. 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  is  the  most  senior  employee  in  the  District.  Her 

seniority  date  is  January  7,  1980.  She  holds  a  single  subject  credential  in  music  and  a 
supplemental  authorization  in  photography. 

 

  

9. 

No  certificated  employee  is  being  retained  to  teach  music  or 

photography  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Therefore,  no  certificated  employee 
junior  to  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  is  being  retained  to  perform  any  of  these  services. 

10. 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  maintains  that  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to 
render  services  in  alternative  education.  The  District  has  two  teacher  openings  in 
alternative  education  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Both  openings  are  in  a  new 
alternative  education  program,  which  merged  continuation  community  high  school 
and  community  day  school.  The  incumbents  will  be  teaching  math  and  science, 
language  arts  and  social  sciences,  and  some  physical  education.  The  assigned 
teachers  have  to  be  very  “versatile”  in  what  they  are  authorized  to  teach. 

11. 

The  District  maintains  that  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  is  not  certificated  to  fill  an 

alternative  education  teaching  opening  because  she  does  not  hold  a  multiple  subject 
teaching  credential.  The  alternative  education  classes  are  self-contained  and  four  core 
subjects  are  taught.  The  program  requires  either  a  multiple  subject  credential  or  a 
single  subject  permit  to  teach  self-contained  classes.  The  incumbent  teacher  must 
possess  certification  as  a  highly  qualified  teacher  under  No  Child  Left  Behind 
(NCLB),  showing  competency  in  core  subject  areas.  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  does  not  hold  a 
multiple  subject  credential,  a  single  subject  permit  to  teach  self-contained  classes  or  a 
NCLB  certification. 

12. 

13. 

The  District  acknowledges  that  under  the  Education  Code,  any  teacher 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  maintains  that  she  can  teach  life  skill  classes  currently 

with  a  credential  can  be  assigned  into  an  alternative  education  or  continuing  education 
class  with  their  permission.  The  District  acknowledges  that  it  did  not  ask  Ms.  Leasure 
Gill  if  she  wished  to  teach  in  the  alternative  program.  The  District  did  not  do  so, 
because  it  has  “received  clear  direction  from  county  credentialing”  that  teachers  who 
fill  positions  in  alternative  education  programs  must  be  highly  qualified  under  NCLB 
and  must  be  credentialed  to  teach  the  core  subject  areas.  Music  is  not  a  core  subject 
area.  Math,  Sciences,  Social  Sciences  and  Language  Arts  are  core  subject  areas. 

   

taught  by  a  junior  certificated  employee,  Kelli  Kuma.  Ms.  Kuma  holds  a  multiple 
subject  credential.  This  class  is  a  required  ninth  grade  course,  consisting  mostly  of 
instruction  in  health.  It  has  components  in  careers,  health  education,  sex  education, 
mental  health,  nutrition,  substance  abuse  and  other  areas.  The  life  skills  teacher  can 
hold  a  multiple  subject  credential,  and  it  is  unclear  to  the  District  whether  a  teacher 
with  a  single  subject  credential  can  teach  this  class.  However,  even  if  a  teacher  holds 
a  single  subject  credential,  the  single  subject  must  be  “in  line”  with  the  curriculum  of 
life  skills.  For  instance,  a  teacher  with  a  single  subject  in  English,  would  not  be 
certificated  to  teach  life  skills.  Thus,  the  District  believes  it  can  not  assign  life  skills 
classes  to  a  holder  of  a  single  subject  credential  in  music. 

14. 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  taught  life  skills  on  a  half  time  assignment  for 

approximately  12  years.  The  last  time  she  taught  any  life  skills  class  was  in  the  1996- 
1997  school  year.  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  also  has  taught  other  classes  over  her  long  tenure 
that  she  is  not  certificated  to  teach,  such  as  English,  reading,  home  economics,  fabric 
design  and  food  and  nutrition.  She  maintains  that  she  should  be  assigned  to  teach  life 
skills  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  fact  that  the  District  assigned  her  to  teach 
classes  outside  of  her  credential  in  the  past  is  not  pertinent  to  the  issue  of  whether  she 
is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  life  skills  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The 
subject  areas  covered  by  the  life  skill  classes  are  not  congruent  with  the  area  of  Ms. 
Leasure  Gill’s  certification.  Thus,  she  is  not  certificated  to  teach  these  classes. 

15. 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  maintains  that  she  should  be  assigned  to  teach 

leadership  classes.  The  District  acknowledges  there  is  no  specific  credential  required 
to  teach  leadership,  but  maintains  that  the  position  requires  a  multiple  subject 
credential  because  the  subject  is  taught  in  the  middle  school  in  self-contained 
classrooms.  Nevertheless,  the  District  acknowledged  that  Tyson  Lowery  currently 
teaches  leadership  at  approximately  one  third  of  his  assignment.  Mr.  Lowry  holds  a 
single  subject  credential  in  social  sciences  and  an  administrative  credential.  He 
teaches  social  sciences  and  leadership  in  the  high  school,  as  well  as  filling  the  role  of 
resource  teacher.  The  evidence  was  equivocal  as  to  whether  the  District  is  offering 
leadership  classes  in  the  high  school  in  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Superintendent 
Miller  testified  that  the  District  was  not  offering  leadership  in  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  Stella  Ybara,  the  District’s  Human  Resources  Technician,  acknowledged  that  a 
few  periods  of  high  school  leadership  may  be  offered.  And  there  was  no  testimony 
that  Mr.  Lowry  was  reassigned  or  his  .33  full  time  equivalent  services  teaching 
leadership  were  reduced  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

16. 

There  was  no  evidence  presented  as  to  why  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  could  not 

teach  leadership  in  the  high  school  if  it  is  offered  next  year.  She  holds  a  single 
subject  credential,  as  Mr.  Lowry  does.  There  was  no  evidence  that  leadership  classes 
require  certification  in  a  core  subject  or  certification  as  competent  under  NCLB. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  is  not  competent  to  teach  leadership.  In 
fact,  there  was  no  evidence  as  to  what  material  leadership  classes  covered.  Thus,  the 
District  may  be  retaining  an  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  to  teach  classes 
which  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  teach. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Ms.  Leasure  Gill  has  rendered  valuable  services  to  the  District. 

1. 

2. 

All  notice and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code 

sections  44949  and  44955  were  met.  The  notices  sent  to  respondent  indicated  the 
statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of  services  and,  therefore,  was  sufficiently  detailed  to 
provide  her  due  process.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144

  

Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116 
Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  service  to  be  reduced,  both  in  the  Board 
Resolution  and  in  the  notice,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds  of  services.  (Zalac 
v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838,  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67 
Cal.App.3d  689.) 

3. 

The  service  identified  in  Board  Resolution  No.  #2008-05  is  a  particular 

kind  of  service  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  The 
Governing  Board’s  decision  to  discontinue  the  identified  service  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  and  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the 
number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  due  to  the  discontinuation  of  music 
service.  Cause  for  the  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall 
not,  thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by 
determining  that  proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer 
employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board 
of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 

5. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

().--[1] 

(b)  Whenever  in  any  school  year  ...  whenever  a  particular 
kind  of  service  is  to  be  reduced  or  discontinued  not  later 
than  the  beginning  of  the  following  school  year,  ...or 
whenever  the  amendment  of  state  law  requires  the 
modification  of  curriculum,  and  when  in  the  opinion  of 
the  governing  board  of  the  district  it  shall  have  become 
necessary  by  reason  of  any  of  these  conditions  to  decrease 
the  number  of  permanent  employees  in  the  district,  the 
governing  board  may  terminate  the  services  of  not  more 
than  a  corresponding  percentage  of  the  certificated 
employees  of  the  district,  permanent  as  well  as 
probationary,  at  the  close  of  the  school  year.  Except  as 
otherwise  provided  by  statute,  the  services  of  no 
permanent  employee  may  be  terminated  under  the 
provisions  of  this  section  while  any  probationary 
employee,  or  any  other  employee  with  less  seniority,  is 
retained  to  render  a  service  which  said  permanent 
employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

(--[9] 

  

 

  

6. 

Education  Code  section  44955  provides  that  when  certificated 

employees  face  layoffs  due  to  reduction  or  elimination  of  PKS,  the  District  has  an 
affirmative  obligation  to  reassign  senior  teachers  who  are  losing  their  positions  into 
positions  held  by  junior  teachers,  if  the  senior  teacher  has  both  the  credentials  and 
competence  to  occupy  such  positions.  The  intent  of  the  Legislature  is  clearly  to 
prevent  Districts  from  laying  off  senior  teachers  while  retaining  junior  teachers. 
Section  44955,  subdivision  (c)  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

Services  of  such  employees  shall  be  terminated  in  the 
inverse  of  the  order  in  which  they  were  employed...  The 
governing  board  shall  make  assignments  and 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be 
retained  to  render  any  service  which  their  seniority  and 
qualifications  entitle  them  to  render... 

7. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  1  through  16,  and  the  Legal 

Conclusions,  the  District  has  established  that  no  employee  junior  to  Ms.  Leasure  Gill 
is  being  retained  to  perform  services  which  she  is  competent  and  certificated  to 
render,  except  Mr.  Tyson  Lowery,  to  the  extent  that  he  is  retained  in  the  2008  2009 
school  year  to  teach  .33  full  time  equivalent  leadership  classes  in  the  high  school.  It 
was  not  proved  that  Ms.  Lesiure  Gill  is  not  certificated  and  competent  to  teach  the  .33 
Leadership  FTE  Mr.  Tyson  is  being  retained  to  teach.  Mr.  Tyson  is  junior  to  Ms. 
Leasure  Gill  and  has  not  been  noticed  for  layoff.  The  layoff  of  Ms.  Leasure  Gill  for 
.33  FTE fails  as  to  the  .33  FTE  Leadership  position,  but  was  proved  with  respect  to 
the  remaining  .67  of  her  1.00  FTE. 

RECOMMENDATION 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Linda  Leasure  Gill  that  her  services  will  be  reduced  by  .67 
full-time  equivalent  in  the  2008-2009  school  year,  because  of  the  discontinuance  of 
music  services. 

Dated:  April  29,  2008 

AWN 
ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

