BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
KONOCTI  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

JONATHAN  BRIGGS,  et  al. 

OAH  No.  2008010912 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Nancy  L.  Rasmussen,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings, 

State  of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  14,  2008,  in  Lower  Lake,  California. 

John  A.  Drummond,  Schools  Attorney,  Lake  County  Office  of  Education, represented 

the  Konoeti  Unified  School  District. 

James  D.  Allen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Jonathan  Briggs,  Aaron 
Carter,  Lea  Derby,  Dave  Hubbard,  Pam  Ingersoll,  Carrie  McCallister,  Rachel  McFarland, 
Evelyn  Meadows,  Jennifer  Radtke,  Christy  Sheffert,  Christina  Sherick,  Cindy  Strugnell, 
Jessica  Taliaferro  and  Bethany  Wagner,  all  of  whom  were  present. 

The  matter  was  submitted  for  decision  on  April  14,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Louise  Nan,  Ed.D.,  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  her  official  capacity  as 

Superintendent  of  the  Konocti  Unified  School  District. 

2. 

Respondents  are  listed  on  Appendix  A,  attached  hereto  and  by  this  reference 

incorporated  herein.  Each  respondent  is  a  certificated  employee  of  the  district. 

3. 

On  February  6,  2008,  the  district’s  Board  of  Trustees  adopted  Resolution  No. 

08-07-08  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  superintendent  to give 
appropriate  notices  to  certificated  employees  whose  positions  will  be  affected  by  the  action. 
An  unsigned  copy  of  the  resolution  is  attached  hereto  as  Appendix  B  and  by  this  reference  is 
incorporated  herein. 

4. 

Between  February  7  and  14,  2008,  Superintendent  Nan  gave  written  notice  to 
approximately  41  certificated  employees,  including  respondents,  of  the  recommendation  that 

 

  

their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  The  reasons  for  the 
recommendation  were  set  forth  in  these  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

5. 

Respondents  filed  timely  requests  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for 

terminating  their  services  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  (The  other  employees  did  not  file 
requests  for  hearing,  or,  in  the  case  of  Ann  Nolasco,  filed  a  request  for  hearing  but  later 
withdrew  it.)  An  accusation  was  served  on  each  respondent.  Appendix  A  notes  the  13 
respondents  who  filed  timely  notices  of  defense  and  the  seven  respondents  who  did  not  file 
notices  of  defense.  All  prehearing  jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met. 

6. 

Respondent  Dave  Hubbard  did  not  file  a  notice  of  defense  but  he  appeared  at 

the  hearing.  In  the  interest  of  fairness  and  because  there  was  no  prejudice  to  the  district, 
Hubbard  was  allowed  to  participate  in  the  hearing.  Government  Code  section  11506, 
subdivision  (c),  provides,  in  pertinent  part:  “The  respondent  shall  be  entitled  to  a  hearing  on 
the  merits  if  the  respondent  files  a  notice  of  defense.  ...  Failure  to  file  a  notice  of  defense 
shall  constitute  a  waiver  of  respondent’s  right  to  a  hearing,  but  the  agency  in  its  discretion 
may  nevertheless  grant  a  hearing...  .”  (Italics  added). 

7. 

Before  issuing  the  preliminary  layoff  notices,  the  district  took  into  account  all 

positively  assured  attrition.  The  district  must  issue  the  final  layoff  notices  before  May  15, 
and  when  it  does  so  the  district  will  take  into  account  any  additional  attrition  that  has 
occurred.'  After  that,  further  attrition  will  allow  the  district  to  rehire  laid  off  employees. 

8. 

On  the  district’s  seniority  list,  a  large  number  of  certificated  employees 

(including  most  of  the  respondents)  share  the  seniority  date  of  August  17,  2007.  The  district 
has  tie-breaking  criteria  in  which  points  are  assigned  for  experience  and  credentials,  but  these 
criteria  were  not  applied  in  determining  who  would  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices. 
Determining  relative  seniority  was  not  necessary  because  effectuating  the  service  reductions 
required  sending  notices  to  all  employees  holding  multiple  subject  credentials  with  a 
seniority  date  of  August  17,  2007  or  later.  The  district  has  made  point  computations  for  tie- 
breaking  and  directed  principals  to  notify  their  employees  of  the  computations.  The  tie- 
breaking  criteria  will  be  applied  to  re-order  the  seniority  list  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  do 
so.  The  district  anticipates  applying  the  tie-breaking  criteria  during  the  rehire  process,  but  it 
may  be  necessary  to  do  so  before  the  final  layoff  notices  are  issued. 

Respondents  argue  that  the  proposed  layoffs  are  arbitrary  and  capricious  because  the 

district  failed  to  comply  with  the  statutory  mandate  that  tie-breaking  criteria  be  used  to 
determine  the  order  of  layoff.  This  argument  is  without  merit.  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b),  provides:  “As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to 
the  district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination 
solely  on  the  basis  of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.”  However,  when  all 

  

'  Counsel  for  the  district  asserted  that  the  district  is  not  required  to  consider  additional  attrition 

before  issuing  final  layoff  notices,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  address  this  legal  issue  since  the  evidence 
established  that  additional  attrition  will  in  fact  be  considered. 

-2- 

 

employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service  are  being  laid  off,  there  is  no  need  to 
determine  the  order  of  termination. 

9. 

August  17,  2007  was  the  commencement  of  the  regular  2007-08  school  year 

for  newly  hired  teachers,  and  the  district  assigned  that  seniority  date  to  employees  who  began. 
work  then.  However,  several  of  those  employees  contend  that  they  should  have  an  earlier 
seniority  date  because  of  training  they  attended  before  school  started. 

Respondents  Jennifer  Radtke  and  Jessica  Taliaferro  are  6th  grade  teachers  at  Burns 

Valley  Elementary  School.  From  July  30  to  August  3,  2007,  Radtke  and  Taliaferro  attended 
the  Houghton  Mifflin  Reading  40-hour  training  course  at  the  Butte  Reading  Implementation 
Center  in  Chico,  (According  to  the  attendance  roster,  respondents  Lea  Derby  and  Rebecca 
Maloney  also  attended  this  course.)  Although  the  training  was  not  mandatory,  when  Radtke 
was  hired  by  the  district  it  was  strongly  recommended  that  she  attend.  Taliaferro  believed 
she  had  to  go  to  the  training  because  her  school  was  a  Reading  First  school.  Respondent 
Christina  Sherick,  who  could  not  attend  the  July  30  to  August  3,  2007  training  session 
because  she  was  on  her  honeymoon,  was  allowed  to  attend  the  October  2007  session.  It  had 
been  strongly  recommended  to  Sherick  that  she  attend  the  training,  and  she  understood  it  to 
be  mandatory.  The  district  paid  each  employee  who  attended  this  training  course  a  $500 
stipend,  and  the  district  paid  for  the  employee’s  lodging  and  travel  expenses.  ‘The  state 
reimbursed  the  district  for  the  entire  amount  of  the  stipends  and  costs  for  the  training. 

Respondent  Rachel  McFarland  is  a  6th  grade  teacher  at  Lower  Lake  Elementary 

School.  She  attended  a  Step  Up  to  Writing  training  course  on  August  6,  7,  13  and  14,  2007 
at  the  district.  McFarlarid  understood  that  it  was  vital  that  she  attend  this  course.  The  district 
paid  McFarland a  stipend  for  attending  the  training  (she  thinks  the  amount  was  $500,  but  she 
is  not  sure). 

Respondents  Aaron  Carter  and  Pamela  Ingersoll  are  kindergarten  teachers  at  Pomo 
Elementary  School.  From  June  11  to  15,  2007,  they  attended  math  training  at  Pomo,  along 
with  most  of  the  rest  of  the  school  staff.  Carter  and  Ingersoll  were  asked  to  attend  this 
training,  which  they  thought  was  required.  They  believed  their  employment  would  be 
adversely  affected  if  they  did  not  attend.  They  were  each  paid  a  $500  stipend  for  attending 
the  training. 

According  to  the  district’s  payroll  supervisor,  training  stipends  were  paid  at  the  next 

pay  period,  in  a  separate  check,  with  the  same  deductions-as  a  paycheck,  including  a 
contribution  for  retirement. 

Respondents  have  not  established  that  they  are  entitled  to  earlier  seniority  dates  by 
reason  of  attending  training  before  school  started.  Although  respondents  felt  they  had  to 
attend  the  training,  it  was  not  actually  mandatory.  The  stipend  that  was  paid  for  attendance 
was  not  a  per  diem  rate  related  to  a  teacher’s  salary  but  a  flat  amount  for  work  in  excess  of 
the  teacher’s  contract.  A  certificated  employee’s  seniority  begins  with  the  date  he  or  she 

 
®
-

  

 

  

“first  rendered  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position.”  Respondents  each  first  rendered 
service  in  a  probationary  position  when  they  began  working  on  the  first  day  of  the  regular 
school  year,  not  the  day  they  attended  an  earlier  training  course. 

10. 

All  contentions  made  by  respondents  not  specifically  addressed  above  are 

found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

ll. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  in  seniority  to  any  respondent  is  being  retained 
by  the  district  to  perform  services  that  any  respondent  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

I. 

Jurisdiction  for  this  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  sections  44949  and  44955, 

and  all  notices  and  other  requirements  of  those  sections  have  been  provided  as  required. 

2. 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  pursuant 
to  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 
2008-09  school  year.  The  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils 
thereof within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

-  ORDER 

Notice  may  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the 

2008-09  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

DATED: 

Ages  $22,  2ooy 

NANCY  L(RASMUSSEN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

?  Education  Code  section  44845. 

-4- 

  

 
.
=

 

Appendix  A

RESPONDENTS 

Filed  Notice  of  Defense 

Jonathan  Briggs 
Aaron  Carter 
Lea  Derby 
Pam  Ingersoll 
Carrie  McCallister 
Rachel  McFarland 
Evelyn  Meadows 
Jennifer  Radtke 
Christy  Sheffert 
Christina  Sherick 
Cindy  Strugnell 
Jessica  Taliaferro 
Bethany  Wagner 

Andrew  Carpenter 
Jonathan  Devlin 
Margaret  Freeman 
Monte  Gregg 
Jennifer  Johnson 
Dave  Hubbard 
Rebecca  Maloney 

Did  Not  File  Notice  of  Defense 

  

-5-   

  

Appendix  B 

RESOLUTION  REGARDING  REDUCTION  IN  SERVICES 
RESOLUTION  NO.  08-07-08 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Konocti  Unified  School  District  has  determined  that  it  shall  be 
necessary  to  reduce  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services  of  the  District  not  later  than  the  beginning  of 
the  2008/2009  school  year: 
Services 

Reduction 

ALL  NON  EL  CLASSES - 5  full  time  equivalents  (FTE),  including: 
¢ 
e¢ 
e 
« 
e 

NON  EL  Social  Studies  at  Lower  Lake  High  School 
NON  EL  Shop  at  Lower  Lake  High  School 
NON  EL  Art  at  Lower  Lake  High  Schoo! 
NON  EL  Special  Education  at  Lower  Lake  High  School 
NON  EL  Health  at  Lower  Lake  High  School 

1  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (FTE) 

e 

* 

¢ 

¢ 

e 

* 

¢ 

* 

ADMINISTRATIVE  POSITIONS  AND  UNDERLYING  EC  44897  TEACHING  POSITIONS - is  a  reduction 
of  10  full  time  equivalents  (FTE),  including: 
* 

Assistant  Superintendent  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary  teaching  position  (one 
: 
full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
Director  of  Educational  Support  Services  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary 
teaching  position  (one  full  time  equivatent  —  1  FTE) 
Curriculum  and  Instruction  Program  Coordinator  --  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary 
teaching  position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
Language  Development  Specialist  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary  teaching 
position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
Curriculum  Coach  (Academic  Coach)  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  secondary  teaching 
position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
High  School  Vice-Principal  (Assistant  Principal)  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  oné  elementary 
teaching  position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
High  School  Vice-Principal  (Assistant  Principal)  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  secondary 
teaching  position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
Elementary  Assistant  Principal/Counselor —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary 
teaching  position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 
Elementary  Assistant  Principal  —  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary  teaching  position 
(one  full  time  equivalent  -  1  FTE) 
Teaching  Principal  of  Konocti  Day  School  -  the  underlying  teaching  position  is  one  elementary 
teaching  position  (one  full  time  equivalent  —  1  FTE) 

   

HIGH  SCHOOL  INSTRUCTIONAL  SERVICES  —  4.67  full  time  equivalents  (FTE) 
This  includes: 
* 
* 
*  —  .67  High  School  CAHSEE  teaching  position 
¢ 
One  High  School  Art  teaching  position 
* 
One  High  School  Social  Studies  teaching  position 

MIDDLE  SCHOOL  INSTRUCTIONAL  SERVICES  — 2.0  full  time  equivalents  (2  FTEs) 
This  includes: 
* 

1  full  time  equivalent  (1  FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (1  FTE) 
0.67  full  time  equivalent  (.67  FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (1  FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (1  FTE) 

One  High  School  Academic  Coach  (Curriculum  Coach)  position 
TwoH.S.  Temporary  Part-time  Math  teaching  positions  totaling 

Two  Middle  School  Social  Studies  teaching  positions 

2  full  time  equivalents  (2  FTEs) 

* 

ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  INSTRUCTIONAL  SERVICES  — 11.25  full  time  equivalents  (11.25  FTEs) 
This  includes: 
* 
e° 
e 
e 
e 
« 
° 

2.5  Reading  First  Coach  positions 
One  Burns  Valley  Reading  teacher  position 
.5  East  Lake  Reading  teacher  position 
.75  East  Lake  Intervention  teaching  position 
One  Temp.  Sp.  Ed.  Pre-school  teaching  position 
.5  Part-time  special  education  teaching  position 
Five  elementary  teaching  positions 

2.5  full  time  equivalents  (2.5  FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (1  FTE) 
0.5  full  time  equivalent  (.5  FTE) 
0.75  full  time  equivalent  (.75  FTE) 
1  full  time  equivalent  (1  FTE) 
full  time  equivalent  (.5  FTE) 
5  full  time  equivalent  (5  FTEs) 

0.5 

WHEREAS,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  that  it  is  necessary  by  reason  of  the  above  to 
decrease  a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District  at  the  close  of  the  current 
school  year  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  §44955;  and, 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  District  further  has  determined  that,  as  between  employees  who. 
first  rendered  paid  service  on  the  same  date,  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  solely  on  the  basis  of 
needs  of  the  District,  and  the  students  thereof;  and, 

WHEREAS,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  Section  44955(d),  the  School  District  shall  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  where  the  School  District  demonstrates  a  specific 
need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  or  course  of  study,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has 
special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study,  which  others  with  more 
seniority  do  not  possess;  and, 

WHEREAS,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  Section  44955(d),  the  School  District  shall  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving 
compliance  with  constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws;  and, 

WHEREAS,  the  School  District  hereby  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  that  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess  as 
follows: 

e 

The  Schoo!  District  has  approximately  481  students  for  whom  English  is  not  their  native  language. 
More  specifically  this  number  includes  the  following:  Lower  Lake  High  Schoo!  94;  Oak  Hill  Middle 
School  84:  elementary  schools  300. 
termination  is  needed  to  better  serve  the  students  for  whom  English  is  not  their  native  language, 
and  thereby  provide  a  better  educational  atmosphere  for  all  students  of  the  School  District.  State 
and  Federal  law  requires  the  School  District  to  provide  teachers  qualified  to  teacher  the  students 
for  whom  English  is  not  their  native  language.  The  above  order  of  termination  is  required  in  order 
for  the  School  District  to  comply  with  State  and  Federal  law. 

This  number  is  projected  to  increase.  This  order  of 

e 

The  School  District  needs  to  retain  teachers  based  upon  the  above  priorities  in  order  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  State  and  federal  law;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Board  of  Trustees  has  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition  which  has  occurred  to 
date,  that  is,  all  deaths,  resignations,  retirements,  and  other  permanent  vacancies  and  other  additional 
attrition  which  may  occur  before  the  start  of  the  2008/2009  school  year,  in  reducing  these  services,  and 
but  for  the  attrition  already  assured  and  the  attrition  anticipated  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  reduce 
additional  particular  kinds  of  services. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED,  that  it  shall  be  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end  of  the 
2007/2008  school  year,  the  employment  of  the  above  mentioned  certificated  positions  as  a  result  of  the 

-2-

  

above  reduction  in  services.  The  Superintendent  or  her  designated  representative  is  directed  to  give 
appropriate  notices  to  the  employees  whose  positions  shall  be  affected  by  virtue  of  this  action. 

ADOPTED  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Konocti  Unified  School  District  on  February  6,  2008,  by  the 
following  vote: 

 
|

(Clerk  of  the  Board) 

ATTEST: 

AYES 
NAYS 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 

 

  

