  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
FALLBROOK  UNION  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of 
the  39  Certificated  Employees  Receiving 
Notice  of  Recommendation  that  Services 
Would  Not  Be  Required  for  the  2008-2009 
School  Year, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030400 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

James  Ahler,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of 

California,  heard  this  matter  in  Indio,  California,  on  April  25,  2008. 

Mark  W.  Thompson  and  William  Diedrich,  Attorneys  at  Law,  represented  the 

Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District. 

Jon  Y.  Vanderpool,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  respondents  Amy  Schwenke,  Kerry 

Pinto,  Emily  Just,  Catherine  Girkins,  Jennifer  Cox,  Erin  Corduan,  Laura  Brumund,  James 
Sheffield,  Keely  Smith,  Caryl  Crowell,  Stephanie  Wilcox-Hall,  Jennifer  Matsumoto, and 
Christa  Rhine. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  remaining  certificated  employees  of 
the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District  who  received  notice  of  the  recommendation 
that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  25,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

The  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District 

1. 

The  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  District  (the  District)  is  headquartered  in 

Fallbrook,  California.  The  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District  is  located  in  a  semi- 
rural,  agricultural  area  in  northern  San  Diego  County.  The  District  is  bound  by  the  San  Luis 

 

Rey  River  on  the  south,  the  Santa  Margarita  River  on  the  north,  Interstate  15  on  the  east,  and 
includes  parts  of  Camp  Pendleton  Marine  Corps  Base  to  the  west. 

The  District  arose  out  of  the  consolidation  of  numerous  small  one-school  school 

districts  that  had  been  in  operation  since  the  1870’s.  The  District  was  known  as  the  West 
Fallbrook  District  until  1946,  when  the  District  changed  its  name  to  the  Fallbrook  Union 
Elementary  School  District. 

The  District  currently  provides  educational  services  to  approximately  5,500 
elementary  school  students.  The  District.  maintains  a  certificated  staff  totaling  nearly  300. 
About  87.5  percent of the  District’s  $55  million  budget  goes  to  pay  the  salaries  of  these 
credentialed  employees. 

The  District  maintains  eight  schools,  two  of  which  are  located  on  the  Camp  Pendleton 

Marine  Corps  Base.  The  schools  within  the  District  include  Maie  Ellis  Elementary  (opened 
in  1885),  Iowa  Street  Elementary  School  (opened  in  1913  as  Fallbrook  High  School), 
Fallbrook  Street  Elementary  (opened  in  1949),  Mary  Fay  Pendleton  Elementary  (opened  in 
1953),  Potter  Junior  High  (opened  in  1964),  La  Paloma  Elementary  (opened  in  1969),  San 
Onofre  Elementary  (opened  in  1974),  Live  Oak  Elementary  School  (opened  in  1991),  and 
William  H.  Frazier  Elementary  (opened  in  1999). 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five  member  Governing  Board  (the 

Board).  The  Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Janice  Schultz,  Ed.  D.,  who  is  the 
Superintendent  of  Schools.  James  Whitlock  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Schools,  and 
he  is  responsible  for  personnel  and  employee  relations.  The  District’s  administrative  staff 
includes  Naomi  Monthei,  who  is  the  Supervisor  of  Personnel  Services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  -  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  local  property  taxes  and  reduced  a 

major  source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  the 
passage  of  Proposition  13,  public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of 
California  and  to  other  governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  the  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  the  budgeting 
problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  board’s  legal  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 

teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  these  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  certificated 
employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority. 

A  public  school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in 

reverse  order  of  seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees 
possess  a  credential,  special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  services  which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4. 

In  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  became  acutely  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive 
economic  problems.  As a result  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget, 
the  District  projected  a  budget  deficit  of  about  $5  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  meet  the  projected  budget  shortfall. 

Under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Schultz  and  Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock,  budgetary 

cuts  were  considered  across  the  board  including  reduction  of  transportation  expenses,  the 
reduction  of  facility  and  supply  expenses,  and  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds 
of  services  being  provided  by  certificated  employees.  Before  March  3,  2008,  the  District’s 
administrative  staff  prepared  a  recommendation  that  Dr.  Shultz  presented  to  the  Board  on 
March  3,  2008,  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services. 

5. 

On  March  3,  2008,  the  Board  passed  Resolution  No.  13-07/08,  which  directed 
that  certain  services  would  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  and  other 
matters.  The  resolution  provided: 

Resolution  No.  13-07/08 

(Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955) 

WHEREAS,  Sections  44949  and  44955  of  the  Education  Code  require  action  by  the 

Governing  Board  in  order  to  reduce  or  discontinue  services  and  permit  the  layoff  of.  certificated 
employees  and; 

WHEREAS,  the  Superintendent of the  Fallbrook  Union  Elementary  School  District  has 

recommended  to  the  Governing  Board  that  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  discontinued 
no  later  than  the  beginning of the  2008-2009  school  year;  and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  determined  that  a  reduction  or  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  is  needed  no  later  than  the  beginning of  the  2008-2009  school  year; 
and 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  positively  assured  attrition  which 

has  occurred  as  of  this  time,  that  is,  all  deaths,  resignations,  retirements  and  other  permanent 
vacancies  in  reducing  these  services  and,  but  for  the  attrition  already  assured,  would  have  found  it 
necessary  to  reduce  additional  particular  kinds  of  services  and/or  full  time  equivalents. 

 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  by  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Fallbrook 

Union  Elementary  School  District: 

That  all  of  the  foregoing  recitals  are  true  and  correct. 

1. 

2. 

That  because  of  the  financial  constraints  resulting  from  revenue  being 

insufficient  to  maintain  the  current  levels  of  programs,  and  necessary  program  changes  resulting 
therefrom,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  determines  to  reduce  or  discontinue  those  particular  kinds 
of  services  and  positions  set  forth  in  Exhibit  A,  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by  reference 
herein,  listing  by  level,  subject  field  or  classification,  and  full  time  equivalent,  those  particular 
kinds  of  services  and  positions  which  shall  be  reduced  or  eliminated  no  later  than  the  beginning 
of  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

3. 

That  because of the  discontinuance  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services 
listed  in  Exhibit  A  it  is  necessary  to  terminate  at  the  end of the  2007-2008  school  year  permanent 
and/or  probationary  certificated  employees  equal  in  number  to  the  positions  affected  in  the 
reduction  or  discontinuance of the  above-described  service. 

4, 

That  the  seniority  and  qualifications  of  some of  the  employees  in  the  services 

being  reduced  or  eliminated  are  such  that  they  have  displacement  rights  by  virtue of  seniority,  and 
that  no  employee  will  be  terminated  while  a  less  senior  employee  is  retained  to  render  a  service 
which  the  more  senior  employee  is  both  certificated  and  competent  to  render,  except  as  permitted 
by  law. 

5. 

Subject  to  requirements  (if  any)  within  the  Educational  Employment  Relations 

Act,  that  for  purposes  of  “bumping”  (displacement)  rights  and  the  determination  of “competency” 
with  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  Section  44955(b),  to  the  extent  such  might  apply, 
“competency”  shall  be  based  upon  possession  and  current  filing  (no  later  than  March  1,  2008)  of 
a  preliminary  or  clear  credential  for  the  subject  matter  into  which  the  employee  would  bump  for 
the  2008-2009  school  year  and  highly  qualified  status  within  the  meaning  of  the  No  Child  Left 
Behind  Act. 

. 

6. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who 

shall  receive  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code  Section  44955 
requires  the  Governing  Board  to  state  specific  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of 
termination  of  certificated  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a 
probationary  position  on  the  same  date. 

7. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 

employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on 
the  same  date  are  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B,  which  is  attached  hereto  and  incorporated  by 
reference  herein. 

8. 

That  the  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination of certificated 

employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  Governing  Board  in  a  probationary  position  on 
the  same  date,  listed  and  described  in  Exhibit  B,  are  based  solely  on  the  needs of the  Fallbrook 
Union  Elementary  School  District  and  the  students  thereof. 

9. 

That  in  selecting  those  probationary  and  permanent  certificated  employees  who 

shall  receive  notice of  termination  pursuant  to  this  Resolution,  Education  Code  Section  44955, 

 

  

subdivision  (d),  allows  the  Governing  Board  to  deviate  from  terminating  a  certificated  employee 
in  order  of  seniority. 

10. 

That  the  criteria  that  will  be  applied  to  deviate  from  terminating  certificated 

employees  who  may  otherwise  be  terminated  by  order of  seniority  will  be  based  on  the  criteria 
within  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d);  the  Governing  Board  hereby  delegates, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  35161,  to  the  District  Superintendent  and  the 
Superintendent’s  designee(s),  the  implementation  and  determination  of  such  deviations  from  the 
order  of  seniority  in  terminating  the  District’s  certificated  employees. 

11. 

That  the  Superintendent  or  his  designated  representative(s)  will  send  appropriate 

notices  to  all  employees  possibly  affected  by  virtue of  the  reduction  and  discontinuance  of 
particular  kinds of service. 

12. 

That  the  action of  this  Governing  Board  will  not,  in  any  way,  be  considered  to 

prejudice  the  rights of certificated  employees  to  whom  notice  will  be  given  as  to  the 
Superintendent's  consideration  of  any  proposed  decision  by  an  administrative  law judge 
event  a  hearing  is  requested  by  any  employee. 

in  the 

6. 

Exhibit  A  to  the  resolution  described  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  were 

being  eliminated  or  reduced.  It  provided: 

PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES  AND  FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENTS  TO  BE  REDUCED  OR 
DISCONTINUED 

  

  

Particular  Kinds  of  Ser  vices 

Number  of  Full  Time  Equivalent  Positions 

. 

1.0 

3.0 

44 

24 

2.6 

|  0.5 

Lead  Teacher  services* 

  

Assistant  Principal  services* 

Counselor  services:  elementary* 

  

  

  

  

  

  

Counselor  services:  junior  high  school* 

VAPA  (vocal  and  performing  arts)  Coordinator  services* 

Teacher  on  special  assignment  services  (district-wide 
resource  teacher)* 

  Junior  highschool  language  arts  teaching  services 

    

 
    
    

Third  through  sixth  grade  SEI  teaching  services* 
(newcomer  teacher) 
Kindergarten  through  sixth  grade  classroom  teaching 
services 

to  the  resolution  contained  the  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  for 

employees  having  the  same  seniority  date.  It  provided: 

*  These  services  are  being  discontinued. 

  

  

Program  support  personnel  services* 

Exhibit B 

Total: 

38.4 

18.5 

7. 

3.0 

2.0 

1.0 

Criteria  to  be  Applied  to  Determine  Order  of  Layoff 
for  those  Certificated  Employees  with  the  Same  Date 
of  First  Paid  Probationary  Service 

The  following  criteria  will  be  applied  in  the  priority  order  indicated  to  determine  which 
certificated  employees  meet  the  particular  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students  in  the  event  that  a 
seniority  tie  needs  to  be  broken.  Criteria  referencing  credentials,  authorizations,  certificates,  or 
the  like,  require  completion  of  procedures  required  by  law  for  those  documents  to  be  legally 
effective,  such  as  possession  and,  when  applicable,  filing  with  the  county  office  of  education. 
These  criteria  meet  and  are  based  solely  upon  the  particular  needs  of  the  District  and  its  students 
at  the  present  time: 

Highly  qualified  within  the  meaning  of  the  No  Child  Left  Behind  Act. 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials. 

3._——Persons-with 

one-or more-credentials-Persons  with  more  than  one  credential, 

1. 

2. 

4, 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials  or  certificates  authorizing  services 
in  classes  for  limited  or  non-English  proficient  students  priority  listed  as  follows: 

A.  Bilingual  Cross  Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (BCLAD) 
B.  Cross  Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD),  SB  1969  or 
SB  395  Certificates 
C.  Language  Development  Specialist  Certificate 
D.  Supplemental  Authorization  for  English  as  a  Second  Language 
E.  Specially  Designated  Academic  Instruction  in  English  (SDAIE) 

Persons  with  supplementary  authorization  to  teach  Math  and/or  Science. 

Persons  with  other  supplementary  authorizations. 

Persons  with  Reading  Specialist  certification. 

Persons  holding  a  School  Nurse  certification. 

Earliest  teaching  experience  in  the  District  in  any  capacity,  including  as  a  day  to 
day  certificated  substitute. 

10. 

Random  Drawing 

8. 

In  preparation  for  possible  layoffs,  the  administrative  staff  reviewed  the 

District’s  credentialed  employee  seniority  list.  That  list  contains  the  names  of  all 
credentialed  employees  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior  employee  in 
descending  order  of  longevity  of  service;  the  employee’s  seniority  date  (first  date  of  paid 
service  with  District  on  a  probationary  basis);  whether  the  employee  was  permanent, 
probationary  2,  or  probationary  1;  the  employee’s  current  assignment;  the  site  where  the 
employee  provided  services;  the  type  of  credential  the  employee  held;  and  what  percent  of 
full  time  service  the  employee  provided,  with  1.00  FTE  (full  time  equivalent)  indicating  the 
employee  held  full  time  employment. 

e 

  

 

The  District’s  seniority  list  was  sent  to  the  employees’  association  and  employees 

were  invited  to  make  any  changes  or  corrections  to  the  seniority  list. 

9. 

Ms.  Monthei  was  assigned  the  task  of  revising  the  seniority  list,  preparing  a 
certificated  layoff tiebreaker  matrix,  and  preparing  a  certificated  layoff  bump  analysis.  In 
order  to  determine  who  should  receive  a  preliminary  layoff  notice,  Ms.  Monthei  had  to 
review  the  Board’s  resolution,  apply  the  reductions  of  particular  kinds  of  services  to  the 
seniority  list,  and  determine  whether  employees  being  displaced  as  a  result  in  the  elimination 
or  reduction  of  a  particular  kind  of  service  could  displace  a  more  junior  employee  in  an  area 
in  which  the  more  senior  employee  was  competent  and  qualified  to  render  services.  The 
purpose  of  this  exercise  was  to  meet  the  Education  Code  retention  requirements. 

The  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  38.4  FTEs  in 
particular  kinds  of  services.  Ms.  Monthei  determined  who  the  39  most  recently  hired 
certificated  employees  were  that  were  providing  the  services  that  were  scheduled  to  be 
eliminated  under  the  resolution. 

10. 

Onor  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given  notice  that  the  Superintendent  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  with  the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year 
and  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  needed  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year.  Each  employee  was  notified  of  the  right  to  a  hearing.  The  preliminary  notices  were 
duly  served  on  the  39  employees,  19  of  whom  requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation  packet 
was  served  on  the  19  employees  requesting  a  hearing,  and  15  of  those  employees  filed  a 
notice  of  defense.  All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

11. 

On  April  25,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  The 

District  gave  an  opening  statement.  Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented,  a  written 
stipulation  to  jurisdictional  facts  was  received,  respondents’  joint  amended  notice  of  defense 
was  filed,  opening  statements  were  given,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was 
received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

12. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Exhibit  A 

(Factual  Finding  6)  were  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and 
discontinued.  The  reduction  and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within 
the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District,  the  schools,  and  the  students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by 
federal  and  state  laws.

  

The  Seniority  List 

13. 

The  District  maintains  a  credentialed  seniority  list.  With  few  exceptions, 

which  do  not  impact  the  layoffs  in  this  matter,  but  which  could  affect  the  order  of  rehiring, 
the  seniority  list  was  accurate.  The  District  agreed  to  make  corrections  to  the  seniority  list  as 
appropriate  following  the  hearing  in  this  matter. 

The  District’s  Layoff Procedure 

14. 

According  to  Assistant  Superintendent  Whitlock,  the  District  staff  reviewed 

the  Board’s  resolution  and  determined  who  the  most  junior  employees  were  who  were 
providing  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  were  scheduled  to  be  reduced  or  eliminated 
under  the  Board’s  resolution.  For  these  employees,  the  District  attempted  to  determine  if  a 
displaced  employee  could  “bump”  a  more  junior  employee.’  The  Board  adopted  a  tie- 
breaking  procedure,  a  method  by  which  employees  having  the  same  seniority  date  could  be 
ranked  for  layoff  purposes.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  based  on  the  welfare  and  needs  of 
the  students.  The  use  of  the  tie-breaking  procedure  was  not  necessary  to  resolve  any  dispute 
related  to  the  layoffs  in  this  matter.  Through  this  elimination  process,  the  District  correctly 
determined  which  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices. 

Preliminary  layoff  notices  were  sent  to  39  employees,  essentially  the  same  number  of 

FTEs  that  were  being  reduced  or  eliminated  under  the  Board’s  resolution.  Ultimately,  no 
junior  employee  was  retained  by  the  District  to  provide  services  a  more  senior  employee  was 
available  to  provide. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  It  is  within  a  board’s  discretion  to  determine 
the  extent  to  which  it  will  reduce  a  particular  service.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen 
(1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 

reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  A  school  board’s 
decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply 

' 
or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  hoids  that  position. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

 

  

because  the  school  board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board 
of Trustees  of  Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute.  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (b)  provides: 

“As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the  same 
date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine  the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis 
of  needs  of  the  district  and  the  students  thereof.” 

4, 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  who  render  services  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
vy.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

5. 

As  a  result of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their  employment  will  be 
terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

RECOMMENDATION 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  respondents  previously  served 

with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the 
current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

These  employees  include  Devon  Alcorn,  Candelaria  Angeles,  Guadalupe  Araiza, 
William  Billingsley,  Stephanie  Blinco-Martinez,  Crystal  Branker,  Laura  Brumund,  Catherine 
Cade,  Erin  Corduan,  Jennifer  Cox,  Caryl  Crowell,  Heather  Dannecker,  Claire  Dewhirst, 
Mark  Epley,  Nancy  Foster,  Susan  Freije,  Claire  Gingerich,  Catherine  Girkins,  Stephanie 
Hall,  Katie  Hamro,  Laura  Herter,  Emily  Just,  David  Kootman,  Megan  Leech,  Caron Lieber, 
Inelda  Luna,  Jennifer  Matsumoto,  Claudia  Miramontes,  Jennifer  Moore,  Kerry  Pinto,  Debra 

9 

 

e@ 

Ralston,  Christa  Rhine,  Amy  Schwenke,  Catherine  Shabestari,  James  Sheffield,  Heather 
Sherer,  Keely  Smith,  Leticia  Stamos,  and  Steven  Stillman. 

patep: 

OS 

dministrative  Law  Judge 

Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

  

