  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SAN  JUAN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  : 

PROPOSED  REDUCTION  OR 
ELIMINATION  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS 
OF  SERVICES,  AFFECTING  23.64  FULL 
TIME  EQUIVALENT  CERTIFICATED 
EMPLOYEES. 

OAH  No.  2008020575 

@ 

@ 

Jakob  Blackwell 
Erin  Cirimele 
Timothy  Gager 
Chris  Lenz 
Shannon  Lopez 
Martin  McCrory 
Matthew  Mitts 
Erica  Oswald 
Breanna  Parker 
Jodee  Thompson 
Phoung  Tran 

  

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

On  April  23,  2008,  in  Sacramento,  California,  Ann  Elizabeth  Sarli,  Administrative 

Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State  of  California,  heard  this  matter. 

Linda  C.T.  Similick,  General  Counsel,  represented  the  San  Juan  Unified  School 

District  (District). 

Michael  N.  McCallum,  Attorney  at  Law,  assisted  by  Paralegal  Robin  Thompson, 

e@ 

represented  the  respondents. 

 

  

Evidence  was  received,  and  the  record  was  left  open  until  April  28,  2008,  for  the 

e 

receipt  of  written  closing  arguments.  On  April  28,  2008,  both  briefs  were  filed.  The 
District’ s  Post-Hearing  Brief  was  marked  as  Exhibit  31.  Respondents’  Closing  Brief  was 
marked  as  Exhibit  R.  The  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29, 
2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

Prior  to  March  11,  2008,  Larry  Graser,  Director  of  Human  Resources  of  the 
District,  sent  a  written  recommendation  to  the  Governing  Board  of  the  District  (Governing 
Board)  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  (PKS),  in  order  to 
reduce  expenses  for  the  2008-09  school  year.  As  a  result  of  the  Governor’s  January  2008 
budget  proposal,  the  District  expected  to  experience  a  budget  shortfall.  Mr.  Graser 
recommended  the  elimination  of  134.84  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  certificated  positions. 

2. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  2420, 
authorizing  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Resolution 
directed  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources,  or  his  or  her  designee,  to  send 
notices  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-09  school  year  to  the 
appropriate  number  of  certificated  employees  necessary  to  effectuate  the  reduction  of  the 
certificated  staff  in  an  amount  equal  to  134.84  FTE  positions. 

e 

3. 

On  March  11,  2008,  the  Governing  Board  also  adopted  Resolution  No.  2421, 

specifying  criteria  to  be  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  of  certificated 
employees  with  the  same  District  seniority  (tiebreaker  criteria). 

4, 

On  March  12,  2008,  Ruth  Peshkoff,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human 

Resources,  caused  to  be  served  on  all  affected  employees,  including  all  respondents,  written 
preliminary  notices  of  the  recommendation  to  the  Governing  Board  that  respondents’ 
services  would  not  be  required  for  the  ensuing  school  year  due  to  a  reduction  or 
discontinuation  of  PKS.  The  notices  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation,  as 
required  by  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955.  The  notices  provided  respondents 
with  information  and  deadlines  for  requesting  a  hearing  and  included  blank  Request  for 
Hearing  forms.  All  of  the  respondents  in  this  action  filed  timely  Requests  for  Hearing. 

5. 

On  March  28,  2008,  Larry  Graser  filed  an  Accusation  against  55  certificated 

employees,  in  his  official  capacity.  The  Accusation  was  served  on  March  28,  2008. 
Pursuant  to  a  Stipulation  between  the  District  and  counsel  for  the  represented  respondents, 
respondents’  counsel  filed  one  Notice  of  Defense  on  their  behalf.  Thereafter,  the  matter  was 
set  for  hearing.  Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955.

  

  

6. 

Subsequent  to  the  service  of  Accusations  on  the  affected  employees,  the 

District  restored  several  FTEs  and  thus  rescinded  nine  notices.  Additionally,  the  District 
removed  from  the  PKS  reduction  44.4  FTEs  in  multiple-subject/self-contained  classes.  It 
had  become  apparent  to  the  District  that  the  Legislature  was  not  going  to  increase 
teacher/student  ratios,  and  therefore  there  was  no  need  to  reduce  elementary  school  PKS. 
Those  positions  affected  by  a  possible  reduction  in  staff  for  the  K-3  CSR  program  were 
removed  from  the  layoff.  Additionally,  the  District  took  into  account  all  positively  assured 
attrition,  including  retirements  and  resignations. 

7. 

As a result  of  the  restoration  of  multiple  PKS,  and  after  accounting  for 

positively  assured  attrition,  the  Governing  Board  directed  the  District  to  decrease  the  number 
of  reduced  or  discontinued  PKS  to  23.64  FTE  positions,  beginning  not  later  than  the 
commencement  of  the  2008-09  school  year,  as  follows: 

  

Administrators 

Vice  Principal,  Elementary  School 
Vice  Principal,  High  School 
Curriculum  Coordinator 

  

  

  Subtotal 

FTE 

1.00 
3.50 
1.00 
5.50 

Non-Administrative  Certificated  Services 

  

  

  

  

4.00 
5.40 
2.00 
0.67 
0.40 
0.67 
0.20 
0.80 
4.00 
18.14 

Science 
Social  Science 
Physical  Education 
Agriculture 
Chinese 
Computers/Technology 
German 

  

  

  

  

Music 
Librarian 
  Subtotal 

  
    
  
   

Human  Resources  is  currently  in  the  process  of  reviewing  employee 
information  in  our  computer  system.  This  information  is  used  to 
generate  reports  for  the  district  to  contact  employees  and  to  ensure 
credential  information,  status  and  seniority  date  are  accurate.  The 
seniority  date  is  your  date  of  hire  or  your  return  date  if  you  resigned 

In  December  of  2007,  the  District  sent  letters  to  each  credentialed  employee. 
The  letters  set  forth  the  employees’  seniority  date  and  credential  information  recorded  with 
the  District.  In  pertinent  part,  the  letter  stated: 

TotalFTE 

23.64 

8. 

  

and  were  later  rehired.  It  reflects  continual  contractual  employment 
with  San  Juan,  without  a  break  in  contractual  service.  This  data 
will  be  used  to  determine  rights  in  the  event  of  board  reductions  or 
layoffs. 

e@ 

The  letter  requests  that  the  employee  review  the  information  therein  for  any  incorrect 
data  and  respond  if  there  are  errors.  The  letter  directs  the  employee  to  return  the  letter  with 
any  corrections  by  January  25,  2008,  or  Human  Resources  will  assume  that  the  information 
provided  therein  is  correct. 

9. 

The  Human  Resources  Department  incorporated  any  new  or  changed 

information  received  on  the  returned  letters  into  its  computer  records,  and  on  February  21, 
2008,  generated  seniority  lists  organized  by  seniority  date  and  alphabetically  by  last  name  of 
the  teacher.  A  separate  list  was  created  for  administrators. 

10. 

|  On  February  27,  2008,  Mr.  Graser  advised  all  teachers  by  e-mail  that  the 

District  had  developed a list  of  all  teachers  showing  seniority  date,  employment  status,  and 
credentials  held.  The  e-mail  advised  that  the  lists  are  provided  in  alphabetical  order  and  also 
in  order  of  seniority  and  may  be  viewed  in  the  district  office  lobby  during  normal  work 
hours.  The  e-mail  advised  that  duplicate  copies  of  both  listings  were  provided  to  the  San 
Juan  Teachers  Association.  The  e-mail  concluded  with  “you  are  welcome  and  encouraged  to 
review  these  lists  to  ensure  the  accuracy  of  your  information.” 

e 

11. 

12. 

employees.  There  are  no  administrators  among  the  respondents. 

All  respondents  in  this  action  are  classified  as  probationary  certificated 

On  April  15,  2008,  the  District  created  individual  lists  of  persons  occupying 
the  positions  affected  by  reduction  in  FTEs.  An  individual  list  was  created  for  each  of  the 
PKS:  vice  principles  of  elementary  schools;  vice  principals  of  high  schools;  curriculum 
coordinator;  science;  social  science;  physical  education;  foreign  language;  agriculture; 
Chinese;  computers/technology;  German;  music;  and  library.  The  most  junior  employees 
providing  these  services  were  identified,  and  where  necessary,  tie-breaking  criteria  were 
applied  to  those  with  the  same  seniority  date  to  determine  the  order  of  layoff.  The 
credentials  of  those  subject  to  layoff  were  reviewed  to  determine  whether  those  subject  to 
layoff  could  bump  into  a  position  held  by  a  junior  teacher. 

    

English-language  authorization.  He  presently  teaches  seventh  and  eighth  grade  history  (.67 
FTE)  and  explorer  (.33)  classes.  Pursuant  to  the  reduction  in  force,  his  FTE  was  reduced  to 
.67.  He  was  “bumped”  out  of  the  .33  position  by  Anne  Varinelli  (seniority  date  April  25, 

Jakob  Blackwell  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  with  an 

JAKOB  BLACKWELL 

13. 

 

  

2007).  Mr.  Blackwell  was  employed  by  the  District  on  August  24,  2007,!  undera  “DAY- 
TO-DAY  CONTRACT”  (day-to-day  contract).  This  contract  states  in  pertinent  part: 

The  San  Juan  Unified  School  District  is  pleased  to  offer  you  a  temporary  contract  to 
serve  as  a  classroom  teacher  on  a  day  to  day  temporary  basis  during  the  first  three 
months  of  the  school  year,  while  the  district  determines  its  ongoing  need  for 
additional  classrooms,  based  on  student  enrollment  and  assignment  of  students  to 
classes. 

On  September  28,  2007,  the  District  offered  Mr.  Blackwell  employment  as  a 
temporary  employee  during  the  2007-08  school  year.  According  to  the  temporary  contract, 
his  services  in  a  temporary  position  began  August  24,  2007,  and  ended  June  6,  2008.  Thus, 
the  District  designated  Mr.  Blackwell  a  temporary  employee  retroactive  to  the  date  he  began 
working  on  a  day-to-day  contract. 

In  January  and  February  2008,  the  District  went  through  the  process  described  below 

(Factual  Finding  24),  whereby  it  selected  temporary  employees  and  designated  them  as 
probationary  (the  selection  process).  Mr.  Blackwell  was  made  probationary  pursuant  to  the 
selection  process,  effective  March  7,  2008.  The  District  assigned  him a  seniority  date  of 
March  7,  2008. 

ERIN  CIRIMELE 

14. 

Ms.  Cirimele  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  with  an 

English-language  authorization  and  has  passed  an  examination  to  teach  English.  She  teaches 
1  FTE  English  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades.  She  was  selected  for  layoff  after  tie-breaking 
criteria  were  applied  to  those  assigned  to  teach  English  classes  and  who  held  the  same 
seniority  date.  Ms.  Cirimele  was  hired  by  the  District  on  August  16,  2007.  It  is  unclear 
whether  she  was  hired  as  a  temporary  teacher  or  under  a  day-to-day  contract.  Pursuant  to  the 
selection  process,  Ms.  Cirimele  was  made  probationary  effective  March  12,  2008,  and  the 
District  assigned  her  this  seniority  date. 

TIMOTHY  GAGER 

15. 

|  Mr.  Gager  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  mathematics  and  a  single- 

subject  credential  in  biological  sciences  with  an  English-language  authorization.  He  teaches 
1  FTE  high  school  psychology,  math,  and  integrated  science.  His  position  is  reduced  to  .50 
FTE  pursuant  to  being  “bumped”  by  senior  teachers  Susan  Sloan  (seniority  date  January  27, 
2003)  and  by  Anne  Varanelli  (seniority  date  April  25,  2007)  and  after  prevailing  on 
application  of  tie-breaking  criteria.  Mr.  Gager  was  hired  by  the  District  on  August  17,  2007. 
It  is  unclear  whether  he  was  hired  as  a  temporary  teacher  or  under  a  day-to-day  contract. 

'  Mr,  Blackwell  maintains  that  he  actually  began  working  on  August  23,  2007.  However,  his  first  date  of  the  paid 
service  was  proven  to  be  August  24,  2007. 

  

  

 

  

Pursuant  to  the  selection  process,  Mr.  Gager  was  made  probationary  effective  March  12, 
2008,  and  the  District  assigned  him  this  seniority  date. 

e 

CHRIS  LENZ 

16. 

Ms.  Lenz  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  with  an  English- 

language  authorization.  She  teaches  1  FTE  high  school  world  history  and  U.S.  history.  Her 
position  is  eliminated  pursuant  to  the  reduction  in  force.  Ms.  Lenz  was  hired  by  the  District 
on  a  day-to-day  contract  on  August  17,  2007.  On  September  28,  2007,  the  District  offered 
Ms.  Lenz  employment  as  a  temporary  employee  during  the  2007-08  school  year.  According 
to  the  temporary  contract,  her  services  in  a  temporary  position  began  August  20,  2007,  and 
ended  June  6,  2008.  Thus,  the  District  designated  Ms.  Lenz  a  temporary  employee 
retroactive  to  three  days  after  the  date  she  began  working  on  a  day-to-day  contract.  Pursuant 
to  the  selection  process,  Ms.  Lenz  was  made  probationary  effective  March  12,  2008,  and  the 
District  assigned  her  this  seniority  date. 

SHANNON  LOPEZ 

17. 

Ms.  Lopez  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  English  with  an  English- 

language  authorization.  She  teaches  1  FTE  high  school  English.  Her  position  is  eliminated 
pursuant  to  the  reduction  in  force.  The  District  hired  Ms.  Lopez  on  August  16,  2007.  It  is 
unclear  whether  she  was  hired  as  a  temporary  teacher  or  under  a  day-to-day  contract. 
Pursuant  to  the  selection  process,  Ms.  Lopez  was  made  probationary  effective  March  12, 
2008,  and  the  District  assigned  her  this  seniority  date. 

e 

MARTIN  McCRORY 

18. 

|  Mr.  McCrory  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  Physical  Education  and  an 

English-language  authorization.  He  teaches  1  FTE  seventh  and  eight  grade  physical 
education  and  adaptive  physical  education.  His  position  is  reduced  by  .60  FTE  as  he  was 
“bumped”  by  Greg  Deal  who  holds  a  seniority  date  of  March  10,  2008.  His  position  was 
further  reduced  .20  FTE  pursuant  to  application  of  tie-breaking  criteria.  The  District  hired 
Mr.  McCrory  on  August  17,  2007  under  a  day-to-day  contract.  On  September  5,  2007,  the 
District  offered  Mr.  McCrory  employment  as  a  temporary  employee  during  the  2007-08 
school  year.  According  to  the  temporary  contract,  his  services  in  a  temporary  position  began 
August  17,  2007,  and  ended  June  6,  2008.  Thus,  the  District  designated  Mr.  McCrory  a 
temporary  employee  retroactive  to  the  date  he  began  working  on  a  day-to-day  contract. 
Pursuant  to  the  selection  process,  Mr.  McCrory  was  made  probationary  effective  March  12, 
2008,  and  the  District  assigned  him  this  seniority  date. 

MATTHEW  MILLS 

19. 

Mr.  Mills  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  and  an  English- 

language  authorization.  He  teaches  high  school  1  FTE  in  world  history  and  freshman 
foundation.  His  position  is  reduced  by  .33  FTE  as  he  was  “bumped”  by  Tima  Burgess  who 

  

@ 

 

  

holds  a  seniority  date  of  April  26,  2007.  The  District  hired  Mr.  Mills  on  September  7,  2006. 
It  is  unclear  whether  he  was  hired  as  a  temporary  teacher  or  under  a  day-to-day  contract. 
However,  the  District  stipulated  that  Mr.  Mills  was  hired  as  a  temporary  employee,  with  his 
first  date  of  paid  service  on  September  7,  2006.  The  District  assigned  Mr.  Mills  a  seniority 
date  of  August  16,  2007  as  his  first  date  of  paid  service  as  a  probationary  employee.  There 
was  no  evidence  of  when  he  was  assigned  this  date.  There  was  no  evidence  of  whether  he 
was  assigned  this  date  pursuant  to  the  selection  process  described  below,  or  earlier.  There 
was  no  argument  made  on  his  behalf  that  Mr.  Mills  was  improperly  hired  as  a  temporary 
employee  in  violation  of  the  Education  Code. 

ERICA  OSWALD 

20. 

Ms.  Oswald  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  Biological  Sciences  with  a 

specialization  in  geosciences  and  an  English-language  authorization.  She  teaches  high 
school  1  FTE  in  biology  and  earth  sciences.  She  is  bumped  out  of  her  position  .20  FTE  by 
Sara  Holbrook  (seniority  date  April  25,  2007),  Anne  Varanelli  .40  FTE  (seniority  date  April 
25,  2007),  and  .40  FTE  by  Donald  Zschokke  (seniority  date  April  25,  2007). 

The  District  hired  Ms.  Oswald  on  August  16,  2007.  It  is  unclear  whether  she  was 

hired  under  a  day-to-day  or  temporary  contract.  Pursuant  to  the  selection  process,  Ms. 
Oswald  was  made  probationary  effective  March  12,  2008,  and  the  District  assigned  her  this 
seniority  date. 

BREANNA  PARKER 

21. 

Ms.  Parker  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  Physical  Education  with  an 

English-language  authorization.  She  teaches  seventh  and  eight  grade  1  FTE  in  physical 
education  and  adaptive  physical  education.  She  is  bumped  .60  FTE  out  of  her  position:  .20 
FTE  by  Jay  Stare  (seniority  date  May  23,  2007);  .40  FTE  by  Greg  Deal  (seniority  date  March 
10,  2008).  She  retained  .20  FTE  of  her  position  pursuant  to  a  tie-breaker. 

The  District  hired  Ms.  Parker  on  August  16,  2007.  It  is  unclear  whether  she  was  hired 
under  a  day-to-day  or  temporary  contract.  Pursuant  to  the  selection  process,  Ms.  Parker  was 
made  probationary  effective  March  12,  2008,  and  the  District  assigned  her  this  seniority  date. 

JODEE  THOMPSON 

22. 

Ms.  Thompson  holds a  single-subject  credential  in  English  with  an  English- 

language  authorization.  She  teaches  high  school  1  FTE  in  English.  She  is  bumped  out  of  her 
position  by  .23  FTE  by  Christina  Schlatter  (seniority  date  March  7,  2008).  Pursuant  to a  tie- 
breaker  .40  FTE  of  the  remaining  FTE  was  eliminated,  and  she  retained  .37  FTE. 

The  District  hired  Ms.  Parker  on  August  16,  2007.  It  is  unclear  whether  she  was  hired 
under  a  day-to-day  or  temporary  contract.  Pursuant  to  the  selection  process,  Ms.  Parker  was 
made  probationary  effective  March  12,  2008,  and  the  District  assigned  her  this  seniority  date. 

   

  

PHOUNG  TRAN 

@ 

23. 

Ms.  Tran  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  with  an  English- 
language  authorization.  She  teaches  high  school  1  FTE:  .67  FTE  in  world  history  and  .33 
FTE  in  AVID.  She  is  bumped  out  of  her  position  by  .33  FTE  by  a  senior  employee,  Sarah 
Gibson  (seniority  date  August  4,  2005).  She  retains  .67  FTE.  The  District  hired  Ms.  Tran  on 
January  16,  2007,  as  a  student  teacher  teaching  one  class  while  she  was  working  on  her 
credential.  She  was  hired  as  a  probationary  teacher  on  August  16,  2007.  The  contract  set 
forth  the  date  of  August  16,  2007  as  the  first  date  of  paid  employment.  She  maintains  that 
her  first  date  of  service  was  actually  August  15,  2007,  as  the  District  required  her  to  come  to 
work  on  that  day. 
August  16,  2007,  this  is  her  seniority  date. 

Because  her  first  date  of  paid  service  in  a  probationary  position  was 

CALCULATION  OF  SENIORITY  DATES  FOR  PROBATIONAY  EMPLOYEES  FIRST 
RENDERING  SERVICE  AS  TEMPORARY 

24. 

In  February  of  2008,  the  District  performed  a  yearly  audit  to  determine  the 

number  of  temporary  teachers  employed  and  the  number  of  teachers  who  were  on  leaves  of 
abserice.  The  audit  disclosed  that  there  were  approximately  79  teachers  on  leaves  of  absence 
as  of  February  2008.  There  were  approximately  182  certificated  employees  in  temporary 
classifications.  The  District  determined  that  there  were  approximately  106  temporary 
certificated  employees  in  excess  of  the  number  of  teachers  on  leave  at  the  time.  The  District 
then  selected  106  temporary  employees,  on  a  merit  basis  and  according  to  District  need,  and 
moved  them  to  probationary  status.  The  District  assigned  these  new  probationary  employees 
starting  dates  of  March  7,  2008,  March  10,  2008  or  March  12,  2008,  depending  upon  which 
school  employed  the  teacher.  These  starting  dates  were  designated  as  the  employees’ 
seniority  dates. 

e 

25. 

Nine  of  the  11  respondents  (Tran  and  Mills  excepted)  were  initially  hired  on 
temporary  or  day-to-day  contracts.  Ultimately,  all  nine  were  hired  in  temporary  status  prior 
to  being  selected  for  probationary  status.  These  nine  respondents  maintain  that  they  were 
misclassified  as  temporary  employees  because,  at  the  time  they  were  hired,  they  did  not  fit 
any  of  the  criteria  for  classifications  as  temporary  employees  set  forth  in  the  Education  Code. 
Thus,  they  maintain  that  according  to  the  Education  Code  they  should  have  been  classified  as 
probationary  employees  as  of  the  date  of  their  hire.  If  they  had  been  classified  as 
probationary  employees  as  of  the  date  of  their  hire,  their  seniority  dates  would  predate  those 
dates  that  were  used  to  determine  their  seniority  for  layoff  purposes. 

The  principal  issue  these  respondents  raise  is  whether  some  or  all  of  the 

respondents  classified  by  the  District  as  temporary  employees  properly  should  have  been 
classified  instead  as  probationary.  If  so,  the  effect,  if  any,  of  this  misclassification  on  the 
elimination  or  reduction  of  their  services  must  be  determined. 

  

| 

 

26. 

In  the  recent  case  of  Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v. 

Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.  App.  4th  1260  (Bakersfield),  the  Appellate 
Court  addressed  the  issue  of  whether  the  District’s  practice  of  classifying  teachers  as 
temporary  employees,  because  they  held  something  less  than  a  preliminary  or  professional 
(clear)  credential,  violated  the  Education  Code.?  The  Court’s  holding  is  instructive  here. 

The  Court  held  that  the  District  could  classify  as  temporary  only  those  employees 

who,  by  virtue  of  the  position  they  occupied  or  the  manner  of  service  they  performed, 
were  defined  or  described  as  temporary  employees  in  the  Education  Code.  All 
certificated  employees  who  were  not  classified  as  temporary  employees  under  the 
Education  Code,  and  who  were  not  properly  classified  under  the  Education  Code  as 
permanent  or  substitute  employees,  had  to  be  classified  as  probationary  employees  under 
Education  Code  section  44915,  and  had  to  be  accorded  the  rights  of  probationary 
employees  as  provided  in  the  Code.? 

The  Bakersfield  Court  identified  the  circumstances  under  which a  District  could 
properly  classify  an  employee  as  temporary  under  the  Education  Code.  “The  Education 
Code  recognizes  two  general  kinds  of  temporary  employees:  those  who  are  employed  to 
serve  for  less  than  three  or  four  months,  or  in  some  types  of  limited,  emergency,  or 
temporary  assignments  or  classes  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44919,  44921,  44986);  and  those  who 
are  employed  for  up  to  one  year  to  replace  a  certificated  employee  who  is  on  leave  or  has 
a  lengthy  illness  (Ed.  Code,  §§  44920,  44918).  In  addition,  persons  employed  in 
categorically  funded  programs  or  in  programs  operated  by  a  District  under  contract  are 
treated  like  temporary  employees  in  certain  respects  (Ed.  Code,  §  44909)  as  are  persons 
145  Cal.  App. 
employed  as  substitute  teachers  (Ed.  Code,  §  44917).”  (Bakersfield,  supra, 
Ath  at  p.  1281.) 

The  Bakersfield  court  held  that  the  Education  Code  does  not  grant  school  districts 

discretion  to  deviate  from  this  statutory  classification  scheme,  and  section  44915  makes 
probationary  status  the  default  classification  for  certificated  employees  who  are  not 
otherwise  required  by  the  Education  Code  to  be  classified  as  permanent,  substitute,  or 
temporary  employees.  (Citing  Eureka  Teacher's  Assn.  v.  Board  of Education  (1988)  202  Cal. 
App.  3d  469,  474  [school  district's  control  over  teacher  classification  ends  where  the  rights 
afforded  teachers  by  the  Code  begins].) 

27. 

Inthe  matter  before  us,  three  certificated  employees  (Jakob  Blackwell,  Chris 
Lenz  and  Martin  McCrory)  were  initially  hired  on  a  day-to-day  contract,  which  specifically 
stated  that  they  were  retained  on  a  day-to-day  temporary  basis  during  the  first  three  months 
of  the  school  year,  while  the  District  determined  its  ongoing  need  for  additional  classrooms, 
based  on  student  enrollment  and  assignment  of  students  to  classes. 

 
  

?All  statutory  references  are  to  the  California  Education  Code  unless  otherwise  indicated. 
*  Including  the  right  to  accrue  seniority  under  Education  Code  section  44845,  and  the  rights  to  notice  and  a  hearing 
in  the  event  of  a  workforce  reduction  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

  

Section  44919  provides  in  pertinent  part: 

(a)  Governing  boards  of  school  districts  shall  classify  as  temporary 
employees  those  persons  requiring  certification  qualifications,  other 
than  substitute  employees,  who  are  employed  to  serve  from  day  to 
day  during  the  first  three  school  months  of  any  school  term  to  teach 
temporary  classes  not  to  exist  after  the  first  three  school  months  of 
any  school  term  or  to  perform  any  other  duties  which  do  not  last 
longer  than  the  first  three  school  months  of  any  school  term,  or  to 
teach  in  special  day  and  evening  classes  for  adults  or  in  schools  of 
migratory  population  for  not  more  than  four  school  months  of  any 
school  term.  Ifthe  classes  or  duties  continue  beyond  the  first  three 
school  months  of any  school  term  or  four  school  months  for  special 
day  and  evening  classes  for  adults,  or  schools  for  migratory 
population,  the  certificated  employee,  unless  a  permanent 
employee,  shall  be  classified  as  a  probationary  employee.’  The 
school  year  may  be  divided  into  not  more  than  two  school  terms  for 
the  purposes  of  this  section. 

28. 

Pursuant  to  section  44919,  after  the  first  three  months  of  the  school  term 
Jakob  Blackwell,  Chris  Lenz  and  Martin  McCrory,  if  they  were  to  be  retained,  were  to  be 
retained  as  probationary  employees.  These  three  continued  teaching  their  assignments  past 
the  third  month  of  the  semester.  The  District  failed  to  adhere  to  the  mandate  of  section 
44919  when,  instead  of  classifying  these  day-to-day  employees  as  probationary  upon  the 
fourth  month  of  their  employment,  it  classified  them  as  temporary  in  September. 

29. 

Pursuant  to  section  44920,  “the  governing  board  of  a  school  district  may 
employ  as a  teacher,  for  a  complete  school  year,  but  not  less  than  one  semester  during  a 
school  year  unless  the  date  of  rendering  first  paid  service  begins  during  the  second  semester 
and  prior  to  March  15th,  any  person  holding  appropriate  certification  documents,  and  may 
classify  such  person  as  a  temporary  employee.  The  employment  of such  persons  shall  be 
based  upon  the  need for  additional  certificated  employees  during  a  particular  semester  or 
year  because  a  certificated  employee  has  been  granted  leave  for  a  semester  or  year,  or  is 
experiencing  long-term  illness,  and  shall  be  limited,  in  number  of persons  so  employed,  to 
that  need,  as  determined  by  the  governing  board.”  Section  44920  specifies  that  temporary 
employees  are  only  to  be  hired  if  there  are  long-term  vacancies  due  to  a  teacher's  leave  of 
absence.  (Melanie  Welch  v.  Oakland  Unified  School  District,  and  Mark  Petrofsky  v  Oakland 
Unified  School  District  (2001)  91  Cal.  App.  4th  1421,  1431-1432.) 

*  Emphasis  added. 
°  Emphasis  added. 

10

  

30. 

In  the  matter  before  us,  six  of  the  respondents  (Phoung  Tran  and  Matthew 

Mills  excepted)  were  initially  hired  as  temporary  employees  at  the  beginning  of  the  2007-08 
school  year.  The  District  did  not  conduct  an  audit  to  determine  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  granted  leave  for  a  semester  or  year,  or  teachers  on  leave  due  to  long-term  illness, 
until  February  2008.  No  accounting  was  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  2007-08  school  year 
to  determine  how  many  certificated  employees  were  on  leave  and  how  many  certificated 
employees  should  be  hired  as  temporary  employees  to  replace  those  on  leave.  Nor  was  there 
evidence  that  the  District  relied  upon  a  prior  year’s  audit  in  determining  how  many 
temporary  teachers  to  hire  in  2007-08. 

31. 

It  is  clear  that  an  audit  or  an  accounting  of  teachers  on  leave  at  any  given  time 

is  a  complex  task  in  a  District  this  size.  The  District  has  over  42,000  students,  over  2,000 
certificated  employees,  and  approximately  70  schools.  However,  section  44920  directs  that  a 
District  may  employ  no  more  long-term  replacement  teachers  than  it  has  permanent  or 
probationary  teachers  absent  on  leave  at  any  one  time.  (Bakersfield,  supra,  145  Cal.  App. 
4th  at  p.  1281.)  It  is  not  necessary  to  maintain  strict  mathematical  correspondence  at  any 
given  time  between  the  number  of  teachers  on  leave  and  the  number  of  temporary  teachers 
hired.  And,  section  44920  does  not  require  that  Districts  assign  a  temporary  teacher  to  a 
classroom  of  a  particular  permanent  or  probationary  teacher  whose  absence  (due  to  leave  or 
illness)  has  necessitated  the  hiring  of  the  temporary  teacher.  (Gloria  Paulis  v.  Board  Of 
But,  a 
Trustees  Of Sequoia  Union  High  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.  App.  3d  59,  63.) 
mid-school-year  excess  of  106  temporary  teachers  over  teachers  on  leave  suggests  that  the 
District  did  not  make  an  effort  at  the  commencement  of  the  school  year  to  ascertain  the 
number  of  teachers  on  leave,  and  thus,  the  numbers  of  certificated  employees  who  could  be 
hired  as  temporary  teachers, 

32. 

The  District  maintains  that  respondents  have  failed  to  show  that  at  the 

commencement  of  the  school  year  there  were  more  temporary  teachers  hired  than  there  were 
teachers  on  leave.  However,  respondents  have  demonstrated  that  non-compliance  with 
section  44920  can  be  inferred  from  the  excess  of  temporary  teachers  in  February  and  from 
the  fact  that  most  new  teachers  hired  in  the  2007-08  school  year  were  hired  under  temporary 
contracts.  Additionally,  the  inclination  of  the  District  to  convert  day-to-day  contracts  to 
temporary  contracts,  without  conducting  an  audit  to  determine  if  more  temporary  teachers 
were  warranted,  supports  the  inference  that  the  District  hired  temporary  teachers  without 
regard  to  the  number  of  teachers  on  leave. 

The  District  has  not  produced  contrary  evidence.  The  District  has  not  provided 
evidence  that  the  approximately  106  temporary  certificated  employees  in  excess  of  the 
number  of  teachers  on  leave  in  February  2008  were  employed  to  serve  in  capacities  the 
Education  Code  designates  as  temporary:  (1)  those  employed  for  less  than  three  or  four 
months,  or  in  some  types  of  limited,  emergency,  or  temporary  assignments  or  classes 
(sections  44919,  44921  and  44986);  (2)  those  employed  for  up  to  one  year  to  replace  a 
certificated  employee  who  is  on  leave  or  has  a  lengthy  illness  (sections  44920  and  44918); 
(3)  those  employees  in  categorically  funded  programs  or  in  programs  operated  by  a  District 
under  contract  who  are  treated  like  temporary  employees  in  certain  respects  (section  44909); 

. 

   

11 

     

and  (4)  those  employed  as  substitute  teachers  (sections  44917).  (Bakersfield  ,  supra,  145  Cal. 
App.  4th  at  p.  1281.) 

33. 

The  District  maintains  that  even  if  it  erroneously  employed  more  temporary 
teachers  than  permitted  under  the  Education  Code  there  is  no  way  to  determine  whether  the 
respondents  herein  are  included  in  the  number  of  temporary  employees  properly  hired  to 
replace  teachers  on  leave  at  the  commencement  of  the  school  year.  In  February  2008, 
approximately  79  teachers  were  on  leave.  The  inference  can  properly  be  drawn  that 
approximately  79  teachers  were  on  leave  at  the  commencement  of  the  school  year.  Thus,  it 
appears  the  District  is  maintaining  that  the  nine  respondents  hired  as  temporary  and  day-to- 
day  teachers  could  have  been  temporary  in  that  they  were  replacing  some  of  the 
approximately  79  teachers  on  leave  at  the  commencement  of  the  school  year. 

Clearly,  the  District’s  failure  to  properly  account  for  teachers  on  leave  at  the 

commencement  of  the  school  year  has  made  it  impossible  for  respondents  to  ascertain 
whether  they  were  hired  to  replace  one  of  the  approximately  79  teachers  on  leave.  The 
burden  is  on  the  District  to  show  which  teachers  were  hired  to  replace  teachers  on  leave.  The 
District  has  not  met  this  burden.  Additionally,  the  District  designated  these  nine  respondents 
as  part  of  the  106  excess  temporary  employees  on  staff  in  February  2008,  and  made  them 
probationary.  The  District  has  thus  conceded  that  these  employees  were  not  filling  in  for 
teachers  on  leave  in  February.  The  inference  can  properly  be  drawn  that  neither  were  these 
employees  filling  in  for  teachers  on  leave  at  the  outset  of  the  school  year. 

e@ 

34. 

Because  temporary  employees  are  not  guaranteed  procedural  due  process  by 

statute,  temporary  classifications  are  narrowly  defined  by  the  Legislature  and  should  be 
strictly  interpreted.  (Balen  v.  Peralta  Junior  College  Dist.(1974)  11  Cal.3d  821,  826).  Thus, 
section  44920  is  narrowly  construed  to  require  that  the  employment  of  temporary  employees 
be  based  upon  the  need  for  additional  certificated  employees  during  a  particular  semester  or 
year  and  the  need  must  be  determined  at  the  time  of  employment  of  the  temporary  persons. 
The  District’s  wholesale  hiring  of  temporary  employees  to  meet  a  perceived  or 
unsubstantiated  need,  subject  to  audit  and  correction  a  semester  later,  deprives  misclassified 
temporary  employees  of  the  rights  they  would  be  accorded  as  probationary  employees. 

35. 

In  summary,  employees,  Jakob  Blackwell,  Chris  Lenz  and  Martin  McCrory 
became  probationary  employees  when  the  District  converted  their  day-to-day  contracts  to 
temporary  contracts.  The  temporary  contracts  designated  the  first  dates  of  paid  service  in  the 
temporary  position.  As  these  employees  were  not  filling  any  positions  that  the  Education 
Code  permits  temporary  classification,  these  employees  became  probationary  employees  on 
the  dates  they  were  first  hired  as  “temporary.”  Thus,  Jakob  Blackwell  became  a  probationary 
employee  on  August  24,  2007,  Chris  Lenz  became  a  probationary  employee  on  August  20, 
2007,  and  Martin  McCrory  became  a  probationary  employee  on  August  17,  2007. 

 Inrespect  to  the  remaining  respondents  (except  Phoung  Tran  and  Matthew 

Mills),  they  became  probationary  employees  on  their  first  day  of  paid  service  under 

@

   

36. 

  

temporary  contracts:  Erin  Cirimele  on  August  16,  2007;  Timothy  Gager  on  August  17,  2007; 
Shannon  Lopez  on  August  17,  2007;  Erica  Oswald  on  August  16,  2007;  Breanna  Parker  on 
August  16,  2007;  and  Jodee  Thompson  on  August  16,  2007. 

37. 

Because  of  their  misclassifications  as  temporary  employees,  the  seniority  dates 

of  Blackwell,  Cirimele,  Gager,  Lenz,  Lopez,  McCrory,  Oswald,  Parker  and  Thompson  were 
incorrect  when  the  District  formulated  its  seniority  lists  and  applied  its  tie-breaking  criteria. 
Therefore,  the  order  in  which  these  respondents  were  laid  off  relative  to  the  District’s  other 
probationary  employees  was  incorrect.  The  evidence  presented  at  hearing  did  not  equip  the 
Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  means  to  determine  the  relative  seniority  of  these 
respondents  among  the  remaining  probationary  employees.  Therefore,  to  avoid  retaining 
junior  certificated  employees  in  violation  of  section  44955,  the  layoff  notices  issued  to  these 
respondents  must  be  rescinded.® 

38. 

Asset  forth  above,  Phuong  Tran  was  hired  as  a  probationary  employee.  She 

has  a  seniority  date  of  August  16,  2007.  There  is  no  evidence  that  she  was  initially 
misclassified  as  a  temporary  employee.  Ms.  Tran  holds a  single-subject  credential  in  social 
science  with  an  English-language  authorization.  She  teaches  high  school  1  FTE:  .67  FTE  in 
world  history  and  .33  FTE  in  AVID.  She  is  affected  by  the  Board  Resolution  to  eliminate 
5.40  FTE  in  social  science.  She  is  bumped  out  of  her  position  by  .33  FTE  by  a  senior 
employee,  Sarah  Gibson  (seniority  date  August  4,  2005).  She  retains  .67  FTE.  The  District 
did  not  retain  a  junior  employee  to  render  service  which  Ms.  Tran  is  certificated  to  render. 

39. 

Matthew  Mills  was  hired  as  a  temporary  employee  on  September  7,  2006,  and 

made  probationary  on  August  16,  2007.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he  was  initially 
misclassified  as  a  temporary  employee.  (He  was  hired a  year  prior  to  the  remaining  group  of 
respondents.)  Mr.  Mills  holds  a  single-subject  credential  in  social  science  and  an  English- 
language  authorization.  He  teaches  high  school  1  FTE  in  world  history  and  freshman 
foundation.  His  position  is  reduced  by  .33  FTE  as  he  was  “bumped”  by  Tima  Burgess  who 
holds  a  seniority  date  of  April  26,  2007.  He  retains  .67  FTE.  The  District  did  not  retain  a 
junior  employee  to  render  service  which  Mr.  Mills  is  certificated  to  render. 

    

Cause  exists  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  and  of  23.64  FTE  certificated  positions  at  the  end  of  the  2007-2008  school  year, 
pursuant  to  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

sections  44949  and  44955.  All  notices  and  other  jurisdictional  requirements  of  those  sections 
have  been  met. 

®  The  remaining  issues  raised  by  these  respondents  are  not  addressed  herein,  as  their  layoff  notices  must  be 
rescinded  due  to  their  misclassification  as  temporary  employees. 

Jurisdiction  for  the  subject  proceeding  exists  pursuant  to  Education  Code 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

 

2. 

1, 

13 

  

3. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Governing  Board  Resolution  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  can  be  reduced  under  Education  Code  section  44955.  The  Governing 
Board’s  decision  to  reduce  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and 
was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion. 

4. 

The  reduction  of  the  particular  kinds  of  services  and  the  resultant  reduction  in 
23.64  FTE  certificated  positions  was  done  for  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  the  pupils.  The 
decision  was  made  because  of  factors  affecting  the  District  budget  for  the  ensuing  school 
year,  including  the  state  budget  crisis  with  the  resultant  possible  loss  of  revenue  from  the 
state. 

5. 

By  reason  of  the  facts  set  forth  in  the  Factual  Findings  and  Discussion  | 

through  37,  the  layoff  notices  sent  to  respondents  Jakob  Blackwell,  Erin  Cirimele,  Timothy 
Gager,  Chris  Lenz,  Shannon  Lopez,  Martin  McCrory,  Erica  Oswald,  Breanna  Parker  and 
Jodee  Thompson  must  be  rescinded  in  order  to  avoid  retention  of junior  employees  to 
perform  services  which  these  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

6. 

As  set  forth  in  Factual  Findings  and  Discussion  38  and  39,  Phuong  Tran  and 

Matthew  Mills  were  properly  served  with  layoff  notices  advising  them  that  their  services 
would  be  reduced  .33  FTE.  No  employees  junior  to  Phuong  Tran  and  Matthew  Mills  were 
retained  to  perform  .33  FTE  services  that  these  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent  to 
render. 

1. 

2. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

The  layoff  notices  sent  to  respondents  Jakob  Blackwell,  Erin  Cirimele, 

The  Accusation  against  respondents  Jakob  Blackwell,  Erin  Cirimele,  Timothy 

Timothy  Gager,  Chris  Lenz,  Shannon  Lopez,  Martin  McCrory,  Erica  Oswald,  Breanna 
Parker  and  Jodee  Thompson  shall  be  rescinded. 

Gager,  Chris  Lenz,  Shannon  Lopez,  Martin  McCrory,  Erica  Oswald,  Breanna  Parker  and 
Jodee  Thompson  shall  be  dismissed. 

   

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Phoung  Tran  that  her  services  will  be  reduced  by  .33 

FTE  in  the  2008-09  school  year. 

3. 

14 

@ 

4. 

Notice  shall  be  given  to  Matthew  Mills  that  his  services  will  be  reduced  by  .33 

FTE  in  the  2008-09  school  year. 

Dated:  May  6,  2008 

bone Chk 
ANN  ELIZABETH  SARLI 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

    

  

15 

