BEFORE  THE  BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES 
OF  THE 
SOUTHERN  KERN  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusation  Against: 

Amy  Armstrong,  Maryanna  Baldridge, 
Alicia  Mattson,  Cynthia  McNutt,  Jessica 
Mountz,  Aida  Ortiz,  Mary  Vallejo,  Thomas 
York, 

Respondents. 

  

OAH  No.  2008030682 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  David  L.  Benjamin,  State  of  California,  Office  of 

Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Rosamond,  California,  on  May  5,  2008. 

Peter  C.  Carton,  Attorney  at  Law,  Schools  Legal  Service,  represented  complainant 

Rodney  J.  Van  Norman,  Superintendent  of  the  Southern  Kern  Unified  School  District. 

Michael  R.  Feinberg,  Attorney  at  Law,  Schwartz,  Steinsapir,  Dohrmann  &  Sommers 

LLP,  represented  respondents  Amy  Armstrong,  Maryanna  Baldridge,'  Alicia  Mattson, 
Cynthia  McNutt,  Jessica  Mountz,  Aida  Ortiz,  and  Mary  Vallejo. 

There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  respondent  Thomas  York. 

The  record  was  held  open  at  the  request  of  the  parties  to  permit  them  to  file 
simultaneous  closing  briefs,  which  were  timely  filed  on  May  7,  2008.  Complainant’s  brief 
was  marked  as  Exhibit  15  and  respondents’  brief  was  marked  as  Exhibit  L.  The  parties 
stipulated  to  an  extension  of  time  to  May  12,  2008,  for  the  submission  (by  facsimile 
transmission)  of a  proposed  decision  to  the  Southern  Kern  Unified  School  District. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Rodney  J.  Van  Norman  made  and  filed  the  accusation  in  his  official  capacity 

as  Superintendent  of  the  Southern  Kern  Unified  School  District. 

2. 

Respondents  are  certificated  employees  of  the  district. 

' 

At  the  conclusion of the  hearing,  the  district  rescinded  its  layoff  notice  to  Maryanna  Baldridge. 

As  a  result,  she  is  no  longer  a  respondent  in  this  matter. 

-1- 

 

  

3. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  district’s  governing  board  adopted  Resolution  No.  07- 

08-10  reducing  particular  kinds  of  services  and  directing  the  superintendent  to give 
appropriate  notices  to  certificated  employees  whose  positions  will  be  affected  by  the  action 
(PKS  resolution). 

e@ 

4, 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  James  A.  Johnson,  the  district’s  Assistant 

Superintendent  for  Personnel  and  Operations,  gave  written  notice  to  22  certificated 
employees,  including  respondents,  of  the  recommendation  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  Each  notice  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.” 

5. 

6. 

Each  of  the  respondents  filed  a  timely  request  for  hearing  to  determine  if  there 

is  cause  for  terminating  his  or  her  services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

An  accusation  was  served  on  each  of  the  respondents.  With  the  exception  of 

respondent  York,  each  of  the  respondents  filed  a  notice  of  defense.  All prehearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met  as  to  each  respondent. 

7. 

In  its  PKS  resolution,  the  governing  board  took  action  to  reduce  the  following 

particular  kinds of  service  for  the  2008-2009  school  year: 

Services  being  reduced  or  eliminated 

Self-contained  Classroom  Instruction, 
Grades  K-6 

Administration 

Departmentalized  Instruction,  High  School 
English  (6  sections) 

History  (6  sections) 

FTE 

24 

1 

1 

1 

e 

‘The  total  reduction  of  FTE  positions  in  the  PKS  resolution  is  27. 

8. 

The  PKS  resolution  directs  the  superintendent  to  “determine  which 

employees’  services  may  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year  as  a  result  of  this 
reduction  in  services  and  to  give  those  employees  notice  of  the  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  that  they  not  be  reemployed  not  later  than  March  15,  2008...  .” 

>  Prior  to  hearing,  the  district  rescinded  its  layoff  notices  to  Pamella  Anderson,  Dorothy  Bones, 

Susan  Hemmis,  Kristina  Hillman,  Michelle  Hubkey,  Catherine  Jones,  Jennifer  Kurfess,  Tracy  Lethgo, 
Christen  Luther,  Keith  Meyer,  Julie  Mozee,  Tara  Schank,  Christine  Shoptaw,  and  Amanda  Trimillos. 

    

-2-

@ 

9. 

The  reductions  called  for  by  the  PKS  resolution  are  based  upon  the  governing 
board’s  uncertainty  over  the  level of  state  funding  the  district  will  receive  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

Seniority  dates  of respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo 

10. 

|  Respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo  disagree  with  the  seniority  date 
assigned  to  them  by  the  district.  According  to  the  district’s  seniority  list,  their  seniority  date 
is  August  10,  2006.  Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson  testified  that  he  reviewed 
respondents’  employment  contracts  and  that,  under  those  contracts,  August  10  is  the  first 
date  that  each  of  the  respondents  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district.  Respondents  assert 
that  their  seniority  date  should  be  August  7,  2006,  the  first  date  that  they  attended  training  for 
which  they  were  paid  by  the  district. 

11. 

Respondent  Vallejo’s  offer  of  employment  and  employment  contract  were 

admitted  into  evidence;  the  offers  and  contracts  for  Armstrong  and  McNutt  were  not  offered 
into  evidence.  On  August  7,  2006,  respondent  Vallejo  accepted  the  district’s  written  offer  of 
employment.  The  offer  states  (among  other  things)  that  she  would  be  paid  an  annual  salary 
of  $41,638  for  183  days,  “starting  August  10,  2006  and  ending  June  1,  2007.”  On  August 
10,  2006,  respondent  Vallejo  signed  a  contract  of  employment  as  a  probationary  employee 
with  the  district. 
In  the  contract,  the  parties  agreed  that  respondent  Vallejo’s  service  to  the 
district  “will  be  for  183  days  scheduled  at  the  convenience of District,  between  8/10/2006 
and  6/1/2007.”  (Original  emphasis.)  The  contract  states  that  the  district  will  pay  respondent 
her  annual  salary  of  $42,970  in  12  equal  payments  at  the  end  of  each  month,  beginning  in 
August  and  ending  in  July. 

12. 

Vallejo  testified  that  on  August  7,  8,  and  9,  2006,  she  attended  district  training 

sessions  on  accelerated  math  and  reading  and a  district  software  program  called 
“IntergradePro.”  She  felt  that  her  attendance  was  mandatory,  because  her  principal  called 
her  during  the  summer  and  said  that  August 7  is  “the  day  I  start  work.”  The  district  paid  her 
$235  for  each  day of training. 

Armstrong  testified  that  she  attended  the  same  training  and  that  she,  too,  was  told  by 
her  principal  to  attend  the  training.  Armstrong  also  received  $235  from  the  district  for  each 
day  of  training. 

Respondent  McNutt  did  not  testify. 

13. 

The  district  and  the  teachers  call  these  training  days  “buyback  days.”  James 
Quellman,  a  district  teacher  and  long-time  president  of  the  teachers’  union,  testified  that  the 
state  offers  financial  incentives  to  school  districts  to  offer  staff  development  training  outside 
of  the  teachers’  regular  contract.  The  state  pays  the  district  a  certain  amount  for  each  teacher 
who  attends  a  day  of  training  and,  under  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  between  the 
teachers’  union  and  the  district,  the  district  pays  each  teacher  $235  per  day of  attendance. 
The  collective  bargaining  agreement  states  that  participation  in  buyback  days  is  voluntary. 

  

-3-   

  

Buyback  days  are  in  addition  to  the  teachers’  required  work  days,  and  the  $235  per  day 
payment  for  attending  a  buyback  day  is  in  addition  to  the  teachers’  normal  compensation. 
Quellman  testified  that,  typically,  the  union  is  unable  to  meet  with  new  teachers  until  the  first 
day  of  school,  and  therefore  new  teachers  may  not  realize  that  participation  in  buyback  days 
is  voluntary. 

e 

14, 

Respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo  are  not  entitled  to  a seniority 
date  of  August  7,  2006.  A  certificated  employee’s  seniority  is  measured  from  the  date  that 
he  or  she  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  in  a  probationary  position.  (Ed.  Code. 
§§  44845,  44955.)  The  testimony of Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson,  supported  by 
respondent’s  Vallejo’s  offer  and  contract,  establishes  that  respondents’  employment  in 
probationary  positions  began  on  August  10. 
In  addition,  although  respondents  Vallejo  and 
Armstrong  may  not  have  realized  it  at  the  time,  participation  in  buyback  days  is  voluntary, 
buyback  days  are  not  included  in  their  contractually-required  work  days,  and  the  $235  per 
day  payment  that  each  of  them  received  represented  an  agreed-upon  stipend  in  excess  of  their 
contractual  salaries. 

15. 

The  district  correctly  determined  that  the  seniority  date  for  respondents 

Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo  is  August  10,  2006. 

Tie-break  process 

16. 

Respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo  challenge  the  tie-break  process 

followed  by  the  district  to  establish  the  relative  dates of  seniority  between  employees  with 
the  same  seniority  date  of  August  10,  2006. 

e 

17. 

On  February  6,  2008,  the  district’s  governing  board  adopted  tie-break  criteria 
to  apply  to  determine  the  order  of  termination  between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of 
paid  service  to  the  district.  (Resolution  No.  07-08-08.)  The  resolution  states,  in  relevant 
part,  that  the  order of  termination  “shall  be  based  solely  on  the  needs of  the  district.  The 
specific  criteria  used  in  determining  this  need  shall  be  as  follows,  but  not  necessarily  listed  in 
order  of  importance: 

Credentialing 
Experience 
Extracurricular  Activities 
Training 
Special  Education  Needs 
Competence 
Evaluations 
NCLB  Highly-Qualified  Status 
BCLAD/CLAD/Bilingual  Credential  Needs” 

. 

    

The  district’s  seniority  list  identifies  10  employees  with  a  seniority  date  of 
August  10,  2006,  who  were  subject  to  layoff  under  the  PKS  resolution.  After  the  layoff 

@ 

-4-

18. 

notices  were  sent  to  those  employees  and  prior  to  this  hearing,  the  district  determined  that  it 
could  rescind  three  of  the  layoff  notices. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson  applied  the  governing  board’s  tie-break  criteria  to 

determine  which  layoff  notices  should  be  rescinded.  He  reviewed  the  personnel  files  of  each 
of  the  affected  employees.  Johnson  found  that  none  of  the  teachers  had  provided  paid 
extracurricular  service  to  the  district;  none  of  the  teachers  had  received  more  extensive 
training  than  the  others;  none  of  the  teachers  held  a  special  education  credential;  all  of  the 
teachers  were  competent;  all  of  them  had  positive  evaluations;  all  of  them  were  highly- 
qualified  under  No  Child  Left  Behind;  and  all  of  them  held  a  BCLAD.  Johnson  found  their 
breadth  of  credentialing  and  their  teaching  experience  to  be  determinative;  he  stated  that,  in 
his  view,  it  was  common  sense  that  that  the  district  would  value  credentials  and  experience. 
McNutt  and  Vallejo  hold  a  preliminary  multiple  subject  credential,  while  their  colleagues 
with  the  same  seniority  date  hold  clear  credentials;  Armstrong  has  a  clear  multiple  subject 
credential,  but  fewer  years of  experience  than  her  colleagues  with  the  same  seniority  date. 
The  district  rescinded  the  preliminary  notices  it  had  sent  to  three  employees  who  were  found 
to  have  greater  relative  seniority  than  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo,  and  let  the 
preliminary  notices  to  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo  stand.  The  district  did  not,  at  the 
time  the  other  preliminary  notices  were  rescinded,  inform  respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt, 
and  Vallejo  of  how  the  tie-break  criteria  had  been  applied  to  rank  their  seniority. 

19. 

On  March  25,  2008,  respondents  demanded  production  of  any  documents 
“relating  to...  .  the  application  to  employees  of  any  criteria  used  to  establish  an  order  of 
employment  for  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  probationary  service  to  the  District  on  the 
same  date.”  In  a  letter  dated  April  4,  2008,  counsel  for  the  district  informed  respondents’ 
counsel  only  that  the  criteria  used  were  “[b]readth  and  number  of  credentials”  and 
“experience.” 

20. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  district’s  tie-break  criteria,  and  the  district’s 

application  of  those  criteria,  do  not  comply  with  state  law. 

21. 

The  tie-break  process  is  governed  by  Education  Code  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  which  provides  (in  relevant  part)  as  follows: 

As  between  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the 
district  on  the  same  date,  the  governing  board  shall  determine 
the  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis of  the  needs of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.  Upon  the  request  of  any 
employee  whose  order  of  termination  is  so  determined,  the 
governing  board  shall  furnish  in  writing  no  later  than  five  days 
prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  . 
.  a  statement  of  the 
specific  criteria  used  in  determining  the  order  of  termination  and 
the  application of the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative 
to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.  This  requirement  that  the 
governing  board  provide,  on  request,  a  written  statement  of 

. 

-5- 

  

 

  

reasons  for  determining  the  order  of  termination  shall  not  be 
interpreted  to  give  affected  employees  any  legal  right  or  interest 
that  would  not  exist  without  such  a  requirement. 

22. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  governing  board’s  tie-break  resolution  is  invalid  on 

its  face  because  it  does  not  determine  the  order  of  importance  of  the  tie-break  criteria. 
Instead,  it  leaves  that  task  to  the  district. 
In  addition,  respondents  argue,  the  criteria  are 
vague,  and  therefore  allow  the  superintendent  to  make  impermissible  value  judgments  in 
deciding  which  employees  should  be  laid  off. 

Respondent’s  arguments  are  not  persuasive.  Education  Code  section  44955, 
subdivision  (b),  requires  only  that  the  order  of  termination  shall  be  based  on  the  “needs  of  the 
district  and  the  students  thereof.”  The  criteria  adopted  by  the  governing  board  in  this  case 
are  related  to  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.  Nothing  in  Education  Code  section 
44955  precludes  the  governing  board  from  delegating  to  its  executive  staff  the  responsibility 
of  applying  the  tie-break  criteria,  as  the  governing  board  did  in  its  PKS  resolution  when  it 
directed  its  superintendent  to  identify  the  employees  to  be  laid  off. 
It  is  true  that  some  of  the 
criteria  are  facially  broad  and  require  the  superintendent  to  exercise  judgment  when  he  or  she 
applies  them;  a  different  system,  with  more  precisely-worded  criteria  and  the  value  to  be 
assigned  for  meeting  or  failing  to  meet  each  criterion,  might  be  less  likely  to  invite  challenge. 
But  the  district’s  system  is  not  invalid,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  order  of  termination 
was  based  on  impermissible  value  judgments  about  the  affected  employees.  On  the  contrary, 
after  applying  all  other  criteria,  the  order  of  termination  was  based  upon  objective  criteria 
relating  to  the  employees’  credentials  and  years  of  experience.  That  respondents  McNutt  and 
Vallejo  hold  preliminary  credentials  only,  and  that  respondent  Armstrong  has  less  teaching 
experience  than  her  colleagues  who  started  work  for  the  district  on  the  same  day,  was  not 
contested. 

23. 

Respondents  argue  that  two  of  the  criteria  in  the  tie-break  resolution, 

“evaluations”  and  “competence,”  are  indistinguishable  from  one  another,  and  that  a  teacher’s 
job  performance  may  not  be  used  in  a  layoff  proceeding.  The  only  authority  offered  by 
respondents,  however,  Martin  v.  Kentfield  School  District  (1983)  35  Cal.3d  294,  does  not 
support  their  argument.  Martin  involved  reemployment  rights  under  Education  Code  section 
44596,  not  permissible  tie-break  criteria  under  Education  Code  section  44955;  it  does  not 
hold  or  state  that  competence  is  not  a  permissible  tie-break  criterion  under  section  44955. 

24. 

Respondents  assert,  correctly,  that  the  district  failed  to  provide  them  with  a 

written  statement  describing  the  “application of the  criteria  in  ranking  each  employee  relative 
to  the  other  employees  in  the  group.”  The  district  should  have  done  so.  Before  the  hearing. 
the  district  did  not  inform  the  affected  employees  that,  in  addition  to  breadth  of  credentials 
and  experience,  the  district  also  considered  the  other  tie-break  criteria  set  forth  in  the  board’s 
resolution:  extracurricular  activities,  training,  special  education  needs,  competence, 
evaluations,  NCLB  highly-qualified  status,  and  BCLAD/CLAD/Bilingual  credential  needs. 

 

  

Respondents,  however,  were  not  prejudiced  by  the  district’s  incomplete  disclosure. 

Some  of  the  criteria  —  special  education  needs,  NCLB  highly-qualified  status,  and 
BCLAD/CLAD/Bilingual  credential  needs  —  were  either  met  or  not  met,  and  all  the 
employees  with  an  August  10,  2006,  seniority  date  met  or  failed  to  meet  the  same  criteria. 
is  true  that  the  other  criteria  —  extracurricular  activities,  training,  competence,  and 
evaluations  —  are  broad;  on  their  face,  they  might  have  allowed  respondents  to  argue  that  they 
are  more  competent  than  their  colleagues  or  that  they  participated  in  extracurricular  activities 
that  should  have  been  valued  more  highly.  But  the  district  interpreted  these  criteria  so 
narrowly  that  they  provide  little  room  for  an  employee  to  show  that  he  or  she  ranks  higher 
than  another  employee;  once  again,  the  criteria  were  essentially  met  or  not  met,  and  the 
employees  with  an  August  10  seniority  date  all  fared  the  same  under  these  criteria. 
Respondents  might  argue  that  the  district  should  have  interpreted  the  criteria  differently,  but 
it  is  within  the  district’s  discretion  to  interpret  the  tie-break  criteria  in  a  manner  that  promotes 
the  needs of the  district  and  its  students,  and  the  district’s  interpretation  was  reasonable. 

It 

The  only  criteria  that  provided  a  basis  to  distinguish  the  August  10  employees  from 
one  another  were  credentialing  and  experience.  These  are  essentially  objective  criteria  that, 
based  on  the  testimony  of  Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson,  meet  the  needs  of  the  district 
and  its  students.  The  district  informed  respondents  that  these  criteria  were  applied  to  them 
and  respondents  did  not  establish  that  the  criteria  were  applied  improperly. 

Under  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (b),  the  district’s  failure  to  provide 

a  complete  written  statement  does  not  protect  respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo 
against  an  otherwise  proper  layoff. 

25. 

Respondents  note,  again  correctly,  that  the  district  did  not  apply  the  tie-break 

criteria  until  after  it  sent  the  March  layoff  notices.  Respondents  assert  that  the  district’s 
action  was  inconsistent  with  “the  purpose  for  which  tie-breaking  is  required”  under 
Education  Code  section  44955. 

Respondents’  argument  is  not  persuasive.  Education  Code  section  44955  does  not 

require  the  application  of  tie-break  criteria  prior  to  March  15. 

26.  —  The  district  complied  with  the  requirements  of  the  Education  Code  when  it 
determined  that  respondents  Armstrong,  McNutt,  and  Vallejo  are  junior  to  other  teachers 
with  an  August  10,  2006,  seniority  date. 

Other  matters 

27. 

Respondent  Mountz’s  seniority  date  is  September  8,  2006.  Mountz  is  a 

National  Board  Certified  Teacher;  she  is  the  only  teacher  in  the  district  who  has  participated 
in  that  program.  Mount  believes  that  the  training  she  received  is  beneficial  to  her  students, 
her  colleagues  and  the  district. 

 

  

Respondent’s  testimony  is  not  questioned.  With  certain  exceptions  that  are  not 

relevant  here,  however,  state  law  requires  that  teachers  be  laid off  in  the  reverse  order of their  e 
district  seniority,  and  respondent  Mountz  is  junior  to  other  teachers  who  are  being  laid  off. 

28. 

Respondents  assert  that  the  entire  layoff  is  predicated  upon  the  district’s  intent 

to  eliminate  class  size  reduction  (CSR),  and  that  the  district  has  now  decided  to  maintain 
CSR;  in  essence,  respondents  argue  that  the  layoff  is  arbitrary  and  capricious.  The  evidence, 
however,  fails  to  establish  that  the  elimination  of  CSR 
board’s  PKS  resolution,  or  that  the  board  has  taken  any  new  action  with  respect  to  CSR  since 
it  adopted  the  PKS  resolution. 

is  the  sole  basis  for  the  governing 

29. 

Any  other  assertions  put  forth  by  respondents  at  the  hearing  and  not  addressed 

above  are  found  to  be  without  merit  and  are  rejected. 

30.  |  No  permanent  or  probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  is  being  retained 

to  render  a  service  for  which  respondents  are  certificated  and  competent. 

31. 

The  cause  for  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  to  the  welfare 

of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

Cause  exists  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds of  services  pursuant  to 

Education  Code  section  44955  to  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be 
required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  This  cause  relates  solely  to  the  welfare of  the 
schools  and  the  pupils  thereof  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44949. 

e 

ORDER 

The  district  may  give  notice  to  respondents  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for 

the  2008-2009  school  year. 

DATED: 

May  12,  2008 

O  A 

DAVID  L.  BENJAMIN 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

    

