BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
SANTA  ANA  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Employment  Status  of: 

OAH  No.  2008030331 

Teachers  of  the  Santa  Ana  Unified  School 
District, 

Respondents. 

  

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Ralph  B.  Dash,  Administrative  Law  Judge  with  the  Office  of  Administrative 

Hearings,  heard  this  matter  on  May  15,  2008,  at  Santa  Ana,  California.  The  matter  was 
originally  scheduled  to  commence  on  April  3,  2008,  but  was  continued  at  the  request  of  the 
parties. 

Eric  Bathen,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  Santa  Ana  Unified  School  District 

(SAUSD  or  District). 

Quemada  (Quemada). 

Ernest  F.  Ching,  Jr.,  represented  Respondents  Dominic  Crewe  (Crewe)  and  William 

Carlos  R.  Perez,  Attorney  at  Law,  represented  all  other  Respondents. 

At  the  close  of  the  hearing,  “Exhibit  B”  was  identified  as  a  document  to  be  produced 

by  Mr.  Perez  which  was  to  reflect  the  names  of  all  of  the  teachers  present  at  the  hearing. 
Exhibit  B  was  received  in  due  course  and  admitted.  Pursuant  to  stipulation  of  the  parties,  the 
record  was  left  open  until  June  3,  2008,  for  the  parties  to  submit  certain  offers  of  proof’  and 
closing  briefs.  Crewe?  and  Quemada  were  given  until  May  20,  2008,  to  submit  their  offers 
of  proof;  the  same  were  timely  received,  marked  as  Exhibits  C  and  D,  respectively,  and  were 
admitted  in  evidence.  The  District  was  given  until  May  23,  2008  to  submit  its  responding 
offers  of  proof;  the  same  were  timely  received,  marked  collectively  as  Exhibit  15,  and  were 
admitted  in  evidence.  The  remaining  Respondents  were  given  until  May  23,  2008  to  submit 

'  The  offers  of  proof  consisted  of  representations  as  to  the  testimony  that  each  of  the  teachers  would  have  given  if 
called  as  a  witness  to  testify,  and  a  representation  of  the  testimony  the  District  would  have  offered  in  rebuttal. 

?  Prior  to  the  close  of  the  record,  the  Accusation  was  withdrawn  as  to  Crewe. 

  

 

  

their  offers  of  proof;  the  same  were  timely  received,  marked  collectively  as  Exhibit  E  and 
admitted  in  evidence.?  The  District  was  given  until  May  30,  2008  (thereafter  extended  by 
stipulation  of  the  parties  to  June  3,  2008),  to  submit  its  responding  offer  of  proof;  the  same 
was  timely  received,  marked  as  Exhibit  16,‘  and  was  admitted  in  evidence.  The  record  was 
closed  on  June  3,  2008. 

Oral  and  documentary  evidence  having  been  received  and  the  matter  having  been 

submitted,  the  Administrative  Law  Judge  makes  the  following  Finding  of  Facts. 

1.  Chad  Hammitt,  the  District’s  Executive  Director  of  Human  Resources,  Certificated 
Personnel,  acting  in  his  official  capacity,  caused  all  pleadings,  notices  and  other  papers  to  be 
filed  and  served  upon  Respondents  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Education  Code  Sections 
44949  and  44955.  The  parties,  by  and  through  their  counsel,  stipulated  that  all  pre-hearing 
jurisdictional  requirements  have  been  met.  Accordingly,  no  Findings  regarding  the 
timeliness  of  any  notices  or  requests  for  hearing  are  made. 

2.  On  February  26,  2008,  the  District's  Governing  Board  adopted  Resolution  07/08- 

2713,  which  reads,  in  pertinent  part  as  follows: 

WHEREAS,  the  Governing  Board  hereby  finds  it  is  in  the  best  interest 
of  the  District  and  the  students  it  serves  to  reduce  and  discontinue  at  the  end  of 
the  2007-2008  school  year,  particular  kinds  of  services  specifically  identified 
a 
by  the  numbers  of  FTE  affected  as  follows:  271  FTE  reduction  due  to 
reduction  of  categorical  programs,  232  FTE  reduction  due  to  class 
size 
reduction  in  grades  K-3,  20  FTE  reduction  due  to  class  size  reduction  in  9th 
grade,  34  FTE  reductions  due  to  enrollment  projection  declines  in  grades  K-5, 
and  16  FTE  reductions  due  to  enrollment  projection  declines  in  grades  6-8  for 
a  total  of  573  FTE  reductions  of  particular  kinds  of  services  in  grades  K-12. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED:  That  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  currently  being  provided  by  this  District  be  and  hereby  are  reduced  to 
the  extent  set  forth  above. 

BE  IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED:  That  the  Superintendent,  or  designee, 
hereby  is  authorized  and  directed  to  initiate  and  pursue  procedures  necessary 
to  not  reemploy  the  equivalent  of  573  full-time  certificated  positions  pursuant 
to  Education  Code  Sections  44949  and  44955  because  of  said  reduction  or 
discontinuance  of  services. 

*  Subsequent  to  this  date,  layoff  notices  were  rescinded  as  to  a  number  of  Respondents  who  had  submitted  offers  of 
proof;  accordingly,  this  Proposed  Decision  addresses  only  those  offers  of  proof  from  Respondents  as  to  whom  layoff 
notices  were  not  rescinded. 

“  Accompanying  Exhibit  16  were  three  additional  exhibits,  marked  12  (list  of  151  rescinded  notices);  13  (list  of  151 
rescinded  notices,  alphabetized);  and,  14  (list,  in  order  of  seniority,  of  221  remaining  Respondents.)  Each  was 
admitted  in  evidence. 

 

the 

BE 

shall 

District 

IT  FURTHER  RESOLVED:  That 

retain 
regardless  of  their  seniority  certificated  employees  considered  necessary  to 
meet  the  District's  program  staffing  needs. 
Such  employees  shall  be  retained 
based  upon  their  qualifications  and  credentials  and  include,  but  are  not 
necessarily  limited  to, 
speech  and  language 
special  education  teachers, 
specialists  and  math  and  science  teachers.  In  accordance  with  Education  Code 
and 
Section 
reassignments  in  such  a  manner  that  employees  shall  be  retained  to  render  any 
service  which  their  seniority  and  qualifications  entitle  them  to  render. 

assignments 

Governing 

44955(c) 

Board 

make 

shall 

the 

3.  A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 

44955,  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not,  thereafter, 
be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that  proffered 
services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to  deal  with 
the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167,  178-179.) 
The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was  not 
arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  exercise  of  discretion. 

4.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services  related  to  the 
welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees  of  the  District  as 
determined  by  the  Board. 

services  which  any  Respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

5.  The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements  and  requests 

6.  No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  Respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

for  transfer  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its 
employees.  On  March  7,  2008,  the  District  served  573  notices  of  layoff  in  inverse  order  of 
seniority  in  accordance  with  an  approved  seniority  list.  Since  that  time,  a  total  of  352  notices 
have  been  rescinded.  The  District  is  now  proceeding  to  layoff  221  Respondents,  all  of  whom 
are  listed  on  Exhibit  14,  a  copy  of  which  is  attached  hereto  and  by  this  reference  made  a  part 
hereof. 

  
   

7.  Between  those  employees  who  first  rendered  paid  service  to  the  district  on  the 
same  date,  the  Board  determined  their  order  of  termination  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  needs  of 
the  district  and  the  students.  The  specific  criteria  used  to  determine  the  order  of  termination 
were  fairly  applied  to  rank  those  employees  hired  on  the  same  date. 

It 

/ 

  

8.  Offers  of  proof  were  made  with  respect  to  the  following  teachers: 

a.  Jane  Shawber 

If  called  to  testify,  Shawber  would  assert  that  her  seniority  date  is  incorrect  because 
she  first  started  working  for  the  District  on  July  1,  2002.  She  specifically  recalls  being  on 
campus  on  that  date.  In  support  of  her  position,  Shawber  would  introduce a  letter  from 
Associate  Superintendent  Winston  Best  dated  August  28,  2002.  In  the  letter,  Associate 
Superintendent  Best  confirms  that  Shawber's  appointment  as  a  probationary  staff  member  in 
the  District  for  2002-2003  school  year  was  effective  July  1,  2002.  Consistent  with  this  letter, 
Shawber  requests  that  her  seniority  be  corrected  to  July  1,  2002. 

District  Response: 

follows: 

Finding: 

If  Rosie  Rosales,*  who  testified  at  the  hearing,  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as 

Jane  Shawber  was  offered  a  probationary  contract  for  the  2002-03  school  year.  The 
fiscal  year  began  July  1,  2002.  Ms.  Shawber  was  hired  to  teach  First  Grade  —  Cycle  “C”  at 
Madison  Elementary  School.  The  first  paid  duty  day.  for  Cycle  “C”  was  July  8,  2002. 

It  is  found  that  Ms.  Shawber’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  SAUSD  is  July  8, 

2002,  and  that  is  her  correct  seniority  date. 

b.  Edith  Madruga-Houghton 

If  called  to  testify,  Madruga-Houghton  would  assert  that  her  seniority  date  of  August 
8,  2002  is  inaccurate.  She  would  assert  that  she  started  working  for  the  District  on  August  1, 
2002  and  that  this  date  should  be  reflected  on  the  seniority  list  as  her  first  date  of  paid 
service. 

District’s  Response: 

If  Rosie  Rosales  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows: 

Edith  Madruga-Houghton  was  offered  a  probationary  contract  for  the  2002-03  school 

year.  The  fiscal  year  began  July  1,  2002.  Ms.  Madruga-Houghton  was  hired  to  teach  Third 
Grade  —  “Modified  Cycle  “D”  at  Lowell  Elementary  School.  The  first  paid  duty  day  for 
“Modified  Cycle  “D”  was  August  8,  2002. 

>  Ms.  Rosales’  title  with  the  District  is  “Administrative  Secretary,  Confidential.”  She  prepared  the  Master  Seniority 
List  (Exhibit  8). 

  

 

It  is  found  that  Ms.  Madruga-Houghton’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  the  SAUSD  is 

July  8,  2002,  and  that  is  her  correct  seniority  date. 

Finding: 

c.  Dan  Ramirez 

District’s  Response: 

Finding: 

d.  Cynthia  Ramsay 

If  called  to  testify,  Mr.  Ramirez  would  note  that  the  reference  in  the  District's  master 

seniority  list  to  his  credential  is  incorrect.  On  the  list,  he  is  identified  as  a  District  intern 
when,  in  fact,  he  currently  possesses  a  professional  clear  multiple  subject  teaching  credential. 
In  support  of  his  testimony,  Mr.  Ramirez  would  introduce  a  copy  of  his  credential  with  the 
California  Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing. 

If  Marlene Hernandez,°  who  testified  at  the  hearing,  was  re-called,  she  would  testify 

as  follows:  Both  credentials  are  already  listed  on  the  master  seniority  list.  The  Clear 
Multiple  Subject  is  documented  on  the  list.  All  intern  credentials  were  also  listed  on  the 
seniority  list. 

It  is  found  that  Mr.  Ramirez’s  place  on  the  master  seniority  list  is  correct  and 

accurately  reflects  his  credentialed  status. 

If  called,  Ms.  Ramsay  would  testify  as  follows:  Ms.  Ramsay  began  with  the  District 

in  1982,  and  became  permanent  in  1984  with  a  clear  life  credential.  She  began  child  care 
leave  in  September  1991.  After  her  third  child  was  born,  Ms.  Ramsay  returned  to  the  District 
in  2002.  Ms.  Ramsay  believes  the  District  should  count  her  first  nine  years  of  service 
towards  her  seniority.  She  believes  it  is  unfair  for  the  District  to  promulgate  a  seniority  list 
where  “non-credentialed,  temporary  or  emergency  time  is  considered  equal  to  credentialed 
full-time  service.” 

District’s  Response: 

If  Rosie  Rosales  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows:  Cynthia  Ramsay’s  initial 

contract  was  probationary  status  for  the  1982-83  school  year.  Ms.  Ramsay  resigned  as  a 
permanent  employee  on  February  9,  1991.  Ms.  Ramsay  was  not  reemployed  as  a  permanent 
employee  within  39  months  of  her  resignation.  On  August  2,  2002,  with  a  break-in-service 

®  Ms.  Hernandez  has  been  a  District  employee  for  25  years  and  has  served  as  the  “Lead  Credential  Tech”  for  the 

past  15  years.   

 

  

  

and  a  recommendation  for  re-hire,  Ms.  Ramsay  was  reemployed  on  a  probationary  contract. 
The  first  duty  day  for  the  2002-03  school  year  for  Ms.  Ramsay’s  First  Grade  assignment  at 
Franklin  Elementary  Cycle  “D”  was  August  2,  2002. 

Finding: 

The  layoff  notice  was  properly  given  to  Linda  Ramsay.  She  voluntarily  resigned 

from  the  District  in  1991  after  having  taught  for  nine  years.  As  a  permanent  teacher  with  the 
District  at  the  time  of  her  resignation,  she  was  reinstated  as  a  permanent  teacher  when  re- 
hired  by  the  District  in  2002.  In  essence,  Ms.  Ramsay  retained  all  of  her  rights  as  a 
permanent  teacher,  except  as  to  her  seniority  date. 

Education  Code  section  44931  provides,  in  pertinent  part: 

Whenever  any  certificated  employee  of  any  school  district  who,  at  the  time  of 
his  or  her  resignation,  was  classified  as  permanent,  is  reemployed  within  39 
months  after  his  or  her  last  day  of  paid  service,  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  shall,  disregarding  the  break  in  service,  classify  him  or  her  as,  and 
restore  to  him  or  her  all  of  the  rights,  benefits  and  burdens  of,  a  permanent 
employee,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  code. 

Ms.  Ramsay  was  not  rehired  within  39  months  of  her  resignation.  Even  if  she  had 
been  rehired  within  that  time  frame,  she  still  would  not  have  retained  her  original  seniority 
date.  Rather,  her  seniority  date  would  be  as  of  the  date  of  her  re-hire.  In  San  Jose  Teachers 
Association  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  the  court  held,  at  page  641, 

be 
We  hold  that  section  44931  provides  that  the  break  in  service  shall 
"disregarded"  as  to  individual  rights,  burdens  and  benefits,  but  not  as 
to 
seniority  rights  which  affect  other  employees.  The  “except  as  otherwise 
provided  in  this  code"  provision  in  section  44931  must  be  read  as  deferring  to 
section  44848.  (Emphasis  added.) 

With  respect  to  the  issue  of  “non-credentialed,  temporary  or  emergency  time  [being] 
considered  equal  to  credentialed  full-time  service,”  the  discussions  in  Findings  8f,  8j  and  8n 
below  are  incorporated  herein.  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  Ms.  Ramsay’s  correct  seniority 
date  is  August  2,  2002. 

e.  Linda  Jacobs 

If  called,  Ms.  Jacobs  would  testify  that  she  should  have  been  skipped  by  the  District 

because  she  possesses  a  supplemental  authorization  in  Geo  Science  and  Biology. 

MH 

// 

 

District’s  Response: 

If  Marlene  Hernandez  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows:  The  Commission 

on  Teacher  Credentialing  website  verifies  the  following  valid  credentials  for  Ms.  Jacobs: 

Life  Standard  Elementary  Teaching  Credential  —  Authorized  Field  —  History; 
Administrative  Services  Credential  —  Expires  April  1,  20012;  Certification  of  Staff 
Completion. 

Ms.  Jacobs  failed  to  submit  any  confirming  evidence  that  she  holds  the  claimed 

credential.  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  the  District  was  correct  in  not  skipping  her. 

Finding: 

f.  Andrea  Cortez: 

If  called,  Ms.  Cortez  would  testify  that  she  has  worked  for  the  District  since  July  30, 

2001.  She  would  also  testify  that  she  was  laid  off  after  the  2003-2004  school  year,  and 
returned  to  the  classroom  “three  weeks  late”  in  the  2004-2005  school  year  because  her 
classroom  could  not  yet  open  due  to  insufficient  enrollment.  She  has  been  informed  by  the 
District  that  it  considers  this  three  week  hiatus  to  constitute  a  break  in  her  service.  Ms. 
Cortez  would  assert  that,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  44848,  her  alleged  break  in  service  at 
the  beginning  of  the  2004-2005  school  year  should  not  be  counted  against  her  because  the 
code  section  provides  as  follows:  “When  an  employee's  services  are  terminated  for  lack  of 
enrollment  or  discontinuance  of  service  or  are  otherwise  interrupted  in  a  manner  declared  by 
law  not  to  constitute  a  break  in  service,  his  original  order  of  employment  shall  stand.” 

District’s  Response: 

If  Rosie  Rosales  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows:  Andrea  Cortez’s  initial 

status  for  the  2001-02  school  year.  Ms.  Cortez  had 

contract  was  under  Emergency  44911 
Board  approved  reappointments  for  the  2002-03  and  2003-04  school  years.  Ms.  Cortez  was 
not  affected  by  layoff  in  the  2003-04  school  year  and  was  not  identified  as  a  probationary  or 
permanent  employee.  However,  due  to  Mr.  Cortez’s  Provisional  credential,  she  was  noticed, 
released  and  terminated  at  the  end  of  her  2003-04  contract.  On  July  26,  2004,  with  a  break- 
in-service  and  a  recommendation  for  re-hire,  Ms.  Cortez  was  reemployed  on  a  Probationary 
contract.  Her  assignment  was  a  6"  grade  elementary  teacher,  Cycle  “B”  at  Madison 
Elementary.  The  first  duty  day  for  Cycle  “B”  in  the  2004-05  school  year  was  July  7,  2004. 

Finding: 

   

As  to  Andrea  Cortez,  the  District’s  calculation  of  seniority  date  is  in  error.  Ms, 

Cortez’s  service  under  her  emergency  credential  is  counted,  for  seniority  purposes  (and  not 
for  purpose  of  tenure),  as  though  she  were  a  probationary  employee.  In  the  recent  case  of 
Bakersfield  Elementary  Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145 

  

  

Cal.  App.  4th  1260  (Bakersfield),  the  court  held  that  certificated  employees  who  were  not 
classified  as  temporary  employees  under  the  Education  Code,  and  who  were  not  properly 
classified  under  the  Education  Code  as  permanent  or  substitute  employees,  had  to  be 
classified  as  probationary  employees  under  Education  Code  section  44915,  and  had  to  be 
accorded  the  rights  of  probationary  employees  as  provided  in  the  Code.’  And  in  the  case  of 
California  Teacher’s  Association  v.  Governing  Board  of Golden  Valley  Unified  School 
District  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  369,  375-376  the  court  concluded  that  section  44915  applies 
to  teachers  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  as  well  as  fully  credentialed  teachers  and 
“teachers  serving  under  an  emergency  permit  who  satisfy  the  requirements  of  section  44915 
are  entitled  to  the  statutory  protections  governing  the  dismissal  of  a  probationary  employee.” 
Furthermore,  Ms.  Cortez  did  not  suffer  a  “break  in  service”  that 
(98  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  383.) 
would  trigger  a  new  seniority  date  on  rehire.  Education  Code  section  4484d  provides: 

When  any  certificated  employee  shall  have  resigned  or  been  dismissed  for 
cause  and  shall  thereafter  have  been  reemployed  by  the  board,  his  date  of 
employment  shall 
first  accepted 
reemployment  (if  reemployed  before  July  1,  1947)  or  rendered  paid  service  (if 
reemployment. 
reemployed 

be  the  date  on  which  he 

be  deemed  to 

1947) 

after 

after 

June 

30, 

his 

When  an  employee's  services  are  terminated  for 
of  enrollment  or 
discontinuance  of  service  or  are  otherwise  interrupted  in  a  manner  declared  by 
law  not  to  constitute  a  break  in  service,  his  original  order  of  employment  shall 
stand. 

lack 

The  undisputed  evidence  is  that  the  “late  rehire”  was  due  to  low  enrollment  and  through  no 
fault  of  Ms.  Cortez.  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  Ms.  Cortez’s  correct  seniority  date,  as  set 
forth  in  Finding  8f,  is  July  1,  2001,  and  Ms.  Cortez  enjoys  all of the  rights  and  privileges  of  a 
probationary  teacher  with  that  seniority  date.  Accordingly,  the  Notice  of  Layoff  is  deemed 
rescinded  and  the  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  her. 

If  called,  Mr.  Bean  would  take  issue  with  his  current  seniority  date.  He  is  listed  in  the 

District's  master  seniority  list  as  having  a  seniority  date  of  July  1,  2005.  Mr.  Bean  would 
testify  that  he  had  previously  worked  within  the  District  as  an  intern  since  August  of  2004. 

g.  Donovon  Bean 

District’s  Response: 

If  Rosie  Rosales  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows:  Donovan  Bean’s  initial 

contract  was  under  Probationary  status  for  the  2005-06  school  year.  Mr.  Bean  was  not  a 
SAUSD  intern,  did  not  have  an  Intern  Contract  and  there  is  no  record  of  an  Intern  credential 
issued  by  CCTC. 

7  Including  the  right  to  accrue  seniority  under  Education  Code  section  44845,  and  the  rights  to  notice  and  a  hearing 
in  the  event  of  a  workforce  reduction  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

 

  

Mr.  Bean  submitted  no  evidence  to  support  his  contention  that  he  worked  for  the 
District  as  an  intern  since  2004.  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  his  correct  seniority  date  is  July 
1,  2005. 

Finding: 

h.  Jorge  Castro 

If  called  to  testify,  Mr.  Castro  would  state  that  he  was  currently  working  within  the 

District  as  a  Sth  Grade  (Dual  Immersion)  teacher.  Dual  Immersion,  according  to  Mr.  Castro, 
is  a  powerful  program  designed  to  produce  bilingual/biliterate  students.  Mr.  Castro  would 
testify  that  he  has  10  years  of  experience  as  a  teacher.  He  would  also  state  that  the  program 
is  important  to  the  community.  He  is  concerned  that  the  District  has  identified  three  teachers 
at  his  site,  Jefferson  Elementary,  for  layoff.  In  Mr.  Castro's  opinion,  these  teachers  are 
integral  to  the  Dual  Immersion  program.  Moreover,  he  would  testify  that  students  in  this 
program  consistently  outperform  the  general  population  in  State  and  District  test  scores. 
Based  on  high  test  scores,  the  powerful  and  effective  Dual  Immersion  program  and  its 
proven  results,  Mr.  Castro  would  request  that  his  lay  off  notice  be  rescinded. 

District’s  Response: 

If  Chad  Hammitt  was  re-called,  he  would  testify  as  follows:  The  position  held  by  Mr. 

Finding: 

i.  Bertha  Benavides 

it  is  found  that  Mr.  Castro  is  properly  subject  to  layoff. 

Based  on  the  offer  of  proof  by  Mr.  Hammitt,  and  the  discussion  in  Finding  8n  below, 

Castro  requires  a  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credential  with  a  BCLAD  Authorization. 
Positions  that  require  Multiple  Subject  teaching  credentials  are  not  an  area  of  need  nor  hard 
to  fill.  IfMr.  Castro  is  laid  off,  there  would  be  other  teachers  in  the  seniority  list  with  the 
appropriate  credentials  who  are  NCLB®  “highly  qualified”  and  could  fill  this  position. 

  
   

If  called  to  testify,  Ms.  Benavides  would  affirm  that  she  first  started  to  work  with  the 
District  in  March  1998  through  the  present,  and  that  her  only  break  in  service  occurred  when 
she  was  served  with  a  lay  off  notice  in  the  Spring  of  2004.  Consequently,  she  was  awarded  a 
seniority  by  the  District  of  October  14,  2004.  She  returned  to  work  within  the  statutory 
period  and  contends  that  any  break  in  service  as  a  result  of  the  lay  off  should  not  be  counted 
against  her.  See  Education  Code  Section  44957  (c)  (“As  to  any  such  employee  who  is 
reappointed,  the  period  of  his  absence  shall  be  treated  as  a  leave  of  absence  and  shall  not  be 
considered  as  a  break  in  the  continuity  of  his  service,  he  shall  retain  the  classification  and 

®  NCLB  (No  Child  Left  Behind)  is  the  current  version  of  the  Elementary  and  Secondary  Education  Act  (ESEA).  It 
is  the  federal  law  that  funds  basic  public  school  programs  such  as  Title  1. 

  

order  of  employment  he  had  when  his  services  were  terminated  . 
Section  44956(a)(4)  (same).)” 

. 

.  );  Education  Code 

District’s  Response: 

If  Rosie  Rosales  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows:  Bertha  Benavides’s 

initial  contract  was  under  Emergency  44911  status  for  the  1997-98  school  year.  Ms. 
Benavides’s  first  duty  day  was  March  30,  1998.  Ms.  Benavides  had  Board  approved 
reappointments  with  Emergency  44911  contracts  from  1998-99  through  the  2002-03  school 
year.  Ms.  Benavides  was  not  affected  by  layoff  in  the  2002-03  nor  2003-04  school  year  and 
was  not  identified  as  a  probationary  or  permanent  employee.  However,  due  to  Ms. 
Benavides’  Provisional  credential  not  renewed  with  the  CCTC,  she  was  identified  as  an 
Emergency  44911  employee  who  was  noticed,  released  and  terminated  on  September  1, 
2003.  Ms.  Benavides  served  as  a  substitute  teacher  beginning  September  2,  2003  through 
October  2004  while  she  completed  her  credential  requirements.  After  her  break  in  service, 
Ms.  Benavides  was  reemployed  on  a  Probationary  contract  October  14,  2004.  The  first  duty 
day  for  the  2004-05  school  year  was  October  14,  2004. 

Finding: 

As  to  Bertha  Benavides,  the  District  made  the  same  mistake  in  computation  of 
seniority  dates  as  it  did  with  Ms.  Cortez,  and  the  discussions  in  Findings  8f  and  8}  are 
applicable  here.  In  addition,  Ms.  Benavides’  service  as  a  “substitute”  teacher,  over  an 
uninterrupted  period  of  more  than  12  months,  must  also  be  include  in  the  computation  of  her 
seniority  date.  Education  Code  section  44918,  subdivision  (a)  provides: 

Any  employee  classified  as  a  substitute  or  temporary  employee,  who 
serves  during  one  school  year  for  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the 
regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained  in  that  school  year  and  has 
performed  the  duties  normally  required  of  a  certificated  employee  of  the 
school  district,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  served  a  complete  school  year  as  a 
the 
probationary  employee  if  employed  as 
following  school  year. 

a  probationary  employee  for 

Ms.  Benavides  did  not  suffer  a  break  in  service  at  any  time.  Ms.  Benavides  was  hired 

as  a  substitute  teacher  the  day  after  she  was  released  from  duty  under  her  emergency 
credential.  Ms.  Benavides  served  for  more  than  75%  of  the  school  year  as  a  substitute,  and 
was  then  hired  on  probationary  status.  Ms.  Benavides’  service  under  the  emergency 
credential  counts  towards  seniority  for  purposes  of  layoff.  (See  the  discussion  in  Finding  8).) 
Her  first  date  of  paid  service  was  in  March  1998.  Accordingly,  the  Notice  of  Layoff  is 
deemed  rescinded  and  the  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  her. 

/ 

i 

10 

 

j.  Seth  Liebman 

If  called  as  a  witness,  Mr.Liebman  would  testify  in  accordance  with  the  statement 

attached  as  Exhibit  O  to  the  offer  of  proof.  Marina  Alfaro,  Isela  Gonzalez,  Edith  Madruga- 
Houghton  and  S.  Elizabeth  Leyva  “endorsed”  the  statement.  In  essence,  the  statement  of 
these  teachers  is  that  they  believe  the  Master  Seniority  List  (Exhibit  8)  was  erroneously 
prepared  because  it  ranks  teachers’  seniority  based  on  their  first  date  of  paid  service, 
regardless  of  the  type  of  credential  the  teacher  held  on  that  date.  They  contend,  for  example, 
that  teachers  with  full  credentials,  who  had  moved  from  one  district  to  another,  had  lower 
seniority  dates  than  teachers  in  that  district  who  had  been  working  under  emergency 
credentials.  These  teachers  never  would  have  left  the  security  of  their  relatively  high 
seniority  had  they  known  that  emergency  credentialed  teachers  in  their  new  district  would  be 
given  higher  seniority.  The  teachers  contend  that  “Bakersfield”  (Bakersfield  Elementary 
Teachers  Association  v.  Bakersfield  City  School  District  (2006)  145  Cal.App.4"  1260) 
should  be  “challenged”  because  it  created  a  new  way  of  determining  seniority,  a  way  that  is 
unfair  and  wrong. 

The  District’s  response  is  contained  in  its  legal  argument  which  is  discussed  in  the 

District’s  Response: 

below  Finding. 

Finding: 

The  recent  case  of  California  Teachers  Association  v.  Vallejo  City  Unified  School 

District  (2007)  149  Cal.App.4th  135  explained  in  very  clear  terms  how  the  holdings  in 
Bakersfield  and  Golden  Valley,  supra,  interact  with  each  other  and  with  the  Education  Code. 
The  court  stated,  commencing  at  page  149: 

[T]he  Fifth  District  Court  of  Appeal  recently  reaffirmed  the  Golden 
Valley  holding.  In  Bakersfield,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  1269-1270,  a 
school  district  effecting  a  layoff  sent  “release”  notices  to  approximately  154 
employees  who  were  considered  temporary  because  they  held  something  less 
than  a  full  teaching  credential.  Like  the  District  here,  the  school  district  made 
their  employees’  classification  dependent  upon  their  level  of  certification  and, 
sign  contracts 
further,  required  all  employees  without  full  credentials  to 
acknowledging  their  temporary  status.  (Id.  at  p.  1277.) 
The  appellate  court 
explained  this  view  of  classification  is  incorrect;  rather,  “[a]s  a  general  rule  ... 
,  classification  and  certification  operate  independently  of  one  another.  ...  [A] 
person  who  has  been  determined  to  be  qualified  to  teach  is  not  a  temporary 
employee  simply  because  he  or  she  is  not  yet  fully  accredited,  but  rather 
because  he  or  she  occupies a  position  the  law  defines  as  temporary.”  (Ibid.) 

Just  as  the  District  does  in  this  appeal,  the  school  district  in  Bakersfield 
conflated  the  concepts  of  teacher  credentialing  with  classification,  reasoning 

  

11 

 

  

rights 

that  since  teachers  working  under  a  provisional  credential  do  not  earn  credit 
toward  permanent  status  (§  44911),  whereas  probationary  employees  generally 
do  earn  such  credit  (§  44929.21,  subd.  (b)), 
a  person  working  under  a 
provisional  credential  must  by  definition  be  something  less  than  probationary. 
(See  Bakersfield,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1295,  fn.  22  [summarizing  this 
line  of  reasoning].)  However,  Golden  Valley  and  Bakersfield  make  it  clear  that 
a  provisionally  credentialed  teacher  may  possess  some  of  the 
of 
probationary  employees,  such  as  protections  against  midyear  dismissals  and 
layoffs,  although  she  does  not  possess  others,  such  as  progress  toward  tenure. 
(Bakersfield,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at  p.  1295,  fn.  22;  Golden  Valley,  supra, 
98  Cal.App.4th  at  pp.  383-384.)  The  Education  Code  mandates  that  teachers 
be  classified  as  probationary  employees  if  they  are  not  permanent  and  do  not 
fall  within  one  of  the  narrowly  defined  classes  of  temporary  employees.  (§ 
44915.)  School  districts  have  no  discretion  to  deviate  from  the  Code's 
p.  1299;  see 
classification  scheme.  (Bakersfield,  supra,  145  Cal.App.4th  at 
Eureka  Teacher's  Assn.  v.  Board  of  Education  (1988)  202  Cal.  App.  3d  469, 
473-474  [247  Cal.  Rptr.  790]  [district  cannot  impose a  classification  contrary 
to  statutory  scheme].)  The  fact  that  provisionally  credentialed  teachers  do  not 
accrue  credit  toward  tenure  (§  44911)  is  merely  an  exception  to  the  general 
rule  that  after  two  years  a  probationary  employee  attains  permanent  status  (§ 
44929.21,  subd.  (b).)  Nothing  in  the  Education  Code  suggests  the  lesser  status 
of  their  credentials  removes  such  teachers  from  the  rule—i.e.,  probationary 
classification—entirely. 

Thus,  it  is  clear  that  service  under  a  provisional  (emergency)  credential,  must  be 

credited  for  purposes  of  seniority,  even  if  that  service  is  not  credited  towards  tenure.  With 
respect  to  Mr.  Liebman  and  those  teachers  who  joined  in  his  statement,  while  the  holding  in 
Bakersfield  might  have  caused  unintended  consequences,  or  otherwise  disturbed  the 
reasonable  expectations  of  the  teachers,  it  must  be  followed  in  these  proceedings. 
Bakersfield  certainly  can  be  challenged  by  way  of  a  writ  to  the  Superior  Court  from  the  final 
decision  in  this  matter,  and  then  in  the  Court  of  Appeal,  if  necessary,  if  Mr.  Liebman  so 
desires.  As  of  this  point  in  time,  there  is  no  legal  basis  to  exclude  Mr.  Liebman,  or  those 
teachers  who  joined  in  his  statement,  from  these  layoff  proceedings. 

k.  Dawn  Mohammadi: 

Ms.  Mohammadi  prepared  a  very  long  and  involved  offer  of  proof,  which  actually  can 

be  summarized  very  briefly.  If  called  upon  to  testify,  Ms.  Mohammadi  would  state  that  she 
was  first  employed  by  the  District  on  about  September  28,  1998  under  an  emergency 
credential  in  a  third  grade  teaching  assignment.  She  would  further  testify  that  she  never  once 
stopped  teaching  in  a  District  classroom  from  that  time  until  the  date  of  the  hearing.  Ms. 
Mohammadi  was  employed  for  a  period  of  time  under  a  pre-intern  credential.  She  was  also 
employed  for  several  months  under  a  “30  day  Substitute  credential,”  but  was  treated  as  a  full- 
time  teacher  in  that  she  continued  to  receive  performance  evaluations  and  was  observed  in 
class;  her  name  continued  to  be  listed  on  the  teacher’s  mailbox  inside  the  teacher’s  lounge. 

12 

 

Thirty-day  substitute  teachers  are  not  thus  treated.  In  about  November  2003,  when  her  pre- 
intern  credential  expired,  Ms.  Mohammadi  continued  to  teach,  in  the  same  classroom,  under 
a  30-day  substitute  credential;  she  continued  to  teach  in  that  classroom  for  the  remainder  of 
the  year  for  the  remainder  of  the  year.  For  four  months  during  that  year  (November  2004  to 
February  2004),  she  worked  under  the  “30  day”  credential.  She  then  obtained  another  pre- 
intern  credential  and  continued  teaching.  She  never  stopped  teaching  at  any  time.  Ms. 
Mohammadi  obtained  a  clear  multiple  subject  credential  on  February  4,  2004. 

District’s  Response: 

If  Marlene  Hernandez  was  re-called,  she  would  testify  as  follows:  Dawn  Mohamaddi 

held  a  Pre-Intern  Certificate  October  1,  2000.  Pre-Intern  Certificates  are  initiated  by  the 
teacher.  This  program  works  with  the  teacher  to  prepare  them  for  the  CSET  test.  This 
program  also  provides  funding  for  the  teacher  to  participate  in  the  program.  Validation  of  the 
teacher  working  with  a  participating  school  district  is  necessary.  Her  credentials  as  stated  in 
the  seniority  list  are  correct. 

Finding: 

The  District  does  not  dispute  any  of  Ms.  Mohammadi’s  offer  of  proof.  A  pre-intern 
certificate  is  valid  for  one  year  only,  although  it  may  be  renewed  for  up  to  an  additional  two 
years  under  certain  terms  and  conditions.  The  holdings  noted  in  the  above  findings  compel 
the  determination  that  the  District  incorrectly  assigned  Ms.  Mohammadi  a seniority  date  of 
February  4,  2004,  the  date  she  first  obtained  her  clear  credential.  Since  case  law  has 
established  that  there  are  only  four  categories  of  teachers,  to  wit:  permanent,  probationary, 
substitute  and  temporary,  pre-interns  must  be  considered  as  probationary  employees,  by 
default.  For  purposes  of  seniority,  and  not  for  purposes  of  tenure,  Ms.  Mohammdi’s  first 
date  of  paid  service  was  September  28,  1998  when  she  was  hired  under  an  emergency 
credential.  In  addition,  she  was  not  a  true  “substitute  teacher”  within  the  meaning  of  the 
Education  Code,  at  any  time.  To  categorize  Ms.  Mohammadi’s  service  under  the  30  day 
substitute  credential  as  a  being  a  true  “substitute”  would  exalt  form  over  substance,  since  at 
all  times  she  was  treated  by  the  school  administration  as  a  regular  classroom  teacher. 
Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  Ms.  Mohammadi’s  correct  seniority  date  is  September  28,  1998 
and  the  Notice  of  Layoff  is  deemed  rescinded  and  the  Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  her. 

    

If  called  to  testify,  Ms.  Prado  would  take  issue  with  the  seniority  date  awarded  to  her 
by  the  District  (August  10,  2004).  She  contends  that  her  first  date  of  paid  service  occurred  in 
about  July  2000.  Ms.  Prado  is  aware  of  the  District's  position  that  she  had  a  break  in  service 
between  the  2003-2004  school  year  and  her  acceptance  of  a  support  staff  assignment  on 
about  August  10,  2004.  It  is  the  District's  position,  to  her  knowledge,  that  the  school  cycle 
for  the  support  staff  assignments  started  on  July  12,  2004  and  that  her  start  date  was  after  the 
beginning  of  the  cycle.  Ms.  Prado  would  contest  this  conclusion  and  argue  that  staff 

1.  Nereida  Prado 

13 

 

  

assignments  do  not  have a  specific  start  date,  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  her  start  date  of 
August  10,  2004  in  the  staff  assignment  position  should  not  be  considered  a  break  in  service. 

District’s  Response: 

Nereida  Prado’s  initial  contract  was  under  Emergency  44911  status  for  the  2000-01 

school  year.  Ms.  Prado  had  Board  approved  reappointments  with  Emergency  44911 
contracts  for  the  2001-02  and  2003-04  school  years.  Due  to  Ms.  Prado’s  provisional 
credential,  she  was  identified  as  an  Emergency  44911  employee  who  was  noticed,  released 
and  terminated  at  the  end  of  her  2003-04  Emergency  contract.  On  August  18,  2004,  with  a 
break-in-service  and  a  recommendation  for  re-hire,  Ms.  Prado  was  reemployed  as a late  start, 
with  a  contract  of  only  159  duty  days  left  in  the  Support  Staff  Calendar.  The  first  duty  day 
on  the  Support  Staff  2004-05  school  year  calendar  was  July  12,  2004. 

Finding: 

As  to  Nereida  Prado,  the  holdings  noted  in  the  above  Findings  compel  the 

determination  that  the  District  incorrectly  assigned  her  a  seniority  date  of  August  10,  2004. 
Ms.  Prado  first  began  service  with  the  District  under  an  emergency  credential  in  July  2000. 
The  District  contends  that  Ms.  Prado  suffered  a  “break  in  service”  because  she  was  a  “late 
hire”  in  2004.  However,  even  though  Ms.  Prado’s  service  in  2004  began  one  month  late,  she 
nevertheless  taught  for  more  than  75  per  cent  of  that  school  year,  and  has  been  re-hired  every 
year  since  then,  except  for  the  upcoming  2008-2009  school  year.  Education  Code  section 
44914  provides  as  follows: 

a 

as 

served 

substitute  employee,  or 

If  an  employee  of  a  school  district  has  served  as  a  probationary  employee  of 
the  district  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications,  for  one  complete 
school  year,  and  in  the  year  immediately  preceding  the  service  as  probationary 
a  substitute  and 
employee  has 
probationary  employee,  serving  in  both  capacities  during  the  same  school  year 
in  the  schools  of  the  district,  at  least  75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the 
regular  schools  of  the  district  were  maintained,  the  governing  board  of  the 
district  may  count  the  year  of  employment  as  a  substitute  or  as  a  substitute  and 
probationary  employee  as  one  year  of  the  probationary  period  which  he  is 
required  by  law  to  serve  as  a  condition  to  being  classified  as  a  permanent 
employee  of  the  district. 

as 

In  Ms.  Prado’s  case,  the  “preceding  school  year”  would  be  the  year  in  which  she  had 
the  late  start,  and  her  retention  by  the  District  the  following  year  would  mean  the  “late  start 
year”  is  counted  as  a  full  year  of  service.  Accordingly,  her  correct  seniority  date  is  July 
2000.  The  offers  of  proof  did  not  provide  sufficient  information  for  which  a  more  precise 
date  could  be  determined.  Accordingly  the  Notice  of  Layoff  is  deemed  rescinded  and  the 
Accusation  is  dismissed  as  to  her. 

14 

 

m.  William  Quemada 

Mr.  Quemada’s  offer  of  proof  is  that  he  is  the  “Title  1  Coordinator  of  the  No  Child 

Left  Behind”  at  Valley  High  School  and  his  role  is  vital  to  help  “close  the  achievement  gap” 
of  socio-economically  disadvantaged  and  special  needs  students.  His  responsibilities  are  to 
coordinate  with  the  Math  and  English  departments  at  Valley  High  School  to  attend  to  the 
deficiencies  the  students  have  in  these  areas.  Mr.  Quemada  argues  that  his  position  is 
federally  funded  and  that  the  undisputed  evidence  at  trial  was  that,  although  the  District 
might  suffer  a  shortfall  in  state  funding,  no  shortfall  in  federal  funding  was  expected  and 
therefor  he  should  not  be  subject  to  layoff  because  of  state  funding  problem.  He  further 
argues  that  elimination  of  his  position  contravenes  the  District’s  own  layoff  resolution  (set 
forth  in  Finding  2)  to  retain  special  education  teachers,  speech  and  language  specialists  and 
math  and  science  teachers. 

District’s  Response: 

If  recalled,  Rosie  Rosales  would  testify  as  follows:?  Mr.  Quemada’s  correct  position 
is  Student  Achievement  Project  Coordinator.  His  position  is  currently  paid  “out  of  a  Title  1 
funding  source.”  Mr.  Quemada  is  not  a  Title  1  coordinator.  He  is  part  of  the  teachers’ 
bargaining  unit  for  which  he  receives  an  additional  eight  per  cent  stipend.  The  only  Title  1 
coordinator  the  District  employs  is  Nuria  Solis,  District  Office  Administrator,  a  management 
employee.  Mr.  Quemada  is  not  credentialed  in  the  areas  of  math  or  science. 

Finding 

Categorically  funded  programs  are  typically  funded  outside  the  base  revenue  limit  of 

the  school  district  and  address  needs  that  cannot  be,  or  are  not  being,  addressed  with  base 
revenue  limit  funds.  (Zalac  v.  Governing  Bd.  of Ferndale  Unified  School  Dist.  (2002)  98 
Cal.App.4th  838,  847.)  Education  Code  section  44909  provides,  in  pertinent  part,  as  follows: 

The  governing  board  of  any  school  district  may  employ  persons 
possessing  an  appropriate  credential  as  certificated  employees  in  programs  and 
projects  to  perform  services  conducted  under  contract  with  public  or  private 
agencies,  or  categorically  funded  projects  which  are  not  required  by  federal  or 
state 
statutes.  The  terms  and  conditions  under  which  such  persons  are 
employed  shall  be  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  employee  and  the  governing 
board  and  such  agreement  shall  be  reduced  to  writing.  Service  pursuant  to  this 
section 
a 
included  in  computing  the 
prerequisite  to  attainment  of,  or  eligibility  to,  classification  as  a  permanent 
employee  unless  (1).  such  person  has  served  pursuant  to  this  section  for  at  least 
75  percent  of  the  number  of  days  the  regular  schools  of  the  district  by  which 
he  is  employed  are  maintained  and  (2)  such  person  is  subsequently  employed 

service  required  as 

shall 

not 

be 

°  The  District  attached  a  declaration  of  Ms.  Rosales  which  is  summarized. 

  

15 

 

  

as  a  probationary  employee  in  a  position  requiring  certification  qualifications. 
Such  persons  may  be  employed  for  periods  which  are  less  than  a  full  school 
year  and  may  be  terminated  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  specially 
funded  project  without  regard  to  other  requirements  of  this  code  respecting  the 
termination  of  probationary  or  permanent  employees  other  than  Section  44918. 

Based  on  this  code  section,  arguments  have  been  made  that,  so  long  as  the  funding  for 

“categorical”  or  “specially  funded”  project  has  not  expired,  the  teacher  in  that  project  is  not 
subject  to  layoff.  Even  if  it  was  found  that  Mr.  Quemada  was  employed  in  a  categorically 
funded  project,  and  the  funding  for  that  project  has  not  expired,  although  the  District  might 
be  required  to  retain  a  specific  position  in  that  project,  it  is  not  required  to  retain  Mr. 
Quemada  specifically  in  that  project.  Any  teacher  with  the  appropriate  qualifications  and 
more  seniority  would  retain  the  right  to  “bump”  Mr.  Quemada.  The  happenstance  of  a  junior 
teacher  being  assigned  to  a  particular  project  does  not  supercede  the  seniority  rights  of  other 
teachers. 

Mr.  Quemada  failed  to  establish  that  he  should  be  exempted  from  layoff  based  on  his 
work  as  a  Student  Achievement  Project  Coordinator.  The  funding  source  of  the  program  in 
which  he  is  involved  is  not  at  issue  here;  nothing  in  the  Education  Code  prevents  a  layoff 
based  on  seniority  simply  because  a  program  is  specially  funded  and  the  funding  has  not 
expired. 

n.  Sally  Lane,  Evelyn  Ramirez,  Christopher  Lee,  Nichole  Dotson,  Bradley 

Sterling,  Delilah  Karagouz 

In  his  hearing  brief  (Exhibit  A)  submitted  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing,  Mr.  Perez 

argued  that  the  above-named  teachers,  who  have  supplementary  authorizations  in  math  or 
science,  were  improperly  skipped,  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the  layoff  resolution  specifically 
provides:  “That  the  District  shall  retain  regardless  of  their  seniority  certificated  employees 
considered  necessary  to  meet  the  District's  program  staffing  needs.  Such  employees  shall  be 
retained  based  upon  their  qualifications  and  credentials  and  include,  but  are  not  necessarily 
limited  to,  special  education  teachers,  speech  and  language  specialists  and  math  and  science 
teachers.” 
‘skip’  math,  science  and  special  education  teachers;  however,  the  District  has  refused  to  skip 
over  teachers  who,  according  to  the  District,  do  not  qualify  as  ‘highly  qualified’  under  the 
federal  No  Child  Left  Behind  (NCLB)  law  even  though  those  teacher  are  lawfully  authorized 
to  teach  math  or  science  based  on  the  credential  issued  to  them  by  the  California 
Commission  on  Teacher  Credentialing  (CCTC).” 

Mr.  Perez  argues  that,  “[i]n  this  lay  off  proceeding,  the  District  has  elected  to 

Response: 

If  re-called,  Marlene  Hernandez  would  testify  as  follows:  Sally  Lane  is  a  career 

education  teacher  at  Saddleback  High  School.  She  has  an  Intern  Single  Subject  credential 
authorized  in  Business  and  has  a  supplement  in  Mathematics,  which  was  issued  on 
September  1,  2002.  She  also  holds  a  Clear  Single  Subject  credential  in  Business  and  has  a 

  

16 

 

supplement  in  Mathematics  issued  on  April  26,  2007.  In  addition,  she  has  a  CLAD 
credential.  Ms.  Lane  has  22  units  on  file.  She  would  need  a  CSET  test  in  Math  or  32  total 
units  in  Math  [in  order  to  be  considered  “highly  qualified”  under  NCLB].'° 

Evelyn  Ramirez  is  Block  Core  Subjects  teacher  at  Carr  Intermediate.  She  holds  a 

Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential,  which  was  issued  on  August  3,  2004  and  can  teach  two  or 
more  subjects  for  two  or  more  periods  per  day  to  the  same  group  of  students.  Ms.  Ramirez  is 
authorized  to  teach  General  Subjects/BCLAD  and  has  a  supplement  in  Mathematics.  She  has 
to  have  at  least  20  semester  units  for  a  supplement.  Currently,  her  file  only  has  transcripts 
from  Cal  State  University  at  Fullerton  with  only  10  units  of  Math.  Ms.  Ramirez  would  need 
a  CSET  test  in  Math  or  32  total  units  in  Math. 

Christopher  Lee  holds  a  Preliminary  Single  Subject  credential  authorized  in  Business 
with  EL  and  has  a  supplement  in  Intro  Math,  which  was  issued  on  February  4,  2005.  He  has 
a  total  of  15.0  units  from  Cal  State  University  at  Fullerton  and  the  University  of  Alaska.  Mr. 
Lee  is  eligible  with  10  upper  units.  He  would  need  a  CSET  test  in  Math  or  32  totals  units  in 
Math. 

Nichole  Dotson  has a  credential  in  Preliminary  Multiple  Subject  authorized  in 
General  Subjects  with  EL  and  has  a  supplement  in  Mathematics,  which  was  issued  on 
September  1,  2005  as  well  as  holds  a  Clear  Multiple  Subject  credential  in  General  Subjects 
with  EL  and  has  a  supplement  in  Mathematics  issued  on  February  14,  2008.  She  has  25  units 
on  file  from  Vanguard  University  and  Irvine  Valley  College.  Ms.  Dotson  would  need  a 
CSET  test  in  Math  or  32  total  units  in  Math. 

Bradley  Sterling  holds  a  Preliminary  Multiple  Subject  credential  authorized  in 
General  Subjects  with  EL  and  has  a  supplement  in  Mathematics  issued  on  August  23,  2006. 
He  has  22  units  on  file  from  Point  Loma.  Mr.  Sterling  would  need  a  CSET  test  in  Math  or  32 
total  units  in  Math. 

Delilah  Karaoguz  holds  a  Preliminary  Multiple  Subject  credential  authorized  in 
General  Subjects  with  EL  and  has  a  supplement  in  Mathematics,  which  was  issued  on 
August  10,  2004.  She  has  to  have  at  least  20  semester  units  for  a  supplement.  Currently,  her 
file  only  has  transcripts  from  the  University  of  California  at  Irvine  and  Santiago  College  with 
16.332  units  of  Math.  Ms.  Karaoguz  would  need  a  CSET  test  in  Math  or  32  total  units  in 
Math. 

/ 

/ 

©  At  the  hearing,  Ms.  Hernandez  testified  that  in  order  to  be  considered  “highly  qualified,”  a  teacher  must  achieve 
“100  points”  under  criteria  set  forth  in  Federal  law.  These  “points”  can  be  achieved  in  one  of  two  ways:  a  teacher 
has  completed  no  less  than  32  semester  units  of  credit  in  the  subject  in  question;  or,  a  teacher  has  no  less  than  20 
semester  units,  has  taught  the  subject,  and  has  passed  a  competency  examination.  Ms.  Hernandez  further  testified 
that  as  of  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  District  was  not  using  any  “non-NCLB  compliant”  teachers  in  math  classes. 

 
  

17 

  

Finding: 

The  authority  for  “skipping,”  meaning  deviation  from  the  order  of  seniority  for 

purposes  of  layoff,  is  found  in  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)(1): 

(d)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
terminating  a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the 
following  reasons: 

(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 
specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a 
services  credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or 
health  for  a  school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to 
provide  those  services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

The  undisputed  evidence  at  trial  was  that,  under  NCLB  regulations  promulgated  as 

part  of  Title  1  funding,  a  teacher  must  be  “highly  qualified”  (see  footnote  10)  to  teach 
particular  subjects,  and  the  District  skipped  only  those  math  teachers  who  were  not 
considered  highly  qualified  under  federal  law.  Other  than  the  challenge  to  not  skipping 
teachers  who  have  supplemental  math  or  science  credentials,  but  are  not  NCLB  compliant, 
there  were  no  challenges  to  District  skipping.  As  is  set  forth  in  the  response  to  the  offer  of 
proof,  Ms.  Hernandez  clearly  sets  forth  why  each  one  of  the  employees  who  have  a 
supplemental  authorization  and  who  received  a  layoff  notice  is  not  considered  highly 
qualified.  The  layoff  resolution  clearly  authorized  skipping  with  respect  to  math  teachers, 
and  the  District  properly  skipped  those  math  teachers  who  have  “special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services, 
which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.”  Accordingly,  it  is  found  that  the  District 
properly  skipped  Sally  Lane,  Evelyn  Ramirez,  Christopher  Lee,  Nichole  Dotson,  Bradley 
Sterling  and  Delilah  Karagouz  on  the  master  seniority  list. 

CONCLUSIONS  OF  LAW 

1.  Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955. 

All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied  as  to 
those  respondent  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2.  A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  A  board  may  consider  the  school  district’s 
economic  circumstances  in  making  the  determination  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services.  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

18 

 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  a  particular  kind  of  service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  a  school 
board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

Each  of  the  services  set  forth  in  Finding 2  is  a  particular  kind  of  service  which  may  be 

reduced  or  discontinued  in  accordance  with  applicable  statutes  and  case  law. 

3.  As  of  the  time  the  layoff  notices  were  given,  cause  existed,  because  of  the 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services,  to  reduce  the  District's  teaching  positions  by  573 
Full  Time  Equivalents  and  to  give  notice  to  the  affected  teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
Section  44955.  The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  was  neither 
arbitrary  nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion.  As  of  the 
time  the  layoff  notices  were  given,  cause  existed,  because  of  the  reduction  in  particular  kinds 
of  services,  to  reduce  the  District's  teaching  positions  by  573  Full  Time  Equivalents  and  to 
give  notice  to  the  affected  teachers  pursuant  to  Education  Code  Section  44955.  (Campbell  v. 
Abbot  (1978)  76  Cal.App.3d  796;  Degener  v.  Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689). 

4.  The  District’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  the  services  was  neither  arbitrary 
nor  capricious,  but  rather  a  proper  exercise  of  the  District's  discretion.  During  the  pendancy 
of  this  matter,  the  District  rescinded a  total  of  352  layoff  notices.  The  District  is  now 
proceeding  to  layoff  221  Respondents,  all  of  whom  are  listed  on  Exhibit  14  which  is  attached 
hereto. 

In  doing  so,  the 

6.  A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

5.  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  set  forth  the  general  rule 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469;  Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute.  Between  employees  with  the  same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the 
order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the  needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.” 

   

  

7.  As a  result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services,  cause 
exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all  respondents 
who  were  previously  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their  employment  will  be 
terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed 
for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  the  following:  Andrea  Cortez,  Bertha  Benavides, 
Dawn  Mohammadi  and  Nereida  Prado.  This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and 
on  all  Legal  Conclusions. 

19 

  

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  Respondents  identified  in 

Exhibit  14  attached  to  this  Proposed  Decision  who  were  previously  served  with  a  preliminary 
layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year 
and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  save  and  except  for 
those  Respondents  named  in  Recommendation  2. 

2. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  layoff  notice  be  rescinded  and  the  Accusation  be 

dismissed  as  to  the  following  named  Respondents:  Andrea  Cortez,  Bertha  Benavides,  Dawn 
Mohammadi  and  Nereida  Prado. 

DATED: 

RALPH  B.  DASH 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

 

20 

