  

BEFORE  THE 
GOVERNING  BOARD 
OF  THE 
GROSSMONT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter of the  Reduction  in  Force  of 
Certain  Certificated  Teachers  Employed  by 
the  Grossmont  Union  High  Schoo!  District, 

OAH  No.  2008030147 

Respondents. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Stephen  E.  Hjelt,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  in  El]  Cajon,  California,  on  April  28  and  29,  2008. 

Clifford  D.  Weiler,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo, 

APC,  represented  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  29,  2008. 

Fern  M.  Steiner,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Tosdal,  Levine,  Smith,  Steiner  &  Wax 

represented  all  of  the  respondent  certificated  employees  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High 
School  District  who  received  preliminary  layoff  notices  as  indicated  in  the  record. 

No  appearance  was  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  remaining  certificated  employees  of 
the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  who  received  notice  of  the  recommendation  that 
their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

    

public  school  district  located  in  eastern  San  Diego  County.  The  District  provides  educational 
services  and  supports  for  grades  9-12.  The  District  operates  12  high  schools  (nine  regular, 
two  charter,  and  one  continuation).

  

The  Grossmont  Union High School 

The  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District 

  

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

jist 

District 

District 

(the 

or 

I. 

2. 

The  District  is  governed  by  an  elected  five-member  Board  of  Trustees.  The 
Board’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Robert  J.  Collins.,  the  Superintendent  of  Schools.  Dr. 
Collins  is  supported  by  an  administrative  staff  including  Steve  Sonnich,  Associate 
Administrator  of  Human  Resources  and  Scott  Patterson,  Deputy  Superintendent  of  Business 
Services. 

The  Fiscal  Crisis  —  Economic  Layoffs 

3. 

Proposition  13  limited  the  imposition  of  property  taxes  and  reduced  a  major 

source  of  assured  revenue  for  funding  public  education  in  California.  Since  Proposition  13, 
public  school  districts  have  looked  primarily  to  the  State  of  California  and  to  other 
governmental  entities  for  funding. 

A  school  district  cannot  determine  the  level  of  state  funding  it  will  receive  until  the 

state  budget  is  chaptered,  an  event  usually  occurring  in  late  June.  Before  then,  a  school 
district’s  governing  board  must  take  steps  to  make  certain  that  ends  meet  if  a  worst-case 
financial  scenario  develops.  California’s  current  economic  crisis  has  made  budgeting 
problems  far  more  complicated  than  they  were  before. 

A  school  board’s  legal  obligation  to  balance  its  budget  often  requires  that  some 

teachers,  administrators  and/or  other  certificated  employees  be  given  preliminary  layoff 
notices,  warning  them  that  their  services  will  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year.  Under 
Education  Code  section  44949,  preliminary  layoff  notices  must  be  given  to  affected 
certificated  employees  no  later  than  March  15. 

The  economic  layoff  statutes  found  in  the  Education  Code  generally  require  the 

retention  of  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  the  retention  of  permanent 
employees  over  probationary  employees  and  other  employees  with  less  seniority.  A  public 
school  district  may  deviate  from  the  general  rule  requiring  termination  in  reverse  order  of 
seniority  only  if  it  can  demonstrate  that  identifiable  junior  employees  possess  a  credential, 
special  training  or  experience  necessary  to  teach  a  course  of  study  or  to  provide  services 
which  more  senior  employees  do  not  possess. 

The  District’s  Response 

4. 

By  early  2008,  the  District’s  administration  (as  well  as  the  administrators  of 

most  other  school  districts)  was  well  aware  of  the  State  of  California’s  massive  economic 
problems.  As  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Governor’s  proposed  budget,  the  District 
projected  an  estimated  budget  deficit  of  about  $14.1  million  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 
The  District  was  required  to  look  into  ways  to  meet  the  budget  deficit. 

Under  the  Superintendent’s  direction,  budgetary  cuts  were  considered  across  the 

board  including  the  elimination  and  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  the 
Districts  certificated  employees,  On  or  about  March  11,  2008,  the  Superintendent’s  office 
presented  to  the  Board  a  recommendation  concerning  the  reduction  and  elimination  of 

  

 

particular  kinds  of  services  in  the  approximate  amount  of  96.8  FTEs  (full  time  equivalent 
positions). 

5. 

On  March  5,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  #2008-60  recommending  a 
reduction  in  particular  kinds  of  services  provided  by  District  for  the  2008-2009  school  year, 
together  with  the  adoption  of  tie-breaking  criteria.  The  Board’s  adoption  of  the  resolution 
and  tie-breaking  criteria  was  based  on  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  their  pupils. 

6. 

Resolution  #2008-60  provided  as  follows: 

GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE 
GROSSMONT  UNION  HIGH  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESOLUTION 

(2008-60) 

RESOLUTION  REGARDING  COMMENCEMENT  OF  CERTIFICATED  LAYOFF: 
DISCONTINUANCES  AND  REDUCTIONS  OF  PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES 
(as  listed  in  Exhibit  A);  DIRECTION  TO  NOTIFY  AFFECTED  EMPLOYEES  OF 
RECOMMENDATION  OF  LAYOFF;  AND  RELATED  ACTIONS 

On  motion  of  member 

following  Resolution  is  adopted: 

Schreiber 

_,  seconded  by  member 

___Urdahl___,  the 

and 

constraints 

WHEREAS,  because  of  financial 

resulting  from  revenue  being 
insufficient  to  maintain  current  levels  of  programs  and  services,  including  particular 
it  being  necessary  to  commence  implementing 
kinds  of  certificated  services, 
program  changes  in  a  timely  fashion  within  the  current  structure  of  the  law,  this  District’s 
Governing  Board  determines  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  District  and  the  welfare 
of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  thereof,  to  commence  certificated  layoff  proceedings  to 
discontinue  and  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  (“PKS”)  as  hereinafter  enumerated 
and  to.reduce  the  corresponding  number  of  certificated  staff  no  later  than  the  beginning 
of  the  2008-2009  school  year  (in  addition  to  the  release  of  temporary  certificated 
employees  and/or  the  expiration  of  their  contracts  without  renewals  or  re-issuances); 

WHEREAS,  this  discontinuance  and  reduction  of  certificated  services  shall  result 
in  layoffs  of  certificated  personnel  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44955 
and 
and  44949  which 
notifications  must  be  undertaken  beginning  no  later  than  March  15  of  each  school  year 
of certificated  personnel in  order  to  reduce  the number  of  certificated 
  _fegarding_layors 

process  whereby  particular 

decisions, 

actions 

provide 

a 

staff,  and  this  Board  desires  to  reduce certificated staff  as  permitted  by  law; 

Board 

WHEREAS,  this  Governing 

reduce  the 
particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  as  listed  in  Exhibit  A,  attached,  and  to  that  extent 
of  full  time  equivalents  (“FTEs”)  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school

  

discontinue  and 

desires  to 

year  (in  addition  to  the  release  of  temporary  certificated  employees  and/or  the  expiration 
of  their  contracts  without  renewals  or  re-issuances); 

WHEREAS,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Governing  Board,  it  will  be  necessary  as  a 
result  of  the  discontinuances  and  reductions  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services 
to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  permanent  and/or 
reflected 
probationary  employees  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions; 

Exhibit 

A 

in 

WHEREAS,  in  determining  the  extent  of  staff  FTE  reductions  and  services  to  be 
discontinued  and  reduced,  the  Governing  Board  has  considered  all  assured  and/or 
known  attrition  as  of  this  time  to  the  extent  required  by  law  (including  as  to  the  release 
of  temporary  certificated  employees  and  the  expirations  of  their  contracts),  so  that  the 
total  referenced  above  and  in  Exhibit  A  have  already  accounted  for  such  attrition;  but  for 
that 
this  Board  would  have  found  it  necessary  to  discontinue  or  reduce 
additional  particular  kinds  of  certificated  services  and/or  full  time  equivalents; 

attrition, 

NOW,  THEREFORE  BE  IT  RESOLVED,  DETERMINED  AND  ORDERED  by  this 

Governing  Board,  as  follows: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4, 

5 

All  of  the  above  recitals  are  true  and  correct; 

The  particular  kinds  of  services  as 
in  Exhibit  A  are  to  be  and  will  be 
listed 
discontinued  and  reduced  and  otherwise  eliminated  to  the  described  extent  no 
later  than  the  beginning  of  the  2008-2009  school  year; 

is  the  opinion  of  this  Governing  Board,  in  view  of  the  discontinuances  and 
It 
reductions  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services,  that  it 
is  necessary  to  decrease 
the  number  of  permanent  and/or  probationary  employees  serving  in  positions 
requiring  certification  qualifications  within  this  school  district  at  the  close  of  this 
school  year  by  a  corresponding  number  of  full-time  equivalent  positions  as  set 
forth  within  Exhibit  A; 

Subject  to  requirements  (if  any)  within  the  Educational  Employment  Relations 
Act,  that  for  purposes  of  “bumping”  (displacement)  rights  and  the  determination 
of  “competency”  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section  44955(b),  to  the 
extent  such  might  apply,  “competency”  shall  be  based  upon  possession  and 
current  filing  (no  later  than  March  1,  2008)  of  a  preliminary  or  clear  credential  for 
the  subject  matter  into  which  the  employee  would  bump  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year; 

For  purposes  of  seniority  tie-breaking  criteria  within  the  meaning  of  Education 
Code  sections  44955,  subdivision  (b) 
(third  paragraph)  and  section  44846 
(second  paragraph),  the  Governing  Board  determines  that  seniority  ties  shall  be 
broken  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  listed  within  Exhibit  B,  said  criteria  being 
based  solely  upon  the  needs  of  the  District  and  the  students  thereof; 

6. 

The  Superintendent  or  the  Superintendent's  designee(s)  is(are)  instructed  to  take 
the  steps  necessary  pursuant  to  the  Education  Code  including,  in  part,  sections 

 

44955  and  44949,  to  implement  the  above  and  to  reduce  the  certificated  staff  as 
set  forth  hereinabove; 

7. 

in  any  way,  be  considered  to 
The  actions  of  this  Governing  Board  will 
prejudice  the  rights  of  any  certificated  employee  to  whom  notice  will  be  given  of 
the  superintendent’s  recommendations,  should  any  employee  request  a  hearing 
to  contest  this  matter. 

not, 

PASSED  AND  ADOPTED  this  5th  day  of  March,  2008,  by  the  Governing  Board 
of  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School  District  of  San  Diego  County,  California  by  the 
following  vote: 

AYES: 

Urdahl,  Hoy,  Schreiber,  Kelly,  Shield 

NOES: 

0 

ABSTAIN: 

ABSENT: 

) 

) 

STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

COUNTY  OF  SAN  DIEGO 

|,  Priscilla  Schreiber,  Clerk  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Grossmont  Union  High  School 
District  of  San  Diego  County,  California,  do  hereby  certify  that  the  foregoing  is a  full, 
true,  and  correct  copy  of  a  resolution  adopted  by  the  said  Board  at  a  special  meeting 
thereof  held  at  its  regular  place  of  meeting  at  the  time  and  by  the  vote  above  stated, 
which  resolution  is  on  file  in  the  office  of  the  said  Board. 

   

services  being  reduced  and  the  extent  of  the  reductions  measured  by  FTEs  as  follows: 

Exhibit  A  to  the  Resolution  sets  forth a  list  of  the  particular  kinds  of 

Clerk  of  the  Board 

  

March  5,  2008 

  

  

Date 

7. 

  

EXHIBIT  A 

@ 

IDENTIFICATION  OF 
PARTICULAR  KINDS  OF  SERVICES  (PKSs) 
AND 
FULL  TIME  EQUIVALENTS  (FTEs) 
TO  BE  DISCONTINUED  AND  REDUCED  NO  LATER  THAN  THE  BEGINNING  OF 
THE  ENSUING  SCHOOL  YEAR  (2008-2009) 

  

Particular  Kind  of  Service 

Discontinuance  or |  Full  Time 

Reduction 
Reduction 

Equivalents 
17.2 

  

Math  Teaching  Services 

Foundational  Credential  Level  Courses  (3.6  FTEs) 
Introductory  Credential  Level  Courses  (1.6  FTEs) 
Single  Subject  Credential  Level  Courses  (12.0  FTEs) 

9.4 
3.6 
6.0 
13.0 
3.4 
4 
1.0 
2.8 
1.0 
3.0 
11.0 

Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 
Reduction 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

English  Teaching  Services 
Physical  Science  Teaching  Services 
Life  Science  Teaching  Services 
Social  Science  Teaching  Services 
Physical  Education  Teaching  Services 
Drama/Theatre  Teaching  Services 
Instrumental  Music  Teaching  Services 
Foreign  Language  —  Spanish  Teaching  Services 
Fine  Arts  Teaching  Services 
Counselors’  Services 
Administrators:  Assistant  Principals 
Special  Education  Services  as  follows: 
SAI  (Learning  Handicapped)  Teaching  Services 
(MH)  Transition  Program  @  El  Capitan 
(MH)  Work  Adjustment  Program 

e@ 

  

__ 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

10.0 
1.0 
1.0 
83.8 

Reduction 
Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
Subtotal  FTEs 

Categorically  funded  services  as  follows*: 
Counselors 
English  Teachers 
Math  Teachers 
Biology/Chemistry  Teacher 
Teacher  Services  for  Child  Development  Course 
Teacher  Services  for  Contract  Course/Program 

96.8     
  
  
  
   

*  Inclusion  of  categorically  funded  services  within  this  Resolution  is  not  intended  to 
grant  those  individuals  who  are  impacted  any  rights  greater  than  provided  by  law,  nor  to 
nullify  any  provisions  within  each  impacted  individual’s  employment  contract,  nor  to 
supersede  any  other  Resolution  by  this  Board  to  release  or  otherwise  terminate  the 
services  of  any  impacted  individual. 

Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
Discontinuance 
TOTAL  FTEs 

The  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  provided: 

3.0 
4.0 
3.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

  

8. 

@ 

CRITERIA  FOR  BREAKING  SENIORITY  TIES 

EXHIBIT  B 

Subject  to  requirements  (if  any)  within  the  Educational  Employment  Relations  Act,  this 
Governing  Board  determines,  based  solely  on  the  needs  of  this  District  and  the  students 
of  this  District,  that  seniority  ties  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  sections  44955, 
subdivision  (b)  (third  paragraph)  and  section  44846,  shall  be  resolved  by  applying  the 
Such  criteria 
following  criteria,  to  be  applied  in  the  following  order,  one  step  at 
and 
shall 
reemployment,  subject  to  exceptions  allowed  by  law.  The  criteria  are  as  follows: 

for  purposes 

individuals 

applied 

a  time. 

layoff 

order 

rank 

the 

be 

of 

of 

to 

1. 

Persons  with  preliminary  or  clear  credentials  or  certificates  authorizing  services 
in  classes  for  limited  or  non-English  proficient  students,  priority  listed  as  follows: 
A. 

Language 
Bilingual 
(BCLAD)/Cross  Cultural  Language  and  Academic  Development  (CLAD) 
Language  Development  Specialist  Certificate 

Development 

Academic 

Cultural 

Cross 

and 

B. 

2. 

Supplemental  Authorization  as  English  as  a  Second  Language  Persons  with 
preliminary  or  clear  credentials  in  the  following  subjects,  in  priority  order  listed: 

@ 

A. 
B. 
Cc. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 

Math 
Physical  Science 
Life  Science 
Foreign  Language 
Visual  and  Performing  Arts 
English 
Social  Science 
Physical  Education 

3. 

4. 

Persons  with  Advancement  via  Individual  Determination  (AVID)  Training  and 
assigned  to  teach  AVID  courses  as  of  March  1,  2008. 

Persons  who  are  currently  assigned,  as  of  March  1,  2008,  to  one  of  the  following 
specialized  assignments  and/or  training  priority  listed  as  follows: 

A. 
B. 
Cc. 
D. 

Director  of  Student  Activities  (Associated  Student  Body  (ASB)  Advisor) 
High  Schoo!  Head  Coach 
Yearbook  or  Journalism  Sponsor 
Director  of  Athletics 

5. 

Persons  with  majors  in  an  academic  teaching  subject  possessing  two  teaching 
gredentials 
  

A  lottery  among  individuals  who  remain  tied  with  the  GEA  President  or  her 
6. 
designee  invited  to  attend  with  the  first  name  drawn  being  most  senior  down  to  the  last 
name  being  drawn  being  least  senior. 

 

e@ 

  

The  District’s  tie-breaking  criteria  were  to  be  applied  to  certificated  employees  with 
the  same  date  of  hire.  The  tie-breaking  criteria  were  prepared  specifically  to  meet  the  needs 
of  the  District  and  the  students  and  were  applied  appropriately. 

9. 

Before  preliminary  layoff  notices  were  served,  the  administrative  staff 

circulated  a  certificated  seniority  list  that  contained  the  names  of  all  credentialed  employees, 
ordered  in  longevity  from  the  most  senior  employee  to  the  most  junior  employee;  the  site 
where  the  employee  provided  services;  the  subject/grade  level  in  which  services  were 
provided;  the  employee’s  full  time  employment  status  (a  “1.0  FTE”  indicated  full  time 
employment);  the  employee’s  credential(s)  information;  the  employee’s  seniority  date  (i.e., 
the  employee’s  first  date  of  paid  service  with  District  on  a  probationary  basis);  the 
employee’s  hire  date;  and  the  employee’s  tenured  status  (i.e.,  permanent,  probationary  2  or 
probationary  1).  Employees  were  invited  to  review  the  seniority  list  and  to  respond  to  the 
administrative  staff  with  any  changes  or  corrections. 

. 

10. 

Onor  before  March  15,  2008,  each  certificated  employee  who  is  party  to  this 

proceeding  was  given a  letter  and  notice  that  the  Board  had  recommended  that  his  or  her 
services  with  the  District  would  be  terminated  at  the  conclusion  of  the  current  school  year. 
The  letter  stated  the  reduction  in  the  District’s  workforce  was  due  to  California’s  serious 
budget  shortfall.  A  notice  advised  each  respondent  that  his  or  her  services  would  be 
terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year,  that  the  reasons  for  the  termination  were 
set  forth  in  the  Board’s  resolution  (which  was  enclosed),  that  the  employee  had  the  right  to 
request  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  was  cause  for  termination,  and  specified  dates  on 
which  the  request  for  hearing  had  to  be  filed. 

ll. 

Most  of  the  certificated  employees  served  with  the  preliminary  layoff  notice 

requested  a  hearing.  An  accusation  packet  was  thereafter  served  on  the  certificated 
employees  who  requested  a  hearing. 

All  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met  for  the  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

The  Administrative  Hearing 

12. 

On  April  28,  2008,  the  record  in  the  administrative  hearing  was  opened.  It 

was  stipulated  that  the  Accusations  filed  against  Elizabeth  Chmiel,  Matthew  Flisher,  Kevin 
Forster,  Daniel  Goodrich,  Jennifer  Johnson,  Aamna  Kamil,  Judie  Lincer,  Stephanie  Macceca, 
Ashley  Ormsby,  Carlos  Ortiz,  Jonathan  Owens,  Daemein  Patterson,  Michelle  Lein,  Kasey 
Shemwell  were  withdrawn;  the  Accusations  against  these  employees  were  dismissed. 
Jurisdictional  documents  were  presented.  The  District  gave  an  opening  statement.  An 
opening  statement  was  given  on  behalf  of  all  respondents  represented  by  counsel.  A  written 
stipulation to  jurisdictional  facts  was  filed,  sworn  testimony  and  documentary  evidence  was 
received,  closing  arguments  were  given,  the  record  was  closed  and  the  matter  was  submitted. 

 

  

The  Particular  Kinds  of Services 

13. 

The  services  identified  by  the  Board  for  reduction  or  elimination  in  Exhibit  A 

(Factual  Finding  7)  were  particular  kinds  of  services  that  could  properly  be  reduced  and 
discontinued.  The  reduction  and  elimination  of  those  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor 
capricious,  and  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  those  services  constituted  a  matter  well  within 
the  proper  exercise  of  the  Board’s  discretion.  The  layoff  related  to  the  welfare  of  the 
District,  the  schools,  and  the  students.  No  services  were  reduced  below  levels  required  by 
federal  and  state  laws. 

The  Seniority  List 

14. 

With  a  few  exceptions  which  do  not  impact  the  layoffs  in  this  matter  but  which 
possibly  could  affect  the  order  of  rehiring  (the  order  of  rehiring  is  not  at  issue  in  this  matter), 
the  District’s  seniority  list  was  accurate.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  did  not  establish 
that  the  certificated  employees  who  were  the  subject  to  direct  and  cross-examination  were 
improperly  classified.  Nevertheless,  the  District  should  be  available  to  make  corrections  to 
the  District’s  seniority  list  as  may  be  appropriate  following  this  hearing  upon  verification  of 
the  new  information  provided. 

The  District’s  Layoff Procedure 

15. 

The  Board’s  resolution  called  for  the  elimination  or  reduction  of  about  96.8 

FTEs  in  particular  kinds  of  services.  Using  the  Board’s  resolution  and  the  District’s  seniority 
list,  the  District’s  staff  identified  the  most  junior  employees  providing  the  particular  kinds  of 
services  identified  in  the  resolution.  For  those  employees  who  were  displaced,  the  District 
attempted  to  determine  if  the  displaced  employee  could  “bump”  a  more  junior  employee  by 
providing  a  particular  kind  of  service  that  the  displaced  senior  employee  was credentialed 
and  competent  to  provide.’  The  Board’s  tie-breaking  criteria  established  a  method  by  which 
employees  having  the  same  seniority  date  could  be  ranked  for  layoff  purposes.  A 
preponderance  of  the  evidence  established  that  the  tie  breaker  was  applied appropriately. 
Through  the  tedious  step-by-step  elimination  process,  the  District  correctly  determined 
which  certificated  employees  should  receive  preliminary  layoff  notices.  No  permanent  or 
probationary  employee  with  less  seniority  will  be  retained  to  render  a  service  any  respondent 
is  certificated  and  competent  to  provide. 

Respondent's  Contentions 

16, 

Respondents  contended  the  District  retained  the  services  of  several  junior 

employees  to  provide  services  more  senior  employees  who  were  laid  off  were  credentialed 
and-competent-to-provide—The-evidence-did-net-support-this-contention.-Nejunier———— 
employee  was  retained  over  a  more  senior  employee. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a  continuing  position  which  he 

In  doing  so,  the  senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior 

' 
or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
employee  who  holds  that  position. 

 

Respondents  suggested  that  the  District  may  have  failed  to  afford  permanent  status  to 
some  employees  who  were  classified  as  probationary  employees,  or  may  not  have  provided  a 
correct  seniority  date  for  employees  who  had  worked  under  emergency  permits  or  as  teacher 
interns,  or  may  not  have  afforded  employees  providing  services  in  categorically  funded 
programs  the  seniority  rights  to  which  they  were  entitled.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence 
established  that  the  District  properly  classified  employees  providing  services  in  categorically 
funded  programs  and  their  actions  in  the  layoff  proceeding  were  appropriate.  No  evidence 
established  that  any  mistake  in  classifying  any  certificated  employee  had  any  impact  in  this 
layoff  proceeding.  Any  error  in  classification  that  might  impact  a  certificated  employee’s 
rehiring  rights  was  not  at  issue  in  this  proceeding  and  was  moot. 

Respondents  argued  that,  in  a  global  sense,  the  District  acted  in  an  arbitrary  and 
capricious  fashion  in  pursuing  and  implementing  the  layoff.  They  suggested  that  the  district 
impermissibly  over-noticed  certificated  employees.  The  District  acknowledged  this. 
However,  the  District  did  not  act  inappropriately  under  the  circumstances  since  the  financial 
uncertainties  are  grave  and  the  news  continues  to  worsen  from  Sacramento. 

Respondents  suggest  that  the  District  tap  into  its  reserve  fund.  Although  this  might  be 

one  option  to  pursue,  the  District’s  choice  not  to  was  well  reasoned  and  understandable. 

The  District  also  acknowledged  that  it  had  approximately  80  teachers  who  were 

teaching  six-fifths  time  (1.2  FTE).  The  District  recognized  that  reducing  these  teachers  to  1 
FTE  would  allow  it  to  layoff  fewer  teachers.  The  District  has  agreed  in  principle  to  this  and 
therefore  there  may  be  fewer  layoffs  ultimately  than  this  Proposed  Decision  mandates. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied 
as  to  those  respondent  certificated  employees  identified  herein. 

2. 

A  school  board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  particular  kinds  of  services 

(PKS)  need  not  be  tied  to  any  statistical  computation,  such  as  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
students.  The  number  of  terminations  through  PKS  reductions  depends  totally  upon  the 
decision  about  how  many  services  to  reduce.  A  board  may  consider  the  school  district’s 
economic  circumstances  in  making  the  determination  to  eliminate  particular  kinds  of 
services,  (San  Jose  Teachers  Assn.  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627.) 

A  school  board  may  “reduce  services”  by  eliminating  certain  types  of  service  or  by 
reducing  the  number  of  district  employees  providing  such  services.  The  decision  to  reduce 
or  discontinue  a  particular  kind of service  is  not  unfair  or  improper  simply  because  a  school 
board  made  a  decision  it  was  empowered  to  make.  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Bellflower  Unified  School  District  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167.) 

10 

 

  

3. 

Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c),  sets  forth  a  general 

rule  requiring  school  districts  to  retain  senior  employees  over  more  junior  employees  and  to 
retain  permanent  employees  over  temporary  employees.  Any  exception  to  this  general  rule 
must  be  based  on  statute.  For  employees  hired  on  the  same  date,  Education  Code  section 
44955,  subdivision  (d)  provides: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from 
“(d) 
terminating a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following 
reasons: 

(1)  _  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a 

specific  course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and  experience 
necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those  services,  which 
others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 

(2) 

For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with 

constitutional  requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws.” 

4. 

Seniority  determines  the  order  of  dismissals;  between  employees  with  the 
same  first  date  of  paid  service,  the  order  of  termination  is  determined  on  the  “basis  of  the 
needs  of  the  district  and  its  students.”  Senior  employees  are  given  “bumping”  rights  and  will 
not  be  terminated  if junior  employees  are  being  retained  to  render  services  which  the  more 
senior  employee  is  certificated  and  competent  to  render.  (Alexander  v.  Board  of  Trustees 
(1983)  139  Cal.App.3d  567.) 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  holds  that  position.  (Lacy 
y.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.) 

In  doing  so,  the 

- 

5. 

As a  result  of  the  District’s  lawful  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of  services, 

cause  exists  under  Education  Code  section  44955  for  the  District  to  give  notice  to  all 
respondents  who  were  previously  served  with  preliminary  layoff  notices  that  their 
employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close  of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services 
will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school  year,  except  for  those  respondents  identified  in 
the  stipulation  resulting  in  the  dismissal  of  the  Accusations. 

This  conclusion  is  based  on  all  Factual  Findings  and  on  all  Legal  Conclusions.

    

RECOMMENDATIONS 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  dismiss  the  Accusations  filed  against  Benjamin 

Instone,  Stephanie  Macceca,  Aamna  Kamil,  Elizabeth  Chmiel,  Daemein  Patterson,  Michelle 
Lou  Lein,  Dawna  Blomdal-Lomprey,  Jeffrey  Wolken,  Ashley  Ormsby,  Melanie  Sandoval- 
White,  Douglas  Babington,  Barry  Andrews,  Randy  Melcher,  Shelley  White,  Judie  Lincer, 
Matthew  Flisher,  Mirna-Araceli  Hernandes-Oquendo,  Jennifer  Johnson,  Thomas  Schroeder, 
Daniel  Goodrich,  Kasey  Shemwell,  Jonathan  Owens,  Kevin  Forster,  Carlos  Ortiz,  James 
Sturch. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  Board  give  notice  to  all  remaining  respondents  previously 
served  with  a  preliminary  layoff  notice  that  their  employment  will  be  terminated  at  the  close 
of  the  current  school  year  and  that  their  services  will  not  be  needed  for  the  2008-2009  school 
year  including  Nicole  Travis,  Frank  Luera,  Kelly  McKean,  Glenn  Melero,  Heather  Peterson, 
Emmanuel  Pizano,  Marc  Henning,  Pamela  Ostermann,  Yvonne  Duncan,  Jessica  Fleshner, 
Imad  Nissan,  Jason  Cook,  Mandana  Najimi,  Jose  Garcia,  Brandy  Bryant,  David  Crabtree, 
Ana  Duran,  Shawn  Elam,  Amber  Garrett,  Caralyn  Hamilton,  Sandra  Jenkins,  Cody  Kuhlken, 
Douglas  Martin,  Christopher  Muirhead,  Jeffery  Rollins,  Dana  West,  Ivan  Barrera,  Cynthia 
Napoleon,  Brie  Pagano,  John  Roberts  Jr.,  Rachel  Jackson,  Summer  Havins,  Jessica  Hunt, 
Tiffany  Jokerst,  Brian  Carpenter,  Paola  Cerezo,  Paul  Moss  Jr.,  Lucas  Olivares,  Alisha  Sweat, 
Bryony  Kinnear,  Marcy  Wilson,  Ainoha  Hogan,  Sean  McMeeken,  Kurt  Stalmann,  Ral 
Christman,  Nicole  Williams,  Karl  Franz,  Jeffrey  Hunter,  Adrian  Pearson,  Sara  Beth  Dion, 
Lucas  Phillips,  Andrew  Troi,  Branden  Namimatsu,  Luis  Montes,  Amber  Studer,  Maria 
Simonsen,  Don  Ross  Furrow,  Jose  Guzman,  Sarah  Provo,  Jonathan  Geraci,  Stephanie 
Fernandez,  Elisa  Miller,  Ivan  Barbera,  Amy  Blatt,  Lauren  Aguas,  Heather  Bowler,  Chi-Ping 
Chang,  Anthony  Devine,  Michelle  Ditomaso,  Mariah  Freese,  Kelly  Hale,  Tania  Jackson, 
Katherine  Kipp,  Stephanie  Picon,  Ramey  Rahib,  Marguerite  Rohmer,  Natalie  Vasquez. 

patep:  Maw 

nooy 

     
STEPHEN  E. 
LT 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

  

 

12 

  

