  

BEFORE  THE 
BOARD  OF  EDUCATION 
ALVORD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  the  Matter  of  the  Accusations  against: 

RESPONDENTS  LISTED  ON 
EXHIBIT  A, 

Respondents. 

OAH  No.  2008020573 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Administrative  Law  Judge  Greer  D.  Knopf,  State  of  California,  Office  of 
Administrative  Hearings,  heard  this  matter  in  Riverside,  California,  on  April  23,  2008. 

John  W.  Dietrich,  Atkinson,  Andelson,  Loya,  Ruud  &  Romo,  attorneys  at  law, 

represented  complainant  Alvord  Unified  Schoo!  District. 

Respondents  Ina  Alexandre  and  David  Rhea  appeared  and  represented  themselves  at 

the  hearing. 

Respondent  Julie  Mitchell  failed  to  appear. 

Respondent  Luis  Medina  did  not  appear  at  the  hearing  since  he  withdrew  his  request 

for  a  hearing  in  this  matter. 

The  matter  was  submitted  on  April  23,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

Diana  M.  Asseier,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Instructional  Support 

Services  (the  Assistant  Superintendent)  of  the  Alvord  Unified  School  District,  made  and  filed 
the  Accusation  dated  March  11,  2008  in  her  official  capacity  as  the  Assistant  Superintendent, 
Instructional  Support  Services,  Alvord  Unified  School  District.  The  Accusation  was  filed 
against  the  respondents  identified  in  Attachment  A  that  is  attached  herein  and  incorporated 
herein.  Subsequently,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  filed  the  Amended  Accusation  dated 
March  13,  2008,  against  respondents  identified  in  Attachment  B  attached  hereto  and

  

  

incorporated  herein.  The  Amended  Accusation  was  filed  in  order  to  add  Luis  Medina  as  a 
respondent. 

2. 

The  respondents  are  all  certificated  employees  of  the  Alvord  Unified  School 

District  (the  District). 

3. 

At  the  hearing,  the  District  established  that  respondent  Medina  withdrew  his 

request  for  a  hearing  in  this  matter. 

4, 

On  March  6,  2008,  in  accordance  with  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 
44955,  the  Assistant  Superintendent  and  Katherine  A.  Wright,  Interim  Superintendent  (the 
Superintendent)  of  the  District  notified  the  Board  of  Education  of  the  District  (the  Board)  in 
writing  of  their  recommendation  that  notice  be  given  to  respondents  that  their  services  would 
not  be  required  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  The  Superintendent  stated  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  The  Superintendent  recommended  the  reduction  of  particular  kinds  of 
services  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

5. 

On  March  6,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  Resolution  No.  31  determining  that  it  is 

necessary  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  at  the  end  of  the  current  school  year.  The 
Board  determined  that  the  particular  kinds  of  services  that  must  be  reduced  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  were  the  following  full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  positions: 

Particular  Kinds  of  Services 

Number  of  FTE  Positions 

Elementary  P.E.  Teachers 

Project  Connect 
Alternative  Education  Teacher 

District  Office  Counselor 

3  FTE 

1  FTE 

1  FTE 

The  reductions  adopted  by  the  Board’s  resolution  totaled  5  FTE  positions. 

6. 

The  Board  further  determined  in  Resolution  No.  31  that  due  to  the  fact  that  the 

District  has  a  significant  population  of  English  language  learners  with  special  educational 
needs,  it  would  be  necessary  to  retain  certificated  employees  who  possess  special  training 
and  competency  to  teach  English  Learner  (EL)  students  that  other  certificated  employees 
with  more  seniority  might  not  possess.  The  Board  also  determined  that  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  District  has  been  put  on  a  Program  Improvement  Plan  for  not  meeting  its  Adequate 
Yearly  Progress  in  Math  and  Language  Arts,  that  there  is  a  significant  need  to  retain 
certificated  employees  certified  and  qualified  to  teach  in  those  subjects. 

7. 

The  Board  directed  the  Superintendent,  or  her  designee,  to  initiate  layoff 

procedures  by  determining  which  employees’  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  2008- 
2009  school  year  as  a  result  of the  reduction  of  these  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  Board 
further  directed  the  Superintendent  to  send  the  appropriate  notices  to  all  certificated 

2 

  

 

employees  of  the  District  who  would  be  laid  off  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  of  these 
particular  kinds  of  services. 

8. 
Subsequent  to  the  action  the  Board  took  on  March  6,  2008  to  reduce  services 
positions,  the  District  continued  to  evaluate  personnel  needs  in  the  District.  After 
by  5  FTE 
the  Board’s  action,  the  District  needed  to  take  action  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services  by 
a  total  of  5  FTE  positions  for  the  2008-2009  school  year.  To  accomplish  this  reduction  of 
services,  the  District  began  by  giving  notices  of  termination  to  the  three  certificated 
employees  listed  in  Attachment  A,  but  later,  it  determined  it  would  need  to  add  an  additional 
certificated  employee  to  the  layoff  list  in  order  to  accomplish  the  necessary  reduction  of  5 
FTE’s.  Therefore,  the  District  gave  notice  of  layoff  to  the  four  certificated  employees  listed 
in  Attachment  B  and  named  as  respondents  in  this  proceeding. 

9. 

On  or  before  March  15,  2008,  the  District  timely  served  a  written  notice  on 

each  of  the  respondents  named  herein  that  the  Superintendent  of  the  District  had 
recommended  not  to  re-employ  them  in  the  upcoming  2008-2009  school  year.  The  written 
notice  notified  respondents  that  his  or  her  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  upcoming 
2008-2009  school  year.  The  written  notice  to  respondents  set  forth  the  reasons  for  the 
recommendation.  The  recommendation  that  respondents  be  terminated  from  employment 
was  not  related  to  their  competency  as  teachers. 

10. 

Each  of  the  certificated  employees  given  written  notice  that  he  or  she  would 
not  be  re-employed  for  the  ensuing  school  year  filed  a  Request  for  Hearing  and/or  a  Notice 
of  Defense.  Respondents  all  timely  filed  either  a  written  Request  for  Hearing  or  a  Notice  of 
Defense  or  both  requesting  a  hearing  be  held  in  order  to  determine  if  there  is  cause  for  not 
reemploying  them  for  the  2008-2009  school  year. 

11. 

The  District  filed  and  then  timely  served  the  Accusation  herein,  a  Notice  to 

Respondent,  a  blank  Notice  of  Defense  form,  and  relevant  Education  Code  and  Government 
Code  sections,  upon  each  of  the  remaining  respondents  herein  who  had  timely  requested  a 
hearing  in  this  matter.  Each  of  these  respondents  herein  filed  a  timely  Notice  of  Defense. 
All  pre-hearing  jurisdictional  requirements  were  met. 

12. 

The  services  the  Board  addressed  in  Resolution  No.  31  are  “particular  kinds  of 
services”  that  can  be  reduced  or  discontinued  within  the  meaning  of  Education  Code  section 
44955.  The  Board’s  decision  to  reduce  or  discontinue  these  particular  kinds  of  services  was 
not  arbitrary  or  capricious,  but  constituted  a  proper  and  reasonable  exercise  of  its  discretion. 
The  Board’s  decision  to  make  these  cuts  was  the  result  of  consideration  of  the  necessary  cuts 
in  the  District’s  budget  for  the  ensuing  school  year.  The  Board’s  action  to  reduce  services  is 
a  proper  exercise  of  its  discretion  to  address  the  need  for  budget  cuts  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

13. 

The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of  services  relates  solely 

to  the  welfare  of  the  District  and  its  pupils.  The  District  recognizes  the  high  level  of 
dedication  and  service  these  respondents  have  given  to  the  District,  but  it  faces  difficult 
financial  times  due  to  proposed  state  budget  cuts.  The  reduction  or  discontinuation  of 

3   

particular  kinds  of  services  was  necessary  to  decrease  the  number  of  certificated  employees 
of  the  District  as  determined  by  the  Board. 

14. 

The  Board  considered  all  known  attrition,  resignations,  retirements,  and 

vacancies  in  determining  the  actual  number  of  necessary  layoff  notices  to  be  delivered  to  its 
employees.  At  this  point  in  time,  the  District  proposes  to  send  final  layoff notices 
to a  total 
of  four  certificated  employees  representing  a  total  of  three  FTE’s  as  listed  in  Attachment  C 
attached  hereto  and  incorporated  herein. 

15. 

In  arriving  at  the  order  in  which  certificated  employees  should  be  given  notice 

of  layoff,  the  District  used  its  seniority  list  of  certificated  employees  to  determine  who  the 
In  some  instances,  senior  employees  have  the  right  to  “bump” 
least  senior  employees  are. 
into  other  positions  held  by  junior  employees.  Respondent  David  Rhea  is  employed  as  a 
Middle  School  physical  education  teacher  and  the  District  reduced  Elementary  School 
physical  education  teachers.  However,  respondent  Rhea  was  given  a  notice  of  layoff  because 
he  was  junior  to  Elementary  School  physical  education  teacher  Tacy  Duncan  who  is  certified 
and  competent  to  teach  in  respondent  Rhea’s  position.  Similarly,  respondents  Ina  Alexandre 
and  Luis  Medina  are  District  Office  Counselors  who  are  junior  in  seniority  to  Lisa  Pynn. 
Lisa  Pynn  is  certified  and  competent  to  serve  in  Alexandre’s  and  Medina’s  position  and 
therefore  has  the  right  to  bump  into  respondents’  part-time  positions. 

16. 

The  Board  adopted  Tie-Breaking  Criteria,  but  there  was  no  need  to  apply  the 

criteria, 

: 

17. 

No  certificated  employee  junior  to  any  respondent  was  retained  to  perform  any 

services  that  any  respondent  was  certificated  and  competent  to  render. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Jurisdiction  in  this  matter  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and 

44955.  All  notices  and  jurisdictional  requirements  contained  in  those  sections  were  satisfied. 

2. 

Cause  exists  under  Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  for  the  Alvord 

Unified  School  District  to  reduce  particular  kinds  of  services.  The  cause  for  the  reduction  of 
particular  kinds  of  services  is  related  solely  to  the  welfare  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils 
thereof.  A  preponderance  of  the  evidence  sustained  the  charges  set  forth  in  the  accusations 
herein.  Therefore,  cause  exists  for  the  Board  to  give  the  remaining  respondents  notice  before 
May  15,  2008,  that  their  services  will  no  longer  be  required  by  the  District  for  the  2008-2009 
school  year. 

 

  

  

ORDER 

The  accusations  served  on  respondents  herein  are  sustained  and  notice  shall  be  given 
to  the  four  respondents  as  listed  in  Attachment  C  before  May  15,  2008  that  their  services  will 
not  be  required  in  the  next  school  year  because  of  the  reduction  of  particular  services  as 
indicated. 

DATED: 

dag 

08 

: 

brwtA.  face —— 

GREER  D.  KNOPF 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings

  

ATTACHMENT  A 

ALVORD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESPONDENTS  LISTED  IN  ACCUSATION 

INA  ALEXANDRE 

JULIE  MITCHELL 

DAVID  RHEA 

  

  

  

 

  1 
NOTICE  OF  HEARING 

  

ATTACHMENT  B 

ALVORD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

RESPONDENTS  LISTED  IN  AMENDED  ACCUSATION 

INA  ALEXANDRE 

JULIE  MITCHELL 

DAVID  RHEA 

LUIS  MEDINA 

10 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

    

1 
NOTICE  OF  HEARING 

  

  

 

ATTACHMENT  C 

ALVORD  UNIFIED  SCHOOL  DISTRICT 

PROPOSED  FINAL  LAYOFF  LIST 

INA  ALEXANDRE 

JULIE  MITCHELL 

DAVID  RHEA 

LUIS  MEDINA 

0.6  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

1.0  FTE 

0.4  FTE 

10 

ll 

12 

13 

14 

15 

21 

18 

\7 

16 

19 

—20. 

    

  

1 
NOTICE  OF  HEARING 

 

  

22 

26 

23 

24 

25 

28 

27 

