BEFORE  THE 
GLENN  COUNTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  SCHOOLS 
STATE  OF  CALIFORNIA 

In  The  Matter  of  the  Accusation  against: 

OAH  No.  N2008040046 

PHILLIP  DUNNING, 

Respondent. 

PROPOSED  DECISION 

Trevor  Skarda,  Administrative  Law  Judge,  Office  of  Administrative  Hearings,  State 

of  California,  heard  this  matter  on  April  28,  2008,  in  Willows,  California. 

Janna  Lambert,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  School  and  College  Legal  Services  of  California, 

represented  the  Glenn  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  (County). 

A.  Eugene  Huguenin,  Jr.,  Attorney  at  Law,  of  Huguenin  Law  Office,  represented 

respondent  Phillip  Dunning. 

The  matter  proceeded  in  respect  to  the  Lay  Off  Notice  issued  to  Phillip  Dunning,  as 
he  filed  a  Request  For  Hearing,  was  issued  an  Accusation,  and  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense  to 
the  Accusation. 

The  matter  was  submitted  and  the  record  closed  on  April  28,  2008. 

FACTUAL  FINDINGS 

1. 

The  County  operates  a  charter  school  called  William  Finch  Charter  School 

(William  Finch),  William  Finch  is  a  “home  study”  high  school  whereby  the  bulk  of 
instruction  is  provided  by  students’  parents  in  the  home.  Some  teachers  provide  services  in 
the  home.  Others,  including  respondent,  teach  at  one  or  both  of  two  William  Finch  school 
locations,  where,  much  like  a  typical  school,  the  students  come  to  the  classroom  to  receive 
all  instruction  for  various  subjects. 

2. 

Merrilee  G.  Johnson  is  the  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Human  Resources  for 

the  County.  Her  actions,  and  the  actions  of  Superintendent  Arturo  Barrera,  who  is  the 
Glenn  County  Superintendent  of  Schools,  were  taken  in  their  official  capacities. 

  

 

  

  

3. 

On  March  13,  2008,  Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson  submitted  a  letter  with 

her  recommendation  that  certificated  and  other  employees  holding  1.5  full-time  equivalent 
(FTE)  positions  be  given  notice  that  their  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school 
year  and  stating  the  reasons  for  that  recommendation.  Her  letter  recommends  that  the 
following  particular  kinds  of  services  be  reduced  or  discontinued: 

1)  Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  .10  F.T.E.  Lead  Teacher  Position 
2)  Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  40/100  (.40)  F.T.E.  William  Finch  High 
School  Teacher  Position 
3)  Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  one  (1)  F.T.E.  Home  Study  Teacher 
Position 

4. 

On  March  13,  2007,  the  Superintendent  of  Schools  adopted  Resolution  No. 
11,  providing  for  the  reduction  or  elimination  of  the  following  particular  kinds  of  services, 
and  to  decrease  a  corresponding  number  of  certificated  employees  in  the  District,  as 
follows: 

Eliminate  the  equivalent  of  .40  F.T.E.  Home-Study  Teacher  Position. 

Although  the  resolution  does  not  match  Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson’s 

recommendation,  she  testified  that  “.40  F.T.E.  Home-Study  Teacher  Position”  is 
synonymous  with  her  recommendation  that  the  County  “eliminate  the  equivalent  of  40/100 
(.40)  F.T.E.  William  Finch  High  School  Teacher  Position.” 

5. 

Resolution  11  additionally  states  that  the  County  had  resolved  to  not  reemploy  the 
equivalent  of  “2.5  full  time  equivalent  certificated  employees.”  Apparently  this  was  an 
error,  as  the  County  only  seeks  to  reduce  a  total  of  1.5  FTE,  according  to  the  Assistant 
Superintendent. 

Before  March  15,  2008,  the  County  personally  served  on  respondent  a  written 
notice  that  it  had  been  recommended  that  notice  be  given  to  him  pursuant  to  Education  Code 
sections  44949  and  44955  that  his  services  would  not  be  required  for  the  next  school  year. 
The  written  notice  sets  forth  the  reasons  for  the  recommendation  and  notes  that  the  Glenn 
County  Superintendent  of  Schools  had  adopted a  resolution  reducing  the  certificated  staff  by 
2.5  FTE.  Similar  to  the  reference  to  2.5  FTE  in  Resolution  11,  the  reference  to  2.5  FTE  was 
also  an  error.  The  County  only  seeks  to  reduce  1.5  FTE. 

   

respondent.  The  Accusation  with  required  accompanying  documents  and  blank  Notices  of 
Defense  were  served  on  respondent.  The  notice  of  hearing  was  served  in  a  timely  manner. 
One  of  the  accompanying  documents  referenced  in  the  Accusation  is  described  as  follows: 

Respondent  timely  requested  in  writing  a  hearing  to  determine  if  there  is 

The  interim  Superintendent  made  and  filed  the  Accusation  against 

cause  for  not  reemploying  him  for  the  ensuing  school  year. 

6. 

7. 

+ 

Cause  exists  within  the  meaning  of  the  Education  Code  sections  44949 
and  44955  not  to  reemploy  respondent  for  the  ensuing  school  year 
because,  by  Resolution  of  the  County  Superintendent  adopted  on  or 
about  the  13th  day  of  March,  2008,  a  copy  of  which  is  marked  Exhibit 
“A”  attached  hereto  and  is  by  reference  incorporated  herein  as  though 
fully  set  forth,  said  County  Superintendent  determined  it  was  necessary 
to  reduce  or  eliminate  certain  particular  kinds  of  services  ... 

However,  the  Exhibit  “A”  attached  to  the  Accusation  is  not  Resolution  11.  Instead, 

the  County  mistakenly  attached  Resolution  13,  which  describes  the  County’s  criteria  for 
establishing  a  specific  need  to  retain  junior  personnel. 

Respondent  timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Defense. 

8. 

9. 

The  facts  did  not  establish  whether  respondent  is  a  permanent  or  probationary 

certificated  employee  of  the  County.  Indeed,  respondent  produced  an  “offer  of 
employment”  from  when  respondent  was  first  hired  as  a  high  school  teacher  at  William 
Finch  Charter  in  2005;  the  offer  of  employment  indicates  that  respondent’s  employment 
status  was  “temporary”  and  that  he  was  hired  on  a  “part  time”  basis.  Respondent’s 
“temporary”  contract  was  then  renewed  the  following  two  school  years. 

10. 

Nonetheless,  because  the  County  proceeded  as  if  respondent  was  either 

permanent  or  probationary  and  never  raised  the  argument  that  as  a  temporary  employee,  he 
was  not  entitled  to  a  hearing  regarding  the  layoff  notice,  the  County  waived  any  objection  to 
respondent’s  employment  status.  For  purposes  of  this  decision,  it  is  assumed  that 
respondent  is  permanent  or  probationary. 

11. 

The  County  is  experiencing  financial  difficulties  due  to  budget  reductions. 
The  County’s  resolution  to  eliminate  and  reduce  teaching  services  was  made  in  order  to 
balance  its  budget  for  the  welfare  of  students. 

12. 

Assistant  Superintendent  Johnson  was  responsible  for  implementation  of  the 

technical  aspects  of  the  layoff. 

13. 

The  County  maintains  a  Seniority  List  which  contains  employees’  seniority 

dates  (first  date  of  service),  current  assignment  and  salary.  The  current  assignments  are 
mostly  abbreviations  representing  one  of  five  employment  categories,  “S.E.”  [which  stands 
for  special  education],  “Home  St.”  [which  stands  for  home  study],  “Oppor.”  [which  stands 
for  opportunity],  “Court”  and  “Music.” 

14. 

It  is  unclear  whether  the  County  circulated  the  seniority  list  in  anticipation  of 

issuing  layoff  notices  as  this  fact  was  not  established  by  the  evidence. 

15. 

 Respondent’s  current  assignment  is  designated  as  “Home  St.”  However,  he  is 

not  the  most  junior  “Home  St.”  teacher,  according  to  the  seniority  list.  There  are  two

  

  

individuals  who  are  junior  to  respondent,  Joanne  Payer  and  Rebecca  Hanson.  According  to 
the  list,  Payer  and  Hanson’s  date  of  hire  was  December  17,  2007. 

Moreover,  there  are  15  other  employees  junior  to  respondent,  according  to  the 
County’s  seniority  list.  While  the  bulk  of  these  individuals  are  designated  as  “S.E.,”  one 
individual  named  “John  Tade,”  is  currently  assigned  to  “Opportunity”  and  has  a  hire  date  of 
January  18,  2007. 

16. 

According  to  the  Assistant  Superintendent,  the  County  used  the  seniority  list 

to  develop  a  proposed  layoff  list  of  the  least  senior  employees  currently  assigned  in  the 
various  services  being  reduced.  She  further  testified  that  the  County  identified  the  least 
senior  teachers  who  could  not  teach  other  classes  because  they  lacked  the  necessary 
credentials. 

17. 

|  However,  the  Assistant  Superintendent’s  testimony  is  contradicted  by  the 
County’s  own  seniority  list,  which  indicates  that  at  least  three  individuals  have  seniority 
dates  junior  to  respondent.  These  three  individuals’  credentials  and  employment  status  are 
unknown,  and  it  is  unclear  why  these  individuals  should  be  “skipped.” 

18. 

Accordingly,  it  was  not  established  that  the  County’s  proposed  layoff  of 
respondent  will  satisfy  the  requirement  that  the  County  layoff  individuals  in  the  inverse 
order  of  seniority. 

19. 

20. 

in  the  Superintendent  of  Schools’  Resolution  No.  11. 

Respondent  maintains  that  he  is  not  a  “home-study  teacher”  as  was  identified 

|  The  County  issued  three  layoff  notices.  Only  respondent  was  identified  at  the 

DOES  RESPONDENT  REPRESENT  THE  .40  FTE  “HOME-STUDY  TEACHER  POSITION” 
THE  COUNTY  SEEKS  TO  ELIMINATE? 

hearing,  so  it  is  unclear  who  the  other  two  individuals  are,  and  whether  they  are  junior  or 
senior  to  respondent.  Two  teachers  requested  hearings.  One  of  the  layoff  notices  was 
rescinded  due  to  “an  error  in  determining  her  seniority.”  Only  respondent,  representing  .40 
FTE,  remains. 

   

Respondent  is  currently  assigned  to  teach  at  William  Finch  Charter  School,  a 
County-operated  high  school.  He  was  first  hired  in  August  2005,  and  has  held  the  position 
continuously  since  that  time.  When  he  was  hired,  the  position  was  advertised  as  “High 
School  Teacher-William  Finch  Charter  School.”  The  job  announcement  indicated  that  the 
responsibilities  of  the  position  include  “teaching  Algebra,  Geometry  and  Math  Lab  in  a 
classroom  setting for  Junior/High  School.”  [Emphasis  added.]  Since  he  was  hired, 

Teacher  Retirement  System  (STRS).  Prior  to  his  retirement,  he  worked  for  decades  as  a 
teacher. 

Respondent  is  a  retired  teacher,  who  draws  retirement  benefits  from  the  State 

22. 

21. 

respondent  has  continuously  taught  Algebra,  Geometry  and  Advance  Math,  and  always  in 
two  classrooms  located  at  the  two  William  Finch  Charter  School  locations  in  the  County. 

23. 

While  other  teachers  assigned  William  Finch  to  go  into  homes,  respondent 

has  never  done  so.  The  teachers  that  go  into  the  homes  are  “home-study  teachers” 
according  to  respondent,  because  they  meet  with  students  on  a  bi-weekly  basis  in  their 
homes  to  go  over  homework  and  to  administer  tests.  Instruction  for  these  students  is 
provided  by  parents.  In  contrast,  respondent  testified  that  he  is  a  regular  high  school  teacher 
who  provides  instruction  only  in  the  classroom. 

24. 

Ann  Lambert  was  the  former  principal  of  William  Finch  Charter.  She  retired 

in  August  2007.  She  hired  respondent  in  2005  as  a  classroom  teacher.  She  testified  that 
respondent  was  hired  specifically  to  teach  math  courses  at  the  charter  school  locations  to 
meet  State  mathematics  requirements  which  apply  to  all  High  School  students,  specifically, 
that  they  receive  two  years  of  high-school  math. 

25. 

Susan  Zell  McClelland  Domenighini  replaced  Ann  Lambert  as  William  Finch 
Charter  School’s  principal  beginning  in  October  2007.  She  testified  that  the  phrase  “home- 
study”  teacher  applies  to  all  William  Finch  teachers,  whether  they  work  at  the  school  or  go 
into  the  home.  She  testified  that  she  believed  that  she  could  reassign  respondent  to  go  into 
homes,  like  the  other  teachers,  whether  he  consents  or  not.  Ms.  Domenighini  was  not 
certain,  however. 

26. 

The  County  failed  to  establish  that  respondent  represents  the  .40  FTE 

identified  in  the  Superintendent’s  resolution.  The  Assistant  Superintendent’s 
recommendation  to  the  Superintendent  differentiates  between  “high  school  teachers”  and 
“home-study  teachers,”  and  her  testimony  regarding  what  the  Superintendent’s  resolution 
actually  means  was  not  persuasive.  Respondent’s  testimony,  mirrored  by  the  Ann 
Lambert’s,  that  he  is  a  “high  school  teacher”  as  opposed  to  a  “home-study  teacher”  was 
persuasive. 

OTHER  MATTERS 

27. 

There  was  no  evidence  that  the  County’s  decision  to  eliminate  .40  FTE  of 

“home-study”  teachers  was  arbitrary  or  capricious. 

LEGAL  CONCLUSIONS  AND  DISCUSSION 

1. 

All  notice  and  jurisdictional  requirements  set  forth  in  Education  Code  sections 
44949  and  44955  were  met.  While  there  were  numerous  errors  related  to  the  number  of  FTE 
positions  reduced  or  eliminated,  attachment  of  the  wrong  exhibit  to  the  Accusation  which 
was  served  on  the  respondent,  and  the  lack  of  proof  that  the  County  circulated  the  seniority 
list,  these  errors  were  not  prejudicial  to  respondent. 

 

  

2. 

The  anticipation  of  receiving  less  money  from  the  state  for  the  next  school 

year  is  an  appropriate  basis  for  a  reduction  in  services  under  section  44955.  As  stated  in  San 
Jose  Teachers  Assn  v.  Allen  (1983)  144  Cal.App.3d  627,  638-639,  the  reduction  of  particular 
kinds  of  services  on  the  basis  of  financial  considerations  is  authorized  under  that  section, 
and,  “in  fact,  when  adverse  financial  circumstances  dictate  a  reduction  in  certificated  staff, 
section  44955  is  the  only  statutory  authority  available  to  school  districts  to  effectuate  that 
reduction.”  The  County  must  be  solvent  to  provide  educational  services,  and  cost  savings  are 
necessary  to  resolve  its  financial  crisis.  The  Superintendent’s  decisions  were  a  proper 
exercise  of  its  discretion. 

3. 

The  services  identified  in  the  Superintendent’s  Resolution  13  are  particular 

kinds  of  services  that  could  be  reduced  or  discontinued  under  section  44955.  His  decision  to 
reduce  or  discontinue  the  identified  services  was  neither  arbitrary  nor  capricious,  and  was  a 
proper  exercise  of  his  discretion.  Cause  exists  to  reduce  the  number  of  certificated 
employees  of  the  County  due  to  the  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  particular  kinds  of 
services.  Cause  for  the  reduction  or  discontinuation  of  services  relates  solely  to  the  welfare  of 
the  District’s  schools  and  pupils  within  the  meaning  of  section  44949. 

4. 

A  District  may  reduce  services  within  the  meaning  of  section  44955, 

subdivision  (b),  “either  by  determining  that  a  certain  type  of  service  to  students  shall  not, 
thereafter,  be  performed  at  all  by  anyone,  or  it  may  ‘reduce  services’  by  determining  that 
proffered  services  shall  be  reduced  in  extent  because  fewer  employees  are  made  available  to 
deal  with  the  pupils  involved.”  (Rutherford  v.  Board  of  Trustees  (1976)  64  Cal.App.3d  167, 
178-179.) 

5. 

The  notice  sent  to  respondent  indicated  the  statutory  basis  for  the  reduction  of 
services  and,  therefore,  was  sufficiently  detailed  to  provide  him  with  due  process.  (San  Jose 
Teachers  Association  v.  Allen,  supra,  144  Cal.App.3d  627;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of 
Teachers  v.  Governing  Board  (1981)  116  Cal.App.3d  831.)  The  description  of  services  to  be 
reduced,  both  in  the  Resolution  and  in  the  notices,  adequately  describe  particular  kinds  of 
services.  (Zalac  v.  Ferndale  USD  (2002)  98  Cal.App.4th  838;  see,  also,  Degener  v. 
Governing  Board  (1977)  67  Cal.App.3d  689.) 

6. 

Nonetheless,  as  discussed  in  Factual  Finding  26,  it  was  not  established  that 
respondent  represents  the  .40  FTE  “Home-Study  Teacher”  that  the  County  seeks  to  layoff. 

7. 

A  senior  teacher  whose  position  is  discontinued  has  the  right  to  transfer  to  a 

continuing  position  which  he  or  she  is  certificated  and  competent  to  fill. 
In  doing  so,  the 
senior  employee  may  displace  or  “bump”  a  junior  employee  who  is  filling  that  position. 
(Lacy  v.  Richmond  Unified  School  District  (1975)  13  Cal.3d  469.)  Junior  teachers  may  be 
given  retention  priority  over  senior  teachers  if  the  junior  teachers  possess  superior  skills  or 
capabilities  which  their  more  senior  counterparts  lack.  (Poppers  v.  Tamalpais  Union  High 
School  District  (1986)  184  Cal.App.3d  399;  Santa  Clara  Federation  of  Teachers  v. 
Governing  Board,  supra,  116  Cal.App.3d  831.) 

 

8. 

The  County  may  deviate  from  terminating  certificated  employees  in  order  of 

seniority,  pursuant  to  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d).!  The  County  must 
prove  that  it  has  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific  course  and  that  certificated 
employees  it  seeks  to  retain  have  special  training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  that 
course  of  study,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess.  As  determined  in  Factual 
Finding  18,  it  was  not  established  that  the  County  is  laying  off  employees  in  the  inverse 
order  of  seniority.  There  are  at  least  three  employees  junior  to  respondent  (not  counting  the 
numerous  special  education  teachers)  who  teach  at  William  Finch  Charter  School  or 
“opportunity.” 

9. 

The  County  has  not  met  this  burden;  it  has  not  established  that  it  has  a  specific 

need  to  retain  all  of  the  junior  teachers  it  seeks  to  retain  because  they  possess  the  special 
training  and  experience  necessary  to  teach  “Opportunity”  or  “Home-study.” 

10. 

The  County  argued  that  because  respondent  is  a  STRS  retiree,  he  has  no 

property  right  to  his  current  position,  and  cannot  challenge  his  layoff  notice.  The  County 
sites  Education  Code  section  242616.5,  which  describes  limitations  on  compensation  earned 
by  STRS  retirees. 

11. 

Education  Code  section  24216.5  is  not  applicable  to  this  proceeding. 

Education  Code  sections  44949  and  44955  apply  to  the  instant  proceeding  and  those  sections 
require  that  respondent  receive  due  process  because  he  is  either  a  permanent  or  probationary 
employee.  Again,  as  determined  in  Factual  Finding  10,  the  County  waived  the  argument  that 
respondent  is  a  temporary  employee. 

12. 

Cause  does  not  exist  to  layoff  respondent. 

'  Education  Code  section  44955,  subdivision  (d)  states: 

Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b),  a  school  district  may  deviate  from  terminating 
a  certificated  employee  in  order  of  seniority  for  either  of  the  following  reasons: 
(1)  The  district  demonstrates  a  specific  need  for  personnel  to  teach  a  specific 
course  or  course  of  study,  or  to  provide  services  authorized  by  a  services 
credential  with  a  specialization  in  either  pupil  personnel  services  or  health  for  a 
school  nurse,  and  that  the  certificated  employee  has  special  training  and 
experience  necessary  to  teach  that  course  or  course  of  study  or  to  provide  those 
services,  which  others  with  more  seniority  do  not  possess. 
(2)  For  purposes  of  maintaining  or  achieving  compliance  with  constitutional 
requirements  related  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws. 

  

 

  

ORDER 

The  Accusation  against  Phillip  Dunning  is  dismissed. 

DATED:  May  1,  2008 

owe  a 

TREVOR  SKARDA 
Administrative  Law  Judge 
Office  of  Administrative  Hearings 

   

